{"id": "10692", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10692", "title": "Politics of the Falkland Islands", "text": "The politics of the Falkland Islands takes place in a framework of a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary representative democratic dependency as set out by the constitution, whereby the Governor exercises the duties of head of state in the absence of the monarch, and the Chief Executive is the head of the Civil Service, with an elected Legislative Assembly to propose new laws, national policy, approve finance and hold the executive to account.\nThe Falkland Islands, an archipelago in the southern Atlantic Ocean, are a self-governing British overseas territory. Executive power is exercised on behalf of the King by an appointed Governor, who primarily acts on the advice of the Executive Council. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Legislative Assembly. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The military defence and foreign policy of the islands is the responsibility of the United Kingdom. No political parties exist on the islands currently and so Members stand as independents, however the governmental and legal proceedings very closely resemble British standards.\nFollowing the Falklands War in 1982, Lord Shackleton published a report on the economy of the Falkland Islands which recommended many modernisations. On 1 January 1983 the Falkland Islanders gained British citizenship under the British Nationality (Falkland Islands) Act 1983, and on 3 October 1985 the Constitution of the Falkland Islands was established. A new constitution came into force on 1 January 2009 which modernised the Chapter on fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual, embedding self-determination in the main body of the constitution. The new constitution also replaced the Legislative Council with the Legislative Assembly, and better explained the role of the Governor and the Chief Executive.\nSovereignty issues.\nThe Argentine Republic claims the Falkland Islands (known in Spanish as \"Islas Malvinas\") to be part of its territory. This claim is disputed by the Falkland Islanders and the United Kingdom. In 1982, Argentina invaded and occupied the islands, starting the Falklands War. The islands were subsequently liberated by British forces just 74 days after the start of the war, which led to the collapse of the military dictatorship in Argentina.\nThe sovereignty of the Falklands remains in dispute, with Argentina claiming the islands are an integral and indivisible part of its territory, 'illegally occupied by an occupying power'. The United Kingdom and the Government of the Falkland Islands maintains that the Islanders have the right to determine the sovereignty of their birthplace. In a referendum in 2013 the people of the Falkland Islands soundly rejected Argentina's claim to the islands, with 99.8% of voters supporting the Falklands remaining an Overseas Territory of the United Kingdom.\nExecutive.\nExecutive authority on the Falkland Islands is vested in Charles III, who has been the head of state since his accession to the British throne on 8 September 2022. As the King is absent from the islands for most of the time, executive authority is exercised \"in His Majesty's name and on His Majesty's behalf\" by the Governor of the Falkland Islands. Colin Martin-Reynolds has been Governor since 29 July 2025.\nThe Governor normally acts only on the advice of the Executive Council of the Falkland Islands, which is composed of three Members of the Legislative Assembly elected by the Assembly to serve on the Council every year, the Chief Executive, the Director of Finance and the Governor, who acts as presiding officer. The only members with a vote to progress a change in law or policy are the democratically elected Members of the Legislative Assembly who are serving on Executive Council. The constitution does permit the Governor to act without consulting the Executive Council and even going against its instructions, but in both cases the Governor must immediately inform the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs in the United Kingdom, who can overrule the Governor's actions.\nGovernment policy and the execution thereof is primarily decided by the 3 officio Executive Council MLAs. The Chief Executive leads the civil service and undertakes actions from Executive Council.\nLegislature.\nThe legislative branch consists of a unicameral Legislative Assembly. General elections must take place at least once every four years, in which the islanders elect eight members to the Legislative Assembly (five from Stanley and three from Camp) through universal suffrage using block voting. There are also two ex officio members of the Assembly (the Chief Executive and the Director of Finance) who take part in proceedings but are not permitted to vote in the Assembly.\nThe following major conventions apply to the Falkland Islands and should be taken into account during the drafting of legislation:\nUntil 2009, when the new constitution came into force and created the Legislative Assembly, the legislature of the islands was the Legislative Council, which had existed since the 19th century.\nJudiciary.\nThe judicial branch consists of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal, the Summary Court and the Magistrates' Court. The judiciary is strictly independent of the executive and legislature, although it has links with the other branches of the government through the Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy. The government also employs six lawyers (the Attorney General, Law Commissioner, two Crown Counsels and two Legislative Drafters), a Policy Adviser and one Policy Officer.\nCourts.\nThe court system of the Falklands is set out by and closely resembles the system in England and Wales. The Supreme Court of the Falkland Islands has unlimited jurisdiction to hear and determine any civil or criminal proceedings, and consists of the Chief Justice (CJ) who is generally a senior barrister or solicitor with a good amount of judicial experience in the United Kingdom. The CJ is not resident in the Falkland Islands but travels to the islands if and when necessary to hear cases. The most serious criminal and civil matters are reserved for the Supreme Court. In civil matters, generally there is no jury however, in criminal matters, the defendant can elect trial by judge and jury or judge alone. There are only a few criminal cases which must be heard before the Supreme Court; these are murder, manslaughter, rape, piracy, treason and arson with the intent to endanger life. The CJ also hears appeals from the Magistrates' Court.\nFrom the Supreme Court, appeals are sent to the Falkland Islands Court of Appeal, which is based on the Court of Appeal of England and Wales. The Court of Appeal consists of a President and two Justices of Appeal, as well as the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court who serves as an ex officio member. The President and Justices of Appeal are normally from the UK and are Judges of the Court of Appeal of England and Wales. Appeals from the Court of Appeal are sent to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.\nThe Falkland Islands does not have its own bar or law society, but has a \"Falkland Islands Legal Community\". There is no differentiation between being a barrister or a solicitor; the private practitioners being called legal practitioners. The Legal Practitioners Ordinance defines who can hold themselves out as being a legal practitioner and therefore have rights of audience before the Falkland Islands courts. Only the Chief Justice of the Falkland Islands can prohibit a legal practitioner from practising.\nIn the court system on the islands, there is a panel of Justices of the Peace (JPs) who sit in the Summary Court, which has no jury. JPs are all non-lawyers and are made up of \"upstanding members of the community\". They hear the most simple of criminal cases (or sit when the Senior Magistrate is not in the Islands) and they also act as the Licensing Justices who deal with alcohol-related applications, such as extended opening hours, special occasion licences, etc.\nThe Senior Magistrate (SM) is appointed by the Governor and presides over the Magistrates' Court, which again has no jury. The SM is usually a UK qualified lawyer, with at least 10 years experience as an advocate and, usually, with some judicial experience. The SM holds office for a maximum of three years and is then replaced. The SM is resident in the Islands and hears the majority of cases from simple criminal and civil matters right up to very serious criminal matters or complex civil cases. The SM also hears appeals from the Summary Court.\nAdvisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy.\nThe Governor has the power to grant a pardon to any person concerned in or convicted of an offence, but the Governor can only use this power after consultation with the Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy. The Committee consist of two elected members of the Legislative Assembly (appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Legislative Assembly), the Chief Executive, the Attorney General and the Chief Medical Officer.\nAttorney general.\nThe Attorney General (AG), appointed by the Governor, is the main legal adviser to the Falkland Islands Government. The AG's primary role is to determine the legality of government proceedings and action, and has the power to institute and undertake criminal proceedings before any court of law, to take over and continue any criminal proceedings that may have been instituted by another person or authority, or to discontinue at any stage before judgment any criminal proceedings instituted or undertaken by another person or authority. In the exercise of his or her powers, the AG is not subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority.\nThe Attorney General is also a member of the Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy and acts as presiding officer during Speaker elections in the Legislative Assembly, and has a constitutional right to attend all meetings of the Assembly and all meetings of the Executive Council.\nThe current Attorney General is Simon Young, who took office in December 2017.\nFinances.\nThe Director of Finance of the Falkland Islands is responsible for government expenditure on the islands, acting with authorisation from the Legislative Assembly. The Director is also an ex officio member of both the Legislative Assembly and the Executive Council.\nThere is also a Public Accounts Committee consisting of a chairman and two other members appointed by the Governor (in consultation with the elected MLAs) and two elected members of the Legislative Assembly. Reporting to the Legislative Assembly, the Committee overseas the economy, government expenditure, all public accounts and audit reports on the islands. The Director of Finance is not permitted to be a member of the Public Accounts Committee.\nElections and parties.\nAs in many parliamentary democracies, there are no direct elections for the executive branch of the Falkland Islands Government. Instead the people elect the legislature which then advises and forms part of the executive. General elections, which elect the Legislative Assembly, must take place at least once every four years. Suffrage is universal in the Falklands, with the minimum voting age at eighteen. The Legislative Assembly has ten members, eight of which are elected using block voting (five from the Stanley constituency and three from the Camp constituency) and two \"ex officio\" members (the Chief Executive and the Director of Finance).\nIn the last general election, which took place on 4 November 2021, only non-partisans were elected as there are no active political parties in the Falkland Islands. The next elections will take place in 2025.\nHistorically, there have been two political parties in the Falkland Islands:\nReferences and sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10693", "revid": "38427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10693", "title": "Economy of the Falkland Islands", "text": "The economy of the Falkland Islands, which first involved sealing, whaling and provisioning ships, became heavily dependent on sheep farming from the 1870s to 1980. It then diversified and now has income from tourism, commercial fishing, and servicing the fishing industry as well as agriculture. The Falkland Islands use the Falkland pound, which is backed by the British pound.\nHistorical development.\nThe Falkland Islands have historically been extremely isolated. During the 19th century, the supply and maintenance depot for ships at Stanley developed into a port serving ships rounding Cape Horn and for South Polar expeditions. There was also trade in cow hides from the wild descendants of cattle introduced by French settlers in the late 18th century. Sheep farming was then introduced, taking over from the cattle trade in the 1870s and becoming self-supporting by 1885. The islands also provided a base for whaling and sealing, with factories being built on East Falkland and South Georgia Island, but these industries ended.\nBy the Falklands War of 1982 sheep farming was the islands' only industry and their economic viability was in doubt, but after the war there was a new commitment from the Government of the United Kingdom. The Falkland Islands Development Corporation was formed in mid 1984 and in its annual report at the end of that year it set out to increase employment opportunities by encouraging diversification, to increase population levels through selective immigration, to aim for long-term self-sufficiency and to improve community facilities. To achieve this, the Corporation identified agricultural improvements, tourism, self-sufficiency in energy, development of the industrial and service sector, fisheries, and land subdivision as areas to tackle.\nThe largest company in the islands used to be the Falkland Islands Company (FIC), a publicly quoted company on the London Stock Exchange. The company was responsible for the majority of the economic activity on the islands, though its farms were sold in 1991 to the Falkland Islands Government. The company now operates several retail outlets in Stanley and is involved in port services and shipping operations.\nBy 2002 the Falklands' economy was booming, with income from tourism and the sale of squid fishing licences as well as from indigenous fishing companies with locally registered boats. Fishing boats visit the islands from Spain, Korea, Taiwan and Japan, and obtain supplies and services from the islands. An islander told the BBC that \"we were the luckiest people that was ever mixed up in a war\", and British diplomats joked that the Falklands should have a monument to Leopoldo Galtieri, the Argentinean dictator who invaded the islands. In 2007, Argentina withdrew from a 1995 agreement that set terms for exploitation of offshore resources. It is thought that there might be up to of oil under the sea bed surrounding the islands. Desire Petroleum and Rockhopper Exploration began drilling for oil in the vicinity of the Falklands in the first half of 2010, sparking strong protest from the Argentine government. Diplomatic disputes with Argentina disrupted tourism slightly in 2004. Buenos Aires refused permission for charter flights from Chile that served cruise ships to fly over Argentina to reach the islands.\nEconomic overview.\nThe Falkland Islands have a GDP of $164.5\u00a0million, and a per capita GDP of $70,800 (2015 estimate) compared with the United Kingdom GDP per capita of $35,200 (2009 estimate). The contributors to the GDP by sector (2010 forecast) are:\nIn the 2009/10 financial year, the government revenue was \u00a342.4\u00a0million of which \u00a314.5\u00a0million came from fishery licences and services and \u00a310.5\u00a0million from taxes. During the same period the government expenditure was \u00a347.6\u00a0million.\nOther economic indicators include:\nElectricity \u2013 production:\n19 million kWh (2016 est.)\nElectricity \u2013 production by source: (2016 est.)\nElectricity \u2013 consumption:\n17.67 million kWh (2016 est.)\nInstalled nameplate capacity of electric generation\n12,100 kW (2016 est.)\nBanking.\nThe Falkland Islands do not have a central bank but the Standard Chartered Bank has a single branch in Stanley that offers retail, commercial and wholesale banking facilities.\nThe constitution requires the governor of the islands to seek the approval of a British Secretary of State before assenting to any bill that affects \"\"the currency of the Falkland Islands or relating to the issue of banknotes\" or any bill that establishes \"any banking association or altering the constitution, rights or duties of any such association\"\". These restrictions effectively give the British Government the ability to prevent the island's government from declaring the islands to be a tax haven or from establishing a central bank.\nAgriculture.\nFarmland accounts for a little over 80% of the Falklands land area and a sheep appears on the islands' coat of arms, but agriculture is now less than 2% of the economy. , 670,000 sheep resided on the islands; a 2011 report estimated the sheep population at over one million.\nRoughly 40% of the national flock are on West Falkland and 60% on East Falkland. The base flock are Corriedale and Polwarth breeds with Dohne Merino, South African Meat Merinos, Afrinos and other breeds having been introduced to improve the fineness of wool and meat characteristics. The wool price suffered a slump in 2005/6 and a peak in 2008. Since 2003 the relative premium commanded by higher quality wool has increased with coarser wool missing out on the high prices in 2008. A summary of the prices for the period 2002 to 2010, which are often dictated by Australian exchange rate and weather conditions is shown below:\nAlthough the production of wool is spread across the islands, the breeding of animals for slaughter is concentrated on East Falkland where the EU accredited Send Bay abattoir is situated. An additional cost borne by producers on West Falklands is the fare charged for crossing the Falklands Sound. As of 2010, the ferry company making the crossing charged commercial vehicles \u00a330 per metre for a single trip plus \u00a32 per head of sheep. Wool on the other hand is charged \"\u00a345 per tonne delivered to Stanley\".\nAn increasing number of farmers are supplying lamb to the Falkland Islands Meat Company. The abattoir received export accreditation in December 2002 and began exporting meat in May 2003. The number of farms supplying lambs increased from 6 in 2003 to 27 in 2007 while the number of lambs sent to the abattoir rose from 2600 to 11,963 in the same period.\nSelected statistics for the year 2008-09 relating to sheep farming are given below:\nThere are also a small number of cows, pigs and horses on the islands that are reared for local use.\nFishing.\nFishing is the largest part of the economy. Although Lord Shackleton's Report (1982) recommended the setting up of a fisheries limit which gave an impetus to the fishing industry, the report did not go into much detail regarding the expansion of the industry. The Falkland Islands Development Corporation which formed as a result of the Shackleton Report provided the impetus for the Falkland Islands to exploit their marine environment.\nFishing grounds.\nThe Falkland Islands' fishing waters form part of the 2.7 million square kilometre Patagonian Shelf large marine ecosystem and are located on a spur from the Patagonian Continental Shelf.\nMost of the fishing takes place in water up to deep on this spur or on the Burdwood Bank - another spur lying on an undersea ridge to the south of the Falkland Islands and separated from the islands by a deep channel known as the Falklands Trough. At its highest point, the Burdwood Bank is below sea level.\nThe principal ocean currents in the Falkland Island waters are the West Wind Drift, a cold current from the Southern Pacific Ocean that flows westwards to the south of the Burdwood Bank and the north flowing cold Falklands current, an offshoot of the West Wind Drift that curls around the east of Falklands Plateau and along the Falklands and Patagonian escarpments. It joins the saltier warm Brazil Current in the vicinity of the mouth of the R\u00edo de la Plata to form the South Atlantic Current.\nIn 1986 the Falklands opened up their fishing industry to outsiders with the declaration of a radius Fisheries Conservation &amp; Management Zone centered on the Falkland Sound. This zone was later to become the Falklands Inner Conservation Zone (FICZ). Apart from the Falkland Trough, this zone lies within the continental shelf. In 1990 the Falklands Outer Conservation Zone (FOCZ) was declared \u2013 a zone that lay between the perimeter of the FICZ and the Falklands 200-nautical-mile economic zone boundary. The FOCZ includes part of the Burdwood Bank, borders on the confines of the continental shelf and includes part of the Falklands Escarpment - a undersea escarpment running east\u2013west.\nAt the same time that the FOCZ was declared, the Argentine declared its 200-nautical-mile Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and together with the British Government (acting on behalf of the Falkland Islands) set up the South Atlantic Fisheries Commission (SAFC) to coordinate the management of fishing stocks in the area.\nFish stocks.\nMost of the fish that are harvested in the Falkland Islands waters are either squid or finfish. Other types of fish form an insignificant part of the Falkland Islands' catch. A significant number of the fish that are taken are migratory with the spawning grounds and feeding grounds of some species being highly dependent on the water temperature.\nSquid.\nThe Illex squid (\"Illex argentinus\") which typically has a mantle length of and a weight of is the most important fish to the Falklands economy followed by its smaller cousin, the Patagonian squid (\"Doryteuthis gahi\") which typically has a mantle length of and a weight of . Neither species was discovered in substantial numbers near the Falklands until the late 1980s.\nThe illex squid has its spawning grounds at the mouth of the R\u00edo de la Plata and a migratory pattern that takes it southwards along the Patagonian Shelf as far as the FICZ to its feeding grounds. It then returns to its spawning grounds via a route that lies off the continental shelf. In some years, such as 2007, it enters the FICZ with a resultant good harvest, it other years, such as 2009, it does not migrate as far south as the FICZ at all. The catch for the 2010 season in the Falklands recovered to 12105\u00a0tonnes, but still the fourth lowest since the beginning of the licensing system. This has been attributed to the lower than usual sea temperatures during the feeding season in February\u2013May.\nThe Patagonian squid, unlike the Illex, remain in Falkland Island waters all year and are concentrated in the \"Loloigo box\"\u2014an area within the Falklands Plateau to the east and south-east of the islands and are harvested during both the austral spring and autumn.\nFinfish.\nIn the 1970s many fin fish, particularly the rock cod, a high volume low value fish were exploited to near-extinction. The levels of rock cod taken in the whole of the South Atlantic dropped by 99.3% in the space of two years between the 1969\u201370 and 1971\u201372 seasons. while the patagonian rockcod was fished to near-extinction in the Shag Rock area. This resulted in a ban on fishing which was lifted in 2005. Following the collapse of the Illex industry in 2008/9, the rock cod has become, by weight, the most heavily harvested species in the area.\nIn 2006, a Spanish vessel on an exploratory trawl found commercial quantities of grenadiers (\"Macrourus spp., Coelorhynchus spp.\") to the south and east of the Falkland Islands at depths between depths in the eastern part of FICZ. It has been estimated that this species needs a stock biomass of 40000\u00a0tonnes to produce a sustainable harvest of 3000\u00a0tonnes per annum and is now reflected as a separate entry in the tables below.\nLicense quota policy and revenue.\nWith the establishment of the FICZ, the Falklands Fisheries Department issued licences that enable foreign vessels to fish in Falklands waters. Initially there were seven classes of licence, but as of the 2009 season, this was increased to ten classes of licence. Each class of licence has its own characteristics \u2013 species or combination of species that may be taken, net sizes that may be used and seasons when the licence is valid. The main fishing areas are in waters that are up to deep with principal concentrations close to the confluence of the FOCZ, FICZ and EEZ to the north west of the Islands and also on the Burwood Bank \u2013 a shallow water to the south of the Islands. Initially licences were issued on a total allowable effort (TAE) but in 2007, the toothfish longline fishery became the first fishery in the Falkland Islands to be issued on a total allowable catch (TAC) basis.\nApart from the Islander's own fleet, the principal fishing fleets come from Spain, Korea and Taiwan. When the Falkland Islands first opened up her waters, the Polish fishing fleet had a presence as did the Japanese, but the Poles stopped fishing in the area in the mid-1990s and the Japanese in the middle of the first decade of the twenty-first century. By 2002 the license revenue was so great that the island government had no debt and had built up more than \u00a380 million in savings.\nSince 1993, the principal licence classes have been:\nRevenue from licence fees (\u00a3 millions)\nInternational cooperation.\nThe Antarctic Treaty was signed by both the United Kingdom and Argentina in 1959. In its wake, the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), a treaty signed by 24 nations and covering the area that includes most of the Falkland Islands waters, came into force in 1982, having been signed by the United Kingdom on 31 August 1981 and Argentina on 28 May 1982. The convention covers Southern Ocean ecosystem which is generally accepted as being south of approximately 50\u00b0 to 55\u00b0S. The CCAMLR provides a forum for exchanging information regarding marine life in the Antarctic region and has the authority to ban the harvesting of certain type of fish and also to ban or put restrictions on the use of certain methods of harvesting. The convention requires that member states who are not parties to the Antarctic Treaty accept certain provisions of that treaty.\nThe South Atlantic Fisheries Commission (SAFC) was set up in 1990 between the Argentine and the United Kingdom (acting on behalf of the Falkland Islands) to exchange information and to coordinate fishing activities in the South Atlantic. One of their prime activities was the monitoring of the Illex spawning stock biomass (SSB). If the SSB drops below a threshold of 40000\u00a0tonnes the SAFC recommend will early closure of the fishing season. Since 2005 the SAFC has been largely moribund as the Argentine Government reduced co-operation, declining to continue the routine joint meeting process and suspending joint scientific activities. She has since extended her claim to all of the Falkland Island waters.\nCatch statistics.\nThe table below shows the average catch in tonnes of various species (as categorised by FIFD - Falkland Island Fisheries Department) for successive five-year periods.\nTourism.\nTourism is the second-largest part of the economy. In 1982, an average of only 500 tourists visited the Falklands per annum but by 2007, this figure had grown to 55,000 and the Falkland Islands Tourist Board hired its first tourism director that year. In 2010, the transport and hospitality sector was expected to contribute \u00a37.8 million or 7.7% of the island's GDP. Tourism forms a significant part of this figure with land-based visitors expected to contribute \u00a32.7 million to the Islands' economy in 2010. The islands have become a regular port of call for the growing market of cruise ships to Antarctica and elsewhere in the South Atlantic. Attractions include the scenery and wildlife conservation including 1,000,000 penguins, seabirds, seals, and sea lions, as well as visits to battlefields, golf, fishing and wreck diving. In addition to accommodation in Stanley, there are tourist lodges at Port Howard, Darwin, Pebble Island, Carcass Island, and Sea Lion Island. Self-catering accommodation at holiday cottages on island farms. The total contribution of tourism to the Islands' is expected to reach \u00a35.4 million in 2010.\nDuring the 2008\u20132009 season almost 69,000 tourists visited the Falklands, with 62,600 of these arriving onboard cruise or expedition vessels. Since cruise liners have their own accommodation, substantial numbers of tourists can be accommodated at once, such as an occasion in 2005 when 3000 tourists visited the islands in one day. In 2013 passengers from cruise ships faced protests in Latin American ports over the British military presence. The cruise industry is expecting passenger numbers to decline from 39,500 in 2013\u20132014 to 34,000 for 2014\u20132015. However land tourism is increasing which is offsetting the effect of a decrease in cruise tourism.\nOther sources of \"tourist\" revenue include spending by the British military personnel based on the islands, by business travellers and by pilgrims to the graves of both British and Argentine soldiers who fell in the 1982 Falklands War. Although there is still a resentment in the Islands to the Argentine occupation, the Falkland Islands Government continues \"to respect the need for Argentine veterans of the 1982 conflict and their next of kin to visit the battlefield sites and the cemetery at Darwin\". Such visits are arranged in conjunction with LAN Airlines (Chile) who, on such occasions, use larger aircraft than normal for the weekly flights.\nEnergy and minerals.\nPetroleum exploration.\nFour sedimentary basins that could potentially contain hydrocarbons have been identified in the Falkland Island waters. They are:\nThe latter three basins are part of a larger contiguous formation.\nIn May 2015 oil was discovered in Isobel deep by a consortium of oil companies including Falkland Oil &amp; Gas, Premier Oil, and Rockhopper Oil &amp; Gas. In 2023, Rockhopper (working with Tel Aviv-listed Navitas Petroleum) indicated that it had been presented with a new development plan for its Sea Lion project that aimed to cut costs and proceed in phases. It was stated that: \"If realized, the new plan \u2014 with a total price tag of $2.2 billion \u2014 could lead to 80,000 barrels per day of production (up to 100,000 b/d at peak) via a leased floating production, storage and offloading unit\". A final investment decision was targeted for early 2024, though it experienced delays. \nA public consultation on the project took place in the summer of 2024 and was reported to have garnered widespread support from Falkland Islanders. Since Britain's newly elected Labour Government banned similar oil projects in the United Kingdom, this created the prospect for a potential conflict between the Falkland Islands' government and the British government. Nevertheless, the authority to approve oil development around the islands was said to rest solely with the Falkland Islands' government. In November 2024, the Falklands' government Executive Council indicated that, while the public consultation process had been successfully concluded, \"some matters\" related to the Environmental Impact Statement required \"further discussion\" and that any development and production program would need to be considered separately by the Executive Council. \nNavitas Petroleum subsequently indicated that a final investment decision was delayed to mid-2025 with first oil not anticipated until late 2027, at the earliest. Although certified gross 2C recoverable oil resources had increased from 791 million bbls to 917 million bbls, phase 1 costs had increased to $1.4 billion. It was subsequently indicated that the final investment decision had been further pushed back into late 2025.\nRenewable energy sources.\nThe islands have been investing in windpower \u2013 in 2010, three 330\u00a0kW wind turbines were installed at Sand Bay, about from Stanley on the opposite side of the valley from three turbines that were installed in 2007. The island's government has plans to install a 2\u00a0MWh battery storage system which will allow surplus wind energy to be stored. The first three turbines resulted in a 20% reduction in the Stanley power station's fuel consumption and it was hoped that the second set of three turbines would double this figure. In parallel, there are on-going investigations into other forms of renewable energy for remote locations on the islands.\nTransport in the Falkland Islands.\nThe Falkland Islands currently has three primary means of transport \u2013 road, sea and air. There is now an international airport, a domestic airport, a number of airstrips, a growing road network and a much-improved ferry service between the two main islands.\nPhilately and numismatics.\nIn October 1877, the Secretary of State of the Colonial Office, the Earl of Carnarvon began the process of application for the Falkland Islands to join the General Postal Union (renamed Universal Postal Union in 1879). The first stamps, 1d, 6d, and 1 shilling values featuring the usual profile of Queen Victoria, were issued 19 June 1878. Since then the islands have issued their own stamps, which are a source of revenue from overseas collectors. Between 2000 and 2008, the islands issued between six and eight sets of commemorative stamps. The workload placed on the Falkland Islands Post Office by overseas collectors led to the establishments in 1978 of the Falkland Islands Philatelic Bureau. The Bureau also handles philately-related sales on behalf of the governments of Government of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands and of the British Antarctic Territory.\nCoins and banknotes may only be issued by the Falkland Islands Government with the authorisation of the British Government. Coins for local use were first struck in 1974 and are the same size as the corresponding British coins. There is a flourishing business in the issue of commemorative coins struck on behalf of the Falkland Island Government for collectors \u2013 in particular the 2007 series of coins that commemorated the 25th anniversary of the liberation of islands attracted much attention. The Falkland Islands Government (FIG) is required to deposit 110% of the face value of any coins struck on its behalf into its currency fund, thereby effectively backing the Falkland pound with the pound sterling. In the case of commemorative coins that are unlikely to be redeemed, this money represents a long-term investment. In many cases the set-up and production costs are carried by the mint concerned, who pay the FIG a royalty on coins that it sells to collectors.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10694", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10694", "title": "Telecommunications in the Falkland Islands", "text": "Telecommunications in the Falkland Islands includes radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nRadio and television.\nSix free-to-air digital channels are provided by BFBS: BBC One, BBC Two, ITV, Channel 4, Sky News and BFBS Extra for non-military audiences. Entitled personnel within British Forces South Atlantic can also receive Sky Sports 1, Sky Sports 2 and BFBS Sport.\nA local subscription service, KTV carries satellite channels such as ESPN, Discovery, CNN International and Turner Classic Movies (from the United States) along with BBC World News from the United Kingdom.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10695", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10695", "title": "Transport in the Falkland Islands", "text": " \nThe Falkland Islands currently have three primary means of transport \u2013 road, sea and air. However, in 1946, when Sir Miles Clifford arrived as governor, there were no air services, no roads outside Stanley and an indifferent sea service. Sir Miles was instrumental in starting the Falkland Islands Government Air Service in December 1948. The inaugural flight involved a mercy flight from North Arm Settlement to Stanley to bring a girl with peritonitis to life-saving medical help in Stanley. There is now an international airport, a domestic airport, a number of airstrips, a growing road network and a much-improved ferry service between the two main islands.\nRoad.\nIn 1982, the Falkland Islands had no roads outside Stanley, only tracks. By 2007, the Falkland Islands had a road network of with further roads planned for construction to link all occupied mainland settlements by 2013. In 2012, the Falkland Islands Government classified the road network \u2013 East Falkland and West Falkland \u2013 into \"A\" roads, \"B\" roads and \"C\" roads for purposes of \"Highways Asset Management Plan\". The \"A\" roads are the link between Stanley and New Haven (East Falkland) and the link between Port Howard and Fox Bay (West Falkland).\nAll roads within Stanley are asphalted as are the ones at Mount Pleasant Airport (MPA). The road between Stanley and MPA is mostly gravel all-weather roads (as like the rest of the roads in the islands) with some short asphalted sections. The road between Stanley and MPA has a large trench on either side, which will ground any vehicle driving into it. These trenches were allegedly dug deeper than they needed to be as annual rainfall was taken as a number for the monthly rainfall.\nStanley has two taxi services which can be used for travel within the town and the surrounding areas. A variety of four-wheel drive vehicles can be hired in Stanley, which are essential for travel along unpaved roads that are potentially badly potholed.\nA bus service ferries passengers between the main airport for international flights at Mount Pleasant and Stanley.\nBicycles can also be hired, though because of the unsealed roads and hilly terrain, these are more suitable for use around the Stanley area.\nSpeed limits are 25\u00a0mph (40\u00a0km/h) in built-up areas and 40\u00a0mph (64\u00a0km/h) elsewhere.\nSea.\nThere are two seaports in the Falkland Islands, Stanley (East Falkland) and Fox Bay (West Falkland). Additionally, British forces in the islands use a port facility at Mare Harbour. The designated harbours in Stanley area include Berkeley Sound, Port William and Stanley Harbour itself. Fox Bay is also a customs entry point for West Falkland. In 2020 the government awarded a contract to BAM Nuttall to design and build a new port for the Falklands. The Falkland Islands do not have a merchant navy.\nSince November 2008, a regular ferry service has linked the two main islands, carrying cars, passengers and cargo. The ferry, \"MV Concordia Bay\", a 42.45\u00a0m twin-screw shallow draft (2.59\u00a0m) landing craft runs between Port Howard in West Falkland and New Haven in East Falkland. She has a deck, 30\u00a0m in length and 10\u00a0m in width which is sufficient for 16 one-ten Land Rovers (or equivalent) and accommodation for 30 passengers. She also has a crane that is capable of lifting 10 tonnes at 7\u00a0m. She also visits some of the smaller islands.\nOther smaller boats may be chartered in advance.\nTourist cruise ships often visit many of the islands, making use of inflatable boats where adequate docking facilities are not available.\nRail.\nA gauge railway, known as the Camber Railway, was built along the north side of Stanley Harbour in 1915-1916 and used until the 1920s. It was about long. The trackbed is still visible.\nAir.\nThe Falkland Islands have two airports with paved runways. The main international airport is RAF Mount Pleasant, west of Stanley.\nLATAM Airlines operate weekly flights to Punta Arenas. Once a month, this flight also stops in R\u00edo Gallegos, Argentina.\nThe Royal Air Force operates flights from RAF Mount Pleasant to RAF Brize Norton in Oxfordshire, England, with a refuelling stop at RAF Ascension Island. This service is called the South Atlantic Airbridge.\nBristow Helicopters also operate two Sikorsky S-92 helicopters, based at RAF Mount Pleasant, under contract to the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence, primarily for moving military personnel, equipment and supplies around the islands. Additionally, two AgustaWestland AW189 helicopters are operated from RAF Mount Pleasant by AAR Corp and Bristow in the search and rescue role.\nThe smaller Port Stanley Airport, outside the city, is used mainly for internal flights. The Falkland Islands Government Air Service (FIGAS) operates Islander aircraft that can use the grass airstrips that most settlements have. Flight schedules are decided a day in advance according to passenger needs and the next day's timetable is published every evening. The schedules are based on three routes - a Northern Shuttle and the Southern Shuttle that each have one flight a day and the East - West Shuttle that has a morning and an evening flight every day.\nThe British Antarctic Survey operates a transcontinental air link between Port Stanley Airport and the Rothera Research Station on the Antarctic Peninsula and servicing also other British bases in the British Antarctic Territory using a de Havilland Canada Dash 7.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "10696", "revid": "1313139354", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10696", "title": "Military of the Falkland Islands", "text": "Military unit\nThe Falkland Islands are a British overseas territory and, as such, rely on the United Kingdom for the guarantee of their security. The other British territories in the South Atlantic, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, fall under the protection of British Forces South Atlantic Islands (BFSAI), formerly known as British Forces Falkland Islands (BFFI), which includes commitments from the British Army, Royal Air Force and Royal Navy. They are headed by the Commander, British Forces South Atlantic Islands (CBFSAI), a brigadier-equivalent appointment that rotates among all three services (Navy, British Army, and RAF).\nArgentina invaded and took control of the Falklands on 2 April 1982. After recapturing the territory in June 1982, the UK invested heavily in the defence of the islands, the centrepiece of which was a new airfield at RAF Mount Pleasant, west of Stanley. The base was opened in 1985, and became fully operational in 1986.\nFalkland Islands Defence Force.\nThe Falkland Islands maintains its own part-time volunteer force, the Falkland Islands Defence Force (FIDF), previously known as the Falkland Islands Volunteer Corps. Although this unit existed in 1982 as a reinforcement for the Governor's detachment of Royal Marines, it did not play any part in the main conflict during the war of 1982, its members having spent the duration of the hostilities under house arrest by the Argentines after their surrender on the Argentine capture of the islands. The FIDF is now a platoon to company-strength light infantry unit with a permanent training Warrant Officer seconded from the Royal Marines. The FIDF operates in a number of roles and is fully integrated into the defence scheme for the islands.\nFIDF soldiers can deploy aboard the Falklands Government Fisheries Protection vessel for sovereignty protection duties if the vessel requires an armed presence. As of 2023, the Falklands Government fisheries protection vessel is the FPV \"Lilibet\", which arrived in the islands in April and is tasked with policing the exclusive economic zone around the islands. (Another vessel, MV \"Pharos\", is contracted by the Government of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands (GSGSSI) for the purpose of sovereignty protection in its waters).\n\"Lilibet\" is named in honour of the late Queen Elizabeth II, and has been chartered to the Falklands Government by Seagull Maritime Limited for fifteen years. Civilian-crewed, the vessel is a Damen Stan 5009 patrol ship with a maximum speed of up to and a crew of up to 28 persons. She has an endurance of 30 days, though sixty days of provisions can be carried. If patrolling at 10 knots she can reportedly operate for 42 days with a range of up to 10,000 nautical miles. She is fitted for two Browning .50 caliber heavy machine gun mounts though she routinely deploys unarmed.\nRoyal Navy.\nRAF Mount Pleasant has its own port facility called Mare Harbour, operated by Naval Party 2010 (NP2010). The Royal Navy deploys a River-class offshore patrol vessel, , in the south Atlantic and the ship is the principal naval presence permanently close to the islands. In addition, an Ice Patrol Ship, , is on station close to Antarctica during the regional summer months.\nPrior to 2015 a major warship and RFA vessel commonly carried out the Atlantic Patrol Task (South) mission, which provides for \"a maritime presence to protect the UK's interests in the region\". The Type 42 destroyer took over the South Atlantic Patrol Task in October 2006, replacing . Prior to \"Southampton\"'s deployment in August 2005, the role was filled by , which was decommissioned on return to the UK. As of February 2010, the on-station warship was the Type 42 destroyer . In late April 2010, \"York\" was relieved by the Type 23 frigate . In August 2010, \"Portland\" was relieved by the Type 42 destroyer . On 21 April 2011, \"York\" returned to the East Cove Military Port in the Falkland Islands, beginning patrol duties for the islands. October 2011 saw the arrival of the Type 23 frigate , generating a statement from UNASUR (Union of South American Nations). The Type 45 guided missile destroyer replaced \"Montrose\" as of April 2012. In the second half of 2013, was deployed on the Royal Navy's south Atlantic patrol duty. \"Portland\" was deployed in January 2014, followed by in 2015 and \"Portland\" again in late 2016/early 2017 on the return leg of a longer deployment to the Gulf and Indian Ocean. As of 2024, \"Portland\"'s deployment was the last time a frigate deployed to the Falklands.\nSince 2015, with the commitment to deploy a destroyer or frigate scaled back, HMS \"Forth\" has been the principal Royal Navy asset permanently in the south Atlantic having replaced in 2020. HMS \"Forth\" is expected to be tasked to the south Atlantic mission for a decade or more. HMS \"Clyde\" returned to Britain in late 2019 for decommissioning, after itself having relieved the s and which maintained the patrol vessel commitment on rotation up to 2007. temporarily replaced \"Forth\" in 2023 during her refit.\nThe Royal Navy also has -class nuclear submarines that it can deploy to the area, though such deployments are classified and likely rare. In February 2012, a submarine of the former \"Trafalgar\"-class may have been deployed to the Falkland Islands. The threat posed by submarines to hostile ships was demonstrated during the Falklands War when sank the Argentine cruiser . The Royal Navy's current fleet submarines also carry BGM-109 Tomahawk cruise missiles, which have a range of .\nBritish Army.\nThe British Army maintains a garrison on the Falkland Islands based at Mount Pleasant. The force is made up of a roulement infantry company, an engineer squadron, a signals unit (part of the Joint Communications Unit \u2013 see below), a logistics group and supporting services.\nGround-based air defence of RAF Mount Pleasant is provided by the 16th Regiment Royal Artillery of the British Army's 7th Air Defence Group. Up until 2021, the detachment was equipped with the Rapier FSC surface-to-air missile system. Rapier has been replaced with the new Sky Sabre surface-to-air missile system incorporating an expanded capability. Sky Sabre achieved informal initial operating capability at RAF Mount Pleasant in October 2021. In the same month Rapier was fully withdrawn from service on the Falklands.\nThe British Army contributed to the Joint Service Explosive Ordnance Disposal group in the Falkland Islands, providing 33 Engineer Regiment (EOD) and RLC EOD teams. This was subsequently reduced to a team of 11 personnel. In November 2020, it was announced that all remaining land mines had been cleared from the islands.\nRoyal Air Force.\nRoyal Air Force elements in the Falklands are under the command of No. 905 Expeditionary Air Wing which, as of 2023, consists of two flights: Typhoon multi-role fighters of No. 1435 Flight RAF and Voyager KC.2/A400M Atlas aircraft of No. 1312 Flight RAF.\nRAF Mount Pleasant was built in 1985\u201386, able to accept large trans-Atlantic aircraft such as the Lockheed TriStar. The TriStar was initially purchased mainly for the UK-Falklands route; until their entry into service, the UK used leased 747s and 767s.\nFour Tranche 1 Typhoon fighter aircraft of No. 1435 Flight RAF provide air defence for the islands and surrounding territories.\nOriginally Lockheed Hercules C.1K were used for air-to-air refuelling missions, but these were later replaced by a VC10. On 31 August 2013 the VC10 was temporarily replaced by a TriStar K.1, which was itself replaced by a Voyager KC.2 in March 2014. The Voyager is deployed in the islands for air refueling operations but is unable to fit within a hangar at RAF Mount Pleasant due to its size.\nInitially, a C-130 Hercules was used for transport, search and rescue and maritime patrol until replaced with an A400M Atlas aircraft in April 2018. The aircraft is used for both regional operations, as well as for providing support for the British Antarctic Survey. In August 2022, an RAF A400M aircraft flying from RAF Ascension Island was refueled for the first time by a Voyager KC.2 aircraft flying out of RAF Mount Pleasant. In January 2023, an RAF A400M Atlas supported by a Voyager tanker aircraft, dropped the first of 300 fuel drums as part of a tasking to resupply the Sky Blu facility of the British Antarctic Survey.\nFor a lengthy period, the helicopters of No. 1564 Flight (formerly No. 78 Squadron) provided tactial air transport support. The Sea Kings carried out short and medium range search and rescue missions, until their retirement. AAR Corp was awarded a contract for helicopter search and rescue services in the Falkland Islands to replace 1564 Flight, using AgustaWestland AW189 helicopters in the role from 2016. In March 2015, the UK announced that a pair of Chinooks would be stationed in the Falklands again, the first of which started flying in June 2016. 1564 Flight disbanded in March 2016 being subsequently replaced by the Chinooks of No. 1310 Flight.\nThese military helicopters only remained on the islands for a short period and, as of 2022, Chinooks are no longer based in the Falklands. In lieu of this military capability, the firms AAR Corp and British International Helicopters (part of Bristow Helicopters), jointly provide two AW189s (in the Search and Rescue role) and two Sikorsky S92A helicopters (in the support role) from RAF Mount Pleasant. The latter helicopter replaced the formerly used S61N helicopter in 2023.\nThere were initially two air defence radar units, both located on West Falkland; No. 7 Signals Unit at Byron Heights and No. 751 Signals Unit at Mount Alice. Byron Heights and Mount Alice were later augmented by a further radar installation on Mount Kent, designated No. 303 Signals Unit. No. 7 Signals Unit and No. 751 Signals Unit were eventually disbanded and all three radar installations were reduced to Remote Radar Heads under the control of No. 303 Signals Unit who moved into a purpose-built operations building at Mount Pleasant Complex to form the Control and Reporting Centre in 1998.\nJoint Service.\nThe Joint Communications Unit Falkland Islands (JCUFI) provides the electronic warfare and command and control systems for the Royal Navy, Army and RAF stationed there. It incorporates the Army's signals unit and RAF personnel. \nCommanders.\nThe following have served as Commander British Forces Falkland Islands/South Atlantic Islands:\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10697", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10697", "title": "Falkland Islands/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "10698", "revid": "4280259", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10698", "title": "History of the Faroe Islands", "text": " \nThe early details of the history of the Faroe Islands are unclear. It is possible that Brendan, an Irish monk, sailed past the islands during his North Atlantic voyage in the 6th century. He saw an 'Island of Sheep' and a 'Paradise of Birds', which some say could be the Faroes with its dense bird population and sheep. This does suggest however that other sailors had got there before him, to bring the sheep. Norsemen settled the Faroe Islands in the 9th or 10th century. The islands were officially converted to Christianity around the year 1000, and became a part of the Kingdom of Norway in 1035. Norwegian rule on the islands continued until 1380, when the islands became part of the dual Denmark\u2013Norway kingdom, under king Olaf II of Denmark.\nFollowing the 1814 Treaty of Kiel that ended the dual Denmark\u2013Norway kingdom, the Faroe Islands remained under the administration of Denmark as a county. During World War II, after Denmark was occupied by Nazi Germany, the British invaded and occupied the Faroe Islands until shortly after the end of the war. Following an independence referendum in 1946 that took place unrecognized by Denmark, the Faroe Islands were in 1948 granted extended self-governance with the Danish Realm with the signing of the \"Home Rule Act of the Faroe Islands\".\nEarly Gaelic and Norse settlements.\nThere is some evidence of settlement on the Faroe Islands before Norse Viking settlers arrived in the ninth century AD. Scientific researchers found burnt grains of domesticated barley and peat ash deposited in two phases: the first dated between the mid-fourth and mid-sixth centuries, and another between the late-sixth and late-eighth centuries. Researchers have also found sheep DNA in lake-bed sediments, which were dated to around the year 500. Barley and sheep had to have been brought to the islands by humans. It is unlikely the Norse would have sailed near the Faroes long before the early 800s. The first settlers may have come from Britain or Ireland. Archaeologist Mike Church suggested that the people living there might have been from Ireland, Scotland or Scandinavia, or from all three.\nAccording to a ninth-century voyage tale, the Irish saint Brendan visited islands resembling the Faroes in the sixth century. This description, however, is not conclusive.\nThe earliest text which has been claimed to be a description of the Faroe Islands was written by the Irish monk Dicuil c.825 in his work \"Liber de Mensura Orbis Terrae\" (description of the sphere of the earth). Dicuil had met a \"man worthy of trust\" who related to his master, the abbot Sweeney (Suibhne), how he had landed on islands in the far north after sailing \"two days and a summer night in a little vessel of two banks of oars\" (\"in duobus aestivis diebus, et una intercedente nocte, navigans in duorum navicula transtrorum\").\n\"Many other islands lie in the northerly British Ocean. One reaches them from the northerly islands of Britain, by sailing directly for two days and two nights with a full sail in a favourable wind the whole time... Most of these islands are small, they are separated by narrow channels, and for nearly a hundred years hermits lived there, coming from our land, Ireland, by boat. But just as these islands have been uninhabited from the beginning of the world, so now the Norwegian pirates have driven away the monks; but countless sheep and many different species of sea-fowl are to be found there...\"\nNorse settlement of the Faroe Islands is recorded in the F\u00e6reyinga saga, whose original manuscript is lost. Portions of the tale were inscribed in three other sagas: the \"Flateyjarb\u00f3k\", the Saga of \u00d3l\u00e1fr Tryggvason, and AM 62 fol. Similar to other sagas, the historical credibility of the F\u00e6reyinga saga is highly questioned.\nBoth the Saga of \u00d3lafr Tryggvason and the \"Flateyjarb\u00f3k\" claim that Gr\u00edmr Kamban was the first man to discover the Faroe Islands. The two sources disagree, however, on the year in which he left and the circumstances of his departure. The \"Flateyjarb\u00f3k\" details the emigration of Gr\u00edmr Kamban as sometime during the reign of Harald H\u00e5rfagre, between 872 and 930 AD. The Saga of \u00d3l\u00e1fr Tryggvason indicates that Kamban was residing in the Faroes long before the rule of Harald H\u00e5rfagre, and that other Norse were driven to the Faroe Islands due to his chaotic rule. This mass migration to the Faroe Islands shows a prior knowledge of the Viking settlements' locations, furthering the claim of Gr\u00edmr Kamban's settlement much earlier. While Kamban is recognized as the first Viking settler of the Faroe Islands, his surname is of Gaelic origin. Writings from the Papar, an order of Irish monks, show that they left the Faroe Islands due to ongoing Viking raids.\nPre-14th century.\nThe name of the islands is first recorded on the Hereford \"Mappa Mundi\" (1280), where they are labelled \"farei\".\nThe name has long been understood as based on Old Norse \"f\u00e1r\" \"livestock\", thus \"f\u00e6r-\u00f8er\" \"sheep islands\".\nThe main historical source for this period is the 13th-century work \"F\u00e6reyinga saga\" (\"Saga of the Faroese\"), though it is disputed as to how much of this work is historical fact.\n\"F\u00e6reyinga saga\" only exists today as copies in other sagas, in particular the manuscripts called \"Saga of \u00d3l\u00e1fr Tryggvason\", \"Flateyjarb\u00f3k\" and one registered as AM 62 fol.\nAccording to Flateyjarb\u00f3k, Gr\u00edmr Kamban settled in Faroe when Harald H\u00e5rfagre was king of Norway (872\u2013930). A slightly different account is found in the version of \"F\u00e6reyinga saga\" in \u00d3lafs Saga Tryggvasonar:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Ma\u00f0ur er nefndur Gr\u00edmur kamban; hann bygg\u00f0i fyrstur manna F\u00e6reyjar. En \u00e1 d\u00f6gum Haralds hins h\u00e1rfagra fl\u00fd\u00f0u fyrir hans ofr\u00edki fj\u00f6ldi manna; settust sumir \u00ed F\u00e6reyjum og bygg\u00f0u \u00fear, en sumir leitu\u00f0u til annarra ey\u00f0ilanda\".\n\"There was a man named Gr\u00edmr Kamban; he first settled in Faroe. But in the days of Harold Fairhair many men fled before the king's overbearing. Some settled in Faroe and began to dwell there, and others sought to other waste lands.\"\nThe text suggests that Gr\u00edmr Kamban settled in the Faroes some time before the flight from Harald H\u00e5rfagre, perhaps even hundreds of years before. His first name, \"Gr\u00edmr\", is Norse, but his last, \"Kamban\", suggests a Gaelic origin (\"Camb\u00e1n\"). He may have been of mixed Norse and Irish origin and have come from a settlement in the British Isles: a so-called Norse-Gael. The Norse-Gaels had intermarried with speakers of Irish, a language also spoken at the time in Scotland (being the ancestor of Scottish Gaelic). Evidence of a mixed cultural background in later settlers may be found in the Norse-Irish ring pins found in the Faroe Islands, and in features of Faroese vocabulary. Examples of such words (derived from Middle Irish) are: \"blak/bla\u00f0ak\" (buttermilk), Irish \"bl\u00e1thach\"; \"drunnur\" (animal tail), Irish \"dronn\" (chine); \"gr\u00fakur\" (head), Irish \"gruaig\" (hair); \"l\u00e1mur\" (hand, paw), Irish \"l\u00e1mh\" (hand); \"tarvur\" (bull), Irish \"tarbh\"; and \"\u00e6rgi\" (pasture in the outfield), Irish \"\u00e1irge\" (byre, milking place: Mod. Irish \"\u00e1ir\u00ed\"). The discovery at Toftanes on Eysturoy of wooden devotional crosses apparently modelled on Irish or Scottish exemplars suggests that some of the settlers were Christian. It has also been suggested that the typical curvilinear stone-built walls enclosing early ecclesiastical sites in the Faroes (as in Norse settlements elsewhere) reflect a Celtic Christian style, seen in the circular enclosures of early ecclesiastical sites in Ireland. Indirect support for this theory has been found in genetic research showing that many Norse settler women in the Faroe Islands had Celtic forebears.\nIf there was settlement in the Faroes in the reign of Harald H\u00e5rfagre, it is possible that people already knew about the Faroes because of previous visitors or settlers.\nThe fact that immigrants from Norway also settled in the Faroe Islands is proven by a runestone (\"see Sandav\u00e1gur stone\") found in the village of Sandav\u00e1gur on V\u00e1goy Island. It says: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"\u00deorkil Onundsson, austma\u00fer af Hrua-lande, bygg\u00fee \u00fee(n)a sta\u00fe fyrst\". \n\"Thorkil Onundsson, eastman (Norwegian) from Rogaland, settled first in this place (Sandav\u00e1gur)\"\nThis description \"eastman\" (from Norway) has to be seen together with the description \"westman\" (from Ireland/Scotland), which is to be found in local place-names such as \"Vestmanna-havn\" i.e. \"Irishmen's harbour\" in the Faroe Isles, and \"Vestmannaeyjar\" i.e. \"Irishmen's islands\" in Iceland.\nAccording to \"F\u00e6reyinga saga\" there was an ancient institution on the headland called Tinganes in T\u00f3rshavn on the island of Streymoy. This was an \"Al\u00feing\" or Althing (All-council.) This was the place where laws were made and disputes solved. All free men had the right to meet in the Al\u00feing. It was a parliament and law court for all, thus the name. Historians estimate the Al\u00feing to have been established from 800 to 900.\nThe islands were officially converted to Christianity around the year 1000, with the Diocese of the Faroe Islands based at Kirkjub\u00f8ur, southern Streymoy, of which there were 33 Catholic bishops.\nThe Faroes became a part of the Kingdom of Norway in 1035. Early in the 11th century Sigmund or Sigmundur Brestisson, whose family had flourished in the southern islands but had been almost exterminated by invaders from the islands of the north, was sent from Norway, to where he had escaped, to take possession of the islands for Olaf Tryggvason, king of Norway. He introduced Christianity, and, though he was subsequently murdered, Norwegian supremacy was upheld and continued.\nKing Sverre of Norway was brought up in the Faroes, being stepson of a Faroese man, and relative to Roe, bishop of the islands.\nForeign commercial interest: 14th century to Second World War.\nThe 14th century saw the start of what would prove to be a long era of foreign encroachment on the Faroese economy. At this time trading regulations were set up so that all Faroese commerce had to pass through Bergen, Norway, in order to collect customs tax. Meanwhile, the Hanseatic League was gaining in power, threatening Scandinavian commerce. Though Norway tried to halt this, it was forced to desist after the Black Death decimated its population.\nNorwegian supremacy continued until 1380, when the islands became part of the Kalmar Union. The islands were still a possession of the Norwegian crown since the crowns had not been joined. In 1380 the Al\u00feting was renamed the L\u00f8gting, though it was by now little more than a law court.\nIn 1390s, Henry I Sinclair, Earl of Orkney, took possession of the islands (as vassal of Norway, however) and for some time they were part of the Sinclair principality in the North Atlantic.\nArchaeological excavations on the islands indicate sustained pig keeping up to and beyond the 13th century, a unique situation when compared to Iceland and Greenland. The Faroese at Junkarinsfl\u00f8tti remained dependent upon bird resources, especially puffins, far longer and to a greater degree than with any of the other Viking Age settlers of the North Atlantic islands.\nEnglish adventurers gave great trouble to the inhabitants in the 16th century, and the name of Magnus Heinason, a native of Streymoy, who was sent by Frederick II to clear the seas, is still celebrated in many songs and stories.\nReformation era.\nIn 1535 Christian II, the deposed monarch, tried to regain power from King Christian III who had just succeeded his father Frederick I. Several of the powerful German companies backed Christian II, but he eventually lost. In 1537 the new King Christian III gave the German trader Thomas K\u00f6ppen exclusive trading rights in the Faroes. These rights were subject to the following conditions: only good quality goods were to be supplied by the Faroese and were to be made in numbers proportionate to the rest of the market; the goods were to be bought at their market value; and the traders were to deal fairly and honestly with the Faroese.\nChristian III also introduced Lutheranism to the Faroes, to replace Catholicism. This process took five years to complete, in which time Danish was used instead of Latin and church property was transferred to the state. The bishopric at Kirkjub\u00f8ur, south of T\u00f3rshavn, where remains of the cathedral may be seen, was also abolished.\nAfter K\u00f6ppen, others took over the trading monopoly, though the economy suffered as a result of the Dano-Swedish war between Denmark\u2013Norway and Sweden. During this period of the monopoly most Faroese goods (wool products, fish, meat) were taken to the Netherlands, where they were sold at pre-determined prices. The guidelines of the trading agreement, however, were often ignored or corrupted. This caused delays and shortages in the supply of Faroese goods and a reduction in quality. With the trading monopoly nearing collapse smuggling and piracy were rife.\n1600s onwards.\nThe Danish king tried to solve the problem by giving the Faroes to the courtier Christoffer Gabel (and later on his son, Frederick) as a personal feudal estate. However, the Gabel rule was harsh and repressive, breeding much resentment in the Faroese. This caused Denmark\u2013Norway, in 1708, to entrust the islands and trading monopoly once more to the central government. However, they too struggled to keep the economy going, and many merchants were trading at a loss. Finally, on 1 January 1856 the trading monopoly was abolished.\nThe Faroe Islands, Iceland and Greenland became a part of Denmark at the Peace of Kiel in 1814, when the union of Denmark\u2013Norway was dissolved.\nIn 1816 the L\u00f8gting (the Faroese parliament) was officially abolished and replaced by a Danish judiciary. Danish was introduced as the main language, whilst Faroese was discouraged. In 1849 a new constitution came into use in Denmark and was promulgated in the Faroes in 1850, giving the Faroese two seats in the Rigsdag (Danish parliament). The Faroese, however, managed in 1852 to re-establish the L\u00f8gting as a county council with an advisory role, with many people hoping for eventual independence. The late 19th century saw increasing support for the home rule/independence movement, though not all were in favour. Meanwhile, the Faroese economy was growing with the introduction of large-scale fishing. The Faroese were allowed access to the large Danish waters in the North Atlantic. Living standards subsequently improved and there was a population increase. Though Faroese was standardized as a written language in 1890, it was not allowed to be used in public schools until 1938, or in the church (F\u00f3lkakirkjan) until 1939.\nWorld War II.\nDuring the Second World War, Denmark was invaded and occupied by Nazi Germany. The British subsequently made a pre-emptive invasion and occupation of the Faroes, known as Operation Valentine, to prevent a German invasion. Given their strategic location in the North Atlantic, the Faroes could have proved useful to Germany in the Battle of the Atlantic, possibly as a submarine base. Instead, the British forces built an airbase on V\u00e1gar, which is still in use as V\u00e1gar Airport. Faroese fishing boats also provided a large amount of fish to the UK, which was crucial given food rationing.\nThe L\u00f8gting gained legislative powers, with the Danish prefect Carl Aage Hilbert retaining executive power. The Faroese flag was recognized by British authorities. There were some attempts to declare complete independence in this period, but the UK had given an undertaking not to interfere in the internal affairs of the Faroe Islands nor to act without the permission of a liberated Denmark. The experience of wartime self-government was crucial in paving the way for formal autonomy in 1948.\nThe British presence was broadly popular (particularly given the alternative of a German occupation). Approximately 150 marriages took place between British soldiers and Faroese women, although the scale of the British presence on V\u00e1gar did lead to some local tensions. The British presence also left a lasting popularity for British chocolate and sweets, which are readily available in Faroese shops but uncommon in Denmark.\nPost-World War II: Home Rule.\nFollowing the liberation of Denmark and the end of World War II, the last British troops left in September 1945. Until 1948 the Faroes had the official status of a Danish amt (county). A referendum on full independence was held in 1946, which produced a majority in favour. This was, however, not recognised by the Danish Government or king due to only 2/3 of the population participating in the referendum, so the Danish king abolished the government of the Faroes. The subsequent elections L\u00f8gting were won by an anti-independence majority and instead a high degree of self-governance was attained in 1948 with the passing of the Act of Faroese Home Rule. Faroese was now an official language, though Danish is still taught as a second language in schools. The Faroese flag was also officially recognised by Danish authorities.\nIn 1973 Denmark joined the European Community (now European Union). The Faroes refused to join, mainly over the issue of fishing limits.\nThe 1980s saw an increase in support for Faroese independence. Unemployment was very low, and the Faroese were enjoying one of the world's highest standards of living, but the Faroese economy was almost entirely reliant on fishing. The early 1990s saw a dramatic slump in fish stocks, which were being overfished with new high-tech equipment. During the same period the government was also engaged in massive overspending. National debt was now at 9.4 billion Danish krones (DKK). Finally, in October 1992, the Faroese national bank (Sj\u00f3vinnurbankin) called in receivers and was forced to ask Denmark for a huge financial bailout. The initial sum was 500 million DKK, though this eventually grew to 1.8 billion DKK (this was in addition to the annual grant of 1 billion DKK). Austerity measures were introduced: public spending was cut, there was a tax and VAT increase and public employees were given a 10% wage-cut. Much of the fishing industry was put into receivership, with talk of cutting down the number of fish-farms and ships.\nIt was during this period that many Faroese (6%) decided to emigrate, mainly to Denmark. Unemployment rose to as much as 20% in T\u00f3rshavn, and even higher in the outlying islands.\nIn 1993 the Sj\u00f3vinnurbankin merged with the Faroe Islands' second largest bank, F\u00f8roya Banki. A third was declared bankrupt. Meanwhile, there was a growing international boycott of Faroese produce because of the grindadr\u00e1p (whaling) issue. The independence movement dissolved on the one hand while Denmark found itself left with the Faroe Islands' unpaid bills on the other.\nRecuperative measures were put in place and largely worked. Unemployment peaked in January 1994 at 26%, since which it fell (10% in mid-1996, 5% in April 2000). The fishing industry survived largely intact. Fish stocks also rose, with the annual catch being 100,000 in 1994, rising to 150,000 in 1995. In 1998 it was 375,000. Emigration also fell to 1% in 1995, and there was a small population increase in 1996. In addition, oil was discovered nearby. By the early 21st century weaknesses in the Faroese economy had been eliminated and, accordingly, many minds turned once again to the possibility of independence from Denmark. However, a planned referendum in 2001 on first steps towards independence was called off following Danish Prime Minister Poul Nyrup Rasmussen saying that Danish money grants would be phased out within four years if there were a 'yes' vote.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10699", "revid": "1267627580", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10699", "title": "Geography of the Faroe Islands", "text": " \nThe Faroe Islands are an island group consisting of eighteen islands between the Norwegian Sea and the North Atlantic, about half-way between Iceland and Norway. Its coordinates are . It is 1,393 square kilometres in area, and includes small lakes and rivers, but no major ones. There are 1,117 kilometres of coastline, and no land boundaries with any other country.\nThe Faroe Islands generally have cool summers and cool to cold winters, with a usually overcast sky and frequent fog and strong winds. Although at a high latitude, due to the Gulf Stream their climate is ameliorated. The islands are rugged and rocky with some low peaks; the coasts are mostly bordered by cliffs. The Faroe Islands are notable for having the highest sea cliffs in Europe, and some of the highest in the world otherwise. The lowest point is at sea level, and the highest is at Sl\u00e6ttaratindur, which is 882 metres above sea level. The landscape made roadbuilding difficult, and only recently has this been remedied by building tunnels.\nMany of the Faroese islands tend to be elongated in shape. Natural resources include fish and hydropower.\n* North: Enniberg, 62\u00b029\u2032,2 N\n* South: Sumbiarsteinur, 61\u00b021\u2032,6 N\n* West: G\u00e1adrangur, 7\u00b040\u2032,1 W\n* East: Stapin, 6\u00b021\u2032,5 W\n* Land: 1,393 km\u00b2 \n* Water: 7.19 km\u00b2 (the area includes 10 of the largest lakes. There are a number of smaller lakes and streams.)\n 0 km\n 1,117 km\n* Territorial sea: \n* Continental shelf: or agreed boundaries or median line\n* Exclusive economic zone: or agreed boundaries or median line\n Subarctic oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfc\") moderated by North Atlantic Current; long, mild, windy winters; short, cool summers, damp in the South and West. Arctic climate (K\u00f6ppen \"ET\") in some mountains.\n Rugged, rocky, some low peaks; cliffs along most of coast. The coasts are deeply indented with fjords, and the narrow passages between islands are agitated by strong tidal currents. Multiple sea stacks exist along the coast.\n* Lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m\n* Highest point: Sl\u00e6ttaratindur 880 m\n Fish, whales, hydropower, wind, possible petroleum and natural gas\n* Arable land: 2.14%\n* Permanent crops: 0%\n* Other: 97.86% (2012)\n Marine dumping\nClimate.\nThe climate is classed as subpolar oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfc\"), with areas having a tundra climate, especially in the mountains, although some coastal or low-lying areas may have very mild-winter versions of a tundra climate. The overall character of the climate of the islands is influenced by the strong warming influence of the Atlantic Ocean, which produces the North Atlantic Current. This, together with the remoteness of any source of landmass-induced warm or cold airflows, ensures that winters are mild (mean temperature 3.0 to 4.0\u00a0\u00b0C or 37 to 39\u00a0\u00b0F) while summers are cool (mean temperature 9.5 to 11.2\u00a0\u00b0C or 49 to 52\u00a0\u00b0F).\nThe islands are windy, cloudy and cool throughout the year with an average of 210 rainy or snowy days per year. The islands lie in the path of depressions moving northeast, making strong winds and heavy rain possible at all times of the year. Sunny days are rare and overcast days are common. Hurricane Faith struck the Faroe Islands on 5 September 1966 with sustained winds over 100\u00a0mph (160\u00a0km/h) and only then did the storm cease to be a tropical system.\nDue to the altitude, ocean currents, topography, and winds, the islands exhibit a variety of microclimates. Precipitation varies considerably throughout the archipelago. In some highland areas, snow cover may last for months with snowfalls possible for the greater part of the year (on the highest peaks, summer snowfall is by no means rare), while in some sheltered coastal locations, several years pass without any snowfall whatsoever.\nT\u00f3rshavn receives frosts more often than other areas just a short distance to the south. Snow is also seen at a much higher frequency than outlying islands nearby. The area receives on average 49 frosts a year.\nWhile receiving more frost than most of the Faroe Islands, Mykines is more temperate in the winter than nearby V\u00e1gar. Snow is also less common despite the relatively lower winter temperatures due to the relatively low precipitation in the area. It also has a very mild tundra climate bordering on subpolar oceanic. Frost occurs on 46 days in an average year It is also likely that the lower areas of the island experience less than this, as the weather station is located at 105 meters above sea level.\nAkraberg is milder than much of the Faroe Islands and experiences frost on 38 days in an average year, possibly less in lower areas, as the weather station is located at an elevation of 101 meters above sea level.\nV\u00e1gar has colder and snowier winters than most other places in the archipelago. Lower temperatures combined with higher precipitation are responsible for this, and measurable snow cover can be seen- a rarity in the Faroe Islands, in which snow cover (in areas which regularly experience it) is usually limited to a thin coating. The airport, at which data is recorded, is also located at a higher altitude on the island (84 meters above sea level), which might result in lower temperatures and higher precipitation than lower-lying areas on the island. Frost occurs on average on 62 days of the year, the most out of all stations included in the records of the Danish Meteorological Institute.\nKirkja has a very mild climate, similar to Akraberg. It has the lowest frequency of frosts out of all weather stations included in the records by the Danish Meteorological Institute, with 36 days of frost in an average year. Snowfall is uncommon, due to mild temperatures and relatively low precipitation. The weather station is somewhat high at 53 meters above sea level, which could possibly affect the data, but not as much as the previous stations.\nN\u00f3lsoy experiences a climate that is quite typical of the surrounding area and the Faroe Islands in general, and is similar to nearby T\u00f3rshavn. There are on average 44 days of frost a year. Also, as in the case of previous weather stations, the location is higher on its respective island, and the climate of the lower areas of the island differs slightly.\nThe climate of Sandur is typical for a low-lying coastal location in the south of the Faroe Islands, as the weather station for Sandur is located at 5 meters above sea level. On average, Sandur experiences 41 days of frost a year.\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10700", "revid": "50661392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10700", "title": "Demographics of the Faroe Islands", "text": "Demographic features of the population of the Faroe Islands include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population. The vast majority of the population are ethnic Faroese, of North Germanic descent. Ethnic Faroese are, in genetic terms, among the most homogenous groups ever found.\nA 2004 DNA analysis revealed that Y chromosomes, tracing male descent, are 87% Scandinavian. The studies show that mitochondrial DNA, tracing female descent, is 84% Scottish/Irish.\nOf the approximately 48,000 inhabitants of the Faroe Islands (16,921 private households (2004)), 98% are Danish realm citizens, meaning Faroese, Danish, or Greenlandic. By birthplace one can derive the following origins of the inhabitants: born on the Faroes 91.7%, in Denmark 5.8%, and in Greenland 0.3%. The largest group of foreigners are Icelanders comprising 0.4% of the population, followed by Norwegians and Poles, each comprising 0.2%. Altogether, on the Faroe Islands there are people from 77 different nationalities. The Faroe Islands have the highest rate of adoption in the world, despite a relatively high fertility rate of 2.6 children.\nFaroese is spoken in the entire country as a first language. It is not possible to say exactly how many people worldwide speak the Faroese language.\nThe 2011 census, called Manntal, shows that 10% were not born in the Faroe Islands, but of these only 3% were born outside the Kingdom of Denmark. 6.5% of people older than 15 did not speak Faroese as their mother tongue. 33 persons said that they did not understand Faroese at all. According to the 2011 census, 45 361 Faroese people (people living in the Faroes) spoke Faroese as their first language and 1546 spoke Danish as their first language.\nVital statistics since 1900.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2021): \nCIA World Factbook demographic statistics.\nThe following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\n 0\u201314 years: 19.89% (male 5,214/female 4,878)\n 15\u201324 years: 14.34% (male 3,738/female 3,538)\n 25\u201354 years: 37.31% (male 10,252/female 8,676)\n 55\u201364 years: 11.69% (male 3,054/female 2,878)\n 65 years and over: 16.76% (male 4,111/female 4,391) (2017 est.)\n at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female\n 0\u201314 years: 1.07 male(s)/female\n 15\u201324 years: 1.05 male(s)/female\n 25\u201354 years: 1.18 male(s)/female\n 55\u201364 years: 1.06 male(s)/female\n 65 years and over: 0.94 male(s)/female\n total population: 1.08 male(s)/female (2017 est.)\nInfant mortality rate.\n5.4 deaths/1,000 live births (2017 est.)\n \"total population:\" 79.85 years (2012 est.)\n \"male:\" 77.37 years\n \"female:\" 82.50 years\n 2.4 children born/woman (2012 est.)\n \"noun:\" Faroese (singular and plural)\n \"adjective:\" Faroese\nEthnic groups.\n\u2013 Faroese\n\u2013 Danes\nLiteracy.\n&lt;br&gt;\"definition:\"\nNA\n&lt;br&gt;\"total population:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"male:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"female:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"note:\"\nsimilar to Denmark proper\nLanguages.\nThe official languages are Faroese (derived from Old Norse, closely related to Icelandic), and Danish.\nAccording to the Faroese census of 2011, here is the breakdown of people in the Faroe Islands by language:\nThe percentages have been calculated based on the total number of respondents, which was 48,346 residents of the Faroe Islands who were asked to reply to the questions in November 2011."}
{"id": "10701", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10701", "title": "Politics of the Faroe Islands", "text": "The politics of the Faroe Islands, an autonomous country () of the Kingdom of Denmark, function within the framework of a parliamentary, representative democratic dependency, whereby the Prime Minister of the Faroe Islands is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. The Faroe Islands are politically associated with the Kingdom of Denmark but have been self-governing since 1948. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the L\u00f8gting. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature and the responsibility of Denmark.\nExecutive branch.\nThe high commissioner is appointed by the Monarch of Denmark. The High Commissioner has a seat in the L\u00f8gting, with the ability to speak in the L\u00f8gting regarding common Danish/Faroese affairs, but is unable to vote. Following legislative elections, the leader of the party that wins the most seats is usually given the initiative to establish a new coalition by the Faroese Parliament, unless the current L\u00f8gma\u00f0ur (\"Prime Minister\" in English) is still in power. However, if he or she fails, the chairman of the parliament asks all chairmen of the parties elected to the parliament, and asks them to point to another chairman who they feel can rightly form a new coalition. The chairman with the most votes is then handed the initiative. After forming the coalition, the L\u00f8gma\u00f0ur leads the landsst\u00fdri. The landsst\u00fdri will often consist of around 7 members. The coalition parties divide the various ministries among themselves and after this, the parties elect their representative to these ministries. Any other member of the cabinet is called a \"landsst\u00fdrisma\u00f0ur\" if the person is a man, or \"landsst\u00fdriskvinna\" if the person is a woman. The word \"r\u00e1\u00f0harri\" is also used for a member of the cabinet, i.e. \"mentam\u00e1lar\u00e1\u00f0harri\" (minister of culture) or \"heilsum\u00e1lar\u00e1\u00f0harri\" (minister of health).\nCurrent government.\nFollowing the 2022 Faroese general election, a new government, consisting of three parties (Social Democratic Party, Republic, and Progress) under Prime Minister Aksel V. Johannesen was created.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Portfolio !! scope=\"col\" | Minister !! scope=\"col\" | Took\u2002office !! scope=\"col\" | Left\u2002office !! scope=\"col\" colspan=\"2\" | Party !! scope=\"col\" | Ref\nLegislative branch.\nThe Faroese Parliament (\"L\u00f8gtingi\u00f0 in Faroese\") has 33 MPs (members of parliament), elected for a four-year term by proportional representation.\nElection of 2 seats to the Danish Parliament was last held 31 October 2022: Social Democrat 1, Unionist 1.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nThe Faroe Islands have a multi-party system (disputing on independence and unionism as well as left and right), with numerous parties in which no one party often has a chance of gaining power alone, and parties must work with each other to form coalition governments. The Faroese Parliament (L\u00f8gting) has 33 seats. Members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms. For the L\u00f8gting elections, there were seven electoral districts, each one comprehending a\"s\u00fdslur\", while Streymoy is divided into northern and southern parts (T\u00f3rshavn region), but since 2008, the Faroes constitute a single district.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe islands are administratively divided into 29 municipalities with about 120 cities and villages.\nTraditionally, there are also the 6 s\u00fdslur (Nor\u00f0oyar, Eysturoy, Streymoy, V\u00e1gar, Sandoy, and Su\u00f0uroy). \"S\u00fdsla\" means district and although it is only a police district today, it is still commonly understood as a geographical region. In earlier times, each s\u00fdsla had its own ting, the so-called \"v\u00e1rting\" (spring ting).\nInternational affairs.\nThe nation continues to be intimately tied with the Nordic countries of Europe and the European Union. \nAlong with diplomatic missions to Iceland, the Court of St. James's (United Kingdom), Russia, and the European Union, the Faroe Islands participate in the Nordic Council, NIB, International Maritime Organization, International Whaling Commission (http://).\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10702", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10702", "title": "Economy of the Faroe Islands", "text": " \nThe economy of the Faroe Islands was the 166th largest in the world in 2014, having a nominal gross domestic product (GDP) of $2.613 billion per annum. GDP increased from DKK 8 billion in 1999, to 21 billion in 2019. The vast majority of Faroese exports, around 90%, consists of fishery products.\nHistory.\nAfter the severe economic troubles of the early 1990s, brought on by a drop in the vital fish catch and poor management of the economy, the Faroe Islands have recently recovered, with unemployment down to 5% in mid-1998, and holding below 3% since 2006, one of the lowest rates in Europe.\nChallenges and opportunities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHigh dependence on fishing (including salmon farming) means the Faroe Islands' economy remains vulnerable. The Faroese hope to broaden their economic base by building new fish-processing plants. The islands allow up to 25% foreign ownership of ocean industry decreasing gradually until 2032 when foreign ownership must end. Petroleum found close to the Faroese area gives hope for deposits in the immediate area, which may lay the basis for sustained economic prosperity. Also important are the annual subsidy from Denmark, which amounted to about 3% of the GDP.\nThe Faroes have one of the lowest unemployment rates in Europe (1% in 2019), but this is not necessarily a sign of a recovering economy, as many young students move to Denmark and other countries once they are finished with high school. This leaves a largely middle-aged and elderly population that may lack the skills and knowledge to take IT positions in business and industry. Since 2000, new information technology and business projects have been fostered in the Faroe Islands to attract new investment. The result from these projects is not yet known but is hoped to bring a better market economy to the Faroe Islands. The population was around 52,000 by 2019.\nGeneral salaries increased from DKK 7 billion in 2013 to DKK 10 billion in 2019. In 2020, salmon exports were DKK 3.3 billion. Fishing industries occupied 1,441 people on land and 1,341 at sea.\nTrade.\nIn 2014 the Faroe Islands had a trade surplus of 401 million DKK, a figure that rose to 1.43 billion DKK in 2016. As of 2016, the Faroe Islands mainly imported goods from Denmark (2,467 million DKK), Germany (877 million DKK), and Norway (610 million DKK). The country's top export destinations were Russia (1,907 million DKK), the United States (898 million DKK), the United Kingdom (851 million DKK), and Denmark (697 million DKK). European Union countries constituted 72.9% of total Faroese imports, while the exports of the Faroe Islands were more equally distributed between European Union (44.4%) and non-European Union countries (55.6%). The vast majority of Faroese exports, around 90%, consists of fishery products. Russian countersanctions on food imports from Norway and the European Union, saw the Faroe Islands increase its fresh salmon exports to Russia. The Faroe Islands has a free trade agreement with Iceland since 2005.\nEnergy.\nOil consumption peaked at over 300,000 tonnes in 2020, of which 30% was for fishing vessels. In 2014 217,547 tonnes of oil products were consumed in the Faroe Islands. Of this 31.58% was consumed by fishing vessels, 14.73% was used by SEV for electricity production, 23.23% was consumed in air, sea or land transport, 9.6% was used in the industry, and the rest was used in public or private buildings.\nThe islands have 6 hydroelectric plants, 4 diesel plants and several wind power plants with a capacity factor above 40%. In 2014, a 12MW wind farm for DKK 180 million became operational near Torshavn and increased wind capacity from 6.6 to 18.6MW. It decreases oil consumption by 8,000 ton (approximately 4M\u20ac) per year. A 2.3MW 700 kWh lithium-ion battery became operational in 2016. Planners also consider converting the existing hydropower to pumped-storage hydroelectricity. Tidal power and Thermal energy storage solutions are also considered. The islands have a goal of 100% green electricity production by 2030.\nIn 2014 and 2017 50.8% of the electricity production of SEV in the Faroe Islands came from green energy like hydro and wind, while 49.2% was produced by the thermal power plants, which was 12.4% less than in 2013.\nTotal annual production: 305.4 GWh (2014) of which the production of thermal, hydropower and wind power was:\nThe Faroe Islands have no electricity connections to other areas, and thus operate in island condition. Some islands are also not connected to the other islands, and must maintain their own electric system.\nOther.\nAgriculture - products:\nmilk, potatoes, vegetables; sheep; salmon, other fish\nCurrency:\n1 Danish krone (DKr) = 100 \u00f8rer\nExchange rates:\nDanish kroner (DKr) per US$1 \u2013 5.560 (2008), 7.336 (January 2000), 6.976 (1999), 6.701 (1998), 6.604 (1997), 5.799 (1996), 5.602 (1995)\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10703", "revid": "202051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10703", "title": "Telecommunications in the Faroe Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "10704", "revid": "19244234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10704", "title": "Transport in the Faroe Islands", "text": " \nThe Faroe Islands is served by an internal transport system based on roads, ferries, and helicopters. As of the 1970s, the majority of the population centres of the Faroe Islands have been joined to a single road network, connected by bridges and tunnels.\nInternational transport, both for passengers and freight, remains difficult due to high costs, long distances, and bad weather, especially during the winter. Exporting domestically produced goods is thus expensive; this limits the development of a commodity-based economy.\nHistory.\nThe general history of the Faroese transportation system can be divided into four periods:\nBefore 1900.\nDuring this first period, transportation was rather primitive; it consisted of row boats, walking, and, in certain places, horse transport (for the upper class). Boats were used for transport between villages, even on the same island, as land transport was difficult due to the steep mountains.\n1900 to the end of World War II.\nThe second period commenced in the late-19th century, when ferry connections began to emerge. The ferries were largely private initiatives, but they increasingly came to be operated by the public sector. This was supplemented by an emerging culture of automobiles. After World War\u00a0II, a large part of the Faroe Islands was accessible via ferries and automobiles; private buses and taxis operated as well.\nThe end of World War II to the 1970s.\nThe third period was characterized by modernization. The introduction of the car ferry made it possible to drive between the various city centres of the country. It became possible to drive from the capital T\u00f3rshavn to V\u00e1gur and Tv\u00f8royri in the south, to Fuglafj\u00f8r\u00f0ur and Klaksv\u00edk in the north, and to the airport at S\u00f8rv\u00e1gur in the west. V\u00e1gar Airport was built by the British during World War\u00a0II; it was reopened as a civilian international airport in\u00a01963. Additionally, the road network was further developed. Tunnels to distant valleys and firths such as Hvalba, Sandv\u00edk, and Nor\u00f0depil were constructed in the 1960s.\n1970s onwards.\nThe fourth period saw the emergence of a \"mainland\" thanks to tunnels and bridges. In\u00a01973 the Streymin Bridge, the first bridge between two Faroese islands, was established between Nor\u00f0sk\u00e1li on Eysturoy and Nesv\u00edk on Streymoy; in\u00a01976 the new tunnel between Nor\u00f0sk\u00e1li and Eysturoy was completed. The Faroes' two largest islands were connected into what is now referred to as \"Meginlandi\u00f0\", the Mainland. In\u00a01975 the causeway between Vi\u00f0oy and Bor\u00f0oy was constructed, in\u00a01986 a similar one between Bor\u00f0oy and Kunoy was established, and in\u00a01992 the capital T\u00f3rshavn was granted a first-class connection to the northern parts of the islands, creating the infrastructural prerequisites for a mobile society on the mainland.\nThe newest developments of the Faroese transportation network are the sub-sea tunnels. In\u00a02002 the tunnel between Streymoy and V\u00e1gar\u2014the latter is the airport island\u2014was finished, and in\u00a02006 the Nor\u00f0oyatunnilin between Eysturoy and Bor\u00f0oy was finished. A toll, payable at petrol stations, of 170\u00a0DKK (130\u00a0DKK in June 2013) is charged to drive through these two tunnels; the others are free. Now more than 85% of the Faroese population is accessible by automobile. On 19 December 2020 the Eysturoyartunnilin between Streymoy and Eysturoy opened for traffic.\nFuture.\nIn early 2014 all political parties of the L\u00f8gting agreed to the construction of two tunnels: Eysturoyartunnilin, a tunnel connecting Eysturoy and Streymoy, which was completed in 2020, and Sandoyartunnilin, a tunnel connecting Streymoy and Sandoy, will be completed by 2023. The combined cost of the project is estimated at almost 3 billion DKK, and it will be the most expensive construction project in Faroese history. Eysturoyartunnilin has the world's first under-sea roundabout. Its three tubes are 7.1\u00a0km, 2.1\u00a0km and 1.8\u00a0km long, linked together by the roundabout. Sandoyartunnilin will be 10.6\u00a0km long.\nThere have been talks about a possible tunnel between Sandoy and Su\u00f0uroy. The tunnel would be around 20\u201325\u00a0km long. If completed this would mean that 99% of the Faroes would be connected by road.\nRailways.\nThere are no passenger railways on the Faroe Islands due to the difficult landscape, small population, and relatively short distances.\nTwo railways have operated on the islands. A tunnel and rail system supplied a NATO radar installation, now decommissioned, which previously existed on a mountaintop in the southern part of Streymoy Island. The Gj\u00f3gv incline railway operates a freight service between the harbour and the village of Gj\u00f3gv on Eysturoy island.\nRoads.\nRoads have become the main method of transportation on the islands, replacing boats. In 2021, there were 16,289 petrol cars, 9,795 diesel cars, and 567 electric cars. \nGoogle Street View became available for some roads in November 2017, supplied by residents and sheep rather than Google cars.\nHighways.\n\"total:\" \n\"national highways:\" \n\"local roads:\" \nBus services.\nThe national bus network (\"Bygdalei\u00f0ir\", Village routes) is operated by Strandfaraskip Landsins operating the characteristic blue buses. Most minibuses, buses and coaches in current service are built by either Volvo or Irisbus/Iveco. In 2024, they introduced their first Battery-Electric buses, the Iveco E-Way. The principal route is T\u00f3rshavn-Klaksv\u00edk (via the Nor\u00f0oyatunnilin tunnel and Streymin Bridge). Although individual buses are generally owned by individuals or small companies, the timetables, fares, and levels of service are set by Strandfaraskip Landsins and the government.\nThe municipalities of T\u00f3rshavn, Klaksv\u00edk, Eysturkommuna and Sunda operate their own free-of-charge local services, usually referred to as \"Busslei\u00f0in\". T\u00f3rshavn's Busslei\u00f0in has five routes and is operated by the T\u00f3rshavn municipality. Like Bygdalei\u00f0ir, the actual buses are privately owned, but contracted to Busslei\u00f0in. Klaksv\u00edk's service commenced in 2014.\nSea.\nMerchant marine.\n\"total:\" 6\u00a0ships (\u00a0gross tonnage\u00a0(GT) or over) totaling \u00a0GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT) (1999 est.)\n\"ships by type:\"\n* cargo ship 2,\n* petroleum tanker 1,\n* refrigerated cargo ship 1,\n* roll-on/roll-off 1,\n* short-sea passenger 1.\nFerries.\nThe Faroese ferry company Strandfaraskip Landsins operates a network of ferries, in addition to the rural blue buses, called Bygdalei\u00f0ir (Villagelines). Their largest vessel is the \"Smyril\", a roll-on/roll-off ferry which maintains the link between T\u00f3rshavn and the southern island, Su\u00f0uroy. This vessel entered service in\u00a02005. Another ferry, \"Teistin\", a roll-on-off ferry, maintains the link between the island of Sandoy and Streymoy; the ferry port on Streymoy is at Gamlar\u00e6tt near Kirkjub\u00f8ur and Velbasta\u00f0ur on the south-west coast of Streymoy. A sub-sea tunnel is under construction between Sandoy and Streymoy, it will open in 2023 according to the plan. After that there will not be need of a ferry between the two islands. The proposed Su\u00f0uroyartunnilin would also remove the ferry services to Sk\u00favoy and Su\u00f0uroy.\nSince the early 1980s, Smyril Line has operated a regular international passenger, car and freight service using a large, modern, multipurpose ferry, the \"Norr\u00f6na\". The weekly service links the Faroe Islands with Sey\u00f0isfj\u00f6r\u00f0ur, Iceland, and Hirtshals, Denmark.\nAir.\nAtlantic Airways is the national airline of the Faroe Islands, and has its operating base at V\u00e1gar Airport. It operates regular flights to Iceland, Denmark, Norway, and Scotland while there are also seasonal flights connecting the Faroe Islands with destinations including Barcelona, Mallorca, Lisbon, and Stewart International Airport, New York.\nOriginally state-owned, the airline has been partially privatised. The Government has plans to continue selling its remaining share in the airline. As a private company, Atlantic Airways continues to provide the Faroe Islands search and rescue capability, under contract to the government.\nAirports.\nThe Faroe Islands has only one commercial airport. V\u00e1gar Airport is located close to the village of S\u00f8rv\u00e1gur, on the island of V\u00e1gar. It has a paved 1,799 m / 5,902\u00a0ft runway, and was originally built by British Royal Engineers during the Second World War. The main airlines operating regular scheduled flights are Atlantic Airways and Scandinavian Airlines. Other airlines operate charter flights.\nHeliports.\nHelicopters provide domestic scheduled transportation, medical evacuation, and search &amp; rescue activities.\nThere are public (passenger and freight) heliports at Fro\u00f0ba, Hattarv\u00edk, Kirkja, Klaksv\u00edk, Mykines, Sk\u00favoy, St\u00f3ra D\u00edmun, Sv\u00ednoy, and T\u00f3rshavn (Bo\u00f0anes). There are air ambulance heliports at Skopun and T\u00f3rshavn (hospital).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10705", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10705", "title": "Military of the Faroe Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "10707", "revid": "44620460", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10707", "title": "Fiji", "text": "Country in Melanesia, Oceania\nFiji, officially the Republic of Fiji, is an island country in Melanesia, part of Oceania in the South Pacific Ocean. It lies about north-northeast of New Zealand. Fiji consists of an archipelago of more than 330 islands\u2014of which about 110 are permanently inhabited\u2014and more than 500 islets, amounting to a total land area of about . The most outlying island group is Ono-i-Lau. About 87% of the total population live on the two major islands, Viti Levu and Vanua Levu. About three-quarters of Fijians live on Viti Levu's coasts, either in the capital city of Suva, or in smaller urban centres such as Nadi (where tourism is the major local industry) or Lautoka (where the sugar-cane industry is dominant). The interior of Viti Levu is sparsely inhabited because of its terrain.\nThe majority of Fiji's islands were formed by volcanic activity starting around 150\u00a0million years ago. Some geothermal activity still occurs today on the islands of Vanua Levu and Taveuni. The geothermal systems on Viti Levu are non-volcanic in origin and have low-temperature surface discharges (of between roughly .\nHumans have lived in Fiji since the second millennium BC\u2014first Austronesians and later Melanesians, with some Polynesian influences. Europeans first visited Fiji in the 17th century. In 1874, after a brief period in which Fiji was an independent kingdom, the British established the Colony of Fiji. Fiji operated as a Crown colony until 1970, when it gained independence and became known as the Dominion of Fiji. In 1987, following a series of coups d'\u00e9tat, the military government that had taken power declared it a republic. In a 2006 coup, Commodore Frank Bainimarama seized power. In 2009, the Fijian High Court ruled that the military leadership was unlawful. At that point, President Ratu Josefa Iloilo, whom the military had retained as the nominal head of state, formally abrogated the 1997 Constitution and re-appointed Bainimarama as interim prime minister. Later in 2009, Ratu Epeli Nailatikau succeeded Iloilo as president. On 17 September 2014, after years of delays, a democratic election took place. Bainimarama's FijiFirst party won 59.2% of the vote, and international observers deemed the election credible.\nFiji has one of the most developed economies in the Pacific through its abundant forest, mineral, and fish resources. The currency is the Fijian dollar, with the main sources of foreign exchange being the tourist industry, remittances from Fijians working abroad, bottled water exports, and sugar cane. The Ministry of Local Government and Urban Development supervises Fiji's local government, which takes the form of city and town councils.\nEtymology.\nThe name of Fiji's main island, Viti Levu, served as the origin of the name \"Fiji\", though the common English pronunciation is based on that of Fiji's island neighbours in Tonga. An official account of the emergence of the name states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFijians first impressed themselves on European consciousness through the writings of the members of the expeditions of Cook who met them in Tonga. They were described as formidable warriors and ferocious cannibals, builders of the finest vessels in the Pacific, but not great sailors. They inspired awe amongst the Tongans, and all their Manufactures, especially bark cloth and clubs, were highly valued and much in demand. They called their home Viti, but the Tongans called it Fisi, and it was by this foreign pronunciation, Fiji, first promulgated by Captain James Cook, that these islands are now known.\n\"Feejee\", the Anglicised spelling of the Tongan pronunciation, occurred in accounts and other writings by missionaries and other travellers visiting Fiji until the late 19th century.\nHistory.\nEarly settlement.\nPottery art from Fijian towns shows that Fiji was settled by Austronesian peoples by at least 3500 to 1000\u00a0BC, with Melanesians following around a thousand years later, although there are still many open questions about the specific dates and patterns of human migration. It is believed that either the Lapita people or the ancestors of the Polynesians settled the islands first, but not much is known of what became of them after the Melanesians arrived; the old culture may have had some influence on the new one, and archaeological evidence shows that some of the migrants moved on to Samoa, Tonga and even Hawai'i. Archeological evidence also shows signs of human settlement on Moturiki Island beginning at least by 600 BC and possibly as far back as 900 BC. Although some aspects of Fijian culture are similar to the Melanesian culture of the western Pacific, Fijian culture has a stronger connection to the older Polynesian cultures. The evidence is clear that there was trade between Fiji and neighbouring archipelagos long before Europeans made contact with Fiji.\nIn the 10th century, the Tu'i Tonga Empire was established in Tonga, and Fiji came within its sphere of influence. The Tongan influence brought Polynesian customs and language into Fiji. That empire began to decline in the 13th century.\nFiji has long had permanent settlements, but its peoples also have a history of mobility. Over the centuries, unique Fijian cultural practices developed. Fijians constructed large, elegant watercraft, with rigged sails called \"drua\" and exported some to Tonga. Fijians also developed a distinctive style of village architecture, consisting of communal and individual \"bure\" and \"vale\" housing, and an advanced system of ramparts and moats that were usually constructed around the more important settlements. Pigs were domesticated for food, and a variety of agricultural endeavours, such as banana plantations, existed from an early stage. Villages were supplied with water brought in by constructed wooden aqueducts. Fijians lived in societies led by chiefs, elders and notable warriors. Spiritual leaders, often called \"bete\", were also important cultural figures, and the production and consumption of \"yaqona\" was part of their ceremonial and community rites. Fijians developed a monetary system where the polished teeth of the sperm whale, called \"tambua\", became an active currency. A type of writing existed which can be seen today in various petroglyphs around the islands. Fijians developed a refined \"masi\" cloth textile industry, and used the cloth they produced to make sails and clothes such as the \"malo\" and the \"liku\". As with most other ancient human civilisations, warfare or preparation for warfare was an important part of everyday life in pre-colonial Fiji. The Fijians were noted for their distinctive use of weapons, especially war clubs. Fijians used many different types of clubs that can be broadly divided into two groups, two handed clubs and small specialised throwing clubs called \"ula\".\n With the arrival of Europeans in the 17th century, and European colonisation in the late 19th century, many elements of Fijian culture were either repressed or modified to ensure European \u2013 specifically, British \u2013 control. This was especially the case with respect to traditional Fijian spiritual beliefs. Early colonists and missionaries utilised and conflated the concept of cannibalism in Fiji to give a moral imperative for colonial intrusion. Europeans labelled many native Fijian customs as debased or primitive, enabling colonists to see Fiji as a \"paradise wasted on savage cannibals\". This narrative became a justification for violence and punitive actions by the colonists which accompanied the enforced transfer of power to the Europeans. Authors such as Deryck Scarr have perpetuated 19th century myths of \"freshly killed corpses piled up for eating\" and ceremonial mass human sacrifice on the construction of new houses and boats. While some modern archaeological studies conducted by scholars including Degusta, Cochrane, and Jones on Fijian sites have shown that Fijians may have practised an intermittent and ritualistic form of cannibalism, other research doubts even the existence of cannibalism in Fiji. Perhaps the most accurate account of cannibalism in 19th century Fiji comes from William MacGregor, the long term chief medical officer in British colonial Fiji. During the Little War of 1876, he stated that the rare occasion of tasting of the flesh of the enemy was done \"to indicate supreme hatred and not out of relish for a gastronomic treat\".\nEarly interaction with Europeans.\nDutch explorer Abel Tasman was the first known European visitor to Fiji, sighting the northern island of Vanua Levu and the North Taveuni archipelago in 1643 while looking for the Great Southern Continent.\nJames Cook, the British navigator, visited one of the southern Lau islands in 1774. It was not until 1789, however, that the islands were charted and plotted, when William Bligh, the castaway captain of , passed Ovalau and sailed between the main islands of Viti Levu and Vanua Levu en route to Batavia, in what is now Indonesia. Bligh Water, the strait between the two main islands, is named after him and for a time, the Fiji Islands were known as the \"Bligh Islands\".\nThe first Europeans to maintain substantial contact with the Fijians were sandalwood merchants, whalers and \"beche-de-mer\" (sea cucumber) traders. The first whaling vessel known to have visited was the \"Ann and Hope\" in 1799, and she was followed by many others in the 19th century. These ships came for drinking water, food and firewood and, later, for men to help man their ships. Some of the Europeans who came to Fiji in this period were accepted by the locals and were allowed to stay as residents.\nBy the 1820s, Levuka was established as the first European-style town in Fiji, on the island of Ovalau. The market for \"beche-de-mer\" in China was lucrative, and British and American merchants set up processing stations on various islands. Local Fijians were utilised to collect, prepare and pack the product which would then be shipped to Asia. A good cargo would result in a half-yearly profit of around $25,000 for the dealer. The Fijian workers were often given firearms and ammunition as an exchange for their labour, and by the end of the 1820s most of the Fijian chiefs had muskets and many were skilled at using them. Some Fijian chiefs soon felt confident enough with their new weapons to forcibly obtain more destructive weaponry from the Europeans. In 1834, men from Viwa and Bau were able to take control of the French ship \"L'amiable Josephine\" and use its cannon against their enemies on the Rewa River, although they later ran it aground.\nChristian missionaries like David Cargill also arrived in the 1830s from recently converted regions such as Tonga and Tahiti, and by 1840 the European settlement at Levuka had grown to about 40 houses with former whaler David Whippey being a notable resident. The religious conversion of the Fijians was a gradual process which was observed first-hand by Captain Charles Wilkes of the United States Exploring Expedition. Wilkes wrote that \"all the chiefs seemed to look upon Christianity as a change in which they had much to lose and little to gain\". Christianised Fijians, in addition to forsaking their spiritual beliefs, were pressured into cutting their hair short, adopting the sulu form of dress from Tonga and fundamentally changing their marriage and funeral traditions. This process of enforced cultural change was called \"lotu\". Intensification of conflict between the cultures increased, and Wilkes was involved in organising a large punitive expedition against the people of Malolo. He ordered an attack with rockets which acted as makeshift incendiary devices. The village, with the occupants trapped inside, quickly became an inferno with Wilkes noting that the \"shouts of men were intermingled with the cries and shrieks of the women and children\" as they burnt to death. Wilkes demanded the survivors should \"sue for mercy\" and if not \"they must expect to be exterminated\". Around 57 to 87 Maloloan people were killed in this encounter.\nCakobau and the wars against Christian infiltration.\nThe 1840s was a time of conflict where various Fiji clans attempted to assert dominance over each other. Eventually, a warlord named Seru Epenisa Cakobau of Bau Island was able to become a powerful influence in the region. His father was Ratu Tanoa Visawaqa, the Vunivalu (a chiefly title meaning warlord\",\" often translated also as paramount chief) who had previously subdued much of western Fiji. Cakobau, following on from his father, became so dominant that he was able to expel the Europeans from Levuka for five years over a dispute about their giving of weapons to his local enemies. In the early 1850s, Cakobau went one step further and declared war on all Christians. His plans were thwarted after the missionaries in Fiji received support from the already converted Tongans and the presence of a British warship. The Tongan Prince Enele Ma\u02bbafu, a Christian, had established himself on the island of Lakeba in 1848, forcibly converting the local people to the Methodist Church. Cakobau and other chiefs in the west of Fiji regarded Ma\u02bbafu as a threat to their power and resisted his attempts to expand Tonga's dominion. Cakobau's influence, however, began to wane, and his heavy imposition of taxes on other Fijian chiefs, who saw him at best as first among equals, caused them to defect from him.\nAround this time the United States also became interested in asserting their power in the region, and they threatened intervention following a number of incidents involving their consul in the Fiji islands, John Brown Williams. In 1849, Williams had his trading store looted following an accidental fire, caused by stray cannon fire during a Fourth of July celebration, and in 1853 the European settlement of Levuka was burnt to the ground. Williams blamed Cakobau for both these incidents, and the U.S. representative wanted Cakobau's capital at Bau destroyed in retaliation. A naval blockade was instead set up around the island which put further pressure on Cakobau to give up on his warfare against the foreigners and their Christian allies. Finally, on 30 April 1854, Cakobau offered his \"soro\" (supplication) and yielded to these forces. He underwent the \"lotu\" and converted to Christianity. The traditional Fijian temples in Bau were destroyed, and the sacred \"nokonoko\" trees were cut down. Cakobau and his remaining men were then compelled to join with the Tongans, backed by the Americans and British, to subjugate the remaining chiefs in the region who still refused to convert. These chiefs were soon defeated with Qaraniqio of the Rewa being poisoned and Ratu Mara of Kaba being hanged in 1855. After these wars, most regions of Fiji, except for the interior highland areas, had been forced into giving up much of their traditional systems and were now vassals of Western interest. Cakobau was retained as a largely symbolic representative of a few Fijian peoples and was allowed to take the ironic and self proclaimed title of \"Tui Viti\" (\"King of Fiji\"), but the overarching control now lay with foreign powers.\nCotton, confederacies and the Kai Colo.\nThe rising price of cotton in the wake of the American Civil War (1861\u20131865) caused an influx of hundreds of settlers to Fiji in the 1860s from Australia and the United States in order to obtain land and grow cotton. Since there was still a lack of functioning government in Fiji, these planters were often able to get the land in violent or fraudulent ways such as exchanging weapons or alcohol with Fijians who may or may not have been the true owners. Although this made for cheap land acquisition, competing land claims between the planters became problematic with no unified government to resolve the disputes. In 1865, the settlers proposed a confederacy of the seven main native kingdoms in Fiji to establish some sort of government. This was initially successful, and Cakobau was elected as the first president of the confederacy.\nWith the demand for land high, the white planters started to push into the hilly interior of Viti Levu. This put them into direct confrontation with the Kai Colo, which was a general term to describe the various Fijian clans resident to these inland districts. The Kai Colo were still living a mostly traditional lifestyle, they were not Christianised, and they were not under the rule of Cakobau or the confederacy. In 1867, a travelling missionary named Thomas Baker was killed by Kai Colo in the mountains at the headwaters of the Sigatoka River. The acting British consul, John Bates Thurston, demanded that Cakobau lead a force of Fijians from coastal areas to suppress the Kai Colo. Cakobau eventually led a campaign into the mountains but suffered a humiliating loss with 61 of his fighters being killed. Settlers also came into conflict with the local eastern Kai Colo people called the Wainimala. Thurston called in the Australia Station section of the Royal Navy for assistance. The Navy duly sent Commander Rowley Lambert and to conduct a punitive mission against the Wainimala. An armed force of 87 men shelled and burnt the village of Deoka, and a skirmish ensued which resulted in the deaths of over 40 Wainimala.\nKingdom of Fiji (1871\u20131874).\nAfter the collapse of the confederacy, Enele Ma\u02bbafu established a stable administration in the Lau Islands and the Tongans. Other foreign powers such as the United States were considering the possibility of annexing Fiji. This situation was not appealing to many settlers, almost all of whom were British subjects from Australia. Britain, however, refused to annex the country, and a compromise was needed.\nIn June 1871, George Austin Woods, an ex-lieutenant of the Royal Navy, managed to influence Cakobau and organise a group of like-minded settlers and chiefs into forming a governing administration. Cakobau was declared the monarch (\"Tui Viti\") and the Kingdom of Fiji was established. Most Fijian chiefs agreed to participate, and even Ma'afu chose to recognise Cakobau and participate in the constitutional monarchy. However, many of the settlers had come from Australia, where negotiation with the indigenous people almost universally involved coercing them to accept very unfavourable terms. These settlers' expectation of dominating by force led them to form several aggressive, racially motivated groups, such as the British Subjects Mutual Protection Society. One group called themselves the Ku Klux Klan in homage to the white supremacist group in America. However, when respected individuals such as Charles St Julian, Robert Sherson Swanston and John Bates Thurston were appointed by Cakobau, a degree of authority was established.\nWith the rapid increase in white settlers entering the country, the desire for land acquisition also intensified. Once again, conflict with the Kai Colo in the interior of Viti Levu ensued. In 1871, the killing of two settlers near the Ba River in the northwest of the island prompted a large punitive expedition of white farmers, imported slave labourers, and coastal Fijians to be organised. This group of around 400 armed vigilantes, including veterans of the U.S. Civil War, had a battle with the Kai Colo near the village of Cubu, in which both sides had to withdraw. The village was destroyed, and the Kai Colo, despite being armed with muskets, received numerous casualties. The Kai Colo responded by making frequent raids on the settlements of the whites and Christian Fijians throughout the district of Ba. Likewise, in the east of the island on the upper reaches of the Rewa River, villages were burnt, and many Kai Colo were shot by the vigilante settler squad called the Rewa Rifles.\nAlthough the Cakobau government did not approve of the settlers taking justice into their own hands, it did want the Kai Colo subjugated and their land sold. The solution was to form an army. Robert S. Swanston, the minister for Native Affairs in the Kingdom, organised the training and arming of suitable Fijian volunteers and prisoners to become soldiers in what was variably called the King's Troops or the Native Regiment. In a similar system to the Native Police that was present in the colonies of Australia, two white settlers, James Harding and W. Fitzgerald, were appointed as the head officers of this paramilitary brigade. The formation of this force did not sit well with many of the white plantation owners as they did not trust an army of Fijians to protect their interests.\nThe situation intensified further in early 1873 when the Burns family was killed by a Kai Colo raid in the Ba River area. The Cakobau government deployed 50 King's Troopers to the region under the command of Major Fitzgerald to restore order. The local whites refused their posting, and deployment of another 50 troops under Captain Harding was sent to emphasise the government's authority. To prove the worth of the Native Regiment, this augmented force went into the interior and massacred about 170 Kai Colo people at Na Korowaiwai. Upon returning to the coast, the force was met by the white settlers who still saw the government troops as a threat. A skirmish between the government's troops and the white settlers' brigade was only prevented by the intervention of Captain William Cox Chapman of , who detained the settlers' leaders, forcing the group to disband. The authority of the King's Troops and the Cakobau government to crush the Kai Colo was now total.\nFrom March to October 1873, a force of about 200 King's Troops under the general administration of Swanston with around 1,000 coastal Fijian and white volunteer auxiliaries, led a campaign throughout the highlands of Viti Levu to annihilate the Kai Colo. Major Fitzgerald and Major H.C. Thurston (the brother of John Bates Thurston) led a two pronged attack throughout the region. The combined forces of the different clans of the Kai Colo made a stand at the village of Na Culi. The Kai Colo were defeated with dynamite and fire being used to flush them out from their defensive positions amongst the mountain caves. Many Kai Colo were killed, and one of the main leaders of the hill clans, Ratu Dradra, was forced to surrender with around 2,000 men, women and children being taken prisoner and sent to the coast. In the months after this defeat, the only main resistance was from the clans around the village of Nibutautau. Major Thurston crushed this resistance in the two months following the battle at Na Culi. Villages were burnt, Kai Colo were killed, and a further large number of prisoners were taken. About 1,000 of the prisoners (men, women and children) were sent to Levuka where some were hanged and the rest were sold into slavery and forced to work on various plantations throughout the islands.\nBlackbirding and slavery in Fiji.\nThe blackbirding era began in Fiji in 1865 when the first New Hebridean and Solomon Islands labourers were transported there to work on cotton plantations. The American Civil War had cut off the supply of US cotton to the international market when the Union blockaded Confederate ports. Cotton cultivation was potentially an extremely profitable business. Thousands of European planters flocked to Fiji to establish plantations, but found the natives unwilling to adapt to their plans. They sought labour from the Melanesian islands. On 5 July 1865 Ben Pease received the first licence to provide 40 labourers from the New Hebrides to Fiji.\nThe British and Queensland governments tried to regulate this recruiting and transport of labour. Melanesian labourers were to be recruited for a term of three years, paid three pounds per year, issued basic clothing, and given access to the company store for supplies. Most Melanesians were recruited by deceit, usually being enticed aboard ships with gifts, and then locked up. In 1875, the chief medical officer in Fiji, Sir William MacGregor, listed a mortality rate of 540 out of every 1,000 labourers. After the expiry of the three-year contract, the government required captains to transport the labourers back to their villages, but most ship captains dropped them off at the first island they sighted off the Fiji waters. The British sent warships to enforce the law (Pacific Islanders Protection Act 1872 (35 &amp; 36 Vict. c. 19)), but only a small proportion of the culprits were prosecuted.\nA notorious incident of the blackbirding trade was the 1871 voyage of the brig \"Carl\", organised by Dr. James Patrick Murray to recruit labourers to work in the plantations of Fiji. Murray had his men reverse their collars and carry black books, to appear as church missionaries. When islanders were enticed to a religious service, Murray and his men would produce guns and force the islanders onto boats. During the voyage Murray shot about 60 islanders. He was never brought to trial for his actions, as he was given immunity in return for giving evidence against his crew members. The captain of the \"Carl\", Joseph Armstrong, was later sentenced to death.\nIn addition to the blackbirded labour from other Pacific islands, thousands of people indigenous to the Fijian archipelago were sold into slavery on the plantations. As the white settler backed Cakobau government, and later the British colonial government, subjugated areas in Fiji under its power, the resultant prisoners of war were regularly sold at auction to the planters. This provided a source of revenue for the government and also dispersed the rebels to different, often isolated islands where the plantations were located. The land that was occupied by these people before they became slaves was then also sold for additional revenue. An example of this is the Lovoni people of Ovalau, who after being defeated in a war with the Cakobau government in 1871, were rounded up and sold to the settlers at \u00a36 per head. Two thousand Lovoni men, women and children were sold, and their period of slavery lasted five years. Likewise, after the Kai Colo wars in 1873, thousands of people from the hill tribes of Viti Levu were sent to Levuka and sold into slavery. Warnings from the Royal Navy stationed in the area that buying these people was illegal were largely given without enforcement, and the British consul in Fiji, Edward Bernard Marsh, regularly turned a blind eye to this type of labour trade.\nBritish annexation.\nDespite achieving military victories over the Kai Colo, the Cakobau government was faced with problems of legitimacy and economic viability. Indigenous Fijians and white settlers refused to pay taxes, and the cotton price had collapsed. With these major issues in mind, John Bates Thurston approached the British government, at Cakobau's request, with another offer to cede the islands. The newly elected Tory British government under Benjamin Disraeli encouraged expansion of the empire and was therefore much more sympathetic to annexing Fiji than it had been previously. The murder of Bishop John Patteson of the Melanesian Mission at Nukapu in the Reef Islands had provoked public outrage, which was compounded by the massacre by crew members of more than 150 Fijians on board the brig \"Carl.\" Two British commissioners were sent to Fiji to investigate the possibility of an annexation. The question was complicated by maneuverings for power between Cakobau and his old rival, Ma'afu, with both men vacillating for many months. On 21 March 1874, Cakobau made a final offer, which the British accepted. On 23 September, Sir Hercules Robinson, soon to be appointed the British Governor of Fiji, arrived on HMS \"Dido\" and received Cakobau with a royal 21-gun salute. After some vacillation, Cakobau agreed to renounce his \"Tui Viti\" title, retaining the title of \"Vunivalu\", or Protector. The formal cession took place on 10 October 1874, when Cakobau, Ma'afu, and some of the senior chiefs of Fiji signed two copies of the Deed of Cession. Thus the Colony of Fiji was founded; 96 years of British rule followed.\nMeasles epidemic of 1875.\nTo celebrate the annexation of Fiji, Hercules Robinson, who was Governor of New South Wales at the time, took Cakobau and his two sons to Sydney. There was a measles outbreak in that city and the three Fijians all came down with the disease. On returning to Fiji, the colonial administrators decided not to quarantine the ship on which the convalescents travelled. This was despite the British having a very extensive knowledge of the devastating effect of infectious disease on an unexposed population. In 1875\u201376 the resulting epidemic of measles killed over 40,000 Fijians, about one-third of the Fijian population. Some Fijians allege that this failure of quarantine was a deliberate action to introduce the disease into the country. Historians have found no such evidence; the disease spread before the new British governor and colonial medical officers had arrived, and no quarantine rules existed under the outgoing regime.\nSir Arthur Gordon and the Little War.\nRobinson was replaced as Governor of Fiji in June 1875 by Sir Arthur Hamilton Gordon. Gordon was immediately faced with an insurgency of the Qalimari and Kai Colo people. In early 1875, colonial administrator Edgar Leopold Layard had met with thousands of highland clans at Navuso to formalise their subjugation to British rule and Christianity. Layard and his delegation managed to spread the measles epidemic to the highlanders, causing mass deaths in this population. As a result, anger at the British colonists flared throughout the region, and a widespread uprising quickly took hold. Villages along the Sigatoka River and in the highlands above this area refused British control, and Gordon was tasked with quashing this rebellion.\nIn what Gordon termed the \"Little War\", the suppression of this uprising took the form of two co-ordinated military campaigns in the western half of Viti Levu. The first was conducted by Gordon's second cousin, Arthur John Lewis Gordon, against the Qalimari insurgents along the Sigatoka River. The second campaign was led by Louis Knollys against the Kai Colo in the mountains to the north of the river. Governor Gordon invoked a type of martial law in the area where Arthur John Lewis Gordon and Knollys had absolute power to conduct their missions outside of any restrictions of legislation. The two groups of rebels were kept isolated from each other by a force led by Walter Carew and George Le Hunte who were stationed at Nasaucoko. Carew also ensured the rebellion did not spread east by securing the loyalty of the Wainimala people of the eastern highlands. The war involved the use of the soldiers of the old Native Regiment of Cakobau supported by around 1,500 Christian Fijian volunteers from other areas of Viti Levu. The colonial New Zealand Government provided most of the advanced weapons for the army including 100 Snider rifles.\nThe campaign along the Sigatoka River was conducted under a scorched earth policy whereby numerous rebel villages were burnt and their fields ransacked. After the capture and destruction of the main fortified towns of Koroivatuma, Bukutia and Matanavatu, the Qalimari surrendered \"en masse\". Those not killed in the fighting were taken prisoner and sent to the coastal town of Cuvu. This included 827 men, women and children as well as Mudu, the leader of the insurgents. The women and children were distributed to places like Nadi and Nadroga. Of the men, 15 were sentenced to death at a hastily conducted trial at Sigatoka. Governor Gordon was present, but chose to leave the judicial responsibility to his relative, Arthur John Lewis Gordon. Four were hanged and ten, including Mudu, were shot with one prisoner managing to escape. By the end of proceedings the governor noted that \"my feet were literally stained with the blood that I had shed\".\nThe northern campaign against the Kai Colo in the highlands was similar but involved removing the rebels from large, well protected caves in the region. Knollys managed to clear the caves \"after some considerable time and large expenditure of ammunition\". The occupants of these caves included whole communities, and as a result many men, women and children were either killed or wounded in these operations. The rest were taken prisoner and sent to the towns on the northern coast. The chief medical officer in British Fiji, William MacGregor, also took part both in killing Kai Colo and tending to their wounded. After the caves were taken, the Kai Colo surrendered and their leader, Bisiki, was captured. Various trials were held, mostly at Nasaucoko under Le Hunte, and 32 men were either hanged or shot including Bisiki, who was killed trying to escape.\nBy the end of October 1876, the \"Little War\" was over, and Gordon had succeeded in vanquishing the rebels in the interior of Viti Levu. Remaining insurgents were sent into exile with hard labour for up to 10 years. Some non-combatants were allowed to return to rebuild their villages, but many areas in the highlands were ordered by Gordon to remain depopulated and in ruins. Gordon also constructed a military fortress, Fort Canarvon, at the headwaters of the Sigatoka River where a large contingent of soldiers were based to maintain British control. He renamed the Native Regiment, the Armed Native Constabulary to lessen its appearance of being a military force.\nTo further consolidate social control throughout the colony, Governor Gordon introduced a system of appointed chiefs and village constables in the various districts to both enact his orders and report any disobedience from the populace. Gordon adopted the chiefly titles \"Roko\" and \"Buli\" to describe these deputies and established a Great Council of Chiefs which was directly subject to his authority as Supreme Chief. This body remained in existence until being suspended by the military-backed interim government in 2007 and only abolished in 2012.\nGordon also extinguished the ability of Fijians to own, buy or sell land as individuals, the control being transferred to colonial authorities.\nIndian indenture system in Fiji.\nGordon decided in 1878 to import indentured labourers from India to work on the sugarcane fields that had taken the place of the cotton plantations. The 463 Indians arrived on 14 May 1879 \u2013 the first of some 61,000 that were to come before the scheme ended in 1916. The plan involved bringing the Indian workers to Fiji on a five-year contract, after which they could return to India at their own expense; if they chose to renew their contract for a second five-year term, they would be given the option of returning to India at the government's expense, or remaining in Fiji. The great majority chose to stay. The Queensland Act, which regulated indentured labour in Queensland, was made law in Fiji also.\nBetween 1879 and 1916, tens of thousands of Indians moved to Fiji to work as indentured labourers, especially on sugarcane plantations. Given the steady influx of ships carrying indentured Indians to Fiji up until 1916, repatriated Indians generally boarded these same ships on their return voyage. The total number of repatriates under the Fiji indenture system is recorded as 39,261, while the number of arrivals is said to have been 60,553. Because the return figure includes children born in Fiji, many of the indentured Indians never returned to India.\nTuka rebellions.\nWith almost all aspects of indigenous Fijian social life being controlled by the British colonial authorities, a number of charismatic individuals preaching dissent and return to pre-colonial culture were able to forge a following amongst the disenfranchised. These movements were called Tuka, which roughly translates as \"those who stand up\". The first Tuka movement was led by Ndoongumoy, better known as Navosavakandua, which means \"he who speaks only once\". He told his followers that if they returned to traditional ways and worshipped traditional deities such as Degei and Rokola, their current condition would be transformed, with the whites and their puppet Fijian chiefs being subservient to them. Navosavakandua was previously exiled from the Viti Levu highlands in 1878 for disturbing the peace, and the British quickly arrested him and his followers after this open display of rebellion. He was again exiled, this time to Rotuma where he died soon after his 10-year sentence ended.\nOther Tuka organisations, however, soon appeared. The British colonial administration ruthlessly suppressed both the leaders and followers, with figureheads such as Sailose being banished to an asylum for 12 years. In 1891, entire populations of villages who were sympathetic to the Tuka ideology were deported as punishment. Three years later in the highlands of Vanua Levu, where locals had re-engaged in traditional religion, Governor Thurston ordered in the Armed Native Constabulary to destroy the towns and the religious relics. Leaders were jailed and villagers exiled or forced to amalgamate into government-run communities. Later, in 1914, Apolosi Nawai came to the forefront of Fijian Tuka resistance by founding Viti Kabani, a co-operative company that would legally monopolise the agricultural sector and boycott European planters. The British and their proxy Council of Chiefs were not able to prevent the Viti Kabani's rise, and again the colonists were forced to send in the Armed Native Constabulary. Apolosi and his followers were arrested in 1915, and the company collapsed in 1917. Over the next 30 years, Apolosi was re-arrested, jailed and exiled, with the British viewing him as a threat right up to his death in 1946.\nWorld War I and II.\nFiji was only peripherally involved in World War I. One memorable incident occurred in September 1917 when Count Felix von Luckner arrived at Wakaya Island, off the eastern coast of Viti Levu, after his raider, , had run aground in the Cook Islands following the shelling of Papeete in the French colony of Tahiti. On 21 September, the district police inspector took a number of Fijians to Wakaya, and von Luckner, not realising that they were unarmed, unwittingly surrendered.\nCiting unwillingness to exploit the Fijian people, the colonial authorities did not permit Fijians to enlist. One Fijian of chiefly rank, a great-grandson of Cakobau, joined the French Foreign Legion and received France's highest military decoration, the Croix de Guerre. After going on to complete a law degree at Oxford University, this same chief returned to Fiji in 1921 as both a war hero and the country's first-ever university graduate. In the years that followed, Ratu Sir Lala Sukuna, as he was later known, established himself as the most powerful chief in Fiji and forged embryonic institutions for what would later become the modern Fijian nation.\nBy the time of World War II, the United Kingdom had reversed its policy of not enlisting natives, and many thousands of Fijians volunteered for the Fiji Infantry Regiment, which was under the command of Ratu Sir Edward Cakobau, another great-grandson of Cakobau. The regiment was attached to New Zealand and Australian army units during the war. Because of its central location, Fiji was selected as a training base for the Allies. An airstrip was built at Nadi (later to become an international airport), and gun emplacements studded the coast. Fijians gained a reputation for bravery in the Solomon Islands campaign, with one war correspondent describing their ambush tactics as \"death with velvet gloves\". Corporal Sefanaia Sukanaivalu, of Yucata, was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross, as a result of his bravery in the Battle of Bougainville.\nResponsible government and independence.\nA constitutional conference was held in London in July 1965 to discuss constitutional changes with a view to introducing responsible government. Indo-Fijians, led by A. D. Patel, demanded the immediate introduction of full self-government, with a fully elected legislature, to be elected by universal suffrage on a common voters' roll. These demands were vigorously rejected by the ethnic Fijian delegation, who still feared loss of control over natively owned land and resources should an Indo-Fijian dominated government come to power. The British made it clear, however, that they were determined to bring Fiji to self-government and eventual independence. Acknowledging their lack of choice, Fiji's chiefs decided to negotiate for the best deal they could get.\nA series of compromises led to the establishment of a cabinet system of government in 1967, with Ratu Kamisese Mara as the first Chief Minister. Ongoing negotiations between Mara and Sidiq Koya, who had taken over the leadership of the mainly Indo-Fijian National Federation Party on Patel's death in 1969, led to a second constitutional conference in London, in April 1970, at which Fiji's Legislative Council agreed on a compromise electoral formula and a timetable for independence as a fully sovereign and independent nation within the Commonwealth. The Legislative Council would be replaced with a bicameral Parliament, with a Senate dominated by Fijian chiefs and a popularly elected House of Representatives. In the 52-member House, Native Fijians and Indo-Fijians would each be allocated 22 seats, of which 12 would represent communal constituencies comprising voters registered on strictly ethnic roles, and another 10 representing national constituencies to which members were allocated by ethnicity but elected by universal suffrage. A further 8 seats were reserved for \"general electors\" \u2013 Europeans, Chinese, Banaban Islanders, and other minorities; 3 of these were \"communal\" and 5 \"national\". With this compromise, it was agreed that Fiji would become independent.\nThe British flag, the Union Jack, was lowered for the last time at sunset on 9 October 1970 in the capital Suva. The Fijian flag was raised after dawn on the morning of 10 October 1970; the country had officially become independent at midnight.\nIndependence.\n1987 coups d'\u00e9tat.\nThe British granted Fiji independence in 1970. Democratic rule was interrupted by two military coups in 1987 precipitated by a growing perception that the government was dominated by the Indo-Fijian (Indian) community. The second 1987 coup saw both the Fijian monarchy and the Governor General replaced by a non-executive president and the name of the country changed from \"Dominion of Fiji\" to \"Republic of Fiji\" and then in 1997 to \"Republic of the Fiji Islands\". The two coups and the accompanying civil unrest contributed to heavy Indo-Fijian emigration; the resulting population loss resulted in economic difficulties and ensured that Melanesians became the majority.\nIn 1990, the new constitution institutionalised ethnic Fijian domination of the political system. The Group Against Racial Discrimination (GARD) was formed to oppose the unilaterally imposed constitution and to restore the 1970 constitution. In 1992 Sitiveni Rabuka, the Lieutenant Colonel who had carried out the 1987 coup, became Prime Minister following elections held under the new constitution. Three years later, Rabuka established the Constitutional Review Commission, which in 1997 wrote a new constitution which was supported by most leaders of the indigenous Fijian and Indo-Fijian communities. Fiji was re-admitted to the Commonwealth of Nations.\n2000 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nIn 2000, a coup was instigated by George Speight, which effectively toppled the government of Mahendra Chaudhry, who in 1997 had become the country's first Indo-Fijian Prime Minister following the adoption of the new constitution. Commodore Frank Bainimarama assumed executive power after the resignation, possibly forced, of President Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara. Later in 2000, Fiji was rocked by two mutinies when rebel soldiers went on a rampage at Suva's Queen Elizabeth Barracks. The High Court ordered the reinstatement of the constitution, and in September 2001, to restore democracy, a general election was held which was won by interim Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase's Soqosoqo Duavata ni Lewenivanua party.\nIn 2005, the Qarase government amid much controversy proposed a Reconciliation and Unity Commission with power to recommend compensation for victims of the 2000 coup and amnesty for its perpetrators. However, the military, especially the nation's top military commander, Frank Bainimarama, strongly opposed this bill. Bainimarama agreed with detractors who said that to grant amnesty to supporters of the present government who had played a role in the violent coup was a sham. His attack on the legislation, which continued unremittingly throughout May and into June and July, further strained his already tense relationship with the government.\n2006 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nIn late November and early December 2006, Bainimarama was instrumental in the 2006 Fijian coup d'\u00e9tat. Bainimarama handed down a list of demands to Qarase after a bill was put forward to parliament, part of which would have offered pardons to participants in the 2000 coup attempt. He gave Qarase an ultimatum date of 4 December to accede to these demands or to resign from his post. Qarase adamantly refused either to concede or resign, and on 5 December President Ratu Josefa Iloilo signed a legal order dissolving the parliament after meeting with Bainimarama.\nCiting corruption in the government, Bainimarama staged a military takeover on 5 December 2006 against the prime minister that he had installed after a 2000 coup. The commodore took over the powers of the presidency and dissolved the parliament, paving the way for the military to continue the takeover. The coup was the culmination of weeks of speculation following conflict between the elected prime minister, Laisenia Qarase, and Bainimarama. Bainimarama had repeatedly issued demands and deadlines to the prime minister. A particular issue was previously pending legislation to pardon those involved in the 2000 coup. Bainimarama named Jona Senilagakali as caretaker prime minister. The next week Bainimarama said he would ask the Great Council of Chiefs to restore executive powers to the president, Ratu Josefa Iloilo.\nOn 4 January 2007, the military announced that it was restoring executive power to Iloilo, who made a broadcast endorsing the actions of the military. The next day, Iloilo named Bainimarama as the interim prime minister, indicating that the military was still effectively in control. In the wake of the takeover, reports emerged of alleged intimidation of some of those critical of the interim regime.\n2009 transfer of power.\nIn April 2009, the Fiji Court of Appeal overturned the High Court decision that Bainimarama's takeover of Qarase's government was lawful and declared the interim government to be illegal. Bainimarama agreed to step down as interim prime minister immediately, along with his government, and President Iloilo was to appoint a new prime minister. President Iloilo abrogated the constitution, and removed all office holders under the constitution including all judges and the governor of the Central Bank. In his own words, he \"appoint[ed] [him]self as the Head of the State of Fiji under a new legal order\". He then reappointed Bainimarama under his \"New Order\" as interim prime minister and imposed a \"Public Emergency Regulation\" limiting internal travel and allowing press censorship.\nOn 2 May 2009, Fiji became the first nation ever to have been suspended from participation in the Pacific Islands Forum, for its failure to hold democratic elections by the date promised. Nevertheless, it remains a member of the Forum.\nOn 1 September 2009, Fiji was suspended from the Commonwealth of Nations. The action was taken because Bainimarama failed to hold elections by 2010 as the Commonwealth of Nations had demanded after the 2006 coup. Bainimarama stated a need for more time to end a voting system that heavily favoured ethnic Fijians at the expense of the multi-ethnic minorities. Critics claimed that he had suspended the constitution and was responsible for human rights violations by arresting and detaining opponents.\nIn his 2010 New Year's address, Bainimarama announced the lifting of the Public Emergency Regulations (PER). However, the PER was not rescinded until January 2012, and the Suva Philosophy Club was the first organisation to reorganise and convene public meetings. The PER had been put in place in April 2009 when the former constitution was abrogated. The PER had allowed restrictions on speech, public gatherings, and censorship of news media and had given security forces added powers. He also announced a nationwide consultation process leading to a new constitution under which the 2014 elections were held.\nThe official name of the country was reverted to \"Republic of Fiji\" in February 2011.\nSince 2014.\nOn 14 March 2014, the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group voted to change Fiji's full suspension from the Commonwealth of Nations to a suspension from the councils of the Commonwealth, allowing them to participate in a number of Commonwealth activities, including the 2014 Commonwealth Games. The suspension was lifted in September 2014.\nThe FijiFirst party, led by Prime Minister Frank Bainimarama, won outright majority in the country's 51-seat parliament both in 2014 election and narrowly in 2018 election. In October 2021, Tui Macuata Ratu Wiliame Katonivere was elected the new President of Fiji by the parliament.\nOn 24 December 2022, Sitiveni Rabuka, the head of the People's Alliance (PAP), became Fiji's 12th prime minister, succeeding Bainimarama, following the December 2022 general election.\nGeography.\nFiji lies approximately southwest of Hawaii and roughly from Sydney, Australia. Fiji is the hub of the Southwest Pacific, midway between Vanuatu and Tonga. The archipelago is located between 176\u00b0 53\u2032 east and 178\u00b0 12\u2032 west. The archipelago is roughly and less than 2 percent is dry land. The 180\u00b0 meridian runs through Taveuni, but the International Date Line is bent to give uniform time (UTC+12) to all of the Fiji group. With the exception of Rotuma, the Fiji group lies between 15\u00b0 42\u2032 and 20\u00b0 02\u2032 south. Rotuma is located north of the group, from Suva, 12\u00b0 30\u2032 south of the equator.\nFiji covers a total area of some of which around 10% is land. Fiji consists of 332 islands (of which 106 are inhabited) and 522 smaller islets. The two most important islands are Viti Levu and Vanua Levu, which account for about three-quarters of the total land area of the country. The islands are mountainous, with peaks up to 1,324 metres (4,341\u00a0ft), and covered with thick tropical forests.\nThe highest point is Mount Tomanivi on Viti Levu. Viti Levu hosts the capital city of Suva and is home to nearly three-quarters of the population. Other important towns include Nadi (the location of the international airport), and Lautoka, Fiji's second largest city with large sugar cane mills and a seaport.\nThe main towns on Vanua Levu are Labasa and Savusavu. Other islands and island groups include Taveuni and Kadavu (the third and fourth largest islands, respectively), the Mamanuca Group (just off Nadi) and Yasawa Group, which are popular tourist destinations, the Lomaiviti Group, off Suva, and the remote Lau Group. Rotuma has special administrative status in Fiji. Ceva-i-Ra, an uninhabited reef, is located about southwest of the main archipelago.\nFiji contains two ecoregions: Fiji tropical moist forests and Fiji tropical dry forests. It had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 8.35/10, ranking it 24th globally out of 172 countries.\nClimate.\nThe climate in Fiji is tropical marine and warm year round with minimal extremes. The warm season is from November to April, and the cooler season lasts from May to October. Temperatures in the cool season average . Rainfall is variable, with the warm season experiencing heavier rainfall, especially inland. For the larger islands, rainfall is heavier on the southeast portions of the islands than on the northwest portions, with consequences for agriculture in those areas. Winds are moderate, though cyclones occur about once annually (10\u201312 times per decade).\nClimate change in Fiji is an exceptionally pressing issue for the country \u2013 as an island nation, Fiji is particularly vulnerable to rising sea levels, coastal erosion and extreme weather. These changes, along with temperature rise, will displace Fijian communities and will prove disruptive to the national economy \u2013 tourism, agriculture and fisheries, the largest contributors to the nation's GDP, will be severely impacted by climate change causing increases in poverty and food insecurity. As a party to both the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Climate Agreement, Fiji hopes to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050 which, along with national policies, will help to mitigate the impacts of climate change. The governments of Fiji and other island states at risk from climate change (Niue, the Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Tonga and Vanuatu) launched the \"Port Vila Call for a Just Transition to a Fossil Fuel Free Pacific\", calling for the phase out fossil fuels and the 'rapid and just transition' to renewable energy and strengthening environmental law including introducing the crime of ecocide.\nGovernment and politics.\nPolitics in Fiji normally take place in the framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic wherein the Prime Minister of Fiji is the head of government and the President the Head of State, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government, legislative power is vested in both the government and the Parliament of Fiji, and the judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nA general election took place on 17 September 2014. Bainimarama's FijiFirst party won with 59.2% of the vote, and the election was deemed credible by a group of international observers from Australia, India and Indonesia.\nIn the 2018 election FijiFirst won with 50.02 per cent of the total votes cast. It held its outright majority in the parliament, winning 27 of the 51 seats. The Social Democratic Liberal Party (SODELPA) came in second with 39.85 per cent of the vote.\nIn the 2022 election FijiFirst lost its parliamentary majority. Sitiveni Rabuka of People's Alliance party, with the backing of the Social Liberal Democratic party (Sodelpa), became Fiji's new Prime Minister to succeed Frank Bainimarama.\nArmed forces and law enforcement.\nThe military consists of the Republic of Fiji Military Forces with a total manpower of 3,500 active soldiers and 6,000 reservists, and includes a Navy unit of 300 personnel. The land force comprises the Fiji Infantry Regiment (regular and territorial force organised into six light infantry battalions), Fiji Engineer Regiment, Logistic Support Unit and Force Training Group. Relative to its size, Fiji has fairly large armed forces and has been a major contributor to UN peacekeeping missions in various parts of the world. In addition, a significant number of former military personnel have served in the lucrative security sector in Iraq following the 2003 U.S.-led invasion.\nThe law enforcement branch is composed of the Fiji Police Force and Fiji Corrections Service.\nAdministrative divisions.\nFiji is divided into four major divisions which are further divided into 14 provinces. They are:\nFiji was divided into three confederacies or governments during the reign of Seru Epenisa Cakobau, though these are not considered political divisions, they are still considered important in the social divisions of the indigenous Fijians:\nEconomy.\nEndowed with forest, mineral, and fish resources, Fiji is one of the most developed of the Pacific island economies, though still with a large subsistence sector. Some progress was experienced by this sector when Marion M. Ganey introduced credit unions to the islands in the 1950s. Natural resources include timber, fish, gold, copper, offshore oil, and hydropower. Fiji experienced a period of rapid growth in the 1960s and 1970s but stagnated in the 1980s. The coups of 1987 caused further contraction.\nEconomic liberalisation in the years following the coups created a boom in the garment industry and a steady growth rate despite growing uncertainty regarding land tenure in the sugar industry. The expiration of leases for sugar cane farmers (along with reduced farm and factory efficiency) has led to a decline in sugar production despite subsidies for sugar provided by the EU. Fiji's gold mining industry is based in Vatukoula.\nUrbanisation and expansion in the service sector have contributed to recent GDP growth. Sugar exports and a rapidly growing tourist industry\u00a0\u2013 with tourists numbering 430,800 in 2003 and increasing in the subsequent years\u00a0\u2013 are the major sources of foreign exchange. Fiji is highly dependent on tourism for revenue. Sugar processing makes up one-third of industrial activity. Long-term problems include low investment and uncertain property rights.\nThe South Pacific Stock Exchange (SPSE) is the only licensed securities exchange in Fiji and is based in Suva. Its vision is to become a regional exchange.\nTourism.\nFiji has a significant amount of tourism with the popular regions being Nadi, the Coral Coast, Denarau Island, and Mamanuca Islands. The biggest sources of international visitors by country are Australia, New Zealand and the United States. Fiji has a significant number of soft coral reefs, and scuba diving is a common tourist activity. Fiji's main attractions to tourists are primarily white sandy beaches and aesthetically pleasing islands with all-year tropical weather. In general, Fiji is a mid-range priced holiday/vacation destination with most of the accommodations in this range. It also has a variety of world-class five-star resorts and hotels. More budget resorts are being opened in remote areas, which will provide more tourism opportunities. CNN named Fiji's Laucala Island Resort as one of the fifteen world's most beautiful island hotels.\nOfficial statistics show that in 2012, 75% of visitors stated that they came for a holiday/vacation. Honeymoons are very popular as are romantic getaways in general. There are also family-friendly resorts with facilities for young children including kids' clubs and nanny options. Fiji has several popular tourism destinations. The Botanical Gardens of Thursten in Suva, Sigatoka Sand Dunes, and Colo-I-Suva Forest Park are three options on the mainland (Viti Levu). A major attraction on the outer islands is scuba diving.\nAccording to the Fiji Bureau of Statistics, most visitors arriving to Fiji on a short-term basis are from the following countries or regions of residence:\nFiji has also served as a location for various Hollywood movies starting from the \"Mr Robinson Crusoe\" in 1932 to \"The Blue Lagoon\" (1980) starring Brooke Shields and \"Return to the Blue Lagoon\" (1991) with Milla Jovovich. Other popular movies shot in Fiji include \"Cast Away\" (2000) and \"\" (2004).\nThe U.S. version of the reality television show \"Survivor\" has filmed all of its semiannual seasons in the Mamanuca Islands since its in 2016. Typically, two 39-day competitions will be filmed back to back, with the first season airing in the fall of that year, and the second airing in the spring of the following year. This marks the longest consecutive period that \"Survivor\" has filmed in one location. Before the airing of the 35th season (\")\", host Jeff Probst said in an interview with \"Entertainment Weekly\" that the Mamanucas are the optimal location for the show and he would like to stay there permanently.\nTransport.\nAirports Fiji Limited (AFL) is responsible for the operation of 15 public airports in the Fiji Islands. These include two international airports: Nadi international Airport, Fiji's main international gateway, and Nausori Airport, Fiji's domestic hub, and 13 outer island airports. Fiji's main airline is Fiji Airways. The Nadi International Airport is located north of central Nadi and is the largest Fijian hub. Nausori International Airport is about northeast of downtown Suva and serves mostly domestic traffic with flights from Australia and New Zealand. The main airport in the second largest island of Vanua Levu is Labasa Airport located at Waiqele, southwest of Labasa Town. The largest aircraft handled by Labasa Airport is the ATR 72.\nFiji's larger islands have extensive bus routes that are affordable and consistent in service. There are bus stops, and in rural areas buses are often simply hailed as they approach. Buses are the principal form of public transport and passenger movement between the towns on the main islands. Buses also serve on inter-island ferries. Bus fares and routes are regulated by the Land Transport Authority (LTA). Bus and taxi drivers hold Public Service Licenses issued by the LTA. Taxis are licensed by the LTA and operate widely all over the country. Apart from urban, town-based taxis, there are others that are licensed to serve rural or semi-rural areas.\nInter-island ferries provide services between Fiji's principal islands, and large vessels operate roll-on-roll-off services such as Patterson Brothers Shipping Company, transporting vehicles and large amounts of cargo between the main island of Viti Levu and Vanua Levu, and other smaller islands.\nScience and technology.\nFiji is the only developing Pacific Island country with recent data for gross domestic expenditure on research and development (GERD), with the exception of Papua New Guinea. The national Bureau of Statistics cites a GERD/GDP ratio of 0.15% in 2012. Private-sector research and development (R&amp;D) is negligible. Government investment in research and development tends to favour agriculture. In 2007, agriculture and primary production accounted for just under half of government expenditure on R&amp;D, according to the Fijian National Bureau of Statistics. This share had risen to almost 60% by 2012. However, scientists publish much more in the field of geosciences and health than in agriculture. The rise in government spending on agricultural research has come to the detriment of research in education, which dropped to 35% of total research spending between 2007 and 2012. Government expenditure on health research has remained fairly constant, at about 5% of total government research spending, according to the Fijian National Bureau of Statistics.\nThe Fijian Ministry of Health is seeking to develop endogenous research capacity through the \"Fiji Journal of Public Health\", which it launched in 2012. A new set of guidelines is now in place to help build endogenous capacity in health research through training and access to new technology.\nFiji is also planning to diversify its energy sector through the use of science and technology. In 2015, the Secretariat of the Pacific Community observed that \"while Fiji, Papua New Guinea and Samoa are leading the way with large-scale hydropower projects, there is enormous potential to expand the deployment of other renewable energy options such as solar, wind, geothermal and ocean-based energy sources\".\nIn 2014, the Centre of Renewable Energy became operational at the University of Fiji, with the assistance of the Renewable Energy in Pacific Island Countries Developing Skills and Capacity programme (EPIC) funded by the European Union. From 2013 to 2017, the European Union funded the EPIC programme, which developed two master's programmes in renewable energy management, one at the University of Papua New Guinea and the other at the University of Fiji, both accredited in 2016. In Fiji, 45 students have enrolled for the master's degree since the launch of the programme and a further 21 students have undertaken a related diploma programme introduced in 2019.\nIn 2020, the Regional Pacific Nationally Determined Contributions Hub Office in Fiji was launched to support climate change mitigation and adaptation. Pacific authors on the frontlines of climate change remain underrepresented in the scientific literature on the impact of disasters and on climate resilience strategies.\nSociety.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe 2017 census found that the population of Fiji was 884,887, compared to the population of 837,271 in the 2007 census. The population density at the time of the 2007 census was 45.8 inhabitants per square kilometre. The life expectancy in Fiji was 72.1 years. Since the 1930s the population of Fiji has increased at a rate of 1.1% per year. The median age of the population was 29.9, and the gender ratio was 1.03 males per 1 female.\nFiji's score on the 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI) is 10.2, which indicates a moderate level of hunger.\nEthnic groups.\nThe population of Fiji is mostly made up of native Fijians (54.3%), who are Melanesians, although many also have Polynesian ancestry; and Indo-Fijians (38.1%), descendants of Indian contract labourers brought to the islands by the British colonial powers in the 19th century. The percentage of the population of Indo-Fijian descent has declined significantly over the last two decades through migration for various reasons. Indo-Fijians suffered reprisals for a period after the coup of 2000. Relationships between ethnic Fijians and Indo-Fijians in the political arena have often been strained, and the tension between the two communities has dominated politics in the islands for the past generation. The level of political tension varies among different regions of the country.\nAbout 1.2% of the population is Rotuman \u2013 natives of Rotuma Island, whose culture has more in common with countries such as Tonga or Samoa than with the rest of Fiji. There are also small but economically significant groups of Europeans, Chinese, and other Pacific island minorities.\nThe membership of other ethnic groups is about 4.5%. 3,000 people or 0.3% of the people living in Fiji are from Australia.\nThe concept of family and community is of great importance to Fijian culture. Within the indigenous communities many members of the extended family will adopt particular titles and roles of direct guardians. Kinship is determined through a child's lineage to a particular spiritual leader, so that a clan is based on traditional customary ties as opposed to actual biological links. These clans, based on the spiritual leader, are known as a matangali. Within the matangali are a number of smaller collectives, known as the mbito. The descent is patrilineal, and all the status is derived from the father's side.\nDemonym.\nFiji's constitution refers to all Fijian citizens as \"Fijians\". Former constitutions referred to citizens of Fiji as \"Fiji Islanders\", though the term \"Fiji nationals\" was used for official purposes. In August 2008, shortly before the proposed People's Charter for Change, Peace and Progress was due to be released to the public, it was announced that it recommended a change in the name of Fiji's citizens. If the proposal were adopted, all citizens of Fiji, whatever their ethnicity, would be called \"Fijians\". The proposal would change the English name of indigenous Fijians from \"Fijians\" to \"itaukei\", the Fijian language endonym for indigenous Fijians. Deposed Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase reacted by stating that the name \"Fijian\" belonged exclusively to indigenous Fijians, and that he would oppose any change in legislation enabling non-indigenous Fijians to use it. The Methodist Church, to which a large majority of indigenous Fijians belong, also reacted strongly to the proposal, stating that allowing every Fiji citizen to call themselves \"Fijian\" would be \"daylight robbery\" inflicted on the indigenous population.\nIn an address to the nation during the constitutional crisis of April 2009, military leader and interim Prime Minister Voreqe Bainimarama, who was at the forefront of the attempt to change the definition of \"Fijian\", stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I know we all have our different ethnicities, our different cultures and we should, we must, celebrate our diversity and richness. However, at the same time we are all Fijians. We are all equal citizens. We must all be loyal to Fiji; we must be patriotic; we must put Fiji first.\nIn May 2010, Attorney-General Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum reiterated that the term \"Fijian\" should apply to all Fiji nationals, but the statement was again met with protest. A spokesperson for the Viti Landowners and Resource Owners Association claimed that even fourth-generation descendants of migrants did not fully understand \"what it takes to be a Fijian\", and added that the term refers to a legal standing, since legislation affords specific rights to \"Fijians\" (meaning, in that legislation, indigenous Fijians).\nLanguages.\nFiji has three official languages under the 1997 constitution (and not revoked by the 2013 Constitution): English, Fijian (iTaukei), and Hindi. (Fiji Hindi is a variety of Hindi common in Fiji.)\nFijian is an Austronesian language of the Malayo-Polynesian family spoken in Fiji. It has 350,000 native speakers, and another 200,000 speak it as a second language. There are many dialects of the language across the Fiji Islands, which may be classified in two major branches\u2014eastern and western. Missionaries in the 1840s chose an eastern dialect, the speech of Bau Island, to be their written standard of the Fijian language. Bau Island was home to Seru Epenisa Cakobau, the chief who eventually became the self-proclaimed King of Fiji.\nFiji Hindi, also known as Fijian Baat or Fijian Hindustani, is the language spoken by most Fijian citizens of Indian descent. It is derived mainly from the Awadhi and Bhojpuri varieties of Hindi. It has also borrowed a large number of words from Fijian and English. The relation between Fiji Hindi and Standard Hindi is similar to the relation between Afrikaans and Dutch. Indian indentured labourers were initially brought to Fiji mainly from districts of eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, North-West Frontier and South India such as from Andhra and Tamil Nadu. They spoke numerous, mainly Hindi, dialects and languages depending on their district of origin.\nEnglish, a remnant of British colonial rule over the islands, was the sole official language until 1997 and is widely used in government, business and education as a lingua franca.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2017 census, 69.2% of the population was Christian, while 24.0% was Hindu, 5.8% Muslim, and 1.04% belonged to other religions including Sikhism. As of 2007, among Christians, 54% were counted as Methodist, followed by 14.2% Catholic, 8.9% Assemblies of God, 6.0% Seventh-day Adventist, 1.2% Anglican with the remaining 16.1% belonging to other denominations.\nThe largest Christian denomination is the Methodist Church of Fiji and Rotuma. With 34.6% of the population (including almost two-thirds of ethnic Fijians), the proportion of the population adhering to Methodism is higher in Fiji than in any other nation. Fijian Catholics are administered by the Archdiocese of Suva. The archdiocese is the metropolitan see of an ecclesiastical province which includes the Dioceses of Rarotonga (on the Cook Islands, for those and Niue, both New Zealand-associated countries) and Tarawa and Nauru (with see at Tarawa on Kiribati, also for Nauru) and the Mission sui iuris of Tokelau (New Zealand).\nThe Assemblies of God and the Seventh-day Adventist denominations are significantly represented. Fiji is the base for the Anglican Diocese of Polynesia (part of the Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia).These and other denominations have small numbers of Indo-Fijian members; Christians of all kinds comprised 6.1% of the Indo-Fijian population in the 1996 census. Hindus in Fiji mostly belong to the Sanatan sect (74.3% of all Hindus) or else are unspecified (22%). Muslims in Fiji are mostly Sunni (96.4%).\nEducation.\nFiji has a high literacy rate (91.6 percent), and although there is no compulsory education, more than 85 percent of the children between the ages of 6 and 13 attend primary school. Schooling is free and provided by both public and church-run schools. Generally, the Fijian and Hindi children attend separate schools, reflecting the political split that exists in the nation.\nPrimary education.\nIn Fiji, the role of government in education is to provide an environment in which children realise their full potential, and school is free from age 6 to 14. The primary school system consists of eight years of schooling and is attended by children from the ages of 6 to 14 years. Upon completion of primary school, a certificate is awarded and the student is eligible to take the secondary school examination.\nSecondary education.\nHigh school education may continue for a total of five years following an entry examination. Students either leave after three years with a Fiji school leaving certificate, or remain on to complete their final two years and qualify for tertiary education. Entry into the secondary school system, which is a total of five years, is determined by a competitive examination. Students passing the exam then follow a three-year course that leads to the Fiji School Leaving Certificate and the opportunity to attend senior secondary school. At the end of this level, they may take the Form VII examination, which covers four or five subjects. Successful completion of this process gains students access to higher education.\nTertiary education.\nThe University of the South Pacific, called the crossroads of the South Pacific because it serves ten English-speaking territories in the South Pacific, is the major provider of higher education. Admission to the university requires a secondary school diploma, and all students must take a one-year foundation course at the university regardless of their major. Financing for the university is derived from school fees, funds from the Fiji government and other territories, and aid from Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and the United Kingdom. In addition to the university, Fiji also has teacher-training colleges, as well as medical, technological, and agricultural schools. Primary school teachers are trained for two years, whereas secondary school teachers train for three years; they then have the option to receive a diploma in education or read for a bachelor's degree in arts or science and continue for an additional year to earn a postgraduate certificate of education.\nThe Fiji Polytechnic School offers training in various trades, apprenticeship courses, and other courses that lead to diplomas in engineering, hotel catering, and business studies. Some of the course offerings can also lead to several City and Guilds of London Institute Examinations. In addition to the traditional educational system, Fiji also offers the opportunity to obtain an education through distance learning. The University Extension Service provides centres and a network of terminals in most regional areas. For students taking non-credit courses, no formal qualifications are necessary. However, students who enroll in the credit courses may be awarded the appropriate degree or certificate upon successful completion of their studies through the extension services.\nCulture.\nWhile indigenous Fijian culture and traditions are very vibrant and are integral components of everyday life for the majority of Fiji's population, Fijian society has evolved over the past century with the introduction of traditions such as Indian and Chinese as well as significant influences from Europe and Fiji's Pacific neighbours, particularly Tonga and Samoa. Thus, the various cultures of Fiji have come together to create a unique multicultural national identity.\nFiji's culture was showcased at the World Exposition held in Vancouver, Canada, in 1986 and more recently at the Shanghai World Expo 2010, along with other Pacific countries in the Pacific Pavilion.\nSport.\nSports are very popular in Fiji, particularly sports involving physical contact. Fiji's national sport is Rugby sevens. Cricket is a minor sport in Fiji. Cricket Fiji is an associate member of the International Cricket Council (\"ICC\"). Netball is the most popular women's participation sport in Fiji. The national team has been internationally competitive, at Netball World Cup competitions reaching 6th position in 1999, its highest level to date. The team won gold medals at the 2007 and 2015 Pacific Games.\nBecause of the success of Fiji's national basketball teams, the popularity of basketball has experienced rapid growth in recent years. In the past, the country only had few basketball courts, which severely limited Fijians who desired to practice the sport more frequently. Through recent efforts by the national federation Basketball Fiji and with the support of the Australian government, many schools have been able to construct courts and provide their students with basketball equipment.\nVijay Singh, a PGA golfer from Fiji, was ranked the world number one male golfer for a total of 32 weeks.\nRugby union.\nRugby union is the most-popular team sport played in Fiji. The Fiji national sevens side is a popular and successful international rugby sevens team and has won the Hong Kong Sevens a record eighteen times since its inception in 1976. Fiji has also won the Rugby World Cup Sevens twice \u2013 in 1997 and 2005. The Fiji national rugby union sevens team is the reigning Sevens World Series Champions in World Rugby. In 2016, they won Fiji's first ever Olympic medal in the Rugby sevens at the Summer Olympics, winning gold by defeating Great Britain 43\u20137 in the final.\nThe national rugby union team is a member of the Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance formerly along with Samoa and Tonga. In 2009, Samoa announced their departure from the Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance, leaving just Fiji and Tonga in the union. Fiji is currently ranked eleventh in the world by the IRB (as of 2015[ [update]]). The national rugby union team has competed at five Rugby World Cup competitions, the first being in 1987, where they reached the quarter-finals. The team again qualified in the 2007 Rugby World Cup when they upset Wales 38\u201334 to progress to the quarter-finals where they lost to the eventual Rugby World Cup winners, South Africa.\nFiji competes in the Pacific Tri-Nations and the IRB Pacific Nations Cup. The sport is governed by the Fiji Rugby Union which is a member of the Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance, and contributes to the Pacific Islanders rugby union team. At the club level there are the Skipper Cup and Farebrother Trophy Challenge.\nRugby league.\nThe Fiji national rugby league team, nicknamed the Bati (pronounced [m\u02c8bat\u0283i]), represents Fiji in the sport of rugby league football and has been participating in international competition since 1992. It has competed in the Rugby League World Cup on three occasions, with their best results coming when they made consecutive semi-final appearances in the 2008 Rugby League World Cup, 2013 Rugby League World Cup and 2019 Rugby League World Cup. The team also competes in the Pacific Cup.\nAssociation football.\nAssociation football was traditionally a minor sport in Fiji, popular largely amongst the Indo-Fijian community, but with international funding from FIFA and sound local management over the past decade, the sport has grown in popularity in the wider Fijian community. It is now the second most-popular sport in Fiji, after rugby for men and after netball for women.\nThe Fiji Football Association is a member of the Oceania Football Confederation. The national football team defeated New Zealand 2\u20130 in the 2008 OFC Nations Cup, on their way to a joint-record third-place finish. However, they have never reached a FIFA World Cup to date. Fiji won the Pacific Games football tournament in 1991 and 2003. Fiji qualified for the 2016 Summer Olympics men's tournament for the first time in history.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10709", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10709", "title": "Geography of Finland", "text": " \nThe geography of Finland is characterized by its northern position, its ubiquitous landscapes of intermingled boreal forests and lakes, and its low population density. Finland can be divided into three areas: archipelagoes and coastal lowlands, a slightly higher central lake plateau and uplands to north and northeast. Bordering the Baltic Sea, Gulf of Bothnia, and Gulf of Finland, as well as Sweden to the west, Norway (one of Finland's non-EU neighbours) to the north, and Russia (another non-EU neighbour) to the east, Finland is the northernmost country in the European Union. Most of the population and agricultural resources are concentrated in the south. Northern and eastern Finland are sparsely populated containing vast wilderness areas. Taiga forest is the dominant vegetation type.\nSize and external boundaries.\nFinland's total area is . Of this area 10% is water, 69% forest, 8% cultivated land and 13% other. Finland is the eighth largest country in Europe after Russia, Ukraine, France, Spain, Sweden, Norway and Germany.\nAs a whole, the shape of Finland's boundaries resembles a figure of a one-armed human. In Finnish, parallels are drawn between the figure and the national personification of Finland \u2013 Finnish Maiden (\"Suomi-neito\") \u2013 and the country as a whole can be referred in the Finnish language by her name. Even in official context the area around Enonteki\u00f6 in northwestern part of the country between Sweden and Norway can be referred to as the \"Arm\" (\"k\u00e4sivarsi\"). After the Continuation War Finland lost major land areas to the Soviet Union in the Moscow Armistice of 1944, and the figure was said to have lost the other of her arms, as well as a hem of her \"skirt\".\nRelief and geology.\nGeology.\nThe bedrock of Finland belong to the Baltic Shield and was formed by a succession of orogenies in Precambrian time. The oldest rocks of Finland, those of Archean age, are found in the east and north. These rocks are chiefly granitoids and migmatitic gneiss. Rocks in central and western Finland originated or came to place during the Svecokarelian orogeny. Following this last orogeny Rapakivi granites intruded various locations of Finland during the Mesoproterozoic and Neoproterozoic, specially at \u00c5land and the southeast. So-called Jotnian sediments occur usually together with Rapakivi granites. The youngest rocks in Finland are those found in the northwestern arm which belong to Scandinavian Caledonides that assembled in Paleozoic times. During the Caledonian orogeny Finland was likely a sunken foreland basin covered by sediments, subsequent uplift and erosion would have eroded all of these sediments.\nRelief and hydrography.\nAbout one third of Finland lies below 100 m, and about two thirds lies under 200 m. Finland can be divided into three topographical areas; the coastal landscapes, the interior lake plateau also known as Finnish lake district and Upland Finland. The coastal landscapes are made up mostly of plains below 20 m. These plains tilt gently towards the sea so that where its irregularities surpasses sea-level groups of islands like the Kvarken Archipelago or the \u00c5land Islands are found. \u00c5land is connected to the Finnish mainland by a shallow submarine plateau that does not exceed 20 m in depth. Next to the Gulf of Bothnia the landscape of Finland is extremely flat with height differences no larger than 50 m. This region called the Ostrobothnian Plain extends inland about 100\u00a0km and constitute the largest plain in the Nordic countries.\nThe interior lake plateau is dominated by undulating hilly terrain with valley to top height differences of 100 or less and occasionally up to 200 m. Only the area around the lakes Pielinen and P\u00e4ij\u00e4nne stand with a subtly more pronounced relief. The relief of the interior lake plateau bears some resemblance to the Swedish Norrland terrain. Upland Finland and areas higher than 200 m are found mostly in the north and east of the country where hills and mountains exceed 500 m in height in these regions. Inselberg plains are common in the northern half of the country. In the northern region more known as Lapland, highest points reach mostly from 200 m to 600 m and the landscape is a f\u00f6rfj\u00e4ll (fore-fell). However the most northern parts represent a more dramatic mountain landscape where the Halti fell represents a highest point (1361 m) in the country.\nThe subdued landscape of Finland is the result of protracted erosion that has leveled down ancient mountain massifs into near-flat landforms called peneplains. The last major leveling event resulted in the formation of the Sub-Cambrian peneplain in Late Neoproterozoic time. While Finland has remained very close to sea-level since the formation of this last peneplain some further relief was formed by a slight uplift resulting in the carving of valleys by rivers. The slight uplift also means that at parts the uplifted peneplain can be traced as summit accordances. The Quaternary ice ages resulted in the erosion of weak rock and loose materials by glaciers. When the ice masses retreated eroded depressions turned into lakes. Fractures in Finland's bedrock were particularly affected by weathering and erosion, leaving as result trace straight sea and lake inlets.\nExcept a few rivers along the coasts most rivers in Finland drain at some stage into one or more lakes. The drainage basins drain into various directions. Much of Finland drains into the Gulf of Bothnia including the country's largest and longest rivers, Kokem\u00e4enjoki and Kemijoki respectively. Finland's largest lake drains by Vuoksi River into Lake Ladoga in Russia. Upland Finland in the east drains east across Russian Republic of Karelia into the White Sea. In the northeast Lake Inari discharges by Paatsjoki into Barents Sea in the Arctic.\nQuaternary glaciation.\nThe ice sheet that covered Finland intermittently during the Quaternary grew out from the Scandinavian Mountains. During the last deglaciation the first parts of Finland to become ice-free, the southeastern coast, did so slightly prior to the Younger Dryas cold-spell 12,700 years before present (BP). The retreat of the ice cover occurred simultaneously from the north-east, the east and southeast. The retreat was fastest from the southeast resulting in the lower course of Tornio being the last part of Finland to be deglaciated. Finally by 10,100 years BP the ice cover had all but left Finland to concentrate in Sweden and Norway before fading away.\nAs the ice sheet became thinner and retreated the land begun to rise by effect of isostacy. Much of Finland was under water when the ice retreated and was gradually uplifted in a process that continues today. Albeit not all areas were drowned at the same time it is estimated at time or another about 62% has been under water. Depending on location in Finland the ancient shoreline reached different maximum heights. In southern Finland 150 to 160 m, in central Finland about 200 m and in eastern Finland up to 220 m.\nClimate.\nLatitude is the principal influence on Finland's climate. Because of Finland's northern location, winter is the longest season. Only in the south coast is summer as long as winter. On the average, winter lasts from early December to mid March in the archipelago and the southwestern coast and from early October to early May in Lapland. This means that southern portions of the country are snow-covered about three months of the year and the northern, about seven months. The long winter causes about half of the annual of precipitation in the north to fall as snow. Precipitation in the south amounts to about annually. Like that of the north, it occurs all through the year, though not so much of it is snow.\nThe Atlantic Ocean to the west and the Eurasian continent to the east interact to modify the climate of the country. The warm waters of the Gulf Stream and the North Atlantic Drift Current, which warm Norway and Sweden, also warm Finland. Westerly winds bring the warm air currents into the Baltic areas and to the country's shores, moderating winter temperatures, especially in the south. These winds, because of clouds associated with weather systems accompanying the westerlies, also decrease the amount of sunshine received during the summer. By contrast, the continental high pressure system situated over the Eurasian continent counteracts the maritime influences, occasionally causing severe winters and high temperatures in the summer.\nThe highest ever recorded temperature is (Liperi, 29 July 2010). The lowest, (Kittil\u00e4, 28 January 1999). The annual middle temperature is relatively high in the southwestern part of the country (), with quite mild winters and warm summers, and low in the northeastern part of Lapland ().\nTemperature extremes for every month:\nExtreme highs:\nExtreme lows:\nArea and boundaries.\nArea:\n\"total:\"\n\"land:\"\n\"water:\"\nArea \u2013 comparative:\nslightly smaller than Germany, Montana, and Newfoundland and Labrador\nLand boundaries:\n\"total:\"\n\"border countries:\"\nNorway , Sweden , Russia \nCoastline:\nMaritime claims:\n\"Territorial sea:\"\n, in the Gulf of Finland; there is a stretch of international waters between Finnish and Estonian claims; Bogsk\u00e4r has separate internal waters and 3 nmi of territorial waters\n\"Contiguous zone:\"\n\"Exclusive economic zone:\"\n\"Continental shelf:\"\n depth or to the depth of exploitation\nElevation extremes:\n\"lowest point:\"\nBaltic Sea 0\u00a0m\n\"highest point:\"\nHaltitunturi \nResources and land use.\nNatural resources:\ntimber, iron ore, copper, lead, zinc, chromite, nickel, gold, silver, limestone\nLand use:\n\"agricultural land:\" 7.5% (2018 est.)\n\"arable land:\" 7.4% (2018 est.)\n\"permanent crops:\" 0% (2018 est.)\n\"permanent pasture:\" 0.1% (2018 est.)\n\"forest:\" 72.9% (2018 est.)\n\"other:\" 19.6% (2018 est.)\nIrrigated land:\n690\u00a0km2 (2012)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n110 billion\u00a0m3 (2017 est.)\nFreshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):\n\"municipal:\" 400 million\u00a0m3 (2017 est.)\n\"industrial:\" 1.417 billion\u00a0m3 (2017 est.)\n\"agricultural:\" 50 million\u00a0m3 (2017 est.)\nEnvironmental concerns.\nNatural hazards:\nCold periods in winter pose a threat to the unprepared.\nEnvironment \u2013 current issues:\nAir pollution from manufacturing and power plants contributing to acid rain; water pollution from industrial wastes, agricultural chemicals; habitat loss threatens wildlife populations.\nEnvironment \u2013 international agreements:\n\"party to:\"\nAir Pollution, Air Pollution-Heavy Metals, Air Pollution-Multi-effect Protocol, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants (signed 2001, ratified 2002), Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protection, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol (signed May 1998, ratified together with 14 other EU countries May 31, 2002), Climate Change-Paris Agreement, Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping-London Convention, Marine Dumping-London Protocol, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 2006, Wetlands, Whaling.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10710", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10710", "title": "Demographics of Finland", "text": "The demographics of Finland is monitored by the Statistics Finland (, ). Finland has a population of over 5.6 million people, ranking it 19th out of 27 within the European Union. The average population density in Finland is , making it the third most sparsely populated country in Europe, after Iceland and Norway. Population distribution is extremely uneven, with the majority of the population concentrated in the southern and western regions of the country. The majority of the Finnish population - approximately 73% - lives in urban areas. Approximately million, or almost 30%, reside solely in the Helsinki Metropolitan Area. Conversely, the Arctic Lapland region contains only .\nUntil recently, Finland has been mainly an ethnically homogeneous country, with native Finns being the dominant ethnic group. However, with increased immigration, the country is slowly becoming more ethnically diverse. In addition, Finland is home to significant groups of Finno-Swedish, S\u00e1mi and Roma minorities, which have long historical roots in the country. The official languages are Finnish and Swedish, of which 84.1 percent and 5.1 percent of the population respectively speak as their mother tongue. Finland was a part of the Swedish kingdom for around 500 years.\nDue to recent immigration, significant populations of ethnic Estonians, Russians, Ukrainians, Iraqis, Chinese, Somalis, Filipinos, Indians and Iranians, now reside in the country.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], Statistics Finland has published data on the foreign population using three different methods. The Finnish population includes persons of foreign origin and background, who make up 11.1% of the total population. In additional calculations, the proportion of persons born outside Finland is 10.3%. Persons with a mother tongue other than Finnish, Swedish or S\u00e1mi account for 10.8%.\nIn the history of Finland, the first human settlement originated approximately 11,000 BC, following the end of the Ice Age. The initial settlers of present-day Finland were presumably hunter-gatherers. They were later replaced by the S\u00e1mi, followed by Finnic populations from the east, south and west. The initial dependable population information dates back to 1749 when Swedish officials initially recorded population statistics. Finland was a part of the Swedish Kingdom until it became a Grand Duchy ruled by the Russian Empire in 1809, and finally gained its full independence in 1917.\nIn the late 19th and 20th centuries, significant emigration, primarily from rural areas, occurred to Sweden and North America, while Finland's primary immigrant source was other European countries. Approximately 300,000 Finnish nationals reside abroad and, according to estimates, the number of individuals of Finnish ancestry worldwide ranges from 1.6 to 2 million. Currently, Sweden, the United Kingdom, Germany, the United States, and Spain are the preferred destinations for most Finnish emigrants.\nOne of the primary challenges facing society in the future is adapting to demographic changes, particularly the aging of the population. The proportion of the working-age population is decreasing, resulting in projected labour shortages. However, immigration has significantly increased in recent years. If the current trend persists, the population of Finland will continue to increase and could even reach the milestone of 6 million people by 2040.\nPopulation.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], there are 5,635,971 people in Finland.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nHistorical population.\nThe first human settlement in Finland originated around 11,000 BC, following the end of the Ice Age. The initial inhabitants of modern-day Finland were presumably hunter-gatherers. There is no information about the language spoken by the first inhabitants. However, it is known that the Finnish and S\u00e1mi languages emerged thousands of years later. Archaeological, linguistic, and genetic studies support the notion that the country was inhabited from south to north, with a population of a few thousand during prehistoric times. The S\u00e1mi people then succeeded the previous inhabitants, followed by the influx of Finnic people from the east, west, and south who eventually replaced them. The S\u00e1mi people now number around 10,000 in Finland as a minority. Although they have lived north of the Arctic Circle for 7,000 years, they make up only 5% of the population of the province of Lapland.\nThe reliable population data is available from 1749, when Sweden first compiled population statistics. At that time, the population of Finland stood at 410,400 individuals. The threshold of one million inhabitants was surpassed subsequent to the Finnish War (1808\u20131809) in 1811, upon the annexation of the Old Finland region. The milestone of five million inhabitants was reached in 1991.\nExceeding the million population milestones:\nUntil the beginning of the 20th century, annual population growth fluctuated between 1% and 2%. There were a few exceptional years of negative growth during times of war and destruction. The significant demographic and economic transformations that took place in Finland post-World War II affected the composition of Finnish families. Over time, family sizes reduced noticeably, declining from an average of 3.6 individuals in 1950 to an average of 2.7 in 1975. Despite this change, family structures remained relatively constant during the 25-year period, with 24.4% of families consisting of a man and a woman, 61.9% comprising a couple and children, 11.8% consisting of a woman with offspring, and 1.9% consisting of a man with offspring. There were no substantial differences in percentages compared to 1950.\nNonetheless, fewer children were born per family; the average decreased from 2.24 in 1950 to 1.7 in the 1980s. Large families were infrequent, with only 2% having four or more children, while 51% had a single child; 38% had two children, and 9% had three children. Population growth declined to below 0.5% in the 1970s, and to approximately 0.2% in the 1990s. In recent years, however, population growth has recovered partially, rising to approximately 0.5%, partly due to increased immigration.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDistribution and density.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], the population density of Finland was 18.5 persons per square kilometre. The region of Uusimaa was the most densely populated region with around 196 persons per square kilometre, while Lapland was the least densely populated region with only around two persons per square kilometre. The populace is heavily clustered in the west and south of Finland, where the largest urban centres are situated. There are a total of nine cities in Finland with more than 100,000 residents.\nThe geographical center of population (Weber point) of the Finnish population is currently located in Hauho, in the village of Sappee, now part of the town of H\u00e4meenlinna. The coordinates of this point are 61' 17\" N, 25' 07\" E.\nFertility.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nAs of 2023[ [update]], the birth rate dropped to its lowest level on record since 1776 with a total fertility rate of 1.26. A total of 43,320 children were born, and 38,179 (85%) of them were delivered by women who speak Finnish, Swedish or S\u00e1mi, the country's national languages. As of 2020[ [update]], the average age of first-time mothers was 29.7 years old. The mean age of women who have given birth to a live child was 31.3 years.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], people with a foreign background in Finland had higher fertility rates than those with Finnish roots. Women of foreign descent, either born abroad (1.7) or in Finland (1.65), had the most substantial total fertility rates, averaging 1.45 for all women in Finland. Women of Finnish lineage had a slightly higher fertility rate of 1.4. For men, the total fertility rate was just above 1.3, with Finnish men slightly under the average. In contrast, men of foreign origin, whether born abroad or in Finland, exhibited a fertility rate of approximately 1.45 each. Since 2018, the most frequent countries of affiliation for women of foreign origin delivering infants have been former Soviet Union countries, Somalia, and Iraq.\nHistorical fertility rates.\nIn the 18th century, Finland recorded a fertility rate of 5-6 children per woman, but population growth was hindered by high infant mortality, with approximately 1 in 5 infants dying before their first birthday. Fertility remained relatively steady in the 19th century, with occasional variations. During times of conflict, such as the Finnish war, and periods of famine, birth rates declined, but eventually normalised. Presently, some developing countries have fertility rates similar to those of Finland in the 18th and 19th centuries.\nAs the 19th century drew to a close, the traditional agrarian society began to crumble. Simultaneously, the industrial and service sectors witnessed a surge in job opportunities, and urban migration intensified. Manufacturing plants mushroomed in proximity to rivers. Fewer children being born played a role in the rising living standards. However, it is important to note that contraceptive methods were limited to the rhythm method and interrupted intercourse.\nThe decline in fertility experienced a noteworthy acceleration in the early 20th century. In 1900, the fertility rate stood at 4.8, which plummeted to 2.3 by 1933. In the late 1930s, fertility rates experienced an uptick, but it later plummeted due to the war, particularly in 1940 as a result of the Winter War. Although the ceasefire caused a spike in births, the resumption of hostilities stalled family planning efforts. Post-war in autumn 1944, there was a resurgence in births, leading to a total fertility rate of 3.1 in 1945, reaching a peak of 3.5 in 1947\u20131948, a record that remains unbroken. However, fertility rates began a steady decline, dipping below the generational renewal threshold of 2.1 by 1969. Finnish fertility rates have not recovered to this level since.\nThe decline persisted until 1973, when it hit a historic low of 1.5 children per woman. In recent years, there have been fluctuations, with fertility rates fluctuating between 1.7 and 1.9. As of the 2020s, Finland's overall fertility rate has fallen below 1.4.\nThe fertility rate in Finland exceeded that of neighbouring countries for the duration of the 20th century. However, since 2010, there has been a significant decline, whereas other Nordic countries have not experienced such a trend until more recently. It is a recent development that Sweden and Finland have similar social policies and incomes, however, Finland is the only country experiencing natural population decrease (excluding immigration).\nAge.\nThe Finnish population is ageing. Life expectancy has also increased in recent decades. Population growth has mainly been driven by immigration. Furthermore, the population is increasingly concentrated in urban areas in southern and western Finland.\nLife expectancy and mortality.\nIn the mid-18th century, when population statistics were initially recorded, Finland recorded an annual death rate of over 10,000, with yearly fluctuations. The overall mortality rate was at 26 and men had a life expectancy of 36.1 years during the 1750s, while women had an expectancy of 38.4 years. The gender gap in life expectancy was a few years at that time.\nThe rapid spread of various infectious diseases such as cholera caused mortality up until the 1870s. The war years significantly increased mortality rates in the civilian population. During this time, the highest mortality rates were recorded during the Finnish War of 1808-09 and the cholera outbreak of 1832\u201333, which caused the deaths of a significant portion of the population. The years 1867-68 were marked as years of high death rates, with the latter year seeing a peak of 137,700 deaths.\nBefore the turn of the 20th century, mortality rates were notably high, but they gradually decreased thereafter. During that time period, the life expectancy of a newborn saw a significant increase to 42.8 years for men and 45.7 years for women. The gender gap in life expectancy already stood at three years. Starting from the beginning of the 20th century, improvements in hygiene, prevention of communicable diseases, and advancements in vaccinations and medicines played crucial roles in accelerating the decline in mortality rates, as compared to previous decades. On the eve of World War II, life expectancy for males stood at 53.4 years and for females, 59.0 years, constituting a five-year gap between them. The life expectancy took almost two centuries to increase by 20 years since the 18th century. In contrast, the succeeding two decades only required 40 years to attain the same growth by the mid-20th century.\nVital statistics.\nData from Statistics Finland, which is the official agency for the collection of statistics in Finland.. The Old Finland (Vanha Suomi) territories were incorporated into the new Grand Duchy of Finland in 1811.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotable events in Finnish demographics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nIn the year 2023 36,174 (83.4%) babies were born to mothers with Finnish background, and 7,209 (16.6%) to mothers with foreign background. Persons with Finnish background are defined as persons who have at least one parent born in Finland. Of those newborns that have mothers with foreign background 2,741 had Asian mothers, 2,683 had European mothers (both EU and non-EU countries), 1,355 had African mothers, and 171 had American mothers. 249 babies were born to mothers with unknown background.\nLanguages.\nOfficial and national languages.\nFinland has two official languages (national languages): Finnish and Swedish. In addition, there are other languages that are officially recognised by the authorities, but are not national languages. The S\u00e1mi languages are those of Finland's indigenous people. Indigenous languages with a long history in Finland include Finnish Romani (Kalo), Finnish Sign Language, Finnish-Swedish Sign Language and Karelian. Finnish, which belongs to the Uralic languages, is spoken by approximately 4.9 million people in Finland as a first language and by more than 0.5 million as a second language. It is also spoken in Sweden, Norway, Eastern Karelia, Ingria (Russia), the USA and Australia, with various dialects. Written Finnish dates back 500 years.\nSwedish, an Indo-European language within the North Germanic branch, is spoken by approximately 9 million people worldwide, including 285,360 (2024) speakers in Finland. Finland Swedish is a regional variety that aims to remain similar to the Swedish spoken in Sweden. The S\u00e1mi languages, which are indigenous to Europe and closely related to the Finnic languages, have approximately 60,000-100,000 speakers, of whom 10,000 live in Finland. There are three S\u00e1mi languages in Finland: Inari S\u00e1mi, Skolt S\u00e1mi and Northern S\u00e1mi, each with its own written form. Since 1992 they have had official status in certain areas of Lapland.\nKarelian, spoken in Finland and Russia, is the closest linguistic relative of Finnish. There are fewer than 100,000 speakers of Karelian, with approximately 5,000 in Finland. Romani, an Indo-European language, belongs to the Indo-Aryan subgroup of the Indo-Iranian branch. Finnish Romani is one of the Northern Romani dialects and has been spoken in Finland for approximately 450 years. Efforts to preserve it as a literary language began in the 1970s. Finnish Sign Language serves as the primary language for 4,000-5,000 deaf Finns and is used as a first or second language by 6,000-9,000 hearing Finns. Finnish-Swedish Sign Language, on the other hand, is endangered, with only 90 users left.\nAll mainland municipalities are monolingual in Finnish or bilingual in Finnish and Swedish. None is monolingual Swedish. However, Swedish is the only official language on the autonomous island of \u00c5land.\nFirst languages of the foreign population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2024[ [update]], 610,148 people, or 10.8%, live in Finland with a first language other than Finnish, Swedish or S\u00e1mi. More than 150 foreign languages are spoken in Finland. However, most of them have only few speakers. Historically, Finland has been a bilingual country where only Finnish or Swedish was spoken. This is slowly changing as the rate of immigration has increased in last three decades. The majority of the Finnish population is able to communicate in English. However, the foreign population is expected to study and speak Finnish or Swedish if they want to integrate into Finnish society.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], the most common foreign languages are Russian (1.8%), Estonian (0.9%), Arabic (0.8%), Ukrainian (0.7%), English (0.7%), Somali (0.5%) and Persian (0.4%). Approximately 70% of the country's foreign speakers live in Finland's six largest cities.\nImmigration.\nStatistics of foreign population.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], Statistics Finland produces statistics on foreign nationals in three different ways:\nNo official statistics exist on ethnicities. Nonetheless, the Finnish population statistics are available according to the birth countries of the residents' parents (foreign background/origin statistics). International census recommendations define an ethnic group by the perception of its members of historical, regional, or national origin. Therefore, data on ethnic status should always be sourced from a person's own statement. Due to the fact that Finland's census is registry-based, official statistics regarding ethnic groups cannot be provided.\nOrigin and background country.\nOrigin and background country - the definition used by Statistics Finland includes all individuals with at least one parent born in Finland as being of Finnish background. Individuals with both parents or only one known parent born abroad are classified as having foreign heritage. If both parents of an individual were born abroad, the mother's country of birth is primarily considered as the background country. For all individuals of Finnish heritage, the background country is Finland.\nCountry of birth.\nThe definition used by Statistics Finland for country of birth is based on the mother's country of permanent residence at the time of birth. Consequently, Estonian immigrants born before Estonian independence are recorded as being born in the Soviet Union, and those born in territories ceded by Finland are listed as being born in Finland, regardless of subsequent territorial changes. This information reflects the government in power at the time of birth and is devoid of subjective evaluations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEmigration.\nHistorically, Finnish emigration began in the 16th century, when Finns worked in Swedish mines, and continued until the 1970s. About 100,000 Finns emigrated to Russia during the Tsarist period, mainly to St Petersburg. Large-scale emigration began in the late 19th century, with about 400,000 Finns moving to the United States and Canada by 1980. After the Second World War, many Finns emigrated to Sweden, reaching a peak in 1970 when 41,000 settled there. An estimated 250,000 to 300,000 Finns became permanent residents of Sweden after the war. However, migration slowed in the 1980s, with more Finns returning than leaving.\nThe impact of emigration on the Finnish labour force and birth rate has been significant. Finland has experienced two major waves of emigration: one at the beginning of the 20th century, when more than 300,000 Finns went to North America, and another from the 1950s to the 1970s, when 400,000 Finns moved to Sweden, forming large expatriate communities.\nApart from these major flows, there have been smaller migrations around the world and some Finns live in different countries. In the 21st century about 14,000 people, mostly of Finnish origin, emigrate every year. Many are well-educated and may return to Finland after a few years. About 300,000 Finnish citizens live abroad and it is estimated that about 1.5 million people of Finnish origin live overseas.\nInternal migration.\nMigration has played an important role in shaping Finnish society throughout its history. Notable instances are the Forest Finns' migration to Sweden during the 15th century and the relocation of Ingrians to the present-day St Petersburg region during the 17th century. Changes in borders resulted in the formation of Finnish settlements outside its territory. Wars and political conflicts led to massive population movements, such as the Karelian evacuation during World War II, which exiled roughly 420,000 individuals within Finland's borders.\nUntil the 1960s, Finland was predominantly an agricultural society. However, waves of urbanization and political transitions have contributed to migration movements. Currently, urbanization continues to be a significant internal migration pattern, with growth centers and sparsely populated regions. Approximately 250,000 people, mainly young adults, make annual municipal moves, which have notable implications for regional development in the 21st century.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBefore Christianisation, Finnish paganism prevailed, venerating deities such as Ukko, the god of thunder and sky. Currently, most of the Finnish population consider themselves nominal Christians, though the proportion of non-religious individuals has increased since the 1980s. As of 2024[ [update]], 62.2% of the population were affiliated with the Evangelical Lutheran Church, 1.0% with the Orthodox Church and 1.9% were members of another religious group. A total of 34.9% have no religious affiliation. The Evangelical Lutheran Church and the Orthodox Church are both entitled to collect church tax. There are around 140 registered religious communities, including Islam, Catholicism, and Jehovah's Witnesses.\nIn Finland, there are also revival movements, which began as spiritual reform movements and are now organized and active within the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland. The historic Finnish revivalist movements emerged in the late 1700s and 1800s and consisted of the Prayer Movement, the Awakened Movement, the Lutheran Evangelical Movement, and the Laestadian Movement. These movements laid out an important religious and social influence on Finnish society during this period.\nReligious freedom is highly valued in Finland and all residents have the right to choose and practice their faith. Religious education is mandatory in Finnish schools, customized to a student's registered denomination if there are a minimum of three pupils who profess that religion.\nEducation.\nThe Finnish educational framework encompasses several developmental phases, from early childhood through pre-primary, primary, and lower secondary (basic education), to gymnasium (lukio), vocational, higher, and adult education. Compulsory education is mandatory for 6 to 18-year-olds, covering pre-primary to upper secondary levels.\nUpon completion of the nine-year basic education, students may opt between gymnasium, culminating in a matriculation exam, or vocational upper secondary, culminating in a vocational qualification. Higher education in Finland consists of universities and universities of applied sciences, which place emphasis on education and research. While universities are authorized to grant doctorates, universities of applied sciences offer vocational education and practical research.\nIn 2012 OECD survey, adults aged 16 to 65 in Finland exhibit exceptional literacy, numeracy, and problem-solving skills in technology compared to other countries surveyed. Young adults aged 16\u201324 have above-average literacy, whereas those aged 55\u201365 perform at an average level, resulting in a massive 37-point age-related gap. In contrast, foreign-language immigrants in Finland demonstrate lower literacy proficiency than native Finns, consistent with the international average.\nLow literacy is correlated with poor health, with individuals reporting low literacy being twice as likely to experience health problems. Furthermore, in Finland, individuals with advanced skill sets have a significantly higher likelihood of being employed when compared to those with lower skill sets, with a difference of almost double.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10711", "revid": "50834884", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10711", "title": "Politics of Finland", "text": "The politics of Finland take place within the framework of a parliamentary representative democracy. Finland is a republic whose head of state is President Alexander Stubb, who leads the nation's foreign policy and is the supreme commander of the Finnish Defence Forces. Finland's head of government is Prime Minister Petteri Orpo, who leads the nation's executive branch, called the Finnish Government. Legislative power is vested in the Parliament of Finland (, ), and the Government has limited rights to amend or extend legislation. The Constitution of Finland vests power to both the President and Government: the President has veto power over parliamentary decisions, although this power can be overruled by a majority vote in the Parliament.\nThe judiciary is independent of the executive and legislative branches. The judiciary consists of two systems: regular courts and administrative courts. The judiciary's two systems are headed by the Supreme Court and the Supreme Administrative Court, respectively. Administrative courts process cases in which official decisions are contested. There is no constitutional court in Finland: the constitutionality of a law can be contested only as applied to an individual court case.\nThe citizens of Finland enjoy many individual and political freedoms, and suffrage is universal at the age of 18; Finnish women became the first in the world to have unrestricted rights both to vote and to run for public office.\nThe country's population is ethnically homogeneous with no sizable immigrant population. Few tensions exist between the Finnish-speaking majority and the Swedish-speaking minority, although in certain circles there is an unending debate about the status of the Swedish language.\nFinland's labor agreements are based on collective bargaining. Bargaining is highly centralized, and often the government participates to coordinate fiscal policy. Finland has universal validity of collective labour agreements and often, but not always, the trade unions, employers, and the Government reach a national income policy agreement. Significant Finnish trade unions include SAK, STTK, AKAVA, and EK.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Finland a \"full democracy\" in . According to the V-Dem Democracy indices Finland was in 2023 the 13th most electoral democratic country in the world.\nHistory.\nAutonomous but under Russian rule.\nA Finnish political identity and distinctively Finnish politics first developed under the Russian rule in the country from 1809 to 1917. During the era Finland had an autonomous position within the Russian Empire with its own legislative powers. However, all bills had to be signed into law by the Russian Emperor who was the Grand Duke of Finland. Military power was firmly in Russian hands. Previously Finland had been a part of Sweden and did not have any political institutions of its own, rather people of Finnish ethnicity participated in Swedish politics.\nIndependence and civil war.\nThe Finnish Senate issued a declaration of independence on 6 December 1917, after Russia's second revolution in October 1917. The Council of People's Commissars of Soviet Russia, chaired by Lenin, recognized Finland's independence on 31 December 1917, and soon after that many other states followed.\nOn 28 January 1918, a civil war broke out that ended in the victory of German-backed Whites against Bolshevik-backed Reds. In the same year the volunteers made some armed expeditions into Soviet Russia, including Karelia, and also Estonia. The Finnish Civil War was part of the First World War. The war was fought between the Finnish Senate, i.e. the forces led by the government, and the Finnish People's Delegation, from 27 January to 16 May 1918. The Senate forces were called Whites and the People's Delegation forces Reds.\nSecond World War.\nDuring the Second World War, Finland fought three wars: the Winter War, the Continuation War and the Lapland War.\nAccording to the ceasefire agreement, in addition to the territorial losses following the Winter War, Finland had to hand over Petsamo and lease Porkkala as a base for 50 years. War reparations were set at US$300 million. The terms of the ceasefire agreement were finally confirmed in the 1947 Paris Peace Treaty.\nUrho Kekkonen's rule.\nAfter the wars, Finland became a Nordic welfare state.\nAt the beginning of 1973, Urho Kekkonen was exceptionally elected president without elections or candidates, which today is considered by some to be the and marked the beginning of the final era for Kekkonen.\nIntegration to the West.\nIn 1982, Mauno Koivisto was elected president to succeed Kekkonen, promising to reduce the powers of the president and increase those of the prime minister.\nThe convergence of Finland and the European Community began in the autumn of 1989 with the decision to join the European Economic Area (EEA).\nFollowing a positive vote in Parliament, Finland's application for EC membership was submitted on 18 March 1992, and membership negotiations began on 1 February 1993 at the same time as with Sweden and Austria.\nFinland joined the European Union in 1995. In 2002, the euro replaced the markka as Finland's official currency.\nAfter almost 30 years of close partnership with NATO, Finland joined the Alliance on 4 April 2023. Finland's partnership with NATO was historically based on its policy of military non-alignment, which changed following Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. On 1 March 2024, Alexander Stubb, a staunch supporter of NATO, was sworn in as Finland's new president.\nConstitution.\nThe current version of the constitution of Finland was written on 1 March 2000. The first iteration of the constitution was adopted on 17 July 1919. The original comprised four constitutional laws and several amendments, which the latter replaced.\nAccording to the constitution, the legislative powers are exercised by the Parliament, the governmental powers are exercised by the President of the Republic and the Government, and the judicial powers are exercised by government-independent courts of law. The Supreme Court may request legislation that interprets or modifies existing laws. Judges are appointed by the President.\nThe constitution of Finland and its place in the judicial system are unusual in that there is no constitutional court and the Supreme Court does not have the explicit right to declare a law unconstitutional. In principle, the constitutionality of laws in Finland is verified by a simple vote by Parliament (see \"parliamentary sovereignty\"). However, the Parliament's Constitutional Law Committee reviews any doubtful bills and recommends changes, if needed. In practice, the Constitutional Law Committee fulfils the duties of a constitutional court. A Finnish peculiarity is the possibility of making exceptions to the constitution in ordinary laws that are enacted in the same procedure as constitutional amendments. An example of such a law is the State of Preparedness Act, which gives the Government certain exceptional powers in cases of national emergency. As these powers, which correspond to US executive orders, affect constitutional basic rights, the law was enacted in the same manner as a constitutional amendment. However, it can be repealed in the same manner as an ordinary law. In addition to preview by the Constitutional Law Committee, all Finnish courts are obligated to give precedence to the constitution when there is an obvious conflict between the constitution and a regular law. Such a case is, however, very rare.\nSome matters are decided by the President of Finland, the Head of State, in plenary meetings with the government, echoing the constitutional history of a privy council. The President is otherwise not present in the government, but decides on issues such as personal appointments and pardons on the advice of the relevant minister. In the ministries, matters of secondary importance are decided by individual ministers, advised by the minister's State Secretary. The Prime Minister and the other ministers in the government are responsible for their actions in office to the Parliament.\nExecutive branch.\nFinland has a parliamentary system, even if the President of Finland is formally responsible for foreign policy. Most executive power lies in the cabinet (the Finnish Government) headed by the prime minister. Responsibility for forming the cabinet out of several political parties and negotiating its platform is granted to the leader of the party gaining largest support in the elections for the parliament. This person also becomes prime minister of the cabinet. Any minister and the cabinet as a whole, however, must have continuing trust of the parliament and may be voted out, resign or be replaced. The Government is made up of the prime minister and the ministers for the various departments of the central government as well as an \"ex officio\" member, the Chancellor of Justice.\nIn the official usage, the \"cabinet\" (\"valtioneuvosto\") are the ministers including the prime minister and the Chancellor of Justice, while the \"government\" (\"hallitus\") is the cabinet presided by the president. In the popular usage, \"hallitus\" (with the president) may also refer to \"valtioneuvosto\" (without the president).\nPresident.\nThough Finland has a primarily parliamentary system, the President has some notable powers. The foreign policy is led by the President in co-operation with the government, and the same applies to matters concerning national security. The main executive power lies in the cabinet, which is headed by the Prime Minister. Before the 2000 constitutional rewrite, the President enjoyed more governing power.\nElected for a six-year term, the president:\nGovernment.\nThe Government is made up of the Prime Minister and other ministers for the ministries of the central government as well as an \"ex officio\" member, the Chancellor of Justice. Ministers are not obliged to be members of Parliament and need not be formally identified with any political party.\nThe Government produces most of the material that the Parliament deals with, such as proposals for new laws or legislative reforms, and the annual budget. The ministers each direct their ministries with relative independence. The current cabinet has 19 ministers in 12 ministries. The number of ministers can be decided by the Government.\nThe Prime Minister's Office and eleven other ministries make up the Government of Finland.\nThe head of government is the Prime Minister, currently Petteri Orpo. The Prime Minister designate is subject to election by the Parliament and subsequent appointment by the President of Finland. All the ministers shall be Finnish citizens, known to be honest and competent.\nMinistries.\nThe ministries function as administrative and political experts and prepare Government decisions within their mandates. They also represent their relevant administrative sectors in domestic and international cooperation.\nNew laws are drafted in ministries. There is a tradition of substantial ministerial independence in law drafting. The drafts are then reviewed by government and parliament before enactment. The final legislative power is vested in Parliament, in conjunction with the President of the Republic, according to the Finnish Constitution.\nThere are 12 ministries in Finland. As the government tends to have more ministers than ministries, some ministries, such as the Ministry of Finance, are associated with multiple ministers.\nParliament.\nThe 200-member unicameral Parliament of Finland (\"Eduskunta\" (Finnish), \"Riksdag\" (Swedish)) is the supreme legislative authority in Finland. The parliament may alter the Constitution of Finland, bring about the resignation of the Government, and override presidential vetoes. Its acts are not subject to judicial review. Legislation may be initiated by the Government, or one of the members of Parliament, who are elected for a four-year term on the basis of proportional representation through open list multi-member districts. Persons 18 or older, except military personnel on active duty and a few high judicial officials, are eligible for election. The regular parliamentary term is four years; however, the president may dissolve the eduskunta and order new elections at the request of the prime minister and after consulting the speaker of parliament.\nThe parliament has, since equal and common suffrage was introduced in 1906, been dominated by secular Conservatives, the Centre Party (former Agrarian Union), and Social Democrats. Nevertheless, none of these has held a single-party majority, with the notable exception of 1916 elections where Social Democrats gained 103 of the 200 seats. After 1944, Communists were a factor to consider for a few decades, and the Finnish People's Democratic League, formed by Communists and others to the left of Social Democrats, was the largest party after 1958 elections. Support for Communists decreased sharply in the early 1980s, while later in the same decade environmentalists formed the Green League, which is now one of the largest parties. The Swedish People's Party represents the Finland-Swedes, especially in language politics. The relative strengths of the parties vary only slightly in the elections due to the proportional election from multi-member districts, but there are some visible long-term trends.\nThere is no constitutional court; matters concerning constitutional rights or constitutional law are processed by the Constitutional Committee of the Parliament (\"perustuslakivaliokunta\"). Additionally, the Constitutional Committee has the sole power to refer a case to the High Court of Impeachment (\"valtakunnanoikeus\") and to authorize police investigations for this purpose.\nIn addition to the parliament, the Cabinet and President may produce regulations (\"asetus\") through a rulemaking process. These give more specific instructions on how to apply statutes, which often explicitly delegate regulation of specific details to the government. Regulations must be based on existing law, and they can clarify and specify, but not contradict the statute. Furthermore, the rights of an individual must always be based on a statute, not a regulation. Often the statute and the regulation come in similarly named pairs. For example, the law on primary education lists the subjects to be taught, and the regulation specifies the required number of teaching hours. Most of regulations are given by the Cabinet, but the President may give regulations concerning national security. Before 2000, the President had the right to enact regulations on matters not governed by parliamentary law, but this power was removed, and existing regulations were converted into regular statutes by the Parliament.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nFinland's proportional representation system encourages a multitude of political parties and since about 1980 the trend has been that the same coalition rules for the whole period between elections.\nFinland elects on national level a head of state\u2014the president\u2014and a legislature. The president is elected for a six-year term by the people. The Parliament has 200 members, elected for a four-year term by proportional representation in multi-seat constituencies. Finland has a multi-party system, with multiple strong parties, in which no one party often has a chance of gaining power alone, and parties must work with each other to form coalition governments.\nIn addition to the presidential and parliamentary elections, there are European Parliament elections every five years, and local municipal elections (held simultaneously in every municipality) every four years.\nJudiciary.\nFinland has a civil law system, which is based on Swedish law, with the judiciary exercising limited powers. Proceedings are inquisitorial, where judges preside, conduct finding of fact, adjudication and giving of sanctions such as sentences; no juries are used. In e.g. criminal and family-related proceedings in local courts, the panel of judges may include both lay judges and professional judges, while all appeals courts and administrative courts consist only of professional judges. Precedent is not binding, with the exception of Supreme Court and Supreme Administrative Court decisions.\nThe judicial system of Finland is divided between courts with regular civil and criminal jurisdiction and administrative courts with responsibility for litigation between the individuals and the administrative organs of the state and the communities. Finnish law is codified and its court system consists of local courts, regional appellate courts, and the Supreme Court. The administrative branch of justice consists of administrative courts and the Supreme Administrative Court. The administrative process has more popularity as it is cheaper and has lower financial risk to the person making claims. In addition to the regular courts, there are a few special courts in certain branches of administration. There is also a High Court of Impeachment for criminal charges (for an offence in office) against the President of the Republic, the justices of the supreme courts, members of the Government, the Chancellor of Justice and the Ombudsman of Parliament.\nAlthough there is no writ of habeas corpus or bail, the maximum period of pre-trial detention has been reduced to four days. For further detention, a court must order the imprisonment. One does not have the right for one phonecall: the police officer leading the investigation may inform relatives or similar if the investigation permits. However, a lawyer can be invited. Search warrants are not strictly needed, and are usually issued by a police officer. Wiretapping does need a court order.\nFinland has a civil law (Roman law) system with an inquisitorial procedure. In accordance with the separation of powers, the \"trias politica\" principle, courts of law are independent of other administration. They base their decisions solely on the law in force. Criminal cases, civil cases and petitionary matters are dealt in 27 district courts, and then, if the decision is not satisfactory to the involved parties, can be applied in six Courts of Appeal. The Supreme Court of Finland serves as the court of last instance. Appeals against decisions by authorities are considered in six regional administrative courts, with the Supreme Administrative Court of Finland as the court of last instance. The President appoints all professional judges for life. Municipal councils appoint lay judges to district courts.\nAdministrative divisions.\nFinland is divided into 313 democratically independent municipalities, which are grouped into 70 sub-regions.\nAs the highest-level division, Finland is divided into 19 regions.\nA municipality in Finland can choose to call itself either a \"city\" or \"municipality\". A municipality is governed by a municipal council (or a city council) elected by proportional representation once every four years. Democratic decision-making takes place on either the municipal or national level with few exceptions.\nUntil 2009, the state organization was divided into six provinces. However, the provinces were abolished altogether in 2010. Today, state local presence on mainland Finland is provided by 6 regional state administrative agencies (\"aluehallintovirasto\", \"avi\"), and 15 Centres for Economic Development, Transport and the Environment (\"elinkeino-, liikenne- ja ymp\u00e4rist\u00f6keskus\", \"ely-keskus\"). Regional state administrative agencies have mostly law enforcement, rescue and judicial duties: police, fire and rescue, emergency readiness, basic services, environmental permits and enforcement and occupational health and safety protection. The centres implement labor and industrial policy, provide employment and immigration services, and promote culture; maintain highways, other transport networks and infrastructure; and protect, monitor and manage the environment, land use and water resources.\n\u00c5land is located near the 60th parallel between Sweden and Finland. It enjoys local autonomy by virtue of an international convention of 1921, implemented most recently in 1951 by the Act on the Autonomy of \u00c5land. The islands are further distinguished by the fact that they are entirely Swedish-speaking. Government is vested in the provincial council, which consists of 30 delegates elected directly by \u00c5land's citizens.\nRegional and local administration.\nFinland is divided between six Regional State Administrative Agencies, which are responsible for basic public services and legal permits, such as rescue services and environmental permits. The 15 Centres for Economic Development, Transport and the Environment (ELY Centres) are responsible for the regional implementation and development tasks of the central government.\nThe basic units for organising government and public services in Finland are the municipalities. As of 2017, there are 311 municipalities, which incorporate the entire country.\nIndirect public administration.\nIndirect public administration supplements and supports the authorities in managing the tasks of the welfare society. It comprises organisations which are not authorities, but which carry out public tasks or execute public powers. Examples of this are issuing hunting licences or carrying out motor vehicle inspection.\nWellbeing services counties.\nWellbeing services counties are responsible for organising health, social and emergency services. There are 21 Wellbeing services counties, and the county structure is mainly based on the region structure. Wellbeing services districts are self-governing. They do not have the right to levy taxes. Their funding is based on central government funding. Central government allocates different amounts of funding to the different wellbeing services counties depending on the structure of their population.\nThe county council is the highest decision-making body in the county and is responsible for operations, administration and finance. The delegates and deputy commissioners of the county council are elected in county elections for a term of four years. The number of delegates varies from 59 to 89. It depends on the population of the county.\nForeign relations.\nAfter the second world war, Paasikivi\u2013Kekkonen doctrine was the foreign policy doctrine which aimed at Finland's survival as an independent sovereign, democratic, and capitalist country in the immediate proximity of the Soviet Union. After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Finland freed itself from the last restrictions imposed on it by the Paris peace treaties of 1947. The Finnish-Soviet Agreement of Friendship, Co-operation, and Mutual Assistance (and the restrictions included therein) was annulled but Finland recognised the Russian Federation as the successor of the USSR and was quick to draft bilateral treaties of goodwill as well as reallocating Soviet debts.\nFinland deepened its participation in the European integration by joining the European Union with Sweden and Austria in 1995. It could be perhaps said that the country's policy of neutrality has been moderated to \"military non-alignment\" with an emphasis on maintaining a competent independent defence. Peacekeeping under the auspices of the United Nations is the only real extra-national military responsibility which Finland undertakes.\nFinland is highly dependent on foreign trade and actively participates in international cooperation. Finland is a member of the European Union, United Nations and World Bank Group and in many of their member organizations.\nFinland-Russia relations have been under pressure with annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation, which Finland considers illegal. Together with the rest of the European Union, Finland enforces sanctions against Russia that followed. Still, economic relations have not entirely deteriorated: 11.2% of imports to Finland are from Russia, and 5.7% of exports from Finland are to Russia, and cooperation between Finnish and Russian authorities continues.\nAfter almost 30 years of close partnership with NATO, Finland joined the Alliance on 4 April 2023. Finland's partnership with NATO was historically based on its policy of military non-alignment, which changed following Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. On 1 March 2024, Alexander Stubb, a staunch supporter of NATO, was sworn in as Finland's new president.\nAs of May 2023, Finnish exports to Russia had dropped by 78%.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10712", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10712", "title": "Economy of Finland", "text": "The economy of Finland is a highly industrialised, mixed economy with a per capita output similar to that of western European economies such as France, Germany, and the United Kingdom. The largest sector of Finland's economy is its service sector, which contributes 72.7% to the country's gross domestic product (GDP); followed by manufacturing and refining at 31.4%; and the primary sector at 2.9%. Among OECD nations, Finland has a highly efficient and strong social security system; social expenditure stood at roughly 29% of GDP.\nFinland's key economic sector is manufacturing. The largest industries are electronics (21.6% - very old data), machinery, vehicles and other engineered metal products (21.1%), forest industry (13.1%), and chemicals (10.9%). Finland has timber and several mineral and freshwater resources. Forestry, paper factories, and the agricultural sector (on which taxpayers spend around 2 billion euro annually) are politically sensitive to rural residents. The Helsinki metropolitan area generates around a third of GDP.\nIn a 2004 OECD comparison, high-technology manufacturing in Finland ranked second largest in the world, after Ireland. Investment was below the expected levels. The overall short-term outlook was good and GDP growth has been above many of its peers in the European Union. Finland has the 4th largest knowledge economy in Europe, behind Sweden, Denmark and the UK. The economy of Finland tops the ranking of the Global Information Technology 2014 report by the World Economic Forum for concerted output between the business sector, the scholarly production and the governmental assistance on information and communications technology.\nFinland is highly integrated in the global economy, and international trade represents a third of the GDP. Trade with the European Union represents 60% of the country's total trade. The largest trade flows are with Germany, Russia, Sweden, the United Kingdom, the United States, the Netherlands and China. The trade policy is managed by the European Union, where Finland has traditionally been among the free trade supporters, except for agriculture. Finland is the only Nordic country to have joined the Eurozone; Denmark and Sweden have retained their traditional currencies, whereas Iceland and Norway are not members of the EU at all.\nFinland has been ranked seventh in the Global Innovation Index of 2023, making it the seventh most innovative country down from 2nd in 2018.\nHistory.\nBeing geographically distant from Western and Central Europe in relation to other Nordic countries, Finland struggled behind in terms of industrialization apart from the production of paper, which partially replaced the export of timber solely as a raw material towards the end of the nineteenth century. But as a relatively poor country, it was vulnerable to shocks to the economy such as the great famine of 1867\u20131868, which killed around 15% of the country's population. Until the 1930s, the Finnish economy was predominantly agrarian and, as late as the 1950s, more than half the population and 40% of output were still in the primary sector.\nAfter World War II.\nWhile nationalization committees were set up in France and the United Kingdom, Finland avoided nationalizations. Finnish industry recovered quickly after the Second World War. By the end of 1946, industrial output had surpassed pre-war numbers. In the immediate post-war period of 1946 to 1951, Finnish industry continued to grow rapidly. Many factors contributed to the rapid industrial growth. War reparations were largely paid in manufactured products. The devaluation of currency in 1945 and 1949, which made the US dollar rise by 70% against the Finnish markka, and thus boosted exports to the West. This helped with rebuilding the country and increased demand for Finnish industrial products. In 1951, the Korean War boosted Finnish exports. Finland practiced an active exchange rate policy. Devaluation was used several times to raise the competitiveness of the Finnish exporting industries.\nBetween 1950 and 1975, Finland's industry was at the mercy of international economic trends. The fast industrial growth in 1953-1955 was followed by a period of more moderate growth, starting in 1956. The causes for the deceleration of growth were the general strike of 1956, as well as weakened export trends and easing of the strict regulation of Finland's foreign trade in 1957. These events compelled Finnish industry to compete against ever toughening international challengers. An economic recession brought industrial output down by 3.4% in 1958. Industry, however, recovered quickly during the international economic boom that followed the recession. One reason for this was the devaluation of the Finnish markka, which increased the value of the US dollar by 39% against the Finnish markka.\nThe international economy was stable in the 1960s. This trend can be seen in Finland as well, where steady growth of industrial output could be seen throughout the decade.\nAfter failed experiments with protectionism, Finland eased some restrictions and signed a free trade agreement with the European Community in 1973. This made Finnish markets more competitive.\nFinland's industrial output declined in 1975. The decline was caused by the free trade agreement that was made between Finland and the European Community in 1973. The agreement subjected Finnish industry to ever toughening international competition. Finnish exports to the west decreased. In 1976 and 1977, the growth in industrial output was almost zero. In 1978, it swung back towards a strong growth. In 1978 and 1979, Finnish industrial output grew at an above average rate. The stimuli for this were three devaluations of Finnish markka, which lowered value of the markka by a total of 19%. Impacts from the global 1979 oil crisis on Finnish industry were alleviated by Finland's bilateral trade with the Soviet Union.\nLocal education markets expanded. An increasing number of Finns went to study abroad in the United States and in Western Europe. These students later returned to Finland, bringing back useful and advanced professional skills. There was quite a common pragmatic credit and investment cooperation between the state and Finnish corporations. It raised suspicion in the populace, due to support for capitalism and free trade from the populace. However, the Finnish communist party (Finnish People's Democratic League) received 23.2% of the votes in the 1958 parliamentary elections. Savings rates in Finland hovered among the world's highest, at around 8%, all the way to the 1980s. In the beginning of the 1970s, Finland's GDP per capita reached the level of Japan and the UK. Finland's economic development was similar to some export-led Asian countries. The official policy of neutrality enabled Finland to trade both with Western and Comecon markets. Significant bilateral trade was conducted with the Soviet Union, but this was not allowed to grow into a dependence.\nLiberalization.\nLike other Nordic countries, Finland has liberalized its system of economic regulation since late 1980s. The financial and product market regulations were modified. Some state enterprises were privatized and some tax rates were altered.\nIn 1991, the Finnish economy fell into a severe recession. This was caused by a combination of economic overheating (largely due to a change in the banking laws in 1986 which made credit much more accessible), depressed markets with key trading partners (particularly the Swedish and Soviet markets), as well as in the local markets. Slow growth with other trading partners, and the disappearance of the Soviet bilateral trade had its effects. The stock market and the Finnish housing market decreased by 50% in value. The growth in the 1980s was based on debt, and when the defaults began rolling in, GDP declined by 13%. Unemployment increased from almost full employment to one fifth of the workforce. The crisis was amplified by the trade unions' initial opposition to any reforms. Politicians struggled to cut spending and the public debt doubled to around 60% of GDP. Much of the economic growth in the 1980s was based on debt financing. Debt defaults led to a savings and loan crisis. Over 10 billion euros were used to bail out failing banks, which led to a banking sector consolidation.\nAfter devaluations, the depression bottomed out in 1993.\nEuropean Union.\nFinland joined the European Union in 1995. The central bank was given an inflation-targeting mandate until Finland joined the euro zone. The growth rate has since been one of the highest of the OECD countries. Finland has topped many indicators of national performance.\nFinland was one of the 11 countries joining the third phase of the Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union. Finland adopted the euro as the country's currency on 1 January 1999. The national currency markka (FIM) was withdrawn from circulation, and replaced by the euro (EUR) at the beginning of 2002.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132017. Inflation under 2% is in green. Estimates begin after 2021.\nAgriculture.\nFinland's climate and soils make growing crops a particular challenge. The country lies between 60\u00b0 and 70\u00b0 north latitude - as far north as Alaska - and has severe winters and relatively short growing seasons that are sometimes interrupted by frosts. However, because the Gulf Stream and the North Atlantic Drift Current moderate the climate, and because of the relatively low elevation of the land area, Finland contains half of the world's arable land north of 60\u00b0 north latitude. In response to the climate, farmers have relied on quick-ripening and frost-resistant varieties of crops. Most farmland had originally been either forest or swamp, and the soil had usually required treatment with lime and years of cultivation to neutralise excess acid and to develop fertility. Irrigation was generally not necessary, but drainage systems were often needed to remove excess water.\nUntil the late nineteenth century, Finland's isolation required that most farmers concentrate on producing grains to meet the country's basic food needs. In the fall, farmers planted rye; in the spring, southern and central farmers started oats, while northern farmers seeded barley. Farms also grew small quantities of potatoes, other root crops, and legumes. Nevertheless, the total area under cultivation was still small. Cattle grazed in the summer and consumed hay in the winter. Essentially self-sufficient, Finland engaged in very limited agricultural trade.\nThis traditional, almost autarkic, production pattern shifted sharply during the late nineteenth century, when inexpensive imported grain from Russia and the United States competed effectively with local grain. At the same time, rising domestic and foreign demand for dairy products and the availability of low-cost imported cattle feed made dairy and meat production much more profitable. These changes in market conditions induced Finland's farmers to switch from growing staple grains to producing meat and dairy products, setting a pattern that persisted into the late 1980s.\nIn response to the agricultural depression of the 1930s, the government encouraged domestic production by imposing tariffs on agricultural imports. This policy enjoyed some success: the total area under cultivation increased, and farm incomes fell less sharply in Finland than in most other countries. Barriers to grain imports stimulated a return to mixed farming, and by 1938 Finland's farmers were able to meet roughly 90% of the domestic demand for grain.\nThe disruptions caused by the Winter War and the Continuation War caused further food shortages, especially when Finland ceded territory, including about one-tenth of its farmland, to the Soviet Union. The experiences of the depression and the war years persuaded the Finns to secure independent food supplies to prevent shortages in future conflicts.\nAfter the war, the first challenge was to resettle displaced farmers. Most refugee farmers were given farms that included some buildings and land that had already been in production, but some had to make do with \"cold farms,\" that is, land not in production that usually had to be cleared or drained before crops could be sown. The government sponsored large-scale clearing and draining operations that expanded the area suitable for farming. As a result of the resettlement and land-clearing programs, the area under cultivation expanded by about 450,000 hectares, reaching about 2.4 million hectares by the early 1960s. Finland thus came to farm more land than ever before, an unusual development in a country that was simultaneously experiencing rapid industrial growth.\nDuring this period of expansion, farmers introduced modern production practices. The widespread use of modern inputs\u2014chemical fertilisers and insecticides, agricultural machinery, and improved seed varieties\u2014sharply improved crop yields. Yet the modernisation process again made farm production dependent on supplies from abroad, this time on imports of petroleum and fertilisers. By 1984 domestic sources of energy covered only about 20% of farm needs, while in 1950 domestic sources had supplied 70% of them. In the aftermath of the oil price increases of the early 1970s, farmers began to return to local energy sources such as firewood. The existence of many farms that were too small to allow efficient use of tractors also limited mechanisation. Another weak point was the existence of many fields with open drainage ditches needing regular maintenance; in the mid-1980s, experts estimated that half of the cropland needed improved drainage works. At that time, about 1 million hectares had underground drainage, and agricultural authorities planned to help install such works on another million hectares. Despite these shortcomings, Finland's agriculture was efficient and productive\u2014at least when compared with farming in other European countries.\nForestry.\nForests play a key role in the country's economy, making it one of the world's leading wood producers and providing raw materials at competitive prices for the crucial wood processing industries. As in agriculture, the government has long played a leading role in forestry, regulating tree cutting, sponsoring technical improvements, and establishing long-term plans to ensure that the country's forests continue to supply the wood-processing industries.\nFinland's wet climate and rocky soils are ideal for forests. Tree stands do well throughout the country, except in some areas north of the Arctic Circle. In 1980 the forested area totaled about 19.8 million hectares, providing 4 hectares of forest per capita\u2014far above the European average of about 0.5 hectares. The proportion of forest land varied considerably from region to region. In the central lake plateau and in the eastern and northern provinces, forests covered up to 80% of the land area, but in areas with better conditions for agriculture, especially in the southwest, forests accounted for only 50 to 60% of the territory. The main commercial tree species\u2014pine, spruce, and birch\u2014supplied raw material to the sawmill, pulp, and paper industries. The forests also produced sizable aspen and elder crops.\nThe heavy winter snows and the network of waterways were used to move logs to the mills. Loggers were able to drag cut trees over the winter snow to the roads or water bodies. In the southwest, the sledding season lasted about 100 days per year; the season was even longer to the north and the east. The country's network of lakes and rivers facilitated log floating, a cheap and rapid means of transport. Each spring, crews floated the logs downstream to collection points; tugs towed log bundles down rivers and across lakes to processing centers. The waterway system covered much of the country, and by the 1980s Finland had extended roadways and railroads to areas not served by waterways, effectively opening up all of the country's forest reserves to commercial use.\nForestry and farming were closely linked. During the twentieth century, government land redistribution programmes had made forest ownership widespread, allotting forestland to most farms. In the 1980s, private farmers controlled 35% of the country's forests; other persons held 27%; the government, 24%; private corporations, 9%; and municipalities and other public bodies, 5%. The forestlands owned by farmers and by other people\u2014some 350,000 plots\u2014were the best, producing 75 to 80% of the wood consumed by industry; the state owned much of the poorer land, especially that in the north.\nThe ties between forestry and farming were mutually beneficial. Farmers supplemented their incomes with earnings from selling their wood, caring for forests, or logging; forestry made many otherwise marginal farms viable. At the same time, farming communities maintained roads and other infrastructure in rural areas, and they provided workers for forest operations. Indeed, without the farming communities in sparsely populated areas, it would have been much more difficult to continue intensive logging operations and reforestation in many prime forest areas.\nThe Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry has carried out forest inventories and drawn up silvicultural plans. According to surveys, between 1945 and the late 1970s foresters had cut trees faster than the forests could regenerate them. Nevertheless, between the early 1950s and 1981, Finland was able to boost the total area of its forests by some 2.7 million hectares and to increase forest stands under 40 years of age by some 3.2 million hectares. Beginning in 1965, the country instituted plans that called for expanding forest cultivation, draining peatland and waterlogged areas, and replacing slow-growing trees with faster-growing varieties. By the mid-1980s, the Finns had drained 5.5 million hectares, fertilized 2.8 million hectares, and cultivated 3.6 million hectares. Thinning increased the share of trees that would produce suitable lumber, while improved tree varieties increased productivity by as much as 30%.\nComprehensive silvicultural programmes had made it possible for the Finns simultaneously to increase forest output and to add to the amount and value of the growing stock. By the mid-1980s, Finland's forests produced nearly 70 million cubic meters of new wood each year, considerably more than was being cut. During the postwar period, the annual cut increased by about 120% to about 50 million cubic meters. Wood burning fell to one-fifth the level of the immediate postwar years, freeing up wood supplies for the wood-processing industries, which consumed between 40 million and 45 million cubic meters per year. Indeed, industry demand was so great that Finland needed to import 5 million to 6 million cubic meters of wood each year.\nTo maintain the country's comparative advantage in forest products, Finnish authorities moved to raise lumber output toward the country's ecological limits. In 1984 the government published the Forest 2000 plan, drawn up by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. The plan aimed at increasing forest harvests by about 3% per year, while conserving forestland for recreation and other uses. It also called for enlarging the average size of private forest holdings, increasing the area used for forests, and extending forest cultivation and thinning. If successful, the plan would make it possible to raise wood deliveries by roughly one-third by the end of the twentieth century. Finnish officials believed that such growth was necessary if Finland was to maintain its share in world markets for wood and paper products.\nIndustry.\nSince the 1990s, Finnish industry, which for centuries had relied on the country's vast forests, has become increasingly dominated by electronics and services, as globalization led to a decline of more traditional industries. Outsourcing resulted in more manufacturing being transferred abroad, with Finnish-based industry focusing to a greater extent on R&amp;D and hi-tech electronics.\nElectronics.\nThe Finnish electronics and electrotechnical industry has evolved from early electrical machinery manufacturing in the late 19th century to a major contributor to global telecommunications and industrial automation. During the 1990s and early 2000s, Nokia became one of the world's leading mobile phone producers, and Finland briefly held a dominant position in global mobile phone market and network infrastructure. Although Nokia's consumer market share declined after 2010, the company remains a significant global supplier of 5G networking equipment through Nokia Networks. Finnish industry today emphasizes high-technology components, measurement systems, and automation solutions. Examples are firms such as Vaisala who specialize in meteorological instrumentation and ABB Finland producing industrial robotics and power systems. Strong investment in research and development\u2014regularly among the highest per capita in the world\u2014 continues to support innovation in Finland's advanced electronics manufacturing and telecommunications technology.\nMetals, engineering and manufacturing.\nFinland has an abundance of minerals, but many large mines have closed down, and most raw materials are now imported. For this reason, companies now tend to focus on high added-value processing of metals. The exports include steel, copper, chromium, gold, zinc and nickel, and finished products such as steel roofing and cladding, welded steel pipes, copper pipe and coated sheets. Outokumpu is known for developing the flash smelting process for copper production and stainless steel.\nIn 2019, the country was the world's 5th largest producer of chromium, the 17th largest world producer of sulfur and the 20th largest world producer of phosphate\nWith regard to vehicles, the Finnish motor industry consists mostly of manufacturers of tractors (Valtra, formerly Valmet tractor), forest machines (f.ex. Ponsse), military vehicles (Sisu, Patria), trucks (Sisu Auto), buses and Valmet Automotive, a contract manufacturer, whose factory in Uusikaupunki produces Mercedes-Benz cars. Shipbuilding is an important industry: the world's largest cruise ships are built in Finland; also, the Finnish company W\u00e4rtsil\u00e4 produces the world's largest diesel engines and has market share of 47%. In addition, Finland also produces train rolling stock.\nThe manufacturing industry is a significant employer of about 400,000 people.\nChemical industry.\nThe chemical industry is one of the Finland's largest industrial sectors with its roots in tar making in the 17th century. It produces an enormous range of products for the use of other industrial sectors, especially for forestry and agriculture. In addition, its produces plastics, chemicals, paints, oil products, pharmaceuticals, environmental products, biotech products and petrochemicals. In the beginning of this millennium, biotechnology was regarded as one of the most promising high-tech sectors in Finland. In 2006 it was still considered promising, even though it had not yet become \"the new Nokia\".\nPulp and paper industry.\nForest products has been the major export industry in the past, but diversification and growth of the economy has reduced its share. In the 1970s, the pulp and paper industry accounted for half of Finnish exports. Although this share has shrunk, pulp and paper is still a major industry, with 52 sites across the country. Several of large international corporations in this business are based in Finland. Stora Enso and UPM were placed No. 1 and No. 3 by output in the world, both producing more than ten million tons. M-real and Myllykoski also appear on the top 100 list.\nEnergy industry.\nFinland's energy supply is divided as follows: nuclear power 26%, net imports 20%, hydroelectric power 16%, combined production district heat 18%, combined production industry 13%, condensing power 6%.\nOne half of all the energy consumed in Finland goes to industry, one fifth to heating buildings and one fifth to transport. Lacking indigenous fossil fuel resources, Finland has been an energy importer. This might change in the future since Finland is currently building its fifth nuclear reactor, and approved building permits for its sixth and seventh ones. There are some uranium resources in Finland, but to date no commercially viable deposits have been identified for exclusive mining of uranium. However, permits have been granted to Talvivaara to produce uranium from the tailings of their nickel-cobalt mine.\nCompanies.\nNotable companies in Finland include Nokia, the former market leader in mobile telephony; Stora Enso, the largest paper manufacturer in the world; Neste Oil, an oil refining and marketing company; UPM-Kymmene, the third largest paper manufacturer in the world; Aker Finnyards, the manufacturer of the world's largest cruise ships (such as Royal Caribbean's \"Freedom of the Seas\"); Rovio Mobile, video game developer most notable for creating Angry Birds; KONE, a manufacturer of elevators and escalators; W\u00e4rtsil\u00e4, a producer of power plants and ship engines; and Finnair, the largest Helsinki-Vantaa based international airline. Additionally, many Nordic design firms are headquartered in Finland. These include the Fiskars owned Iittala Group, Artek a furniture design firm co-created by Alvar Aalto, and Marimekko made famous by Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis. Finland has sophisticated financial markets comparable to the UK in efficiency. Though foreign investment is not as high as some other European countries, the largest foreign-headquartered companies included names such as ABB, Tellabs, Carlsberg and Siemens.\nAround 70-80% of the equity quoted on the Helsinki Stock Exchange are owned by foreign-registered entities. The larger companies get most of their revenue from abroad, and the majority of their employees work outside the country. Cross-shareholding has been abolished and there is a trend towards an Anglo-Saxon style of corporate governance. However, only around 15% of residents have invested in stock market, compared to 20% in France, and 50% in the US.\nBetween 2000 and 2003, early stage venture capital investments relative to GDP were 8.5% against 4% in the EU and 11.5 in the US. Later stage investments fell to the EU median. Invest in Finland and other programs attempt to attract investment. In 2000 FDI from Finland to overseas was 20 billion euro and from overseas to Finland 7 billion euro. Acquisitions and mergers have internationalized business in Finland.\nAlthough some privatization has been gradually done, there are still several state-owned companies of importance. The government keeps them as strategic assets or because they are natural monopoly. These include e.g. Neste (oil refining and marketing), VR (rail), Finnair, VTT (research) and Posti Group (mail). Depending on the strategic importance, the government may hold either 100%, 51% or less than 50% stock. Most of these have been transformed into regular limited companies, but some are quasi-governmental (\"liikelaitos\"), with debt backed by the state, as in the case of VTT.\nIn 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Finland is Services with 191,796 companies followed by Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate and Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing with 159,158 and 102,452 companies respectively.\nHousehold income and consumption.\nFinland's income is generated by the approximately 1.8 million private sector workers, who make an average 25.1 euro per hour (before the median 60% tax wedge) in 2007. According to a 2003 report, residents worked on average around 10 years for the same employer and around 5 different jobs over a lifetime. 62% worked for small and medium-sized enterprises. Female employment rate was high and gender segregation on career choices was higher than in the US. In 1999 part-time work rate was one of the smallest in OECD.\nFuture liabilities are dominated by the pension deficit. Unlike in Sweden, where pension savers can manage their investments, in Finland employers choose a pension fund for the employee. The pension funding rate is higher than in most Western European countries, but still only a portion of it is funded and pensions exclude health insurances and other unaccounted promises. Directly held public debt has been reduced to around 32% in 2007. In 2007, the average household savings rate was -3.8 and household debt 101% of annual disposable income, a typical level in Europe.\nIn 2008, the OECD reported that \"the gap between rich and poor has widened more in Finland than in any other wealthy industrialised country over the past decade\" and that \"Finland is also one of the few countries where inequality of incomes has grown between the rich and the middle-class, and not only between rich and poor.\"\nIn 2006, there were 2,381,500 households of average size 2.1 people. Forty% of households consisted of single person, 32% two and 28% three or more. There were 1.2 million residential buildings in Finland and the average residential space was 38 square metres per person. The average residential property (without land) cost 1,187 euro per square metre and residential land on 8.6 euro per square metre. Consumer energy prices were 8-12 euro cent per kilowatt hour. 74% of households had a car. There were 2.5 million cars and 0.4 other vehicles.\nAround 92% have mobile phones and 58% Internet connection at home. The average total household consumption was 20,000 euro, out of which housing at around 5500 euro, transport at around 3000 euro, food and beverages excluding alcoholic at around 2500 euro, recreation and culture at around 2000 euro. Upper-level white-collar households (409,653) consumed an average 27,456 euro, lower-level white-collar households (394,313) 20,935 euro, and blue-collar households (471,370) 19,415 euro.\nUnemployment.\nThe unemployment rate was 10.3% in 2015. The employment rate is (persons aged 15\u201364) 66.8%. Unemployment security benefits for those seeking employment are at an average OECD level. The labor administration funds labour market training for unemployed job seekers, the training for unemployed job seeker can last up to 6 months, which is often vocational. The aim of the training is to improve the channels of finding employment.\nGross domestic product.\nEuro Membership.\nThe American economist and \"The New York Times\" columnist Paul Krugman has suggested that the short term costs of euro membership to the Finnish economy outweigh the large gains caused by greater integration with the European economy. Krugman notes that Sweden, which has yet to join the single currency, had similar rates of growth compared to Finland for the period since the introduction of the euro.\nMembership of the euro protects Finland from currency fluctuations, which is particularly important for small member states of the European Union like Finland that are highly integrated into the larger European economy. If Finland had retained its own currency, unpredictable exchange rates would prevent the country from selling its products at competitive prices on the European market. In fact, business leaders in Sweden, which is obliged to join the euro when its economy has converged with the eurozone, are almost universal in their support for joining the euro. Although Sweden's currency is not officially pegged to the euro like Denmark's currency the Swedish government maintains an unofficial peg. This exchange rate policy has in the short term benefited the Swedish economy in two ways; (1) much of Sweden's European trade is already denominated in euros and therefore bypasses any currency fluctuation and exchange rate losses, (2) it allows Sweden's non-euro-area exports to remain competitive by dampening any pressure from the financial markets to increase the value of the currency.\nMaintaining this balance has allowed the Swedish government to borrow on the international financial markets at record low interest rates and allowed the Swedish central bank to quantitatively ease into a fundamentally sound economy. This has led Sweden's economy to prosper at the expense of less sound economies who have been impacted by the 2008 financial crisis. Sweden's economic performance has therefore been slightly better than Finland's since the 2008 financial crisis. Much of this disparity has, however, been due to the economic dominance of Nokia, Finland's largest company and Finland's only major multinational. Nokia supported and greatly benefited from the euro and the European single market, particularly from a common European digital mobile phone standard (GSM), but it failed to adapt when the market shifted to mobile computing.\nOne reason for the popularity of the euro in Finland is the memory of a 'great depression' which began in 1990, with Finland not regaining its competitiveness until approximately a decade later when Finland joined the single currency. Some American economists like Paul Krugman claim not to understand the benefits of a single currency and allege that poor economic performance is the result of membership of the single currency. These economists do not, however, advocate separate currencies for the states of the United States, many of which have quite disparate economies.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nPublic policy.\nFinnish politicians have often emulated other Nordics and the Nordic model. Nordic's have been free-trading and relatively welcoming to skilled migrants for over a century, though in Finland immigration is a relatively new phenomenon. This is due largely to Finland's less hospitable climate and the fact that the Finnish language shares roots with none of the major world languages, making it more challenging than average for most to learn. The level of protection in commodity trade has been low, except for agricultural products.\nAs an economic environment, Finland's judiciary is efficient and effective. Finland is highly open to investment and free trade. Finland has top levels of economic freedom in many areas, although there is a heavy tax burden and inflexible job market. Finland is ranked 16th (ninth in Europe) in the 2008 Index of Economic Freedom. Recently, Finland has topped the patents per capita statistics, and overall productivity growth has been strong in areas such as electronics. While the manufacturing sector is thriving, OECD points out that the service sector would benefit substantially from policy improvements. The IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook 2007 ranked Finland 17th most competitive, next to Germany, and lowest of the Nordics. while the World Economic Forum report has ranked Finland the most competitive country. Finland is one of the most fiscally responsible EU countries. According to the grand jury of the 2006 European Enterprise Awards, effective \"entrepreneurial thinking\" was held to be at the root of central Finland's position as \"the most entrepreneur-friendly region in the world\".\nProduct market.\nEconomists attribute much growth to reforms in the product markets. According to OECD, only four EU-15 countries have less regulated product markets (UK, Ireland, Denmark and Sweden) and only one has less regulated financial markets (Denmark). Nordic countries were pioneers in liberalising energy, postal, and other markets in Europe. The legal system is clear and business bureaucracy less than most countries. For instance, starting a business takes an average of 14 days, compared to the world average of 43 days and Denmark's average of 6 days. Property rights are well protected and contractual agreements are strictly honored. Finland is rated one of the least corrupted countries in Corruption Perceptions Index. Finland is rated 13th in the Ease of Doing Business Index. It indicates exceptional ease to trade across borders (5th), enforce contracts (7th), and close a business (5th), and exceptional hardship to employ workers (127th) and pay taxes (83rd).\nJob market.\nAccording to the OECD, Finland's job market is the least flexible of the Nordic countries. Finland increased job market regulation in the 1970s to provide stability to manufacturers. In contrast, during the 1990s, Denmark liberalised its job market, Sweden moved to more decentralised contracts, whereas Finnish trade unions blocked many reforms. Many professions have legally recognized industry-wide contracts that lay down common terms of employment including seniority levels, holiday entitlements, and salary levels, usually as part of a Comprehensive Income Policy Agreement. Those who favor less centralized labor market policies consider these agreements bureaucratic, inflexible, and along with tax rates, a key contributor to unemployment and distorted prices. Centralized agreements may hinder structural change as there are fewer incentives to acquire better skills, although Finland already enjoys one of the highest skill-levels in the world.\nTaxation.\nTax is collected mainly from municipal income tax, state income tax, state value added tax, customs fees, corporate taxes and special taxes. There are also property taxes, but municipal income tax pays most of municipal expenses. Taxation is conducted by a state agency, Verohallitus, which collects income taxes from each paycheck, and then pays the difference between tax liability and taxes paid as tax rebate or collects as tax arrears afterward. Municipal income tax is a flat tax of nominally 15-20%, with deductions applied, and directly funds the municipality (a city or rural locality). The state income tax is a progressive tax; low-income individuals do not necessarily pay any. The state transfers some of its income as state support to municipalities, particularly the poorer ones. Additionally, the state churches - Finnish Evangelical Lutheran Church and Finnish Orthodox Church - are integrated to the taxation system in order to tax their members.\nThe middle income worker's tax wedge is 46% and effective marginal tax rates are very high. Value-added tax is 24% for most items. Capital gains tax is 30-34% and corporate tax is 20%, about the EU median. Property taxes are low, but there is a transfer tax (1.6% for apartments or 4% for individual houses) for home buyers. There are high excise taxes on alcoholic beverages, tobacco, automobiles and motorcycles, motor fuels, lotteries, sweets and insurances. For instance, McKinsey estimates that a worker has to pay around 1600 euro for another's 400 euro service - restricting service supply and demand - though some taxation is avoided in the black market and self-service culture. Another study by Karlson, Johansson &amp; Johnsson estimates that the fraction of the buyer's income entering the service vendor's wallet (inverted tax wedge) is slightly over 15%, compared to 10% in Belgium, 25% in France, 40% in Switzerland and 50% in the United States. Tax cuts have been in every post-depression government's agenda and the overall tax burden is now around 43% of GDP compared to 51.1% in Sweden, 34.7% in Germany, 33.5% in Canada, and 30.5% in Ireland.\nHigh income workers, for instance someone making \u20ac10000/month gross, living in the city of Vantaa and using \u20ac3000/year on commuting to work, pay 33% income tax plus 7.94% social security payments (this varies mildly depending on the age of the worker, but for someone born in 1975, it is currently in the year 2024, 7.94%). This means that 40,94% of the gross income goes to taxes and tax like payments.\nState and municipal politicians have struggled to cut their consumption, which is very high at 51.7% of GDP compared to 56.6% in Sweden, 46.9% in Germany, 39.3% in Canada, and 33.5% in Ireland. Much of the taxes are spent on public sector employees, which amount to 124,000 state employees and 430,000 municipal employees. That is 113 per 1000 residents (over a quarter of workforce) compared to 74 in the US, 70 in Germany, and 42 in Japan (8% of workforce). The Economist Intelligence Unit's ranking for Finland's e-readiness is high at 13th, compared to 1st for United States, 3rd for Sweden, 5th for Denmark, and 14th for Germany. Also, early and generous retirement schemes have contributed to high pension costs. Social spending such as health or education is around OECD median. Social transfers are also around OECD median. In 2001 Finland's outsourced proportion of spending was below Sweden's and above most other Western European countries. Finland's health care is more bureaucrat-managed than in most Western European countries, though many use private insurance or cash to enjoy private clinics. Some reforms toward more equal marketplace have been made in 2007\u20132008. In education, child nurseries, and elderly nurseries private competition is bottom-ranking compared to Sweden and most other Western countries. Some public monopolies such Alko remain, and are sometimes challenged by the European Union. The state has a programme where the number of jobs decreases by attrition: for two retirees, only one new employee is hired.\nOccupational and income structure.\nFinland's export-dependent economy continuously adapted to the world market; in doing so, it changed Finnish society as well. The prolonged worldwide boom, beginning in the late 1940s and lasting until the first oil crisis in 1973, was a challenge that Finland met and from which it emerged with a highly sophisticated and diversified economy, including a new occupational structure. Some sectors kept a fairly constant share of the work force. Transportation and construction, for example, each accounted for between 7 and 8% in both 1950 and 1985, and manufacturing's share rose only from 22 to 24%. However, both the commercial and the service sectors more than doubled their share of the work force, accounting, respectively, for 21 and 28% in 1985. The greatest change was the decline of the economically active population employed in agriculture and forestry, from approximately 50% in 1950 to 10% in 1985. The exodus from farms and forests provided the labour power needed for the growth of other sectors.\nStudies of Finnish mobility patterns since World War II have confirmed the significance of this exodus. Sociologists have found that people with a farming background were present in other occupations to a considerably greater extent in Finland than in other West European countries. Finnish data for the early 1980s showed that 30 to 40% of those in occupations not requiring much education were the children of farmers, as were about 25% in upper-level occupations, a rate two to three times that of France and noticeably higher than that even of neighboring Sweden. Finland also differed from the other Nordic countries in that the generational transition from the rural occupations to white-collar positions was more likely to be direct, bypassing manual occupations.\nThe most important factor determining social mobility in Finland was education. Children who attained a higher level of education than their parents were often able to rise in the hierarchy of occupations. In the Helsinki Metropolitan Area, those who are more educated, in the long-run, will move to newer centrally located buildings. A tripling or quadrupling in any one generation of the numbers receiving schooling beyond the required minimum reflected the needs of a developing economy for skilled employees. Obtaining advanced training or education was easier for some than for others, however, and the children of white-collar employees still were more likely to become white-collar employees themselves than were the children of farmers and blue-collar workers. In addition, children of white-collar professionals were more likely than not to remain in that class.\nThe economic transformation also altered income structure. A noticeable shift was the reduction in wage differentials. The increased wealth produced by an advanced economy was distributed to wage earners via the system of broad income agreements that evolved in the postwar era. Organized sectors of the economy received wage hikes even greater than the economy's growth rate. As a result, blue-collar workers' income came, in time, to match more closely the pay of lower level white-collar employees, and the income of the upper middle class declined in relation to that of other groups.\nThe long trend of growth in living standards paired with diminishing differences between social classes was dramatically reversed during the 1990s. For the first time in the history of Finland income differences have sharply grown. This change has been mostly driven by the growth of income from capital to the wealthiest segment of the population.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10713", "revid": "43475265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10713", "title": "Telecommunications in Finland", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Finland, as indicated by a 2022 European Commission index, highlight the country's significant role in the EU's digital sector. Finland has a high concentration of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) specialists and robust training programs, leading to notable expertise in technologies like AI and cloud computing. The nation has also made significant advancements in 5G technology. Additionally, Finland stands out for its high adoption of digital public services. The Finnish digital sector benefits from both the technology industry's contributions and government policies aimed at enhancing digital infrastructure and cybersecurity.\nInternet and digital progress.\nFixed broadband.\nIn the European Commission's 2022 Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI) report, Finland is ranked 8th in connectivity among 27 EU countries, but it faces challenges in its digital infrastructure. Fixed broadband adoption stands at 61%, below the EU average of 78%. Very High Capacity Network (VHCN) coverage is 68%, slightly lower than the EU's 70%, with rural areas affected, having only 12.4% VHCN coverage. Fiber to the Premises (FTTP) coverage is at 40%, compared to the EU average of 50%. To address these issues, the Finnish government plans to expand VHCN coverage through national broadband and digital infrastructure initiatives. Despite funding challenges, the government allocated EUR 16 million from the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD) in 2021 for fiber network development.\nMobile broadband.\nFinland's mobile broadband performance is strong, with 72% 5G coverage, surpassing the EU average of 66%, and a 96% mobile broadband adoption rate, exceeding the EU average of 87%. This achievement can be attributed to extensive 4G and 5G availability, covering 72% of populated areas. The early allocation of 5G pioneer bands (700 MHz in 2016, 3.6 GHz in 2018, and 26 GHz in 2020) has played a key role in achieving this widespread coverage. Recent frequency usage changes near Russia are expected to further improve 5G services in those regions.\nIntegration of digital technology.\nThe country ranks at the forefront of digital technology integration within the EU. Notably, 82% of Finnish small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) exhibit basic digital intensity, higher than the EU average of 55%. Finland distinguishes itself in the adoption of advanced technologies, with 22% using big data, 66% of companies utilizing cloud solutions, and 16% implementing artificial intelligence (AI)\u2014figures that are higher than the EU averages of 14%, 34%, and 8%, respectively. Further, 83% of Finnish companies have adopted e-invoices in contrast to the EU's average of 32%.\nOn the aspect of ICT for environmental sustainability, 77% of Finnish enterprises report medium or high intensity of green action through ICT, which exceeds the EU average of 66%.\nDigital public services.\nFinland has established itself as a leader in digital public services within the EU, as evidenced by the DESI 2022 report, which notes that 92% of Finnish internet users engage with e-government services compared to the EU average of 65%. This high level of engagement is attributed to Finland's progress in digital services, as seen in the My Kanta portal, which promotes digital health by providing citizens with secure access to their medical records and health services online.\nIn the areas of open data and artificial intelligence (AI), Finland achieves scores of 90 and 93 out of 100 for providing digital services to citizens and businesses, respectively, surpassing the EU averages of 75 and 82. An example of Finland's application of AI to enhance public services is the AuroraAI program, which is designed to facilitate personalized access to a range of public services. Additionally, Finland is enhancing its digital identity infrastructure to offer a secure, unified electronic identification system, improving access to digital services across sectors. The Ministerial Working Group on \"Digitalisation, Data Economy, and Public Administration\" is tasked with both advancing and safeguarding Finland's digital framework, which includes a focus on cybersecurity.\nTelephones.\nTelephones \u2013 main lines in use: 2.368 million (2004)\nTelephones \u2013 mobile cellular: 4.988 million (2004)\nTelephone system: General Assessment: Modern system with excellent service.\nDomestic: Digital fiber-optic fixed-line network and an extensive cellular network provide domestic needs. There are three major cellular network providers with independent networks (Elisa Oyj, Telia Finland and DNA Oyj). There are several smaller providers which may have independent networks in smaller areas, but are generally dependent on rented networks. There is a great variety of cellular providers and contracts, and competition is particularly fierce.\nInternational: Country code \u2013 358; 2 submarine cable (Finland-Estonia and Finland-Sweden Connection); satellite earth stations \u2013 access to Intelsat transmission service via a Swedish satellite earth station, 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic and Indian Ocean regions); note \u2013 Finland shares the Inmarsat earth station with the other Nordic countries (Denmark, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden).\nRadio and television.\nThere is a national public radio and television company Yleisradio (Yle), which was previously funded by television license fees, but nowadays via the YLE tax. and two major private media companies, Alma Media and Sanoma, with national TV channels. Yle maintains four TV channels YLE1, YLE2, Teema and FST5. There are four commercial, national channels: Alma Media has MTV3 and SubTV, and Sanoma has Nelonen and Jim. There are also a lot of pay-TV channels. News Corporation introduced itself to the market in 2012 with the Fox channel, which was preceded by Finnish-owned SuomiTV.\nRadio broadcast stations.\nAM 2, FM 186, shortwave 1 (1998)\nTelevision broadcast stations.\n120 (plus 431 repeaters) (1999)\nTelevision is broadcast as digital (DVB-T) only since August 2007. On cable, only digital (DVB-C) will be broadcast from 2008 on.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10714", "revid": "45266846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10714", "title": "Transport in Finland", "text": " \nThe transport system of Finland is well-developed. Factors affecting traffic include the sparse population and long distance between towns and cities, and the cold climate with waterways freezing and land covered in snow for winter.\nThe extensive road system is utilized by most internal cargo and passenger traffic. As of 2010[ [update]], the country's network of main roads has a total length of around and all public roads . The motorway network totals with additional reserved only for motor traffic. Road network expenditure of around \u20ac1\u00a0billion is paid with vehicle and fuel taxes that amount to around \u20ac1.5\u00a0billion and \u20ac1\u00a0billion, respectively.\nThe main international passenger gateway is Helsinki-Vantaa Airport with over 20 million passengers in 2018. About 25 airports have scheduled passenger services. They are financed by competitive fees and rural airport may be subsidized. The Helsinki-Vantaa based Finnair (known for an Asia-focused strategy), Nordic Regional Airlines provide air services both domestically and internationally. Helsinki has an optimal location for great circle routes between Western Europe and the Far East. Hence, many international travelers visit Helsinki on a stop-over between Asia and Europe.\nDespite low population density, taxpayers spend annually around \u20ac350 million in maintaining railway tracks even to many rural towns. Operations are privatized and currently the only operator is the state-owned VR. It has 5 percent passenger market share (out of which 80 percent are urban trips in Greater Helsinki) and 25 percent cargo market share. Helsinki has an urban rail network.\nIcebreakers keep the 23 ports open all year round. There is passenger traffic from Helsinki and Turku, which have ferry connections to Tallinn, Mariehamn, Sweden and several other destinations.\nRoads.\nRoad transport in Finland is the most popular method of transportation, particularly in rural areas where the railway network does not extend to. As of 2011[ [update]] there are of public roads, of which are paved. The main road network comprises over of road.\nHighways.\n64% of all traffic on public roads takes place on main roads, which are divided into class I (\"/\") and class II (\"/\") main roads. Motorways have been constructed in the country since the 1960s, but they are still reasonably rare because traffic volumes are not large enough to motivate their construction. There are of motorways. Longest stretches are Helsinki\u2013Turku (Main road 1/E18), Vantaa\u2013Yl\u00f6j\u00e4rvi (Main road 3/E12), Helsinki\u2013Heinola (Main road 4/E75), and Helsinki\u2013Vaalimaa (Main road 7/E18). The world's northernmost motorway is also located in Finland between Keminmaa and Tornio (Main road 29/E8).\nThere are no toll roads in Finland.\nSpeed limits.\nSpeed limits change depending on the time of the year; the maximum speed limit on motorways is in the summer and in the winter. The main roads usually have speed limits of either 100\u00a0km/h or . Speed limits in urban areas range between and . If no other speed limit is signposted, the general speed limit in Finland is in built-up areas and outside.\nVehicles.\nAs of 2013[ [update]], there are 4,95\u00a0million registered automobiles, of which 2,58\u00a0million cars. Average age of cars (museum cars excluded) is 12,5 years (in some regions even 15 years), and typically the cars are destroyed in age of 24 years. In 2015, ca. 123\u00a0000 new vehicles were registered in Finland. About 550,000\u2013600,000 used automobiles are sold each year in Finland. During 2011\u20132014 the most sold car brand was Volkswagen. It had a market share of 12% of new cars.\nPublic transport.\nCoaches are mainly operated by private companies and provide services widely across the country. There is a large network of ExpressBus services with connections to all major cities and the most important rural areas as well as a burgeoning OnniBus 'cheap bus' network. Coach stations are operated by Matkahuolto.\nLocal bus services inside cities and towns have often been tightly regulated by the councils. Many councils also have their own bus operators, such as Tampere City Transit (TKL), which operates some bus lines on a commercial basis in competition with privately owned providers. Regional bus lines have been regulated by the provincial administration to protect old transit companies, leading to cartel situations like TLO in the Turku region, but strong regional regulating bodies, like the Helsinki Regional Transport Authority (HSL/HRT), whose routes are put out to tender exist as well and will become the norm after the transitional period during the 2010s.\nAccidents.\nIn 2015, number of road traffic accidents involving personal injury was 5,164. In them, 266 persons were killed. The number of road deaths per million inhabitants is just below the European average. Traffic safety has improved significantly since the early 1970s, when more than one thousand people died in road traffic every year.\nParking.\nMunicipal law 30-31 \u00a7 gives right to Referendum since year 1990. Citizens of Turku collected 15,000 names in one month for referendum against the underground car park. Politicians with in the elections unknown financing from the parking company neglected the citizens opinion. According to International Association of Public Transport UITP parking places are among the most effective ways to promote private car use in the city. Therefore, many European cities have cancelled the expensive underground car parking after the 1990s. The EU recommended actions cover develop guidance for concrete measures for the internalisation of external costs for car traffic also in urban areas. In Finland the shops routinely offer free parking for private cars.\nCycling.\nIn Finland, 13% of the population reports cycling as their primary form of transportation. In 2016, the first bicycle-sharing system, Helsinki City Bikes, opened in Finland.\nRail transport.\nRailways.\nThe Finnish railway network consists of a total of of railways built with . of track is electrified. In 2010, passengers made 13.4\u00a0million long-distance voyages and 55.5\u00a0million trips in local traffic. On the same year, over of freight were transported.\nFinland's first railway was opened between Helsinki and H\u00e4meenlinna in 1862, and today it forms part of the Finnish Main Line (\"p\u00e4\u00e4rata\"), which is more than 800 kilometers long. Nowadays, passenger trains are operated by the state-owned VR. They serve all the major cities and many rural areas, complemented by bus connections where needed. Most passenger train services originate or terminate at Helsinki Central railway station, and a large proportion of the passenger rail network radiates out of Helsinki. High-speed Pendolino services are operated from Helsinki to other major cities like Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4, Joensuu, Kuopio, Oulu, Tampere and Turku. Modern InterCity services complement the Pendolino network, and cheaper and older long and short-distance trains operate in areas with fewer passengers.\nThe Helsinki area has three urban rail systems: a tramway, a metro, and a commuter rail system. Light rail systems are currently being planned for Helsinki and also for Turku and Tampere, two of the country's other major urban centres.\nMetro.\nThe Helsinki metro is a 43-kilometer broad-gauge metro system that connects the center of Helsinki with the eastern districts and the western Espoo. The capital region has the northernmost metro system in the world and the only one in Finland. The Helsinki metro was opened on August 2, 1982, initially between Rautatientori and It\u00e4keskus. On November 18, 2017, L\u00e4nsimetro extended the metro lines from the inner city to the west, via Lauttasaari to Tapiola and Matinkyl\u00e4, and on December 3, 2022, all the way to Kivenlahti.\nHigh-speed rail.\nThere are plans to link Helsinki to Turku and Tampere by high-speed lines resulting in journey times of an hour between the capital and the two cities. A link to Kouvola is also planned. The estimated cost of these lines is \u20ac10 billion.\nTrams and light rail.\nIn Finland there have been two cities with trams: Helsinki and Tampere. Of the older systems only Helsinki has retained its tramway network. The trams in Viipuri, having been lost to Soviet Union in 1945, ceased operations in 1957, while the Turku tramway network shut down in 1972.\nIn November 2016, Tampere city council approved the construction of a new light rail system. Construction of phase 1 begun late 2016 and finished in 2021. Tampere trams are already operating but the official opening date is 9 August 2021. Turku also has preliminary plans for new tram system, but no decision to build it has been made.\nHelsinki currently operates 10 tramlines on a network of approximately of track in passenger service. The trams have annually 57 million passengers.\nAir transport.\nThere are 148 airfields, 74 of which have paved runways. 21 airports are served by scheduled passenger flights. By far the largest airport is Helsinki-Vantaa Airport, and the second largest by passenger volume is Oulu Airport. The larger airports are managed by the state-owned Finavia (formerly the Finnish Civil Aviation Administration). Finnair, Nordic Regional Airlines and Norwegian Air Shuttle are the main carriers for domestic flights.\nHelsinki-Vantaa airport is Finland's global gateway with scheduled non-stop flights to such places as Bangkok, Beijing, Guangzhou, Nagoya, New York, Osaka, Shanghai, Hong Kong and Tokyo. Helsinki has an optimal location for great circle airline traffic routes between Western Europe and the Far East. The airport is located approximately 19 kilometers north of Helsinki's downtown in the city of Vantaa, thus the name Helsinki-Vantaa.\nOther airports with regular scheduled international connections are Kokkola-Pietarsaari Airport, Mariehamn Airport, Tampere-Pirkkala Airport, Turku Airport and Vaasa Airport.\nWater transport.\nThe Finnish Maritime Administration is responsible for the maintenance of Finland's waterway network. Finland's waterways includes some of coastal fairways and of Finland waterways (on rivers, canals, and lakes). Saimaa Canal connects Lake Saimaa, and thus much of the inland waterway system of Finland, with the Baltic Sea at Vyborg (Viipuri). However, the lower part of the canal is currently located in Russia. To facilitate through shipping, Finland leases the Russian section of the canal from Russia (the original agreement with the Soviet Union dates to 1963).\nThe largest general port is Port of Hamina-Kotka. Port of Helsinki is the busiest passenger harbour, and it also has significant cargo traffic. By cargo tons, the five busiest ports are Hamina-Kotka, Helsinki, Rauma, Kilpilahti and Naantali.\nIcebreakers keep 23 ports open for traffic even in winter. The ports in Gulf of Bothnia need icebreakers in average six months a year, while in Gulf of Finland icebreakers are needed for three months a year.\nFrequent ferry service connects Finland with Estonia and Sweden. Baltic cruise liners regularly call on the\nport of Helsinki as well. In domestic service, ferries connect Finland's islands with the mainland. Finland's cargo ports\nmove freight both for Finland's own needs and for transshipment to Russia.\nWaterways and canals.\nFinland's canals are primarily located in inland waters. The canals of the Finnish sea area are mostly made for small boating. In terms of water traffic, a significant reason for canalization has been floating operations. For water management, canals have been built especially for Log driving and hydropower projects. \nIn order to lower and drain Lake Pohjalanj\u00e4rvi, the depression of Rautajoki was deepened by canalization. The Finnish Waterways Association was founded in 1981 to promote the development of waterways and the construction of canals.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10715", "revid": "50791227", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10715", "title": "Finnish Defence Forces", "text": "Armed forces of Finland\nThe Finnish Defence Forces (FDF) (; ) are the military of Finland. The Finnish Defence Forces consist of the Finnish Army, the Finnish Navy, and the Finnish Air Force. In wartime, the Finnish Border Guard becomes part of the Finnish Defence Forces.\nUniversal male conscription is in place, under which all mentally and physically capable men serve for 165, 255, or 347 days, from the year they turn 18 until the year they turn 29. Alternative non-military service for men and voluntary service for women is available.\nFinland's official policy states that a wartime military strength of 280,000 personnel constitutes a sufficient deterrent. The army consists of a highly mobile field army backed up by local defence units. The army defends the national territory and its military strategy employs the use of the heavily forested terrain and numerous lakes to wear down an aggressor, instead of attempting to hold the attacking army on the frontier.\nFinland's defence budget for 2025 equals approximately \u20ac6.5 billion. The voluntary overseas service is highly popular and troops serve around the world in UN, NATO, and EU missions. With an arsenal of 700 howitzers, 700 heavy mortars and 100 multiple rocket launchers, Finland has the largest artillery capability in western Europe. Homeland defence willingness against a superior enemy is at 83%, one of the highest rates in Europe. The air force has 62 F/A-18 combat aircraft from 1995, to be replaced with 64 F-35 aircraft in 2026 by the HX Fighter Program.\nThe Finnish Defence Forces cooperate closely with the Finnish Border Guard. The Finnish Border Guard has its own yearly and long-term investment budget.\nHistory.\nCivil War.\nAfter Finland's declaration of independence on 6 December 1917, the Civil Guards were proclaimed the troops of the government on 25 January 1918 and then Lieutenant General of the Russian Imperial Army Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim was appointed as Commander-in-Chief of these forces the next day. Fighting between the White Guards (as the Civil Guards were commonly known) and the Red Guards had already broken out about a week before around Viipuri, in what became known as the Finnish Civil War.\nIn the war, the Whites were victorious in large part thanks to the leadership of General Mannerheim and the lead by example offensive mindedness of 1,800 German-trained Finnish J\u00e4gers, who brought with them German tactical doctrine and military culture. The post-war years were characterized by the Volunteer Campaigns that came to an end in 1920 with the signing of the Treaty of Tartu, which ended the state of war between Finland and Soviet Russia and defined the internationally recognized borders of Finland.\nInterwar years.\nAfter winning the Civil War, the Finnish peacetime army was organized as three divisions and a brigade by professional German officers. It became the basic structure for the next 20 years. The coast was guarded by former czarist coastal fortifications and ships taken as prizes of war. The Air Force had already been formed in March 1918, but remained a part of the Army and did not become a fully independent fighting force until 1928. The White Guard (\"Suojeluskunta\") played a key role in interwar Finnish defence policy, as they essentially served as local/territorial militia forces, and some had higher readiness and training for quick mobilization.\nThe new government instituted conscription after the Civil War and also introduced a mobilization system and compulsory refresher courses for reservists. An academy providing basic officer training (\"Kadettikoulu\") was established in 1919, the founding of a General Staff College (\"Sotakorkeakoulu\") followed in 1924, and in 1927 a tactical training school (\"Taistelukoulu\") for company-grade and junior officers and NCOs was set up. The requirement of one year of compulsory service was greater than that imposed by any other Scandinavian country in the 1920s and the 1930s, but political opposition to defence spending left the military badly equipped to resist an attack by the Soviet Union, the only security threat in Finnish eyes.\nWorld War II.\nWhen the Soviets invaded in November 1939, the Finns, led by Marshal Mannerheim, defeated the Red Army on numerous occasions, including at the crucial Battle of Suomussalmi. These successes were in large part thanks to the application of motti tactics. Finland successfully defended its independence but ceded 9% of its territory per the Moscow Peace Treaty. During the war, the Finns lost 25,904 men, while the Soviet losses were 167,976 dead.\nFinland fought in the Continuation War alongside Germany from 1941 to 1944. Thanks to Nazi-German aid, the army was much better equipped, and the period of conscription was increased to two years, making possible the formation of sixteen infantry divisions. Having initially deployed on the defensive, the Finns took advantage of the weakened Soviet positions as a consequence of Operation Barbarossa, swiftly recovering their lost territories and invading Soviet territory in Karelia, after settling into defensive positions in December 1941. The Soviet offensive of June 1944 undid these Finnish gains and, while failing in its objective of destroying the Finnish army and forcing Finland's unconditional surrender, forced Finland out of the war. The Finns were able to preserve their independence with key defensive victories over the Red Army, the Battle of Tali-Ihantala being very significant.\nThese conflicts involving Finland had a significant impact on the modern Finnish defence force. While other European militaries have reduced their forces, Finland has maintained a large conscript-based reserve army. As a Swedish report stated: \"The reason why the FDF chose to maintain this model while its Nordic neighbors jumped on the expeditionary bandwagon is not hard to see. Sharing a 1340km border with Russia, the need for large ground forces is self-explanatory. Furthermore, memories of World War II \u2013 in which over 2 percent of the population perished in two brutal wars with the Soviet Union \u2013 are very much alive in Finland\". This same aspect has been highlighted even more strongly after the Russian invasion of Ukraine and Finland's decision to join NATO. With quotes like; \"After World War II, having thwarted the advance of the mighty Red Army in the Winter War of 1939-40 and then seeking to recapture the territory the Soviets eventually claimed, Finland had to settle for neutrality imposed by Moscow. But to almost everyone's surprise, it succeeded in this degrading task, too, building up armed forces that were highly capable and were energetically supported by civil society\u2014while at the same time managing to maintain dialogue with Moscow.\", \"Finland still has compulsory military service. Finland would be in a position to mobilize an army of 280,000 soldiers. That's quite a big army in modern Europe\", with similar views being expressed elsewhere as well, often referring to the fact that Finland has kept its conscript-based armed force or other readiness-related units, contrasting with other European countries that now have to re-arm, such as Germany as an example. During the events of 2022, all this has received attention internationally as well.\nCold War.\nThe demobilization and regrouping of the Finnish Defence Forces were carried out in late 1944 under the supervision of the Soviet-dominated Allied Control Commission. Following the Treaty of Paris in 1947, which imposed restrictions on the size and equipment of the armed forces and required disbandment of the Civic Guard, Finland reorganized its defence forces. The fact that the conditions of the peace treaty did not include prohibitions on reserves or mobilization made it possible to contemplate an adequate defence establishment within the prescribed limits. The reorganization resulted in the adoption of the brigade -in place of the division- as the standard formation.\nFor the first two decades after the Second World War, the Finnish Defence Forces relied largely on obsolete wartime material. Defence spending remained minimal until the early 1960s. During the peak of the Cold War, the Finnish government made a conscious effort to increase defence capability. This resulted in the commissioning of several new weapons systems and the strengthening of the defence of Finnish Lapland by the establishment of new garrisons in the area. From 1968 onwards, the Finnish government adopted the doctrine of territorial defence, which requires the use of large land areas to delay and wear out a potential aggressor. The doctrine was complemented by the concept of total defence which calls for the use of all resources of society for national defence in case of a crisis. From the mid-1960s onwards, the Finnish Defence Forces also began to specifically prepare to defeat a strategic strike, the kind which the Soviet Union employed successfully to topple the government of Czechoslovakia in 1968. In an all-out confrontation between the two major blocs, the Finnish objective would have been to prevent any military incursions in Finnish territory and thereby keep Finland outside the war.\nPost-1991.\nThe collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 did not eliminate the military threat perceived by the government, but the nature of the threat had changed. While the concept of total, territorial defence was not dropped, military planning has moved towards the capability to prevent and frustrate a strategic attack toward the vital regions of the country.\nThe end of the Cold War also allowed new opportunities which would have previously been seen as breaking Finland's stance of neutrality, such as participation in the War in Afghanistan and the Nordic Battlegroup.\nWith the change in the European security environment brought by the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Finnish government officials began voicing increasingly strong support for joining NATO, buttressed by polls showing a rapid increase in Finnish citizens' willingness to join NATO. NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg voiced his support in April 2022 for the inclusion of Finland into the Euro-Atlantic defence alliance and stated that NATO member countries would likely enthusiastically support a Finland bid for membership.\nOn 11 May 2022, British Prime Minister Boris Johnson and Finnish President Sauli Niinist\u00f6 signed a new mutual defence agreement \"to reinforce their security and fortify northern Europe's defences, in the face of renewed threats.\" This has helped to address concerns within Finland that the delay between application and acceptance to NATO, during which time Finland would not yet be able to invoke NATO Article 5 and may present an opportunity for a Russian invasion.\nOn 12 May 2022, Niinist\u00f6 and Prime Minister Sanna Marin issued a joint statement supporting Finland's application for membership of NATO, saying \"As a member of NATO, Finland would strengthen the entire defence alliance. Finland must apply for NATO membership without delay.\" On 17 May 2022, the Parliament of Finland voted overwhelmingly to apply for membership of NATO, with 188 votes in favour of the motion and 8 against. The following morning, the Finnish ambassador to NATO, Klaus Korhonen, formally submitted Finland's application to NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg. Sweden also submitted its application at the same time.\nOn 29 June 2022, thirty NATO countries invited Finland and Sweden to join NATO. Both countries received the status of aspiring members while attending the annual NATO summit in Madrid as guest nations. Finland became a full NATO member on 4 April 2023.\nAs of 2025, the Defence Forces are undergoing key procurement programmes for all the three branches. The Navy is scheduled to get its largest vessels since the WW2-era \"V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen\" class with the new \"Pohjanmaa\" class. The Air Force has made the decision to acquire the Lockheed Martin F-35A to replace all McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet fighter jets for \u20ac10 billion. Meanwhile, the Army is planning to complement the modernized Patria Pasi armoured vehicles with the Finnish Patria 6\u00d76. The standard issue assault rifle RK 62 is also being upgraded to a new variant. A new high altitude air defence missile system was selected in April 2023, Rafael's David's Sling system.\nOrganization.\nThe Finnish Defence Forces are under the command of the Chief of Defence, who is directly subordinate to the President of the Republic in matters related to the military command. Decisions concerning military orders are made by the President of the Republic in consultation with the Prime Minister and the Minister of Defence.\nApart from the Defence Command (, ), the military branches are the Finnish Army (, ), the Finnish Navy (, ) and the Finnish Air Force (, ). The Border Guard (, ) (including the coast guard) is under the authority of the Ministry of the Interior, but can be incorporated fully or in part into the defence forces when required by defence readiness. All logistical duties of the Defence Forces are carried out by the Defence Forces Logistics Command (), which includes three logistics regiments.\nThe Army is divided into eight brigade-level units (). Under the brigades, there were 12 military districts, which were responsible for carrying out the draft, training and crisis-time activation of reservists and for planning and executing territorial defence of their areas. The military districts were disbanded in 2014, as a part of the 800 million euro savings the Finnish Defence Forces had to carry out. Their duties are now carried out by regional offices ().\nThe Navy consists of headquarters and four brigade-level units: Coastal Fleet (), Coastal Brigade (), Nyland Brigade (, ), and Naval Academy (). The Coastal Fleet includes all the surface combatants of the Navy, while Coastal Brigade and Nyland Brigade train coastal troops.\nThe Air Force consists of headquarters and four brigade-level units: Satakunta, Lapland and Karelian Air Wings () and Air Force Academy (). They are responsible for securing the integrity of the Finnish airspace during peace and for conducting aerial warfare independently during a crisis.\nThe military training of the reservists is primarily the duty of the Defence Forces, but it is assisted by the National Defence Training Association of Finland (). This association provides reservists with personal, squad, platoon and company level military training. Most of the 2,000 instructors of the association are volunteers certified by the Defence Forces, but when Defence Forces materiel is used, the training always takes place under the supervision of career military personnel. Annually, the Defence Forces requests the Association to run specialized exercises for some 8,500 personnel placed in reserve units, and an additional 16,500 reservists participate in military courses where the participants are not directly selected by the Defence Forces. The legislation concerning the association will require that the chairman and the majority of the members of its board are chosen by the Finnish Government. The other board members are chosen by NGOs active in the national defence.\nGeneral Officers.\nThe Finnish Defence Forces.\nChief of Defence\nGeneral Janne Jaakkola\nDefence Command.\nChief of Defence Command Finland\nLieutenant General Vesa Virtanen\nDeputy Chief of Staff, Logistics and Armaments\nLieutenant General Mikko Heiskanen\nDeputy Chief of Staff, Strategy\nMajor General Sami Nurmi\nDeputy Chief of Staff, Operations\nMajor General Kari Nisula\nDeputy Chief of Staff, Personnel\nMajor General Rami Saari\nChief of Planning\nBrigadier General Tero Ylitalo\nAssistant Chief of Staff Operations\nCommodore Janne Huusko\nDefence Command Chief of C5\nBrigadier General Jarmo V\u00e4h\u00e4tiitto\nChief of Personnel (J1)\nCommodore Tuomas Tiilikainen\nChief of Logistics\nBrigadier General Timo Saarinen\nAssistant Chief of Staff, Training (J7)\nBrigadier General Manu Tuominen\nDefence Command Chief of Intelligence\nBrigadier General Pekka Turunen\nChief Surgeon\nCommodore Medical Juha-Petri Ruohola\nField Bishop\nJukka Pekka Asikainen\nArmy.\nCommander of the Finnish Army\nLieutenant General Pasi V\u00e4lim\u00e4ki\nChief of Staff, Army\nMajor General Jukka Jokinen\nChief of Operations, Army Command\nBrigadier General Sami-Antti Takamaa\nCommander of Karelia Brigade\nBrigadier General Jyri Raitasalo\nCommander of Kainuu Brigade\nBrigadier General Ari Laaksonen\nCommander of Pori Brigade\nBrigadier General Jami Virta\nNavy.\nCommander of the Finnish Navy\nRear Admiral Jori Harju\nChief of Staff, Navy\nCommodore Jukka Anteroinen\nAir Force.\nCommander of the Finnish Air Force\nMajor General Timo Herranen\nChief of Staff, Air Force\nBrigadier General Aki Puustinen\nNational Defence University.\nRector of The National Defence University\nMajor General Mika Kalliomaa\nSpecial Assignments.\nMilitary Representative to The EU and NATO\nLieutenant General Kim J\u00e4\u00e4meri\nDefence Forces Logistics Command.\nChief of Finnish Defence Forces Logistics Command\nMajor General Tero Ylitalo (2024)\nDeputy Manager, Logistic Command\nBrigadier General Engineering Juha-Matti Ylitalo\nConscription.\nThe Finnish Defence Forces are based on universal male conscription. All men above 18 years of age are liable to serve either six, nine, or 12 months. Some 27,000 conscripts are trained annually. 65% of Finnish men complete their service. The conscripts at first receive basic training, after which they are assigned to various units for special training. Privates who are trained for tasks not requiring special skills serve for six months. In technically demanding tasks the time of service is nine, or in some cases 12 months. Those selected for NCO (non-commissioned officer) or officer training serve 12 months. At the completion of the service, the conscripts receive a reserve military rank of private, lance corporal, corporal, sergeant or second lieutenant, depending on their training and accomplishments. After their military service, the conscripts are placed in reserve until the end of their 50th or 60th living year, depending on their military rank. During their time in reserve, the reservists are liable to participate in military refresher exercises for a total of 40, 75 or 100 days, depending on their military rank. In addition, all reservists are liable for activation in a situation where the military threat against Finland has seriously increased, in full or partial mobilization or in a large-scale disaster or a virulent epidemic. The males who do not belong to the reserve may only be activated in case of full mobilization, and those rank-and-file personnel who have reached 50 years of age only with a specific parliamentary decision.\nMilitary service can be started after turning 18. The service can be delayed due to studies, work or other personal reasons until the 28th birthday, but these reasons do not result in exemptions. In addition to lodging, food, clothes and health care the conscripts receive between 6.10 and 14.15 euros per day, depending on the time they have served. The state also pays for any rental and electricity bills the conscripts incur during their service. If the conscripts have families, they are entitled to benefits as well. It is illegal to fire an employee due to military service or due to a refresher exercise or activation. Voluntary females in military service receive a small additional benefit, because they are expected to provide their own underwear and other personal items.\nThe military service consists of lessons, practical training, various cleaning and maintenance duties and field exercises. Most weekends conscripts can leave the barracks on Friday and are expected to return by midnight on Sunday. A small force of conscripts are kept in readiness on weekends to aid civil agencies in various types of emergency situations, to guard the premises and to maintain defence in case of a sudden military emergency. Field exercises can go on regardless of the time of day or week.\nThe training of conscripts is based on \"joukkotuotanto\"-principle (lit. English \"troop production\"). In this system, 80% of the conscripts are trained to fulfill a specific role in a specific wartime military unit. Each brigade-level unit is responsible for producing specified reserve units from the conscripts it has been allocated. As the reservists are discharged, they receive a specific wartime placement in the unit with which they have trained during their conscription. As the conscripts age, their unit is given new, different tasks and materiel. Typically, reservists are placed for the first five years in first-line units, then moved to military formations with less demanding tasks, while the reservists unable to serve in the unit are substituted with reservists from the reserve without specific placement. In refresher exercises, the unit is then given new training for these duties, if the defence funding permits this.\nThe inhabitants of the demilitarized \u00c5land islands are exempt from military service. By the Conscription act of 1950, they are however required to serve a time at a local institution, like the coast guard instead. However, until such service has been arranged, they are freed from service obligation. The non-military service of the \u00c5land islands has not been arranged since the introduction of the act, and there are no plans to institute it. The inhabitants of the \u00c5land islands can also volunteer for military service on the mainland. Jehovah's Witnesses were exempt until February 2019. It is also possible to serve either weapon-free military service of 255 or 347 days or undergo a 12-month-long non-military service. Finnish law requires that men who do not want to serve the defence of the country in any capacity (so-called total objectors) be sentenced to a prison term of 173 days. As of 1995, women were permitted to serve on a voluntary basis and pursue careers as officers. In conscription, women have a consideration time of 30 days, during which they have the choice to halt their service without any other specific reason. After the said 30 days, all the same laws and jurisdictions apply to them as to men. Unlike in many other countries, women are allowed to serve in all combat arms including front-line infantry and special forces.\nMilitary ranks.\nThe Finnish military ranks follow the Western usage in the officer ranks. As a Finnish peculiarity, the rank of lieutenant has three grades: 2nd lieutenant, lieutenant and senior lieutenant. The 2nd lieutenant is a reserve officer rank, active commissioned officers beginning their service as lieutenants.\nThe basic structure of the NCO ranks is a variant of the German rank structure, but the rank system has some peculiarities due to different personnel groups. The duties carried out by NCOs in most Western armed forces are carried out by\nIn a case of war, most of the NCO duties would be carried out by reserve NCOs who have received their training during conscription.\nThe rank and file of the Finnish Defence Forces is composed of conscripts serving in the ranks of private, lance corporal and NCO student.\nEquipment.\nFinnish Defence Forces Materiel and equipment photos.\nFinland does not have attack helicopters or submarines. Legislation forbids nuclear weapons entirely.\nIn early March 2012, Finland decided to purchase advanced Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missiles (AGM-158 JASSM) from the United States. Other non-USA operators for the JASSM are Australia, Poland and South Korea. The deal also included other sophisticated bombs like glide-bombs AGM-154 Joint Standoff Weapon and JDAM (Joint Direct Attack Munition).\nFinland has updated its M270 multiple launch rocket system (MLRS. In Finnish 298 RSRAKH 06) to be able to fire the ATACMS tactical ballistic missile).\nUniform.\nThe main field uniform is the M05 uniform, introduced in 2005, which is a green camouflage uniform used by the army. M05 has cold weather and snow camouflage variants, which are gray-green and white with green flecks, respectively. Older green camouflage uniforms are M91 and M62. The M83 light service uniform remains in use as a service uniform for permanent personnel, such as officers and as a dress uniform, but is not commonly issued to troops. This is gray for the army, blue for the air force and dark blue for the navy. The navy has separate naval uniforms, while the air force uses army-pattern uniforms. There are also four separate full dress uniforms depending on the dress code.\nPeacekeeping operations.\nFinland has taken part in peacekeeping operations since 1956 (the number of Finnish peacekeepers who have served since 1956 amounts to 43,000). In 2003, over a thousand Finnish peacekeepers were involved in peacekeeping operations, including UN and NATO led missions. According to the Finnish law the maximum simultaneous strength of the peacekeeping forces is limited to 2,000 soldiers.\nSince 1956, 39 Finnish soldiers have died while serving in peacekeeping operations.\nSince 1996, the Pori Brigade has trained parts of the Finnish Rapid Deployment Force (FRDF), which can take part in international crisis management/peacekeeping operations at short notice. The Nyland/Uusimaa Brigade has started training the Amphibious Task Unit (ATU) in recent years, a joint Swedish-Finnish international task unit.\nSince 2006, Finland has participated in the formation of European Union Battlegroups. Finland participated in two European Union Battlegroups in 2011.\nInternational operations Finland is participating in by deploying military units (personnel strength in parentheses):\nOther international operations Finland is participating in with staff personnel, military observers and similar (personnel strength in parentheses):\nTotal defence.\nThe Finnish military doctrine is based on the concept of total defence. The term total means that all sectors of the government and economy are involved in the defence planning. In principle, each ministry has the responsibility for planning its operations during a crisis. There are no special emergency authorities, such as the U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Russian Ministry of Emergency Situations. Instead, each authority regularly trains for crises and has been allocated a combination of normal and emergency powers it needs to keep functioning in any conceivable situation. In a war, all resources of society may be diverted to ensure the survival of the nation. The legal basis for such measures is found in the Readiness Act and in the State of Defence Act, which would come into force through a presidential decision verified by parliament in the case of a crisis.\nThe main objective of the doctrine is to establish and maintain a military force capable of deterring any potential aggressor from using Finnish territory or applying military pressure against Finland. To accomplish this, the defence is organised on the doctrine of territorial defence. The stated main principles of the territorial defence doctrine are\nThe defence planning is organised to counteract three threat situations:\nIn all cases, the national objective is to keep the vital areas, especially the Helsinki metropolitan area in Finnish possession. In other areas, the size of the country is used to delay and wear down the invader, until the enemy may be defeated in an area of Finnish choosing. The Army carries most of the responsibility for this task.\nThe key wartime army units in 2015 are:\nThe total number of territorial and regional units is undisclosed.\nThe army units are mostly composed of reservists, the career soldiers manning the command and specialty positions.\nThe role of the Navy is to repel all attacks carried out against Finnish coasts and to safeguard the territorial integrity during peacetime and the \"gray\" phase of the conflict. The maritime defence relies on the combined use of coastal artillery, missile systems and naval mines to wear down the attacker. The Air Force is used to deny the invader air superiority and to protect most important troops and objects of national importance in conjunction with the ground-based air defence. As the readiness of the Air Force and the Navy is high, even during peacetime, the career personnel have a much more visible role in the wartime duties of these defence branches.\nThe Border Guard has the responsibility for border security in all situations. During a war, it will contribute to the national defence partially integrated into the army, its total mobilized strength being some 11,600 troops. One of the projected uses for the Border Guard is guerrilla warfare in areas temporarily occupied by enemy.\nKey wartime units.\nThe army is organised into operative forces, which consist of approximately 61,000 persons, and territorial forces, which consist of 176,000 persons. The following list is the wartime organisation of the Finnish army from January 2008.\nArmy.\nTerritorial forces:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10716", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10716", "title": "Foreign relations of Finland", "text": "The foreign relations of Finland are the responsibility of the president of Finland, who leads foreign policy in cooperation with the government. Implicitly the government is responsible for internal policy and decision making in the European Union. Within the government, preparative discussions are conducted in the government committee of foreign and security policy (\"ulko- ja turvallisuuspoliittinen ministerivaliokunta\"), which includes the Prime Minister and at least the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Defence, and at most four other ministers as necessary. The committee meets with the President as necessary. Laws concerning foreign relations are discussed in the parliamentary committee of foreign relations (\"ulkoasiainvaliokunta, utrikesutskottet\"). The Ministry of Foreign Affairs implements the foreign policy.\nFinland is a member of the European Union, the Eurozone, NATO, the Nordic Council, and the United Nations.\nThe country declared independence in 1917, and in 1919 it was established as a republic. Throughout its existence, Finland has been a democratic state with a market-based economy.\nFor six to seven centuries Finland formed an integral part of the Kingdom of Sweden, with the process of its incorporation beginning in the 12th century. During the Finnish War, which was linked to the Napoleonic Wars, the Russian Empire conquered Finland from Sweden. It was subsequently organized as an autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland within the Russian Empire.\nThe roots of Finland\u2019s foreign policy can be traced back to 18th-century Sweden and the Caps Party. During the period of autonomy under Russia, long-standing traditions of eastern policy were established.\nIndependent Finland began adopting a policy of neutrality during the 1930s, drawing inspiration from the other Nordic countries that pursued similar lines. This neutrality continued after the Second World War. During the Cold War Finland expanded its economic cooperation with the West, while maintaining bilateral trade with the Soviet Union.\nFollowing the end of the Cold War, Finland purchased Hornet fighter aircraft from the United States, joined NATO\u2019s Partnership for Peace programme in 1994, and became a full partner in 1996. The country became a member of the European Union in 1995 and adopted the euro in 1999. In 1995, it also joined the World Trade Organization.\nIn the post\u2011Cold War era, Finland renounced neutrality but maintained a policy of military non-alignment from the 1990s through the 2010s. This stance came to an end in 2023 when Finland formally acceded to NATO.\nFrom the period of Swedish rule to the era of independent Finland, the most significant Western trade partners have been Sweden, Germany, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and the United States. In 2024, Finland\u2019s largest export destinations were Sweden, Germany, and the United States.\nOver the course of its history, Finland has witnessed the collapse of the Russian Empire, the Russian revolutions of 1917, the birth of the Soviet Union, the devastation of the Second World War, and ultimately the disintegration of the USSR. During both stable and turbulent times, Finland has maintained extensive trading relations with its eastern neighbour. Russia has consistently been Finland\u2019s largest trading partner, during the successive eras of the empire, the Soviet Union, and the Russian Federation. These relations have experienced both periods of great expansion and times of severe decline.\nIn 2014, when Russia annexed Crimea from Ukraine, Finland adhered to the European Union\u2019s sanctions policy. It has maintained this stance since Russia\u2019s invasion of Ukraine began in 2022.\nDuring the decades of neutrality and military non\u2011alignment, Finland emphasized its role as a mediator between East and West. The most notable example of this diplomatic tradition was the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) held in Helsinki in 1975, which contributed to d\u00e9tente in the Cold War order.\nHistory.\nThe Kingdom of Sweden 1100-1809.\nDuring the Middle Ages, the Kingdom of Sweden granted the Finns the right to manage relations with Russia on a practical level. The center of eastern policy was located in Vyborg. A key challenge proved to be the synchronization of eastern policy with the Swedish monarchs residing in Stockholm. At times, the Finns demanded a firmer stance toward Russia, while Stockholm preferred to maintain a conciliatory approach. At other times, Stockholm sought to tighten its policy toward Russia, but the Finns opposed it. Harmony in eastern policy prevailed only when Stockholm and the Finns shared the same outlook.\nFinland\u2019s early foundations of foreign policy date back to the 18th century. Sweden lost its great power status after the Great Northern War in 1721. In the 1730s, the so\u2011called Caps Party emerged in Sweden, advocating peaceful relations with Russia. Its leader was Count Arvid Horn, and the Caps Party enjoyed considerable support in Finland. In contrast, the Hats Party pursued a more belligerent policy toward Russia and favored an alliance with France. The Hats gained power and launched the Russo\u2011Swedish War (1741-1743), known in Finland as the War of the Hats. The war ended in Sweden\u2019s defeat and Finland\u2019s occupation. In the aftermath of the War of the Hats, certain circles within the Finnish nobility began to entertain the notion of an independent Finland, envisaged as a polity established under the aegis of Russian support. At the same time, discontent was mounting among the Finnish population towards the policies exercised by the Swedish Crown, whether in relation to the privileges of the aristocracy or the absolutist rule emanating from Stockholm. Sweden\u2019s autocratic king Gustav III later waged war against Russia in 1788, sparking a mutiny among Finland\u2019s officer corps. The plan for the conquest of Finland was conceived around the time of the Treaty of Tilsit between Napoleonic France and tsar Alexander I of Russia. King Gustav IV Adolf of Sweden refused to join the Continental System directed against the United Kingdom. Alexander showed little enthusiasm for the subjugation of Finland, as he foresaw that the war would bring considerable economic costs. Russia conquered Finland from Sweden in 1809 as part of the Napoleonic Wars. \nThe Grand Duchy of Finland - Russian Empire 1809-1917.\nIn 1809, the Russian Empire turned Finland into a Grand Duchy. While Finland was not granted its own foreign policy, this period laid the early traditions of an eastern policy toward Russia. Finland\u2019s stance was one of compliance and loyalty to the tsars. Finland adapted to the foreign policy pursued by the Russian Empire. This opened for the Finns a perspective on the dynamics of wider world politics. Key figures of Finland's early foreign policy included Count Gustaf Mauritz Armfelt, Count Johan Fredrik Aminoff, Count Robert Henrik Rehbinder, Count Carl Erik Mannerheim, and Count Alexander Armfelt.\nIn the aftermath of the political transformations that followed the early nineteenth century, members of the Finnish nobility, together with soldiers and officers, adapted to the new circumstances with notable celerity. Following Napoleon's invasion of Russia in 1812, a significant number of Finns joined the ranks of the Russian army. Finnish nobles, soldiers and officers played a tangible role during the final campaigns of the Napoleonic Wars, being present within the forces commanded by tsar Alexander I of Russia that occupied Paris in 1814.\nHigh-ranking Finnish officers and soldiers took part in the Caucasian War and the Russian conquest of Central Asia. Finns also participated in the suppression of the Polish uprisings, as well as in wars against the Ottoman Empire, Japan, Austria-Hungary, and the German Empire.\nSeveral states maintained consular representation in the Grand Duchy of Finland. Before the First World War, accredited consulates were established by Sweden, German Empire, Austria-Hungary, Argentina, France, and the United Kingdom, while the United States, for example, was represented through a Finnish honorary consul. Finnish honorary consuls were chosen primarily from among representatives of trade and shipping.\nIn 1887, Finland had a commercial representative at the Russian Embassy in London. The commercial representative operated under the authority of the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, but he was entitled to report directly to Finland on the British economy. The British Empire was Finland's largest exports market.\nRussia and France concluded the Franco-Russian alliance in 1892. The Entente Cordiale between France and Britain was formed in 1904. In 1907, Russia became a member of the Triple Entente. At that time Finland did not conduct its own foreign policy, but instead adhered to the policies of Russia. Finnish soldiers participated in the First World War in the ranks of the Russian army - including Baron Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim.\nEarly independence.\nIn March 1917, Tsar Nicholas II of Russia abdicated the throne, which led to the collapse of the Russian Empire and left the Grand Duchy of Finland without a grand duke. Following the Bolshevik Revolution in November, Finland declared independence in December 1917. Soviet Russia was the first to recognize Finland in 4 January 1918, followed shortly by Sweden, France, and Germany.\nIn late January 1918, Finnish socialists launched a civil war with the support of Russian Bolsheviks. The anti-communist Whites, in turn, were supported by the German Empire. German assistance initially took the form of arms shipments and the deployment of Finnish J\u00e4gers trained in Germany. During the Finnish Civil War, Russia and Germany concluded the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, under which most of the Russian troops withdrew from Finland, leaving the Finnish Reds without support. Already in February, Finland's ambassador to Berlin, Edvard Hjelt, had formally requested German military intervention. In April, the German Baltic Sea Division landed at Hanko and took Helsinki from the Red Guards.\nTo secure German assistance, Finland and Germany had signed a peace treaty accompanied by a trade agreement that granted significant benefits for German industry. A secret supplementary protocol authorized German forces to establish bases in Finland and to operate through Finnish territory to the Arctic Ocean. After the White victory, a plan to establish a Finnish monarchy was set in motion, and Prince Frederick Charles of Hesse, brother-in-law of German Emperor Wilhelm II, was chosen as king-elect. Finland's pro-German policy and the election of a German king led to France to cut diplomatic relations with Finland, and prompted the United States and Great Britain to withhold recognition. U.S. Secretary of State Robert Lansing considered Finland a German-occupied country.\nHowever, Germany's defeat in the World War I and the abdication of Wilhelm II also put an end to Finland's monarchy project and forced a reorientation of its foreign policy. German forces withdrew from Finland following the Armistice of 11 November 1918. General Baron Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim, who had opposed the pro-German orientation, assumed the position of Regent of Finland. Mannerheim advocated the \"entente cordiale\", supporting alignment with Franco\u2013British relations. A republican constitution was adopted in Finland in 1919, and the Allied powers agreed to recognize Finland following the Paris Peace Conference. \nThe establishment of closer ties with the United Kingdom was facilitated by Britain's role as Finland\u2019s principal export market during the era of the Grand Duchy. Relations with France were in turn eased by the fact that the Russian Empire had been allied with France during the First World War. Transatlantic relations gained importance immediately in the early years of Finland\u2019s independence. Herbert Hoover was a friend of Finland, and he organized food aid for the country, whose economy had suffered from the First World War, the collapse of the Russian Empire, and the Civil War. The United States also provided Finland with necessary loans that supported its economy. \nKaarlo Juho St\u00e5hlberg was elected the first President of the Republic of Finland in 1919. His presidency was characterised by an emphasis on domestic political affairs as Finland sought to consolidate its institutions and identity as a sovereign state. During his term, the only official state visit to Finland was made by the Estonian President, Konstantin P\u00e4ts. In foreign policy, St\u00e5hlberg largely delegated authority to Foreign Minister Rudolf Holsti, who pursued the idea of an alliance with the United Kingdom. The proposal, however, failed to gain broad acceptance within Finland\u2019s political establishment.\nSt\u00e5hlberg was succeeded by Lauri Kristian Relander, whose presidency marked a shift in focus toward foreign relations. Relander undertook Finland\u2019s first official state visits abroad and hosted several foreign leaders in Finland. The most significant among these occasions was the visit of King Gustaf V of Sweden to Helsinki, which underscored the close historical and cultural ties between the two nations.\nBetween the world wars.\nRelations with Soviet Russia from 1918 to 1939 were icy; voluntary expeditions to Russia called heimosodat ended only in 1922, four years after the conclusion of the Finnish Civil War. However, attempts to establish military alliances were unsuccessful.\nIn Finnish politics, the right supported orientation towards the Weimar Republic, while the left favoured closer ties with the Soviet Union. The key responsibilities of Finnish foreign policy were held by moderates and liberals, who supported cultivating close relations with Britain, France, and the United States. Finland also maintained naturally close relations with Sweden.\nIn the Baltic region, new independent states emerged: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland. Finland sought cooperation with these countries through the so\u2011called buffer state policy, intended to safeguard against the threat posed by the Soviet Union. In 1922, Finland signed a treaty with these states, but the Finnish Parliament did not ratify the agreement. Cooperation among the buffer states was complicated by disputes between Poland and Lithuania. The buffer state policy was further weakened by the emergence of mistrust between Poland and France concerning the defence against a potential German threat; France was not prepared to support Poland. Instead, Poland signed a non\u2011aggression pact with Germany.\nWorld War II.\nIn 1935, Finland publicly declared its withdrawal from the buffer state policy and officially adopted a stance of neutrality, in line with the other Nordic countries.\nPrior to the outbreak of the Second World War, Finland\u2019s international trade was predominantly directed towards Western Europe. Commercial relations with the Soviet Union did not recover during the interwar years, owing to the fundamental incompatibility between Finland\u2019s system of capitalism and private ownership and the Soviet Union\u2019s model of a planned economy and communism. By the 1930s, exports to the Soviet Union accounted for less than one percent of Finland\u2019s total foreign trade. \nWhen the Winter War broke out, Finland was left alone to resist the Soviet attack. Foreign volunteers also participated in the Winter War, and Finland received supplies from various parts of the world. The Finnish Army succeeded in defending the country against the numerically superior Soviet Union. On the Soviet side, the decision to hasten the conclusion of the conflict was influenced by the willingness of Britain and France to dispatch volunteers in support of Finland. In 1940, Finland and the Soviet Union signed the Moscow Peace Treaty. As a result of the treaty, Finland was compelled to cede Karelia, Salla, the islands of the Gulf of Finland, the Rybachy Peninsula, and the Hanko Peninsula.\nBy 1940, the situation in the Baltic region had altered dramatically. Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union had partitioned Poland. The Soviet Union annexed Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. In the same year, Nazi Germany occupied Denmark and Norway. Finland and Sweden remained the only neutral states in the Baltic Sea region. The two countries considered forming a political union, but Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union obstructed these plans. The Soviet Union had not relinquished its strategic objective of bringing Finland under its control.\nThe Soviet Union continued to exert political and economic pressure on Finland. In June 1940, Nazi Germany occupied Paris, and the next stage was the Battle of Britain. Finland\u2019s only remaining option was partnership with Germany, as no other alternatives existed in the struggle against the Soviet Union. Neither the Finnish state leadership nor the population were enthusiastic about this partnership, yet no viable alternatives were available. Germany, for its part, was interested in cooperation with Finland due to the presence of nickel deposits in Lapland, a raw material of vital importance for the production of defence equipment. \nLater, during the Continuation War, Finland declared \"co-belligerency\" with Nazi Germany, and allowed Northern Finland to be used as a German attack base. For 872 days, the German army, aided indirectly by Finnish forces, besieged Leningrad, the Soviet Union's second-largest city. The peace settlement in 1944 with the Soviet Union led to the Lapland War in 1945, where Finland fought Germans in northern Finland.\nDuring the Cold War.\nAfter the Second World War, Finland returned to a policy of neutrality. Marshal Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim served as President of Finland from 1944 to 1946. He was succeeded by former Prime Minister Juho Kusti Paasikivi, who during the era of the Russian Empire had been a supporter of the policy of conciliation and had served as Finland\u2019s ambassador to Stockholm in the 1930s. Paasikivi, whose background was in the Old Finnish Party, had already been involved in shaping Finland\u2019s policy of neutrality in the interwar period.\nPresident Paasikivi showed willingness to participate in the 1947 Paris conference concerning the Marshall Plan, but the Soviet Union prevented Finland\u2019s participation. Nonetheless, Finland succeeded in negotiating favourable loans from the United States, which were repaid with interest.\nFinland did not join the Soviet Union's economic sphere (Comecon) but remained a free-market economy and conducted bilateral trade with the Soviet Union. \nIn 1948, Finland instead signed the Finno\u2013Soviet Treaty. Similar treaties were concluded by the Eastern Bloc states, yet Finland represented a special case, as it remained both democratic and capitalist. Finland received formal Soviet recognition of its neutrality in 1956.\nDuring the Cold War, Finland\u2019s foreign policy evolved into what became known as the Paasikivi\u2013Kekkonen line, emphasising neutrality and the cultivation of good relations with countries across the international spectrum. The aim was to remain outside the confrontations of the great powers. To reinforce and interpret this foreign policy principle, the Paasikivi Society was officially founded in 1958.\nThroughout the Cold War, Finland\u2019s diplomacy rested on careful balancing in the sphere of international trade agreements. Finland sought to expand its economic cooperation with both West and East, while maintaining relations with neither side at the expense of the other. The Soviet Union regarded excessive Western integration in Finland\u2019s economic relations as a potential risk of Finland slipping out of its sphere of influence. Conversely, Western states were intent on preventing dual\u2011use technologies from reaching the Eastern Bloc, while also seeking to ensure that Finland would not drift into becoming part of that bloc.\nA major highlight of Finland\u2019s Cold War history was the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), held in Helsinki in 1975, which brought together the world\u2019s leaders. The event also served as a demonstration of the diplomatic skill of Urho Kekkonen, Finland\u2019s long\u2011serving president. The purpose of the conference was to promote d\u00e9tente and foster closer relations between the opposing sides of the Cold War.\nThe participating states signed a treaty that guaranteed the free movement of people and information. This provision became a catalyst for demands for human rights within the Eastern Bloc. The CSCE conference thus played a role in undermining the Iron Curtain. Hosting the CSCE was, moreover, an acknowledgement of Finland\u2019s neutrality.\nFrom 1975 onwards, the Soviet Union became Finland\u2019s largest export market, overtaking the United Kingdom. This shift was largely due to Britain\u2019s departure from the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) to join the European Economic Community (EEC), which created customs barriers that hampered trade between Britain and Finland, as Finland was only an associate member of EFTA. Finland signed a free trade agreement with the EEC in 1973, but most tariffs were not removed until 1977, with the final tariffs eliminated in 1985.\nFinland and the Soviet Union maintained a closely regulated bilateral trade relationship characterized by five-year trade agreements that specified export quotas for Finnish manufactured goods, machinery, and transport equipment in exchange for Soviet crude oil and mineral fuels. Trade was largely balanced annually through barter arrangements. The Soviet Union was not only Finland's biggest trading partner but also offered favorable conditions, including premiums on Finnish exports compared to Western markets. This subsidized trade relationship helped support Finnish industry and economic stability during the oil crises of the 1970s and 1980s.\nThe President of the United States Ronald Reagan conducted a three-day state visit to Finland in 1988, hosted by President Mauno Koivisto. This visit symbolised the diplomatic relations between the two nations during the late Cold War period.\nIn 1990, the Helsinki Summit took place in Finland between U.S. President George H.W. Bush and Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev. The agenda of the summit prominently featured the issue of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, which had precipitated international tensions. The discussions foreshadowed the subsequent Gulf War, which resulted in the liberation of Kuwait from Iraqi control.\nThe trade partnership persisted as the Soviet Union remained Finland\u2019s largest export destination until the USSR\u2019s collapse in 1991, after which the dynamics of Finnish foreign trade shifted dramatically. The collapse of this trade regime had significant economic repercussions for Finland, as a substantial share of its exports and industrial sectors depended on the Soviet market. The Soviet trade relationships were also politically significant and symbolized a form of peaceful coexistence during the Cold War era.\nDissolution of the Soviet Union.\nAfter the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, Finland unilaterally abrogated the last restrictions imposed on it by the Paris peace treaties of 1947 and the Finno-Soviet Agreement of Friendship, Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance. The government filed an application for membership in the European Union (EU) three months after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.\nFinland officially established its relations with NATO in 1992 when it participated as an observer in the North Atlantic Cooperation Council (NACC) foreign ministers\u2019 meeting. This marked the beginning of Finland\u2019s engagement with NATO cooperation mechanisms following the end of the Cold War, motivated primarily by the need to monitor security developments in neighboring Russia and the Baltic states. Negotiations to join NATO\u2019s Partnership for Peace (PfP) were initiated in 1993, and Finland formally joined the PfP program in 1994. Initially, Finland\u2019s cooperation with NATO was restricted to non-combat areas such as rescue operations, peacekeeping training, and environmental protection. \nIn November 1995, Finland\u2019s Parliament was presented with a new peacekeeping law that facilitated broader participation in international peace operations. This legal framework enabled Finland\u2019s full engagement in the Bosnia IFOR peacekeeping mission in 1996 as an full and active peace partner.\nConcurrently, efforts to align the Finnish Defence Forces' compatibility with NATO military standards were formalized through agreements signed in 1995. Further integration steps included the establishment of a special Finnish mission to NATO headquarters in Brussels in 1997, enhancing Finland\u2019s involvement in NATO decision-making processes while maintaining its policy of military non-alignment.\nFinland undertook several significant foreign and defence policy decisions in the 1990s. The country acquired 68 American F-18 Hornet fighter aircraft in 1992, entered NATO\u2019s Partnership for Peace programme in 1994, and joined the European Union in 1995. In 1995, Finland reinforced Western economic integration by joining the second stage of the Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union, followed by entry into the third stage in 1999, which introduced the euro currency.\nAccession to the European Union marked the abandonment of Finland\u2019s long-standing neutrality policy. By joining, Finland accepted the Maastricht Treaty, which laid the foundation for the European Union\u2019s Common Foreign and Security Policy.\nFrom 1995 onwards, Finland adopted a policy of military non-alignment, positioning itself as a state outside formal defence alliances. At the same time, the government reserved the so\u2011called NATO option, maintaining the possibility of applying for NATO membership in the future if national or international circumstances required.\nDuring the presidency of Martti Ahtisaari in the 1990s, successive coalition governments brought Finland closer to the institutional core of the European Union. At the time, Finland was widely regarded as a cooperative model state within the Union and did not oppose initiatives aimed at establishing a common European defence policy.\nThis orientation shifted in the following decade. Under President Tarja Halonen and Foreign Minister Erkki Tuomioja, Finland adopted a more cautious line, making it an official policy to resist other EU members\u2019 proposals for common defence structures. Nonetheless, despite this general reluctance, Finland joined the European Union Battlegroups in 2006 and the NATO Response Force in 2008, marking limited yet significant steps in multilateral security cooperation.\nFinland\u2019s role in shaping its relationship with Russia in the late 20th and early 21st centuries is closely tied to its pioneering work in the establishment of the European Union\u2019s Northern Dimension policy. Introduced in 1998 during Finland\u2019s EU Presidency, the Northern Dimension was a strategic initiative aimed at fostering cooperation and sustainable development in the northern regions of Europe, which included the EU, Russia, Norway, and Iceland as equal partners. This policy addressed the unique challenges and opportunities of the EU\u2019s new eastern and northern borders, specifically promoting stability, environmental protection, economic prosperity, and social well-being in cross-border areas around the Baltic Sea and the Arctic.\nThe Northern Dimension was conceived to manage the interdependencies between the EU and Russia, focusing on sectors such as environmental issues, nuclear safety, and the socio-economic development of border regions, including Kaliningrad. Finland\u2019s geographic and political position made it a key driver of this policy, leveraging its EU membership since 1995 to facilitate a cooperative framework with Russia rather than antagonism.\nDuring the 1990s, Finnish exports to Russia recovered gradually after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the severe trade disruptions that followed. The economic situation in Russia came to stabilize during the 2000s, resulting in increased bilateral trade. By 2008, Russia had regained its status as Finland\u2019s largest export market, fuelled not only by industrial goods but also by the growing presence of Russian consumers who contributed to Finland\u2019s economic vitality. President Tarja Halonen\u2019s tenure was marked by the cultivation of close and constructive relations with Russian leadership, further consolidating Finland\u2019s role as a bridge between the EU and Russia.\nThus, the Northern Dimension policy and the strengthening of bilateral trade relations underpinned Finland\u2019s strategic approach to Russia in this period, balancing economic cooperation with political pragmatism to maintain stability and regional integration in Northern Europe.\nThis structured approach positioned Finland as both a mediator and a facilitator in EU-Russian relations through the early 21st century, reflecting its unique geopolitical circumstances and historical ties.\nRelations with Russia were generally cordial, with recurring issues including bureaucracy at the Vaalimaa border crossing, airspace violations, development aid Finland provides to Russia - particularly to address environmental problems impacting Finland - and Finland's energy dependency on Russian gas and electricity. The Vaalimaa border crossing, opened in 1958, was the busiest between Finland and Russia and among the busiest land crossings in the European Union. \nIn 2005, the number of foreign spies in Finland returned to Cold War levels. Espionage activity was concentrated in the Helsinki metropolitan area, where the nation\u2019s political leadership, largest corporations, and principal research institutions are located. The capital also hosts foreign embassies, through which, according to experts, the majority of espionage is conducted. According to information published by \"Helsingin Sanomat\", approximately 50 trained spies representing the intelligence services of various countries were then operating in Finland. Most of them were based within the area of Ring Road III, posing as diplomats, journalists, researchers, businesspeople, grant holders, or students. Of these, an estimated 30 focused on civilian intelligence, while 20 concentrated on gathering military-related information. \nChange in constitution.\nIn 2000, a major reform was made to the Constitution of Finland, which repealed the previously valid four separate constitutional laws and created a unified, modernised Constitution. This reform particularly signified a significant shift in the leadership of foreign policy.\nAccording to the Constitution of 2000, foreign policy is led by the President of the Republic in cooperation with the Council of State (the government). This means that the President\u2019s power in foreign affairs is no longer exclusive but emphasizes collaboration with the government. Additionally, due to EU membership, the leadership of foreign policy was divided: the Council of State was given decision-making authority in preparing EU affairs and national measures, while the President retained responsibility for traditional foreign policy outside the EU. In practice, this transferred much power from the President to the Prime Minister and the government, while also increasing the role of Parliament.\nWith this change, the President\u2019s power in domestic politics was significantly reduced, and the Prime Minister became the key decision-maker in forming the government and leading the EU aspect of foreign policy. Except in times of crisis, the Constitution of 2000 emphasized cooperation and the President\u2019s role is focused on foreign and security policy, but with more limited supervision and authority than before.\nThe Constitution of 2000 strengthened parliamentarism and transformed the President\u2019s position into a dual leadership in foreign policy: the President and the Council of State lead foreign policy together, with the Council of State and Prime Minister having a strong role in EU matters. This pushed Finland toward a more modern, parliamentary system of leadership in foreign policy. The arrangement has been criticised for not providing a simple answer of who's in charge if there is a major dispute.\nRussian invasion of Ukraine.\nThe Ukrainian crisis that erupted in 2014 significantly influenced Finland\u2019s foreign policy, marking a turning point in its approach to regional security and relations with Russia. President Sauli Niinist\u00f6 adopted what became known as a \u201cstability policy\u201d aimed at mitigating tensions between the West and Russia, reflecting a desire to maintain dialogue and avoid escalations amidst growing geopolitical instability. \nPresident Niinist\u00f6\u2019s diplomatic approach stayed rooted in pragmatism and continuity, echoing the principles of President Juho Kusti Paasikivi, seeking stable and functional relations with Russia despite the escalating conflict. Notably, Finland hosted a 2018 summit in Helsinki between U.S. President Donald Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin, underlining its role as a neutral ground for dialogue. Putin also visited Finland as Niinist\u00f6\u2019s guest in 2019, exemplifying this continuing diplomatic engagement.\nThis paradigm shift in Finnish foreign policy signals a new era marked by increased military preparedness, intensified international cooperation, and a commitment to upholding European security architecture, while acknowledging the complex realities of Finland\u2019s geopolitical position.Among the most significant repercussions was Finland\u2019s historic decision in May 2022 to apply for NATO membership, ending decades of military non-alignment. Finland joined NATO in April 2023. This decision was driven by increased perceptions of threat from Russia, which undermined the credibility of bilateral security assurances. Concurrently, Finland intensified its defence cooperation with Ukraine by supplying defence materiel packages and signing cooperation agreements to deepen military collaboration. Finland has emerged as one of Ukraine\u2019s largest supporters by GDP ratio.\nFinland\u2019s response to the Ukraine crisis reflects a balancing act: strengthening national security through NATO while maintaining channels of communication with Russia, supporting Ukraine politically and militarily, and contributing to European efforts to manage the conflict\u2019s broader implications on regional stability.\nPresident Alexander Stubb's value-based realism is Finland's foreign policy approach, which he has articulated. It fundamentally combines a value base - Western values such as democracy, the rule of law, and human rights - with a pragmatically grounded realism in foreign policy that also takes national interests and global realities into account. This means that Finland adheres firmly to its core values while remaining open to dialogue with countries that do not share the same values. According to Stubb, value-based realism allows flexibility in balancing values and realism depending on the situation, providing broad maneuvering room for foreign policy.\nMultilateral relations.\nSince 1917, Finland has joined numerous multilateral organizations. Key ones include:\nThe League of Nations.\nFinland joined the League of Nations in 1920 mainly for security and international legitimacy reasons. The membership was intended to strengthen Finland's international position, especially against the Soviet Union, which remained a significant threat after Finland's 1917 independence and subsequent civil war. Joining the League also gave Finland a voice in international cooperation and provided a platform to resolve regional disputes, most notably the \u00c5land Islands question, where the League in 1921 decided the islands would remain an autonomous and demilitarized part of Finland. This membership helped Finland secure its sovereignty as a young independent nation and gain recognition and support in the international community during the unstable interwar period. The League membership was a cornerstone of Finland's early foreign policy and part of its efforts to cooperate with Scandinavian and Baltic neighbors for regional security.\nThe Bank for international Settlements.\nFinland joined the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in 1930 because the BIS was established as an international financial institution to facilitate international financial arrangements and cooperation between central banks.\nThe International Monetary Fund (IMF).\nFinland joined the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in 1948 for several key reasons related primarily to post-war reconstruction, economic stability, and the need for foreign financing. Established by the Bretton Woods agreements, the IMF aimed to maintain international currency stability and promote global economic cooperation. For Finland, IMF membership provided access to foreign dollar credits crucial for the country's economic recovery and development during the difficult post-war years.\nThe Finnish government had already decided in 1946 to apply for membership as part of a strategy to join the new Western economic system. Membership also strengthened Finland's integration into the Western financial system, despite political uncertainties due to Soviet influence. Joining the IMF committed Finland to international monetary rules, enhanced the convertibility of the Finnish markka internationally, and facilitated the growth of trade and economic cooperation. This membership was a significant step for Finland\u2019s international economic relations and foreign policy in the post-war decades.\nThe World Bank.\nFinland joined the World Bank in 1948 as part of the post-World War II international reconstruction and economic system. The World Bank was established to finance the rebuilding of Europe and Japan, initially focusing on infrastructure such as roads, airports, and power plants. Finland's membership was considered a crucial step in financing postwar reconstruction and strengthening economic integration with the West. The Finnish government decided as early as 1946 to apply for membership because World Bank loans offered opportunities for economic development and acquisition of foreign capital, especially for industry and infrastructure advancement. The membership was also politically significant, reinforcing Finland's integration into the Western monetary system and international trade. The first loans were granted in 1949 and helped alleviate Finland's chronic capital and foreign exchange shortages in the postwar years. This membership was strategically important in Finland\u2019s path toward becoming part of the Western free-trade and economic system.\nGeneral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).\nFinland joined GATT in 1950 with the goal of securing tangible economic benefits. The GATT agreement offered a general reduction in tariffs, which facilitated Finnish exports because the same tariff benefits applied to all members of the system, eliminating the need to negotiate separately with each country. Membership also made it possible to move away from old bilateral trade agreements whose tariffs were based on outdated currency standards. Although tariffs had to be lowered, protective tariffs could still be maintained in certain sectors, and trade with Eastern countries remained outside GATT\u2019s scope. Finland wished to remain part of economic development as the Nordic countries were simultaneously planning a customs union. The forest and export industries pushed for membership because it brought tariff concessions and strengthened Finland's position in exports. The Finnish Parliament approved membership in 1950, and joining helped break down trade barriers based on bilateralism, allowing Finland to engage in freer trade and integration with Western countries.\nThe United Nations (UN).\nFinland joined the United Nations (UN) in 1955 because its membership became possible only after the Paris Peace Treaty of 1947, which came after World War II. Finland was not one of the victors of the war, so it could not be a founding member of the UN. Due to political disputes among the Cold War superpowers - mainly the United States and the Soviet Union - the admission of new members was delayed. Finland was accepted in 1955 as part of a package deal when tensions between the superpowers had eased. Finland emphasized neutrality in its UN policy, which was crucial for its position within the Soviet sphere of influence, while maintaining a Western societal model. Joining the UN marked an important step for Finland in gaining international recognition and engaging more actively in global cooperation and diplomacy. The membership acceptance coincided with the return of the Porkkala naval base, which further enabled Finland to credibly pursue its neutral stance in the UN.\nFinland began its involvement in United Nations peacekeeping missions in 1956, shortly after joining the UN in December 1955. The first deployment was to the United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF I) in the Suez Canal area, making Finland one of the first countries to respond positively to the UN Secretary-General\u2019s call for peacekeeping troops during the Suez Crisis. This early engagement set a precedent for Finland\u2019s significant and sustained role in international peacekeeping efforts.\nSince then, Finland has participated in over 50 different UN peacekeeping operations worldwide, sending more than 50,000 personnel in total. A particularly notable contribution has been to the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) in the Middle East, where Finnish peacekeepers have served continuously since 1967, establishing Finland as a consistent and valued troop contributor. Finland\u2019s participation reflects its foreign policy principles of neutrality, multilateralism, and support for international law and peaceful conflict resolution.\nFinland\u2019s peacekeeping commitment extends beyond troop deployments to include training contributions and specialized units, reaffirming its significant role in global peace efforts. The seriousness of this commitment is underscored by the fact that 39 Finnish peacekeepers have lost their lives in service since 1956. As of recent years, Finland continues to deploy over 200 personnel to various missions, including the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), affirming its ongoing and substantial involvement in UN peacekeeping operations.\nThis longstanding engagement demonstrates Finland\u2019s dedication to multilateral peace initiatives and its status as a respected and reliable partner in United Nations peacekeeping endeavors.\nAs of March 2011 Finland maintains diplomatic relations with all UN member states.\nNordic Council.\nFinland joined the Nordic Council in 1955 after a careful consideration shaped by both international and regional circumstances. Following the death of the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, relations between Finland and the Soviet Union warmed, reducing tensions that had previously constrained Finnish foreign policy. This thaw allowed Finland to engage in broader regional cooperation without provoking Soviet disapproval. Committed to a policy of neutrality and maintaining peaceful bilateral relations, Finland utilized the opportunity to join the Nordic Council as a means of asserting its political and cultural identity as part of the Nordic community. This step also reinforced its neutral stance in the context of Cold War geopolitics.\nThe Nordic Council had been established in 1952 as a cooperative forum initially including Denmark, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden. Finland's accession in 1955 completed the Nordic cooperation framework, emphasizing cultural, social, economic, and political collaboration among the member states while respecting national sovereignty. Joining the Nordic Council in the same year that Finland became a member of the United Nations symbolized Finland\u2019s commitment to peace, stability, and multilateral engagement within the Nordic region.\nThus, Finland\u2019s membership in the Nordic Council in 1955 was a strategic move aligned with its foreign policy objectives of neutrality and regional cooperation during a period when its external relations became less restrictive due to changes in Soviet leadership. It signified Finland\u2019s belonging to the Nordic group both politically and culturally, without compromising its independent foreign policy.\nThe International Finance Corporation\nFinland joined the International Finance Corporation (IFC) in 1956 as one of the original founding member countries at the time of the organization\u2019s establishment. The IFC was created as a member of the World Bank Group with the specific purpose of fostering economic development by encouraging the growth of productive private enterprises, particularly in less developed countries. It was designed to complement the World Bank\u2019s focus on government-backed projects by investing directly in private sector ventures without government guarantees and without taking management control. Finland\u2019s accession to the IFC reflected its alignment with the global initiative to promote private sector-led economic growth and development. This step corresponded with Finland\u2019s broader national economic goals during the mid-20th century, a period marked by efforts to stimulate industrial expansion and embed Finland within emerging international financial cooperation frameworks. The IFC's Articles of Agreement came into force in 1956, marking the formal operational start of the institution, which initially had capital of $100 million and staff dedicated to promoting private investments worldwide.\nThe International Development Association (IDA).\nFinland joined the International Development Association (IDA) as part of its long-standing commitment to international development cooperation and sustainable development. This membership aligns with Finland\u2019s broader development policy, which aims to reduce poverty and inequality while promoting economic growth, gender equality, climate action, and the rights of vulnerable populations globally. Finland\u2019s engagement with the IDA reflects its foreign and security policy goals by fostering international cooperation through concessional financing targeted at the world\u2019s poorest countries. By joining IDA, Finland strategically positions itself to support global development challenges, consistent with its principles of human rights, democratic governance, and sustainable resource use. The decision complements Finland\u2019s historical transition from aid recipient to development donor and its active participation in international organizations that promote peace, security, and economic development.\nThe European Free Trade Association (EFTA).\nFinland joined the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) as an associate member in 1961 in order to secure freer access to Western European markets and to strengthen its national economy through expanded trade opportunities. At the time, Finland\u2019s principal trading partners, such as the United Kingdom and Sweden, were among the founding members of EFTA, and Finland\u2019s economy was heavily reliant on exports to Western Europe, particularly in sectors like woodworking and paper products. Finnish policymakers viewed associate membership as a strategic economic move to enable competitiveness within a growing regional free trade area alongside its Nordic neighbors.\nThe path to membership was shaped by significant geopolitical considerations arising from Finland\u2019s delicate position during the Cold War, with strong influence exerted by the Soviet Union over Finnish affairs. Due to this, Finland\u2019s association with EFTA was carefully negotiated to emphasize the organization\u2019s strictly economic and non-political character, enabling Finland to integrate economically with Western Europe without undermining its special relationship and political neutrality toward the Soviet Union. Nordic solidarity, especially persistent advocacy from Sweden, also played a key role in facilitating Finland\u2019s entry. This pragmatic approach allowed Finland to benefit from greater economic cooperation with the West while managing its geopolitical constraints, thus marking an important step in Finland\u2019s gradual Western economic integration during the early 1960.\nThe Asian Development Bank (ADB).\nFinland joined the Asian Development Bank (ADB) in 1966 as one of its founding members when the bank was established on December 19, 1966. The ADB was created as a regional multilateral development bank to foster economic growth and cooperation in the Asia and Pacific region. Its purpose was to mobilize development financing and support social and economic development in Asia, complementing broader international efforts such as those by the United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (now UNESCAP).\nThe bank was modeled closely on the World Bank and aimed to be \"Asian in character,\" addressing the developmental challenges of some of the poorest regions in the world at the time. Although the majority of members were from Asia and the Pacific, the ADB admitted non-regional developed countries, including Finland, which participated in this institution to support development financing and economic cooperation in Asia.\nThe creation of the ADB was driven by a cooperative effort led by Japan and endorsed by major powers like the United States. It was founded in the context of rising regional identity and development needs following decolonization and economic transformation in Asia. Finland's early membership reflected its broader foreign policy commitment to multilateralism and international development cooperation.\nThe bank's headquarters was established in Manila, Philippines, after a vote among prospective members, and the first president was a Japanese economist, reflecting Japan's prominent role in the bank's creation. Finland has maintained its membership since inception, contributing to and supporting development projects and economic collaboration in the Asia-Pacific region.\nThe Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).\nFinland joined the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) on 28 January 1969. The decision was primarily a logical and strategic step in a long-standing process of economic integration with Western countries. During this period, Finland had been gradually intensifying its economic and commercial ties with OECD member states, reflecting its ambition to modernize and transform from an agrarian economy into a diversified, export-oriented welfare state.\nPolitically, Finland aimed to bolster its image as a modern, highly industrialized Western market economy. At the same time, membership in the OECD was part of Finland\u2019s careful effort to gradually distance itself from the Soviet Union's influence while preserving its policy of neutrality amid Cold War tensions. The Soviet Union was initially skeptical about Finland\u2019s membership due to the OECD\u2019s association with Western countries linked to NATO. To address these concerns, Finnish President Urho Kekkonen provided political guarantees to the Soviet Union, ensuring a delicate geopolitical balance.\nBefore full membership, Finland had observer status in the OECD starting in 1961 and was also an associate member of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). Joining the OECD enabled Finland to deepen its participation in global trade networks, reinforce its commitment to free trade and economic modernization, and align more closely with Western market economies.\nFinland's accession to the OECD marked a significant milestone in its post-war economic development and international cooperation. By joining the OECD, Finland gained access to a platform for economic policy exchange, benchmarking, and research-based advice, which helped guide its evolution into one of the leading knowledge-based economies, known today for innovation, education, and social welfare.\nThe Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).\nFinland joined the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), initially known as the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), in 1973 to promote regional and national security through a broad and inclusive forum linking the European international system. This initiative was deeply rooted in Finland's geopolitical position as a non-aligned and neutral country during the Cold War, aiming to have its policy of neutrality recognized and upheld by both the Western and Eastern blocs. Finland sought to foster dialogue between East and West and support a security paradigm that combined political, military, human rights, and economic cooperation to stabilize the tense East-West relations.\nThe process was closely connected to Finland hosting significant stages of the CSCE talks, including the initial multilateral consultations and the Foreign Ministers\u2019 meeting in Helsinki in 1972-73. This involvement gave Finland both symbolic and practical influence in shaping the European security order. For Finland, the OSCE was instrumental in maintaining its neutrality and regional stability while contributing to the broader European objective of unification through cooperation and peaceful conflict resolution.\nFinnish participation also served to counter Western skepticism about its neutrality and the notion of \"\"Finlandization\",\" a term coined to suggest undue Soviet influence over Finnish policies. By placing Finland at the heart of a major East-West diplomatic effort, the OSCE\u2019s consensus-driven and inclusive framework gained particular appeal for Finland as a smaller, peripheral state that pursued security through multilateral engagement rather than military alliances. Since joining, Finland has actively advocated for democracy, human rights, and the rule of law as integral components of comprehensive security within the OSCE framework.\nThe Inter-American Development Bank (IDB).\nFinland joined the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) in 1977 during a broader expansion of Bank membership to include 13 European countries between 1976 and 1977. This move was part of the IDB's strategy to strengthen economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean by incorporating nonregional members with valuable experience, expertise, and financial resources. Finland\u2019s membership aligned with its foreign and development policy goals, supporting initiatives aimed at reducing poverty and inequality in the region. Participation in the IDB reflects Finland\u2019s commitment to multilateral cooperation, with development cooperation serving as a key instrument of its foreign and security policy. Through this engagement, Finland has been able to contribute to multiple IDB initiatives and foster economic relations with Latin American and Caribbean countries, thereby enhancing bilateral and multilateral development efforts since 1977.\nThe African Development Bank (AfDB).\nFinland became a member of the African Development Bank (AfDB) in 1982, coinciding with the bank's opening of membership to non-African countries. This change was part of an amended agreement concluded at Lusaka on May 7, 1982, which allowed non-regional member countries to join the bank. The inclusion of non-African members was driven by the conviction that partnership between African and non-African countries would facilitate additional flows of international capital for economic development and social progress in Africa, benefiting all parties involved. Finland's membership reflects its commitment to supporting these development goals by contributing financial resources and expertise through the AfDB's investment projects and programs aimed at fostering economic and social development in African regional member countries. This partnership aligns with Finland's broader development cooperation objectives.\nThe Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA).\nFinland joined the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) in 1988, the year MIGA officially commenced operations as part of the World Bank Group. MIGA was established to promote foreign direct investment (FDI) into developing countries by providing political risk insurance and investment guarantees that shield investors from non-commercial risks such as expropriation, war, and breach of contract. The agency\u2019s creation responded to the global need for a multilateral mechanism that could enhance investor confidence and support economic development in emerging markets through stable and fair investment conditions. By becoming a member, Finland aligned itself with international efforts to foster productive investment flows, particularly in developing economies, facilitating risk mitigation for Finnish and other investors abroad while supporting broader developmental objectives.\nThe Council of Europe\nFinland joined the Council of Europe in 1989 as part of its broader strategy to affirm its commitment to European democratic values, human rights, and the rule of law. The accession was motivated by a desire to solidify Finland\u2019s identity as a democratic state amid the Cold War\u2019s geopolitical tensions and to participate actively in efforts to promote political stability and cooperation in Europe. Membership in the Council provided Finland with a platform to enhance dialogue and collaboration with other European countries, thereby strengthening its security and international relations as it sought closer ties with Western institutions during a period of significant political change in Europe.\nThe decision to join the Council of Europe also reflected Finland\u2019s aspiration to integrate more fully into the European community and to have influence in shaping European governance. The timing in 1989 coincided with the waning influence of the Soviet Union and a transforming geopolitical landscape, enabling Finland to take a more assertive role in European affairs. Thus, Finland\u2019s accession was driven by its commitment to uphold democratic principles, enhance security through European cooperation, secure a voice in European decision-making, and prepare for deeper integration within European institutions amid shifting international dynamics.\nThe European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).\nFinland joined the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) as a founding member in 1991, aligning with the bank's mission to support the transition of former centrally planned economies in Central and Eastern Europe towards market-oriented economies after the Cold War. The establishment of the EBRD was driven by the need to foster private sector development, encourage democratic pluralism, and implement market reforms, which corresponded with Finland\u2019s foreign policy objectives of promoting regional stability and economic transformation in the wake of the Soviet Union's collapse.\nAs a founding member, Finland contributed financially to the bank\u2019s operations and has actively engaged in its projects, emphasizing private enterprise and sustainable, green solutions. Finnish companies and professionals have frequently participated in EBRD-financed projects, particularly in countries within the bank\u2019s region of operation, establishing Finland\u2019s role in supporting the economic modernization and integration of Eastern Europe and Central Asia. The EBRD\u2019s commitment to supporting multiparty democracy and market economies reflected Finland's post-Cold War foreign policy stance and enhanced its participation in European and international cooperation frameworks during a significant period of transition in Europe.\nFinland\u2019s involvement also provided opportunities for Finnish companies to engage in high-standard international projects and consultancy services, especially in emerging markets requiring transition finance and expertise. The bank\u2019s green initiatives have recently been an area where Finnish cleantech firms have made notable contributions, supported by the EBRD\u2019s Green Cities Programme and similar projects.\nThe World Trade Organization (WTO).\nFinland joined the World Trade Organization (WTO) on January 1, 1995, as a founding member at the WTO\u2019s establishment after the Uruguay Round negotiations, succeeding its long-standing membership in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) since 1950. The accession granted Finland the ability to participate in a rules-based global trading system with binding agreements that regulate international trade, providing mechanisms for trade negotiations, dispute resolution, and the reduction of trade barriers and discrimination.\nThis membership aligned with Finland\u2019s commitment to free trade, crucial for a small country heavily reliant on international trade. Joining the WTO coincided with Finland\u2019s accession to the European Union in 1995, which brought Finland under the EU\u2019s trade policy framework within the WTO. As an EU member state, Finland\u2019s participation in the WTO is coordinated through the European Commission, which speaks for all EU countries in WTO trade matters. WTO membership thus facilitated Finland\u2019s integration into the global economy, underpinning its economic interests and enhancing its role in international trade through regulated multilateral cooperation.\nThe European Union (EU).\nFinland joined the European Union in 1995, marking a significant turning point in the country\u2019s history. The decision was primarily driven by the desire to strengthen Finland\u2019s economic and political security while deepening its integration with Western Europe. After the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union, Finland sought to diversify its trade and political relations, which had previously been closely tied to its eastern neighbor, Russia. This new phase allowed Finland to reposition itself as a Western-oriented country, thereby increasing its national prosperity and securing markets for its exports, which had been heavily reliant on the Soviet economy.\nDuring the early 1990s, Finland underwent a process of careful negotiation to meet the criteria for EU membership, which were solidified at the 1993 Copenhagen European Council. These criteria required new members to have stable institutions guaranteeing democracy based on the rule of law, respect for human rights including minority rights, and a functioning market economy capable of handling competitive conditions within the Union. Finland met these conditions and was thus well-prepared to join the union.\nPolitical security also played a crucial role, as Finland sought to align itself with the Western European democracies after decades of neutrality during the Cold War. The country\u2019s approach to foreign policy shifted from neutrality toward active participation in a political union, while maintaining military non-alignment. The influence of neighboring Sweden, which applied for EU membership at the same time, was another important factor that encouraged Finland\u2019s accession.\nPublic support for EU membership was secured through a national referendum held in 1994, in which approximately 56.9% of Finnish voters favored joining the union. This referendum reflected a societal consensus that integration with the EU was essential for Finland\u2019s future economic development and political stability. Consequently, Finland officially became a member of the European Union on January 1, 1995, embarking on a path of deeper cooperation and engagement within Europe.\nThe Schengen Area.\nFinland joined the Nordic Passport Union in 1954, which was a pioneering agreement among the Nordic countries to facilitate free movement of people. The Union initially abolished passport requirements for travel between Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and Finland, later extending freedom to reside and work without permits. Iceland joined the Union in 1965. Established through successive agreements in the 1950s, the Nordic Passport Union was a forerunner to the European Schengen system and embodied close Nordic cooperation. It enabled citizens of member countries to travel across borders without passport controls, reinforcing shared cultural ties and economic collaboration long before broader European integration efforts.\nThis tradition of Nordic open borders laid the groundwork for Finland's later accession to the Schengen Area, which it joined in 2001. The move was seen as a natural progression from the Nordic Passport Union towards broader European integration, eliminating internal border controls at a continental scale while enhancing security through common policies. The Schengen membership strengthened Finland's ties within the EU and continued its historical Nordic cooperation by facilitating easier movement and trade within Europe.\nINTELSAT.\nFinland joined INTELSAT in 1999 as part of a long-standing national strategy to integrate into international telecommunications and space-related organizations. This membership aligned with Finland\u2019s interests in advancing scientific research, technological development, and participation in global communications infrastructure. INTELSAT membership enabled Finland to actively engage in satellite telecommunications, supporting both commercial and governmental communication needs in an increasingly interconnected world.\nThe path to joining INTELSAT was preceded by decades of involvement in international space and scientific organizations. Finland had gradually increased its participation in space research bodies and cooperative arrangements within European and global frameworks. These efforts were motivated by a desire to keep pace with technological advancements, benefit from technology transfer, and establish Finland\u2019s presence in international space and telecommunications cooperation.\nJoining INTELSAT in 1999 complemented Finland\u2019s broader foreign and technology policy goals in the 1990s, a decade marked by significant integration into international organizations such as the European Union in 1995 and active engagement in global scientific and policy forums. This step underscored Finland\u2019s commitment to modernizing its telecommunications infrastructure and leveraging global satellite networks to enhance its communication capabilities for both civilian and government purposes.\nNATO.\nFinland\u2019s relationship with NATO began to strengthen immediately after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s, when Finland joined the North Atlantic Cooperation Council (NACC) as an observer in 1992, established for former Warsaw Pact members. Finland started to move closer to NATO by joining the Partnership for Peace (PfP) program in 1994, developing cooperation in defense matters while maintaining military non-alignment. From the 1990s onwards, Finland built increasingly closer ties with NATO, participating in international crisis management operations and signing a host nation support agreement with NATO in 2014, which defined the principles of assistance during crises and exercises.\nFinland has participated in NATO's Partnership for Peace cooperation since 1994. Additionally, Finland became a member of the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC) in 1997. In 2014, Finland was invited as an advanced partner to join NATO's Enhanced Opportunities Partner (EOP) cooperation. Alongside its involvement in the Enhanced Opportunities cooperation, Finland also promoted trilateral cooperation between NATO, Finland, and Sweden, known as the \"30+2\" cooperation framework.\nAs the security environment changed, especially following Russia\u2019s invasion of Ukraine in early 2022, Finland\u2019s security policy situation became decisive. Finland decided to apply for NATO membership in May 2022. The Finnish Parliament strongly approved the membership, with opponents in the minority. Finland\u2019s NATO membership came into force on April 4, 2023, making Finland a full member and part of NATO\u2019s collective defense guarantees under Article 5.\nThis membership marked the end of Finland\u2019s long-standing military non-alignment and strengthened Finland\u2019s security in a changed European security landscape. Finland\u2019s membership also enhances stability and security in the Baltic Sea region and Northern Europe, with Finland actively participating in NATO\u2019s collective defense and decision-making.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList.\nList of countries which Finland maintains diplomatic relations with:\nInternational organization participation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSub-national government participation.\n \u00c5land Islands\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10722", "revid": "33408448", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10722", "title": "Telecommunications in France", "text": " \nTelecommunications in France are highly developed. France is served by an extensive system of automatic telephone exchanges connected by modern networks of fiber-optic cable, coaxial cable, microwave radio relay, and a domestic satellite system; cellular telephone service is widely available, expanding rapidly, and includes roaming service to foreign countries.\nFixed-line telephony.\nThe telephony system employs an extensive system of modern network elements such as digital telephone exchanges, mobile switching centres, media gateways and signalling gateways at the core, interconnected by a wide variety of transmission systems using fibre-optics or Microwave radio relay networks. The access network, which connects the subscriber to the core, is highly diversified with different copper-pair, optic-fibre and wireless technologies. The fixed-line telecommunications market is dominated by the former state-owned monopoly France Telecom.\nAs of 2009[ [update]], France had 36.441 million main lines in use, with 35.5 million of those in metropolitan France.\nInternational connection.\nSatellite earth stations \u2013 2 Intelsat (with total of 5 antennas \u2013 2 for Indian Ocean and 3 for Atlantic Ocean), NA Eutelsat, 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic Ocean region); HF radiotelephone communications with more than 20 countries\nMobile networks.\nFrance currently has 4 mobile networks, Orange, SFR, Bouygues Telecom and Free all of which are licensed for UMTS. All except Free are also licensed for GSM. In 2016 Q3, Orange had 28.966\u00a0million mobile phone customers, SFR had 14.577\u00a0million, Bouygues had 12.660\u00a0million, Free Mobile had 12.385\u00a0million, and the MVNOs had 7.281\u00a0million.\nBefore the launch of Free Mobile in January 2012, the number of physical mobile phone operators was very limited. For example, Sweden currently has 4 licensed operators with their own networks despite a smaller and sparser population than France's, making improved coverage less economically rewarding. However, France has a number of MVNOs which increases competition.\nHowever, Free Mobile obtained its licence in December 2009 and operates since January 2012.\nIn France, the satellite telecommunications system TELECOM 1 (TC1) will provide high-speed, broadband transfer of digital data between different sections of subscribing companies. Conventional telecommunications links between continental France and its overseas departments will also be supplied.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10723", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10723", "title": "Transport in France", "text": "Transportation in France relies on one of the densest networks in the world with 146\u00a0km of road and 6.2\u00a0km of rail lines per 100\u00a0km2. It is built as a web with Paris at its center. Rail, road, air and water are all widely developed forms of transportation in France.\nHistory.\nThe first important human improvements were the Roman roads linking major settlements and providing quick passage for marching armies.\nAll through the Middle Ages improvements were few and second rate. Transport became slow and awkward to use. The early modern period saw great improvements. There was a very quick production of canals connecting rivers. It also saw great changes in oceanic shipping. Rather than expensive galleys, wind powered ships that were much faster and had more room for cargo became popular for coastal trade. Transatlantic shipping with the New World turned cities such as Nantes, Bordeaux, Cherbourg-Octeville and Le Havre into major ports.\nRailways.\nThere is a total of of railway in France, mostly operated by SNCF (Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 nationale des chemins de fer fran\u00e7ais), the French national railway company. Like the road system, the French railways are subsidised by the state, receiving \u20ac13.2 billion in 2013. The railway system is a small portion of total travel, accounting for less than 10% of passenger travel.\nFrom 1981 onwards, a newly constructed set of high-speed \"Lignes \u00e0 Grande Vitesse\" (LGV) lines linked France's most populous areas with the capital, starting with Paris-Lyon. In 1994, the Channel Tunnel opened, connecting France and Great Britain by rail under the English Channel. The TGV has set many world speed records, the most recent on 3 April 2007, when a new version of the TGV dubbed the V150 with larger wheels than the usual TGV, and a stronger engine, broke the world speed record for conventional rail trains, reaching 574.8\u00a0km/h (357.2\u00a0mph).\nTrains, unlike road traffic, drive on the left (except in Alsace-Moselle). Metro and tramway services are not thought of as trains and usually follow road traffic in driving on the right (except the Lyon Metro).\nFrance was ranked 7th among national European rail systems in the 2017 European Railway Performance Index for intensity of use, quality of service and safety performance, a decrease from previous years.\nThe French non-TGV intercity service (TET) is in decline, with old infrastructure and trains. It is likely to be hit further as the French government is planning to remove the monopoly that rail currently has on long-distance journeys by letting coach operators compete. Travel to the UK through the Channel Tunnel has grown in recent years, and from May 2015 passengers have been able to travel direct to Marseille, Avignon and Lyon. Eurostar is also introducing new Class 374 trains and refurbishing the current Class 373s.\nThe French government are making plans to privatise the French railway network, following a similar model Great Britain used from the 1990s until the 2020s.\nRapid transit.\nSix cities in France currently have a rapid transit service (frequently known as a 'metro'). Full metro systems are in operation in Paris (16 lines), Lyon (4 lines) and Marseille (2 lines). Light metro (VAL-type) systems are in use in Lille (2 lines), Toulouse (2 lines) and Rennes (2 lines).\nTrams.\nIn spite of the closure of most of France's first generation tram systems in earlier years, a fast-growing number of France's major cities have modern tram or light rail networks, including Paris, Lyon (Lyon having the biggest one), Toulouse, Montpellier, Saint-\u00c9tienne, Strasbourg and Nantes. Recently the tram has seen a very big revival with many experiments such as ground level power supply in Bordeaux, or trolleybuses pretending to be trams in Nancy.\nThis way of travelling started disappearing in France at the end of the 1930s. Only Lille, Marseille and Saint-\u00c9tienne have never given up their tram systems. Since the 1980s, several cities have re-introduced it.\nThe following French towns and cities run light rail or tram systems:\nTram systems are planned or under construction in Tours, and Fort-de-France.\nThe revival of tram networks in France has brought about a number of technical developments both in the traction systems and in the styling of the cars:\n \"APS third rail\": The Alstom APS system uses a third rail placed between the running rails, divided electrically into eight-metre segments with three metre neutral sections between. Each tram has two power collection skates, next to which are antennas that send radio signals to energise the power rail segments as the tram passes over them. At any one time no more than two consecutive segments under the tram should actually be live. Alstrom developed the system primarily to avoid intrusive power supply cables in sensitive area of the old city of Bordeaux.\n\"Modern styling\": The Eurotram, used in Strasbourg has a modern design that makes it look almost as much like a train as a tram, and has large windows along its entire length.\n\"Modular design\": The Citadis tram, flagship of the French manufacturer Alstom, enjoys an innovative design combining lighter bogies with a modular concept for carriages providing more choices in the types of windows and the number of cars and doors. The recent Citadis-Dualis, intended to run at up to 100 km/h, is suitable for stop spacings ranging from 500 m to 5 km. Dualis is a strictly modular partial low-floor car, with all doors in the low-floor sections.\nProminent bi-articulated \"tram-like\" Van Hool vehicles (Mettis) are used in Metz since 2013. They work as classic trams but without needing rails and catenaries, and can transport up to 155 passengers while being ecological thanks to a diesel-electric hybrid engine. \nIn the starting up, batteries feed the engine of the bus, which can then roll 150 meters before the diesel engine takes over.\nRoads.\nThere are ~ of roads in France. The French motorway network or autoroute system consists largely of toll roads, except around large cities, in Brittany, in parts of Normandy, in the Ardennes and in Alsace. It is a network totalling of motorways operated by private companies such as Sanef (Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des autoroutes du Nord et de l'Est de la France). It has the 8th largest highway network in the world, trailing only the United States, China, India, Russia, Japan, Canada, Spain and Germany.\nFrance currently counts 30,500\u00a0km of major trunk roads or routes nationales and state-owned motorways. By way of comparison, the \"routes d\u00e9partementales\" cover a total distance of 365,000\u00a0km. The main trunk road network reflects the centralising tradition of France: the majority of them leave the gates of Paris. Indeed, trunk roads begin on the parvis of Notre-Dame of Paris at Kilometre Zero. To ensure an effective road network, new roads not serving Paris were created.\nIn 2022, France safety rate is near but not better than the OECD median, with rates of 49.8 per million population (or 4.98 / 100 000) and 5.2 per billion vehicle kilometers traveled (0.52 / 100 million VKT).\nFrance is believed to be the most car-dependent country in Europe. In 2005, 937 billion vehicle kilometres were travelled in France (85% by car). While the traveled distance did not change, from 2012 to 2022, it is counted as 730 billion vehicle kilometers. Car makes 80% of the 1000 billion vehicle kilometers traveled each year. Traveled distance is reduced in 2020, but is counted in 2019 as 615 billion vehicle kilometer traveled including 448 car with a French registration plate according to the Union routi\u00e8re de France.\nIn order to overcome this dependence, in France and many more countries the long-distance coaches' market has been liberalised. Since 2015, with the law Macron, the market has exploded: the increasing demand lead to a higher supply of bus services and coach companies.\nIn France] Black Saturday refers to the day of the year when road traffic is most dense due to the many departures on holiday. (Traffic problems are exacerbated by France's extreme centralisation, with Paris being the hub of the entire national highway network.) This Saturday is usually at the end of July, though in 2007 both the last Saturday of July and the first Saturday of August are designated as Black Saturdays. The Autoroute du Soleil, the highway to the south of France and Spain, is usually particularly busy. In 2004 there was more than in accumulated traffic congestion. The black colour is the qualification with which the French government web site \"Bison Fut\u00e9\" designates a day with \"extr\u00eamement dense\" (extremely busy) traffic. The French newspapers call this day \"samedi noir\" after Bison Fut\u00e9's designation. Usually, the French call these days \"les jours de grands d\u00e9parts\" (days of great departures). In Dutch, this French phenomenon was known as \"zwarte zaterdag\" long before the French adopted the term \"samedi noir\", both meaning (literally) Black Saturday.\nThe term Black Saturday may also refer to Saturday July 31, 1982, when the worst road accident in French history happened. Around 1:45 AM, a coach collided into passenger cars near Beaune in dense holiday traffic during rainfall. The collision and subsequent fire killed 53 people, among which 46 were children. After this crash, a regulation was enforced to prohibit the transportation of groups of children during this part of the year.\nElectric roads.\nFrance plans to invest 30 to 40 billion euro by 2035 in an electric road system spanning 8,800 kilometers that recharges electric cars, buses and trucks while driving. Two projects for assessment of electric road technologies were announced in 2023. Three technologies are being considered: ground-level power supply, inductive charging, and overhead lines. Ground-level power supply technologies, provided by Alstom, Elonroad, and others, are considered the most likely candidate for electric roads. Inductive charging is not considered a mature technology as it delivers the least power, loses 20%-25% of the supplied power when installed on trucks, and its health effects have yet to be documented. Overhead lines is the most mature technology, but the catenaries and overhead wires pose safety and maintenance issues, and motorway companies find overhead lines too expensive.\nA working group of the French Ministry of Ecology recommended adopting a European electric road standard formulated with Sweden, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Poland, and others. A standard for electrical equipment on-board a vehicle powered by a rail electric road system (ERS), CENELEC Technical Standard 50717, has been published in late 2022. A standard encompassing full interoperability and a \"unified and interoperable solution\" for ground-level power supply electric road systems, detailing complete specifications for \"communication and power supply through conductive rails embedded in the road\" is specified in CENELEC technical standard 50740 in accordance with European Union directive 2023/1804. The standard was approved in 2025.\nTrials.\nAlstom has developed a ground-level power supply (alimentation par le sol - APS) system for use with buses and other vehicles. The system has been tested for safety when the road is cleared by snowplows, under exposure to snow, ice, salting, and saturated brine, and for skid and road adherence safety for vehicles, including motorcycles. Alstom will trial its electric road system (ERS) on the public road RN205 in the Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes region between 2024 and 2027. The system is expected to supply 500\u00a0kW of power for electric heavy trucks, as well as power for road utility vehicles and electric cars.\nVinci will test two electric road systems (ERS) from 2023 to 2027. Both technologies will initially be tested in laboratory conditions, and upon meeting the test requirements they will be installed along 2 kilometers each on the A10 autoroute south of Paris. Wireless ERS by will be tested for durability under highway traffic, and will attempt to reach 200\u00a0kW of power delivery per truck using multiple receivers. Rail ERS by Elonroad, which supplies 350\u00a0kW of power per receiver, will be tested for skid effects on motorcycles. Both systems will be interoperable with cars, buses, and trucks.\nBus transport in France.\nIn most, if not all, French cities, urban bus services are provided at a flat-rate charge for individual journeys. Many cities have bus services that operate well out into the suburbs or even the country. Fares are normally cheap, but rural services can be limited, especially on weekends.\nTrains have long had a monopoly on inter-regional buses, but in 2015 the French government introduced reforms to allow bus operators to travel these routes.\nWaterways and canals.\nThe French natural and man-made waterways network is the largest in Europe extending to over of which (VNF, ), the French navigation authority, manages the navigable sections. Some of the navigable rivers include the Loire, Seine and Rh\u00f4ne. The assets managed by VNF comprise of waterways, made up of of canals and of navigable rivers, 494 dams, 1595 locks, 74 navigable aqueducts, 65 reservoirs, 35 tunnels and a land area of . Two significant waterways not under VNF's control are the navigable sections of the River Somme and the Brittany Canals, which are both under local management.\nApproximately 20% of the network is suitable for commercial boats of over 1000\u00a0tonnes and the VNF has an ongoing programme of maintenance and modernisation to increase depth of waterways, widths of locks and headroom under bridges to support France's strategy of encouraging freight onto water.\nMarine transport.\nFrance has an extensive merchant marine, including 55 ships of size Gross register tonnage 1,000 and above. The country also maintains a captive register for French-owned ships in Iles Kerguelen (French Southern and Antarctic Lands).\nFrench companies operate over 1,400 ships of which 700 are registered in France. France's 110 shipping firms employ 12,500 personnel at sea and 15,500 on shore. Each year, 305 million tonnes of goods and 15 million passengers are transported by sea. Marine transport is responsible for 72% of France's imports and exports.\nFrance also boasts a number of seaports and harbours, including Bayonne, Bordeaux, Boulogne-sur-Mer, Brest, Calais, Cherbourg-Octeville, Dunkirk, Fos-sur-Mer, La Pallice, Le Havre, Lorient, Marseille, Nantes, Nice, Paris, Port-la-Nouvelle, Port-Vendres, Roscoff, Rouen, Saint-Nazaire, Saint-Malo, S\u00e8te, Strasbourg and Toulon.\nAir travel.\nThere are approximately 478 airports in France (1999 est.) and by a 2005 estimate, there are three heliports. 288 of the airports have paved runways, with the remaining 199 being unpaved.\nAmong the airspace governance authorities active in France, one is A\u00e9roports de Paris, which has authority over the Paris region, managing 14 airports including the two busiest in France, Charles de Gaulle Airport and Orly Airport. The former, located in Roissy near Paris, is the fifth busiest airport in the world with 60 million passenger movements in 2008, and France's primary international airport, serving over 100 airlines.\nThe national carrier of France is Air France, a full service global airline which flies to 20 domestic destinations and 150 international destinations in 83 countries (including Overseas departments and territories of France) across all 6 major continents.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10724", "revid": "24551146", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10724", "title": "French Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of France\nThe French Armed Forces (, ) are the military forces of France. They consist of four military branches \u2013 the Army, the Navy, the Air and Space Force, and the National Gendarmerie. The National Guard serves as the French Armed Forces' military reserve force. As stipulated by France's constitution, the president of France serves as commander-in-chief of the French military. The Chief of the Defence Staff, currently \"G\u00e9n\u00e9ral d'arm\u00e9e a\u00e9rienne\" Fabien Mandon, serves as the Armed Forces' military head.\nFrance has the ninth largest defense budget in the world and the second largest in the European Union (EU). It also has the largest military by size in the EU. As of 2025, the total active personnel of the French Armed Forces is 264,000. While the reserve personnel is 43,000, for a total of 307,000 personnel (excluding the National Gendarmerie). Including the National Gendarmerie (155,000 in 2024), the total manpower of the French Armed Forces combined is 462,000 strong. A 2015 Credit Suisse report ranked the French Armed Forces as the world's sixth most powerful military.\nThe Armed Forces continuously rank as one the institutions in which the French people have the highest confidence. A 2023 IFOP poll showed that 89% of the French trusted their Armed Forces.\nHistory.\nThe military history of France encompasses an immense panorama of conflicts and struggles extending for more than 2,000 years across areas, including modern France, greater Europe, and French territorial possessions overseas. According to British historian Niall Ferguson, the French participated in 50 of the 125 major European wars that have been fought since 1495; more than any other European state. They are followed by the Austrians who fought in 47 of them, the Spanish in 44 and the English (and later British) who were involved in 43. In addition, out of all recorded conflicts which occurred since the year 387 BC, France has fought in 168 of them, won 109, lost 49 and drawn 10.\nThe Gallo-Roman conflict predominated from 60 BC to 50 BC, with the Romans emerging victorious in the conquest of Gaul by Julius Caesar. After the decline of the Roman Empire, a Germanic tribe known as the Franks took control of Gaul by defeating competing tribes. The \"land of Francia,\" from which France gets its name, had high points of expansion under kings Clovis I and Charlemagne. In the Middle Ages, rivalries with England and the Holy Roman Empire prompted major conflicts such as the Norman Conquest and the Hundred Years' War. With an increasingly centralized monarchy, the first standing army since Roman times, and the use of artillery, France expelled the English from its territory and came out of the Middle Ages as the most powerful nation in Europe, only to lose that status to Spain following defeat in the Italian Wars. The Wars of Religion crippled France in the late 16th century, but a major victory in the Thirty Years' War made France one of the most powerful nations on the continent once more. In parallel, France developed its first colonial empire in Asia, Africa, and in the Americas. Under Louis XIV, France achieved military supremacy over its rivals, but escalating conflicts against increasingly powerful enemy coalitions checked French ambitions and left the kingdom bankrupt at the opening of the 18th century.\nResurgent French armies secured victories in dynastic conflicts against the Spanish, Polish, and Austrian crowns. At the same time, France was fending off attacks on its colonies. As the 18th century advanced, global competition with Great Britain led to the Seven Years' War, where France lost its North American holdings. Consolation came in the form of dominance in Europe and the American Revolutionary War, where extensive French aid in the form of money and arms, and the direct participation of its army and navy led to America's independence. Internal political upheaval eventually led to 23 years of nearly continuous conflict in the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars. France reached the zenith of its power during this period, dominating the European continent in an unprecedented fashion under Napoleon Bonaparte, but by 1815 it had been restored to its pre-Revolutionary borders. The rest of the 19th century witnessed the growth of the Second French colonial empire as well as French interventions in Belgium, Spain, and Mexico. Other major wars were fought against Russia in the Crimea, Austria in Italy, and Prussia within France itself.\nFollowing defeat in the Franco-Prussian War, Franco-German rivalry erupted again in the First World War. France and its allies were victorious this time. Social, political, and economic upheaval in the wake of the conflict led to the Second World War, in which the Allies were defeated in the Battle of France and the French government surrendered and was replaced with an authoritarian regime. The Allies, including the government in exile's Free French Forces and later a liberated French nation, eventually emerged victorious over the Axis powers. As a result, France secured an occupation zone in Germany and a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council.\nThe imperative of avoiding a third Franco-German conflict on the scale of those of two world wars paved the way for European integration starting in the 1950s. France became a nuclear power with its first test of an atomic bomb in Algeria in 1960. Since the 1990s its military action is most often seen in cooperation with NATO and its European partners.\nInternational stance.\nToday, French military doctrine is based on the concepts of national independence, nuclear deterrence (\"see Force de dissuasion\"), and military self-sufficiency. France is a charter member of NATO, and has worked actively with its allies to adapt NATO\u2014internally and externally\u2014to the post-Cold War environment. In December 1995, France announced that it would increase its participation in NATO's military wing, including the Military Committee (France withdrew from NATO's military bodies in 1966 whilst remaining full participants in the Organisation's political Councils). France remains a firm supporter of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and other cooperative efforts. Paris hosted the May 1997 NATO-Russia Summit which sought the signing of the Founding Act on Mutual Relations, Cooperation and Security. Outside of NATO, France has actively and heavily participated in both coalition and unilateral peacekeeping efforts in Africa, the Middle East, and the Balkans, frequently taking a lead role in these operations. France has undertaken a major restructuring to develop a professional military that will be smaller, more rapidly deployable, and better tailored for operations outside of mainland France. Key elements of the restructuring include: reducing personnel, bases and headquarters, and rationalisation of equipment and the armaments industry.\nSince the end of the Cold War, France has placed a high priority on arms control and non-proliferation. French Nuclear testing in the Pacific, and the sinking of the \"Rainbow Warrior\" strained French relations with its Allies, South Pacific states (namely New Zealand), and world opinion. France agreed to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1992 and supported its indefinite extension in 1995. After conducting a controversial final series of six nuclear tests on Mururoa in the South Pacific, the French signed the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty in 1996. Since then, France has implemented a moratorium on the production, export, and use of anti-personnel landmines and supports negotiations leading toward a universal ban. The French are key players in the adaptation of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe to the new strategic environment. France remains an active participant in: the major programs to restrict the transfer of technologies that could lead to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction: the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Australia Group (for chemical and biological weapons), and the Missile Technology Control Regime. France has also signed and ratified the Chemical Weapons Convention.\nWhite Papers.\n2008.\nOn 31 July 2007, President Nicolas Sarkozy ordered M. Jean-Claude Mallet, a member of the Council of State, to head up a thirty-five member commission charged with a wide-ranging review of French defence. The commission issued its White Paper in early 2008.\nActing upon its recommendations, President Sarkozy began making radical changes in French defense policy and structures starting in the summer of 2008. In keeping with post-Cold War changes in European politics and power structures, the French military's traditional focus on territorial defence will be redirected to meet the challenges of a global threat environment. Under the reorganisation, the identification and destruction of terrorist networks both in metropolitan France and in francophone Africa will be the primary task of the French military. Redundant military bases will be closed and new weapons systems projects put on hold to finance the restructuring and global deployment of intervention forces. In a historic change, Sarkozy furthermore has declared that France \"will now participate fully in NATO,\" four decades after former French president General Charles de Gaulle withdrew from the alliance's command structure and ordered American troops off French soil.\n2013.\nIn May 2014, high ranking defence chiefs of the French Armed Forces threatened to resign if the defence budget received further cuts on top of those already announced in the 2013 White Paper. They warned that further cuts would leave the armed forces unable to support operations abroad.\nRecent operations.\nThere are currently 36,000 French troops deployed in foreign territories\u2014such operations are known as \"OPEX\" for (\"External Operations\"). Among other countries, France provides troops for the United Nations force stationed in Haiti following the 2004 Haiti rebellion. France has sent troops, especially special forces, into Afghanistan to help the United States and NATO forces fight the remains of the Taliban and Al Qaeda. In Op\u00e9ration Licorne a force of a few thousand French soldiers is stationed in Ivory Coast on a UN peacekeeping mission. These troops were initially sent under the terms of a mutual protection pact between France and the Ivory Coast, but the mission has since evolved into the current UN peacekeeping operation. The French Armed Forces have also played a leading role in the ongoing UN peacekeeping mission along the Lebanon-Israel border as part of the cease-fire agreement that brought the 2006 Lebanon War to an end. Currently, France has 2,000 army personnel deployed along the border, including infantry, armour, artillery and air defence. There are also naval and air personnel deployed offshore.\nThe French Joint Force and Training Headquarters () at Air Base 110 near Creil maintains the ability to command a medium or large-scale international operation, and runs exercises . In 2011, from 19 March, France participated in the enforcement of a no-fly zone over northern Libya, during the Libyan Civil war, in order to prevent forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi from carrying out air attacks on Anti-Gaddafi forces. This operation was known as Op\u00e9ration Harmattan and was part of France's involvement in the conflict in the NATO-led coalition, enforcing UN Security Council Resolution 1973. On 11 January 2013 France begun Operation Serval to fight Islamists in Mali and the Sahal Region with African support but without NATO involvement and launched Operation Barkhane to combat terror in African Sahal from 2014 to 2022.\nExercises.\nFrance participates in several recurring exercises with other nations, including:\nIn 2023, Exercise Orion, the largest in decades, is to be held in the Champagne-Ardenne region. About 10,000 soldiers are expected to take part, along with the French navy and possibly forces from Belgium, Britain, and the United States.\nPersonnel.\nThe head of the French armed forces is the President of the Republic, in his role as \"chef des arm\u00e9es\". However, the Constitution puts civil and military government forces at the disposal of the \"gouvernement\" (the executive cabinet of ministers chaired by the Prime Minister, who are not necessarily of the same political side as the president). The Minister of the Armed Forces oversees the military's funding, procurement and operations.\nHistorically, France relied a great deal on conscription to provide manpower for its military, in addition to a minority of professional career soldiers. Following the Algerian War, the use of non-volunteer draftees in foreign operations was ended; if their unit was called up for duty in war zones, draftees were offered the choice between requesting a transfer to another unit or volunteering for the active mission.\nIn 1996, President Jacques Chirac's government announced the end of conscription and in 2001, conscription formally was ended. Young people must still, however, register for possible conscription (should the situation call for it). As of 2017 the French Armed Forces have total manpower of 426,265, and has an active personnel of 368,962 (with the Gendarmerie Nationale).\nIt breaks down as follows (2022):\nThe reserve element of the French Armed Forces consists of two structures; the Operational Reserve and the Citizens Reserve. As of 2022 the strength of the Operational Reserve is 25,785 personnel.\nApart from the three main service branches, the French Armed Forces also includes a fourth military branch called the National Gendarmerie. It had a reported strength of 103,000 active personnel and 25,000 reserve personnel in 2018. They are used in everyday law enforcement, and also form a coast guard formation under the command of the French Navy. There are however some elements of the Gendarmerie that participate in French external operations, providing specialised law enforcement and supporting roles.\nHistorically the National Guard functioned as the Army's reserve national defense and law enforcement militia. After 145 years since its disbandment, due to the risk of terrorist attacks in the country, the Guard was officially reactivated, this time as a service branch of the Armed Forces, on 12 October 2016.\nSince 2019, young French citizens can fulfill the mandatory service \"Service national universel (SNU)\" within the Armed Forces in the service branch of their choice.\nOrganisation and service branches.\nPlaced under the command of the staffs, the French armed forces include the five service branches, the Army, the National Navy, the Air and Space Force, the National Gendarmerie, and the National Guard, as well as the support services and joint organizations:\nFrench Army (\"Arm\u00e9e de terre\").\n&lt;br&gt;\nNational Navy (\"Marine nationale\").\nIn addition, the National Gendarmerie form a Coast Guard force called the Gendarmerie Maritime which is commanded by the French Navy.\n&lt;br&gt;\nFrench Air and Space Force (\"Arm\u00e9e de l'air et de l'espace\").\n&lt;br&gt;\nNational Gendarmerie (\"Gendarmerie nationale\").\nThe National Gendarmerie is primarily a military and airborne capable police force which serves as a rural and general purpose police force.\nNational Guard (\"Garde nationale\").\nReactivated in 2016, the National Guard serves as the official primary military and police reserve service of the Armed Forces. It is placed under the jurisdiction of Ministry of the Armed Forces and serves as a reserve force. It also doubles as a force multiplier for law enforcement personnel during contingencies and to reinforce military personnel whenever being deployed within France and abroad.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10725", "revid": "50845697", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10725", "title": "Foreign relations of France", "text": "In the 19th century France built a new French colonial empire second only to the British Empire. It was humiliated in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870\u201371, which marked the rise of Germany to dominance in Europe. France allied with Great Britain and Russia and was on the winning side of the First World War. Although it was initially easily defeated early in the Second World War, Free France, through its Free French Forces and the Resistance, continued to fight against the Axis powers as an Allied nation and was ultimately considered one of the victors of the war, as the allocation of a French occupation zone in Germany and West Berlin testifies, as well as the status of permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. It fought losing colonial wars in Indochina (ending in 1954) and Algeria (ending in 1962). The Fourth Republic collapsed and the Fifth Republic began in 1958 to the present. Under Charles de Gaulle it tried to block American and British influence on the European community. Since 1945, France has been a founding member of the United Nations, of NATO, and of the European Coal and Steel Community (the European Union's predecessor). As a charter member of the United Nations, France holds one of the permanent seats in the Security Council and is a member of most of its specialized and related agencies.\nFrance is also a founding member of the Union for the Mediterranean and the La Francophonie and plays a key role, both in regional and in international affairs.\nOn February 14, 2023, as part of their foreign policy in human rights, France showed its support for international justice by signing the Ljubljana-Hague Convention on International Cooperation in the Investigation and Prosecution of Genocide, Crimes against Humanity, War Crimes, and other International Crimes.\nFifth Republic since 1981.\nFran\u00e7ois Mitterrand: 1981\u20131995.\nFran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, a Socialist, emphasized European unity and the preservation of France's special relationships with its former colonies in the face of \"Anglo-Saxon influence.\" A part of the enacted policies was formulated in the Socialist Party's 110 Propositions for France, the electoral program for the 1981 presidential election. He had a warm and effective relationship with the conservative German Chancellor Helmut Kohl. They promoted French-German bilateralism in Europe and strengthened military cooperation between the two countries.\nAccording to Wayne Northcutt, certain domestic circumstances helped shape Mitterrand's foreign policy in four ways: he needed to maintain a political consensus; he kept an eye on economic conditions; he believed in the nationalistic imperative for French policy; and he tried to exploit Gaullism and its heritage that is on political advantage.\nJacques Chirac.\nChrirac's foreign policy featured continuity. His most prominent move was a break with Washington. Along with his friend Vladimir Putin of Russia, Hu Jintao of China, and Gerhard Schr\u00f6der of Germany, Chirac emerged as a leading voice against the Iraq War of 2003. They opposed George W. Bush (U.S.) and Tony Blair (Britain) during the organisation and deployment of a \"Coalition of the willing\" to forcibly remove the government of Iraq controlled by the Ba'ath Party under the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein. Despite British and American pressure, Chirac threatened to veto a resolution in the UN Security Council that would authorise the use of military force to rid Iraq of alleged weapons of mass destruction. He rallied other governments to his position. \"Iraq today does not represent an immediate threat that justifies an immediate war\", Chirac said on 18 March 2003. Future Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin acquired much of his popularity for his speech against the war at the United Nations (UN).\nNicolas Sarkozy.\nShortly after taking office, President Sarkozy began negotiations with Colombian president \u00c1lvaro Uribe and the left-wing guerrilla FARC, regarding the release of hostages held by the rebel group, especially Franco-Colombian politician \u00cdngrid Betancourt. According to some sources, Sarkozy himself asked for Uribe to release FARC's \"chancellor\" Rodrigo Granda.\n Furthermore, he announced on 24 July 2007, that French and European representatives had obtained the extradition of the Bulgarian nurses detained in Libya to their country. In exchange, he signed with Gaddafi security, health care and immigration pacts \u2013 and a $230\u00a0million (168\u00a0million euros) MILAN antitank missile sale. The contract was the first made by Libya since 2004, and was negotiated with MBDA, a subsidiary of EADS. Another 128 million euros contract would have been signed, according to Tripoli, with EADS for a TETRA radio system. The Socialist Party (PS) and the Communist Party (PCF) criticized a \"state affair\" and a \"barter\" with a \"Rogue state\". The leader of the PS, Fran\u00e7ois Hollande, requested the opening of a parliamentary investigation.\nOn 8 June 2007, during the 33rd G8 summit in Heiligendamm, Sarkozy set a goal of reducing French CO2 emissions by 50% by 2050 in order to prevent global warming. He then pushed forward the important Socialist figure of Dominique Strauss-Kahn as European nominee to the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Critics alleged that Sarkozy proposed to nominate Strauss-Kahn as managing director of the IMF to deprive the Socialist Party of one of its more popular figures.\nSarkozy normalised what had been strained relations with NATO. In 2009, France again was a fully integrated NATO member. Fran\u00e7ois Hollande has continued the same policy.\nFran\u00e7ois Hollande.\nSocialist Fran\u00e7ois Hollande won election in 2012 as president. He adopted a generally hawkish foreign-policy, in close collaboration with Germany in regard to opposing Russian moves against Ukraine, and in sending the military to fight radical Islamists in Africa. He took a hard line with regard to the Greek debt crisis. Fran\u00e7ois Hollande launched two military operations in Africa: Operation Serval in Mali (the French armed forces stopped an Islamist takeover of Bamako, the nation's capital city); and Operation Sangaris (to restore peace there as tensions between different religious communities had turned into a violent conflict). France was also the first European nation to join the United States in bombing the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. Under President Hollande, France's stances on the civil war in Syria and Iran's nuclear program have been described as \"hawkish\".\nEmmanuel Macron, 2017\u2013present.\nOn 31 May 2022, due to the reforms pushed by the president and perceived lack of recognition, the French diplomats will go on a strike for the first time in 20 years. This is a bad timing for President Emmanuel Macron as the France is holding the EU Presidency until the end of June.\nReputation.\nSophie Meunier in 2017 analyzed the causes of decline in France's former reputation as a major player in world affairs:\nFrance does not have as much relative global clout as it used to. Decolonization ... diminished France's territorial holdings and therefore its influence. Other countries acquired nuclear weapons and built up their armies. The message of \"universal\" values carried by French foreign policy has encountered much resistance, as other countries have developed following a different political trajectory than the one preached by France. By the 1990s, the country had become, in the words of Stanley Hoffmann, an \"ordinary power, neither a basket case nor a challenger.\" Public opinion, especially in the United States, no longer sees France as an essential power...[However in 2015 France] mattered in world environmental affairs with...the Paris Agreement, a global accord to reduce carbon emissions.\nInternational organization participation.\nACCT, AfDB, AsDB, Australia Group, BDEAC, BIS, CCC, CDB (non-regional), CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECA (associate), ECE, ECLAC, EIB, EMU, ESA, ESCAP, EU, FAO, FZ, G-5, G-7, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, International Maritime Organization, Inmarsat, InOC, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, ITUC, MINURSO, MIPONUH, MONUC, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, SPC, UN, UN Security Council, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNOMIG, UNRWA, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WADB (nonregional), WEU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, Zangger Committee\nMiddle East.\nFrance established relations with the Middle East during the reign of Louis XIV. To keep Austria from intervening into its plans regarding Western Europe he lent limited support to the Ottoman Empire, though the victories of Prince Eugene of Savoy destroyed these plans. In the nineteenth century France together with Great Britain tried to strengthen the Ottoman Empire, the now \"Sick man of Europe\", to resist Russian expansion, culminating in the Crimean War.\nFrance also pursued close relations with the semi-autonomous Egypt. In 1869 Egyptian workers -under the supervision of France- completed the Suez Canal. A rivalry emerged between France and Britain for control of Egypt, and eventually Britain emerged victorious by buying out the Egyptian shares of the company before the French had time to act.\nAfter the unification of Germany in 1871, Germany successfully attempted to co-opt France's relations with the Ottomans. In World War I the Ottoman Empire joined the Central Powers, and was defeated by France and Britain. After the collapse of the Ottoman Empire France and Britain divided the Middle East between themselves. France received Syria and Lebanon.\n1945\u20131958.\nThese colonies were granted independence after 1945, but France still tried to forge cultural and educational bonds between the areas, particularly with Lebanon. Relationships with Syria are more strained, due to the policies of that country. In 2005, France, along with the United States, pressured Syria to evacuate Lebanon.\nIn the post-World War II era French relations with the Arab Middle East reached a very low point. The war in Algeria between Muslim fighters and French colonists deeply concerned the rest of the Muslim world. The Algerian fighters received much of their supplies and funding from Egypt and other Arab powers, much to France's displeasure.\nMost damaging to Franco-Arab relations, however, was the Suez Crisis. It greatly diminished France's reputation in the region. France openly supported the Israeli attack on the Sinai Peninsula, and was working against Nasser, then a popular figure in the Middle East. The Suez Crisis also made France and the United Kingdom look again like imperialist powers attempting to impose their will upon weaker nations. Another hindrance to France's relations with the Arab Middle East was its close alliance with Israel during the 1950s.\nDe Gaulle's policies.\nThis all changed with the coming of Charles de Gaulle to power. De Gaulle's foreign policy was centered around an attempt to limit the power and influence of both superpowers, and at the same time increase France's international prestige. De Gaulle hoped to move France from being a follower of the United States to becoming the leading nation of a large group of non-aligned countries. The nations de Gaulle looked at as potential participants in this group were those in France's traditional spheres of influence: Africa and the Middle East. The former French colonies in eastern and northern Africa were quite agreeable to these close relations with France. These nations had close economic and cultural ties to France, and they also had few other suitors amongst the major powers. This new orientation of French foreign policy also appealed strongly to the leaders of the Arab nations. None of them wanted to be dominated by either of the superpowers, and they supported France's policy of trying to balance the US and the USSR and to prevent either from becoming dominant in the region. The Middle Eastern leaders wanted to be free to pursue their own goals and objectives, and did not want to be chained to either alliance bloc. De Gaulle hoped to use this common foundation to build strong relations between the nations. He also hoped that good relations would improve France's trade with the region. De Gaulle also imagined that these allies would look up to the more powerful French nation, and would look to it in leadership in matters of foreign policy.\nThe end of the Algerian conflict in 1962 accomplished much in this regard. France could not portray itself as a leader of the oppressed nations of the world if it still was enforcing its colonial rule upon another nation. The battle against the Muslim separatists that France waged in favour of the minority of French settlers was an extremely unpopular one throughout the Muslim world. With the conflict raging it would have been close to impossible for France to have had positive relations with the nations of the Middle East. The Middle Eastern support for the FLN guerillas was another strain on relations that the end of the conflict removed. Most of the financial and material support for the FLN had come from the nations of the Middle East and North Africa. This was especially true of Nasser's Egypt, which had long supported the separatists. Egypt is also the most direct example of improved relations after the end of hostilities. The end of the war brought an immediate thaw to Franco-Egyptian relations, Egypt ended the trial of four French officers accused of espionage, and France ended its trade embargo against Egypt.\nIn 1967 de Gaulle completely overturned France's Israel policy. De Gaulle and his ministers reacted very harshly to Israel's actions in the Six-Day War. The French government and de Gaulle condemned Israel's treatment of refugees, warned that it was a mistake to occupy the West Bank and Gaza Strip, and also refused to recognize the Israeli control of Jerusalem. The French government continued to criticize Israel after the war and de Gaulle spoke out against other Israeli actions, such as the operations against the Palestine Liberation Organization in Lebanon. France began to use its veto power to oppose Israel in the UN, and France sided with the Arab states on almost all issues brought to the international body. Most importantly of all, however, de Gaulle's government imposed an arms embargo on the Israeli state. The embargo was in fact applied to all the combatants, but very soon France began selling weaponry to the Arab states again. As early as 1970 France sold Libya a hundred Dassault Mirage fighter jets. However, after 1967 France continued to support Israel's right to exist, as well as Israel's many preferential agreements with France and the European Economic Community.\nForeign aid.\nIn the second half of the 20th century, France increased its expenditures in foreign aid greatly, to become second only to the United States in total aid amongst the Western powers and first on a per capita basis. By 1968 France was paying out $855\u00a0million per year in aid far more than either West Germany or the United Kingdom. The vast majority of French aid was directed towards Africa and the Middle East, usually either as a lever to promote French interests or to help with the sale of French products (e.g. arms sales). France also increased its expenditures on other forms of aid sending out skilled individuals to developing countries to provide technical and cultural expertise.\nThe combination of aid money, arms sales, and diplomatic alignments helped to erase the memory of the Suez Crisis and the Algerian War in the Arab world and France successfully developed amicable relationships with the governments of many of the Middle Eastern states. Nasser and de Gaulle, who shared many similarities, cooperated on limiting American power in the region. Nasser proclaimed France as the only friend of Egypt in the West. France and Iraq also developed a close relationship with business ties, joint military training exercises, and French assistance in Iraq's nuclear program in the 1970s. France improved relations with its former colony Syria, and eroded cultural links were partially restored.\nIn terms of trade France did receive some benefits from the improved relations with the Middle East. French trade with the Middle East increased by over fifty percent after de Gaulle's reforms. The weaponry industries benefited most as France soon had lucrative contracts with many of the regimes in the Middle East and North Africa, though these contracts account for a negligible part of France's economy.\nDe Gaulle had hoped that by taking a moderate path and not strongly supporting either side France could take part in the Middle East peace process between Israel and the Arab nations. Instead it has been excluded from any major role.\nNicolas de Rivi\u00e8re, the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations, thanked to Mesdames Bahous, Russell and Kanem for their briefings in Gaza war, and to reiterate France's full support for UN Women, UNICEF and UNFPA in their engagement to help the people of Gaza. Furthermore, France welcomed the agreement, which led to the release of dozens of hostages and a truce.\nModern history.\nThe Middle East has been a major factor of France's foreign policy. Over a decade since 2000, France successfully built an influential presence across the MENA region where the major focus had been on Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Qatar. The Middle East policy of France was essential from the strategic, cultural and economic point of view, where the focus remained on proving itself as an international power. The country invested years in maintaining a strong foothold in the region on the lines of trade, security interests, and cultural and social exchanges. As Emmanuel Macron became the president in 2017, he gave a clear picture about the French relations with the Middle East and its importance, both in his foreign policy speeches and his initiatives. His predecessors, on the other hand, had mostly picked the option of \"reassurance\" with the region's governments. Gradually, France began to show increasing interest in Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, particularly. The country became actively supportive towards the two Arab nations in their involvement in the Yemen civil war, becoming one of the crucial arms suppliers. There had been a number of calls from the human rights organizations for France to halt their arms sales to both Saudi and the UAE, which were known for causing a humanitarian crisis in Yemen. Even in 2021, Macron continued taking initiatives towards strengthening relations with the Kingdom and the Emirates. During his visit to the region in November 2021, Macron signed a weapons deal worth 16 billion euros with the UAE. The agreement involved transfer of 80 upgraded Rafale warplanes, along with 12 Airbus-built combat helicopters. While France viewed it as a way to deepen ties with the Emirates, rights organizations criticized and raised concerns around the UAE's involvement in the Yemen and Libyan wars. They objected the deal stating that the Gulf leaders have reflected a constant failure in improving their human rights records.\nDespite the improving relations between the Emirates and France, the UAE made extensive efforts towards to showcase its image in a positive light. In light of it, a Franco-Tunisian businessman, Elyes Ben Chedly reportedly ran promotion for two of the Emirates' cultural campaigns. Reports revealed that the middleman worked to promote the UAE's \"Year of Tolerance\" campaign, and was also involved in running the \"year Zayed\" program in Paris. Reports also revealed that Ben Chedly also used his network of arms contracts to mediate weapons deal between the UAE and other nations.\nA report in March 2023 by Mediapart revealed that the UAE had been interfering in France by the means of a Switzerland-based intelligence firm Alp Services. A French journalist, Roland Jacquard connected Alp's head Mario Brero with the Emirati secret services client, identified as Mohammed. Jacquard maintained a close contact with a network of politicians and diplomats. He was directly in contact with Mohammed, whose emails revealed that Jacquard was supplying the UAE with information from the security services, Emmanuel Macron and the \u00c9lys\u00e9e.\nFrance and Qatar have maintained diplomatic relations since Qatar declared independence in 1971. The bilateral partnership began to flourish in the early 1990s, focusing on security and hydrocarbon cooperation. TotalEnergies, present in Qatar since 1936, quickly emerged as a key collaborator with QatarEnergies in the extraction and development of the nation's hydrocarbon reserves. Additionally, various agreements have been executed between Qatar and France to bolster security measures for 2024 Summer Olympics in Paris. In preparation for the significant security demands of the event, Poland has pledged to contribute troops, including sniffer dog handlers, to support international efforts aimed at ensuring the safety of the Olympic Games in France.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which France maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nAfrica.\nFrance plays a significant role in Africa, especially in its former colonies, through extensive aid programs, commercial activities, military agreements, and cultural impact. In those former colonies where the French presence remains important, France contributes to political, military, and social stability. Many think that French policy in Africa \u2013 particularly where British interests are also involved \u2013 is susceptible to what is known as 'Fashoda syndrome'. Others have criticized the relationship as neocolonialism under the name \"Fran\u00e7afrique\", stressing France's support of various dictatorships, among others: Omar Bongo, Idriss D\u00e9by, and Denis Sassou Nguesso. The Defense Agreements between France and French-speaking African countries established close cooperation, particularly in defense and security matters. Often accompanied by secret clauses, they allowed France to intervene militarily: to rescue regimes in order to establish the legitimacy of political powers favorable to its interests, to fight jihadism, particularly in the Sahel, or to put an end to civil wars. The departure of French troops from the African continent signals the end of a world, that of interventions in Chad, Togo, Gabon, Rwanda, Djibouti, Zaire, Somalia, Ivory Coast, Mali, Libya, and Cameroon. It also marks the end of \"Fran\u00e7afrique\".\nAsia.\nFrance has extensive political and economical relations with Asian countries, including China, India, Japan, South Korea and Southeast Asia as well as an increasing presence in regional fora. France was instrumental in launching the Asia\u2013Europe Meeting (ASEM) process which could eventually emerge as a competitor to APEC. France is seeking to broaden its commercial presence in China and will pose a competitive challenge to U.S. business, particularly in aerospace, high-tech, and luxury markets. In Southeast Asia, France was an architect of the Paris Peace Accords.\nFrance does not have formal diplomatic relationships with North Korea. North Korea however maintains a \"delegation\" (not an embassy nor a consulate) near Paris. As most countries, France does not recognize, nor have formal diplomatic relationships with Taiwan, due to its recognition of China; however, Taiwan maintains a representation office in Paris which is similar to an embassy. Likewise, the French Institute in Taipei has an administrative consular section that delivers visas and fulfills other missions normally dealt with by diplomatic outposts.\nEurope.\nFrance has maintained its status as key power in Western Europe because of its size, location, strong economy, membership in European organizations, strong military posture and energetic diplomacy. France generally has worked to strengthen the global economic and political influence of the EU and its role in common European defense and collective security.\nFrance supports the development of a European Security and Defence Identity (ESDI) as the foundation of efforts to enhance security in the European Union. France cooperates closely with Germany and Spain in this endeavor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10727", "revid": "1307133623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10727", "title": "French Guinea", "text": "French colony in West Africa (1891-1958); now the country of Guinea\nFrench Guinea () was a French colonial possession in West Africa. Its borders, while changed over time, were in 1958 those of the current independent nation of Guinea.\nFrench Guinea was established by France in 1891, within the same borders as its previous colony known as Rivi\u00e8res du Sud (1882\u20131891). Prior to 1882, the coastal portions of French Guinea were part of the French colony of Senegal.\nIn 1891, Rivi\u00e8res du Sud was placed under the colonial lieutenant governor at Dakar, who had authority over the French coastal regions east to Porto-Novo (modern Benin). In 1894 Rivi\u00e8res du Sud, C\u00f4te d'Ivoire and Dahomey were separated into 'independent' colonies, with Rivi\u00e8res du Sud being renamed as the Colony of French Guinea. In 1895, French Guinea was made one of several dependent colonies and its Governor became one of several Lieutenant Governors who reported to a Governor-General in Dakar. In 1904, this federation of colonies was formalised as French West Africa. French Guinea, Senegal, Dahomey, C\u00f4te d'Ivoire and Upper Senegal and Niger, were each ruled by a lieutenant governor, under the Governor General in Dakar.\nColonial history.\nGuinea was ruled by France until 1958. It became independent from France in 1958 following its voters' rejection of Charles de Gaulle's Constitution of 1958. At the time French Guinea was the only colony to reject the new constitution. French Guinea became the modern-day country of Guinea, keeping French as its official language.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10729", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10729", "title": "French Guinea/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "10732", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10732", "title": "French Guinea/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "10733", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10733", "title": "French Guinea/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "10735", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10735", "title": "French Guinea/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "10737", "revid": "50729565", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10737", "title": "French Polynesia", "text": "French overseas collectivity in the Pacific\nFrench Polynesia ( ; ; ) is a French overseas collectivity of France and its sole French overseas country. It comprises 121 geographically dispersed French islands and atolls stretching over more than in the South Pacific Ocean. French Polynesia is associated with the European Union as an overseas country and territory (OCT). The total land area of French Polynesia is , with a population of 282,596 as of September 2025 of which at least 205,000 live in the French Society Islands and the remaining population lives in the rest of the archipelago.\nFrench Polynesia is divided into five island groups: the Austral Islands; the Gambier Islands; the Marquesas Islands; the Society Islands (comprising the Leeward and Windward Islands); and the Tuamotus. Among its 121 islands and atolls, 75 were inhabited at the 2017 census. Tahiti, which is in the Society Islands group, is the most populous island, being home to nearly 69% of the population of French Polynesia as of 2017[ [update]]. Papeete, located on Tahiti, is the capital of French Polynesia. Although not an integral part of its territory, Clipperton Island was administered from French Polynesia until 2007.\nHundreds of years after the Great Polynesian Migration, European explorers began traveling through the region, visiting the islands of French Polynesia on several occasions. Traders and whaling ships also visited. In 1842, the French took over the islands and established a French protectorate that they called \"\" (EFO) (French Establishments/Settlements of Oceania).\nIn 1946, the EFO became an overseas territory under the constitution of the French Fourth Republic, and Polynesians were granted the right to vote through citizenship. In 1957, the territory was renamed French Polynesia. In 1983, it became a member of the Pacific Community, a regional development organization. Since 28 March 2003, French Polynesia has been an overseas collectivity of the French Republic under the constitutional revision of article 74, and later gained, with law 2004-192 of 27 February 2004, an administrative autonomy, two symbolic manifestations of which are the title of the President of French Polynesia and its additional designation as an overseas country.\nHistory.\nAnthropologists and historians believe the Great Polynesian Migration commenced around 1500 BC as Austronesian peoples went on a journey using celestial navigation to find islands in the South Pacific Ocean. The first islands of French Polynesia to be settled were the Marquesas Islands in about 200 BC. The Polynesians later ventured southwest and discovered the Society Islands around AD 300.\nEuropean encounters began in 1521 when Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan, sailing at the service of the Spanish Crown, sighted Puka-Puka in the Tu\u0101motu-Gambier Archipelago. In 1606 another Spanish expedition under Pedro Fernandes de Queir\u00f3s sailed through Polynesia sighting an inhabited island on 10 February which they called Sagitaria (or Sagittaria), probably the island of Rekareka to the southeast of Tahiti. In 1722, Dutchman Jakob Roggeveen while on an expedition sponsored by the Dutch West India Company, charted the location of six islands in the Tuamotu Archipelago and two islands in the Society Islands, one of which was Bora Bora.\nBritish explorer Samuel Wallis became the first European navigator to visit Tahiti in 1767. French explorer Louis Antoine de Bougainville also visited Tahiti in 1768, while British explorer James Cook arrived in 1769, and observed the transit of Venus. He would stop in Tahiti again in 1773 during his second voyage to the Pacific, and once more in 1777 during his third and last voyage before being killed in Hawaii.\nIn 1772, the Spanish Viceroy of Peru Don Manuel de Amat ordered a number of expeditions to Tahiti under the command of Domingo de Bonechea who was the first European to explore all of the main islands beyond Tahiti. A short-lived Spanish settlement was created in 1774, and for a time some maps bore the name \"Isla de Amat\" after Viceroy Amat. Christian missions began with Spanish priests who stayed in Tahiti for a year. Protestants from the London Missionary Society settled permanently in Polynesia in 1797.\nKing P\u014dmare II of Tahiti was forced to flee to Mo'orea in 1803; he and his subjects were converted to Protestantism in 1812. French Catholic missionaries arrived on Tahiti in 1834; their expulsion in 1836 caused France to send a gunboat in 1838. In 1842, Tahiti and Tahuata were declared a French protectorate, to allow Catholic missionaries to work undisturbed. The capital of Papeet\u0113 was founded in 1843. In 1880, France annexed Tahiti, changing the status from that of a protectorate to that of a colony. The island groups were not officially united until the establishment of the French protectorate in 1889.\nAfter France declared a protectorate over Tahiti in 1842 and fought a war with Tahiti (1844\u20131847), the British and French signed the Jarnac Convention in 1847, declaring that the kingdoms of Raiatea, Huahine and Bora Bora were to remain independent from both powers and that no single chief was to be allowed to reign over the entire archipelago. France eventually broke the agreement, and the islands were annexed and became a colony in 1888 (eight years after the Windward Islands) after many native resistances and conflicts called the Leewards War, lasting until 1897.\nIn the 1880s, France claimed the Tuamotu Archipelago, which formerly belonged to the P\u014dmare Dynasty, without formally annexing it. Having declared a protectorate over Tahuata in 1842, the French regarded the entire Marquesas Islands as French. In 1885, France appointed a governor and established a general council, thus giving it the proper administration for a colony. The islands of Rimatara and R\u016brutu unsuccessfully lobbied for British protection in 1888, so in 1889 they were annexed by France. Postage stamps were first issued in the colony in 1892. The first official name for the colony was (Establishments in Oceania); in 1903 the general council was changed to an advisory council, and the colony's name was changed to \u00c9tablissements fran\u00e7ais de l'Oc\u00e9anie (French Establishments in Oceania).\nIn 1940, the administration of French Polynesia recognised the Free French Forces, and many Polynesians served in World War II, primarily in North Africa and parts of Italy. Unknown at the time to the French and Polynesians, the Konoe Cabinet in Imperial Japan on 16 September 1940 included French Polynesia among the many territories which were to become Japanese possessions, as part of the \"Eastern Pacific Government-General\" in the post-war world. However, in the course of the war in the Pacific the Japanese were not able to launch an actual invasion of the French islands.\nIn 1946, Polynesians were granted French citizenship and the islands' status was changed to an overseas territory. The islands' name was changed in 1957 to (French Polynesia). In 1962, France's early nuclear testing ground in Algeria was no longer usable when Algeria became independent and the Moruroa atoll in the Tuamotu Archipelago was selected as the new testing site. Nuclear tests were conducted underground after 1974. In 1977, French Polynesia was granted partial internal autonomy; in 1984, the autonomy was extended. French Polynesia became a full overseas collectivity of France in 2003.\nIn September 1995, France stirred up widespread protests by resuming nuclear testing at Fangataufa atoll after a three-year moratorium. The last test was on 27 January 1996. On 29 January 1996, France announced that it would accede to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, and no longer test nuclear weapons.\nFrench Polynesia was relisted in the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories in 2013, making it eligible for a UN-backed independence referendum. The relisting was made after the indigenous opposition was voiced and supported by the Polynesian Leaders Group, Pacific Conference of Churches, Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, Non-Aligned Movement, World Council of Churches, and Melanesian Spearhead Group.\nGovernance.\nUnder the terms of Article 74 of the French constitution and the Organic Law 2014\u2013192 on the statute of autonomy of French Polynesia, politics of French Polynesia takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic French overseas collectivity, whereby the President of French Polynesia is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Assembly of French Polynesia (the territorial assembly).\nPolitical life in French Polynesia was marked by great instability from the mid-2000s to the mid-2010s. The anti-independence right-wing president of French Polynesia, Gaston Flosse, who had been in power since 1991, had supported the resumption of the French nuclear weapons tests in 1995, and had obtained from his longtime friend and political ally Jacques Chirac, then president of France, a status of expanded autonomy for French Polynesia in 2004, failed to secure an absolute majority in the 2004 French Polynesian legislative election, resulting in deadlock at the Assembly of French Polynesia. Flosse's longtime opponent, the pro-independence leader Oscar Temaru, whose pro-independence coalition had won one less seat than Flosse's party in the Assembly, was nonetheless elected president of French Polynesia by the Assembly in June 2004 thanks to the votes of two non-aligned Assembly members. This resulted in several years of political instability, as neither the pro- nor the anti-independence camps were assured of a majority, depending on the votes of smaller non-aligned parties representing the interests of the distant islands of French Polynesia (as opposed to Tahiti). Several constructive votes of no confidence were passed against the presidency, resulting in it shuffling between Temaru and Flosse until December 2006, when Temaru was succeeded by Gaston Tong Sang, a close ally of Flosse.\nOn 14 September 2007, Temaru was elected president of French Polynesia for the third time in three years (with 27 of 44 votes cast in the Assembly). He replaced anti-independence leader Gaston Tong Sang, who on 31 August had lost a no confidence vote in the Assembly, after Flosse, hitherto opposed to independence, supported Temaru to topple the Tong Sang government. Temaru, however, had no stable majority in the Assembly, and new elections were held in February 2008 in an attempt to solve the political crisis.\nTong Sang's political party, T\u0101h\u014d\u02bb\u0113ra\u02bba Huira\u02bbatira, won the territorial elections. The two minority parties of Temaru and Flosse, who together had one more member in the Assembly than did T\u0101h\u014d\u02bb\u0113ra\u02bba Huira\u02bbatira, formed an alliance to prevent Tong Sang from becoming president again. Flosse was then elected president of French Polynesia by the territorial assembly on 23 February 2008 with the support of the pro-independence party led by Temaru, while Temaru was elected speaker of the territorial assembly with the support of the anti-independence party led by Flosse. Both formed a coalition cabinet. Many observers doubted that the alliance between anti-independence Flosse and pro-independence Temaru could last very long.\nAt the French municipal elections held in March 2008, several prominent mayors who were members of the Flosse\u2013Temaru coalition lost their offices in key municipalities of French Polynesia, which was interpreted as a disapproval of how the alliance had prevented Tong Sang (whose party French Polynesian voters had placed first in the territorial elections the month before) from becoming president of French Polynesia. Only a month later, on 15 April 2008, the coalition government was toppled\u2014by a constructive vote of no confidence in the territorial assembly\u2014when two members of the Flosse\u2013Temaru coalition left the coalition and sided with Tong Sang's party. Tong Sang's majority in the territorial assembly was very narrow, and he was toppled in February 2009, succeeded again by Temaru, who was still supported by Flosse.\nTemaru's return to power was brief as he fell out with Flosse and was toppled in November 2009, succeeded by his predecessor, Tong Sang. Tong Sang remained in power for a year and a half before being toppled in a vote of no confidence in April 2011, and succeeded again by Temaru. Temaru's fifth stint as president of French Polynesia lasted two years, during which time he campaigned for the re-inscription of French Polynesia on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories. Temaru's party, T\u0101vini Huira\u02bbatira, lost the 2013 French Polynesian legislative election by a wide margin, only two weeks before the United Nations re-registered French Polynesia on its list of non-self governing territories. This was interpreted by political analysts as a rejection by French Polynesian voters of Temaru's push for independence as well as the consequence of the socioeconomic crisis affecting French Polynesia after years of political instability and corruption scandals.\nFlosse, whose anti-independence party won a majority of seats in the 2013 election, succeeded Temaru as president of French Polynesia in May 2013, but he was removed from office in September 2014 due to a corruption conviction by France's highest court. Flosse was replaced as president of French Polynesia by his second-in-command in the anti-independence camp, \u00c9douard Fritch, who was also Flosse's former son-in-law (divorced from Flosse's daughter). Fritch fell out with Flosse in 2015 as both leaders were vying for control of the anti-independence camp, and Fritch was excluded from Flosse's party in September 2015, before founding his own anti-independence party, T\u0101pura Huira\u02bbatira, in February 2016. His new party managed to keep a majority in the Assembly, and Fritch remained as president.\nPolitical stability returned to French Polynesia following the split of the anti-independence camp in 2016. T\u0101pura Huira\u02bbatira won 70% of the seats in the Assembly of French Polynesia at the 2018 French Polynesian legislative election\u2014defeating both Temaru's pro-independence party and Flosse's anti-independence party\u2014and \u00c9douard Fritch was re-elected president of French Polynesia by the Assembly in May 2018. By 2022, \u00c9douard Fritch was the longest-serving president of French Polynesia since his former father-in-law Flosse in the 1990s and early 2000s.\nLegal status.\nBetween 1946 and 2003, French Polynesia had the status of an overseas territory (', or \"TOM\"). In 2003, it became an overseas collectivity (', or COM). Its statutory law of 27 February 2004 gives it the particular designation of \"overseas country within the Republic\" (\"\", or POM), but without legal modification of its status.\nRelations with mainland France.\nDespite having a local assembly and government, French Polynesia is not in a free association with France, like the Cook Islands with New Zealand. As a French overseas collectivity, the French central government has direct responsibility for justice, university education, defense (including the National Gendarmerie and French military forces) and foreign affairs. The local government of French Polynesia retains control over primary and secondary education, health, town planning, and the environment. The High Commissioner of the Republic in French Polynesia () represents the French state in the territory.\nFrench Polynesia also sends three deputies to the French National Assembly in three constituencies, the 1st representing Papeete and its north-eastern suburbs, plus the commune (municipality) of Mo'orea-Mai'ao, the Tu\u0101motu-Gambier administrative division, and the Marquesas Islands administrative division, the 2nd representing much of Tahiti outside Papeete and the Austral Islands administrative subdivision, and the 3rd representing the Leeward Islands administrative subdivision and the south-western suburbs of Papeete. French Polynesia also sends two senators to the French Senate.\nDefence.\nThe defence of the collectivity is the responsibility of the French Armed Forces. Some 900 military personnel are deployed in the territory \u2014 incorporating the Pacific-Polynesian Marine Infantry Regiment (RIMaP-P) \u2014 along with modest air transport and surveillance assets. The latter included three Falcon 200 Gardian maritime surveillance aircraft from French Naval Aviation, which as of 2025/26 are being replaced, on an interim basis, by the more advanced Falcon 50 aircraft. These aircraft will in turn be replaced by the new Falcon 2000 Albatros starting in about 2030. The former is composed of two CN-235 tactical transport aircraft drawn from the Air Force's ET 82 \"Maine\" transport squadron.\nAs of mid-2024, three principal French Navy vessels are based in the territory, including the surveillance frigate , the patrol and support ship \"Bougainville\", and \"Teriieroo to Teriierooiterai\", a vessel of the new \"F\u00e9lix \u00c9bou\u00e9\" class of patrol vessels. In 2026 a second vessel of the \"F\u00e9lix \u00c9bou\u00e9\" class, \"Philip Bernardino\", is to be deployed in Tahiti to further reinforce France's maritime surveillance capabilities in the region. As of 2021, two smaller port and coastal tugs (RPCs), \"Maroa\" and \"Manini\", were also operational in the territory. As of 2025, Flottilla 35F of French Naval Aviation deploys a detachment of two AS 365N Dauphin helicopters in Tahiti. The helicopters carry out a variety of roles in the territory, and may be embarked on the frigate \"Prairial\" as needed.\nThe National Gendarmerie (which also polices rural and border areas in metropolitan France) deploys some 500 active personnel and civilians, plus around 150 reservists, in French Polynesia. The patrol boat \"Jasmin\" of the Maritime Gendarmerie is also based in the territory and is to be replaced by a new PCG-NG patrol boat around 2025\u20132026.\nGeography.\nThe islands of French Polynesia make up a total land area of , scattered over more than of ocean. There are 121 islands in French Polynesia and many more islets or s around atolls. The highest point is Mount Orohena on Tahiti.\nIt is made up of five archipelagos. The largest and most populated island is Tahiti, in the Society Islands.\nAside from Tahiti, some other important atolls, islands, and island groups in French Polynesia are: Ah\u0113, Bora Bora, Hiva \u02bbOa, Huahine, Mai\u02bbao, Maupiti, Meheti\u02bba, Mo\u02bborea, Nuku Hiva, Ra\u02bbi\u0101tea, Taha\u02bba, Teti\u02bbaroa, Tubuai and T\u016bpai.\nFrench Polynesia is home to four terrestrial ecoregions: Marquesas tropical moist forests, Society Islands tropical moist forests, Tuamotu tropical moist forests, and Tubuai tropical moist forests.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nAdministrative divisions.\nFrench Polynesia is divided in five administrative subdivisions ():\nThe five administrative subdivisions are not local councils; they are solely deconcentrated subdivisions of the French central State. At the head of each administrative subdivision is an ('State administrator'), generally simply known as , also sometimes called ('head of the administrative subdivision'). The is a civil servant under the authority of the High Commissioner of the French Republic in French Polynesia in Papeete.\nFour administrative subdivisions (Marquesas Islands, Leeward Islands, Tuamotu-Gambier, and Austral Islands) each also form a deconcentrated subdivision of the government of French Polynesia. These are called ('districts'). The head of a is the , known as in French ('territorial administrator'), but the Tahitian title is most often used. The president of French Polynesia's government appoints the , who directly reports to the president. The Windward Islands, due to their proximity to Papeete, do not form a deconcentrated subdivision of the government of French Polynesia.\nThe 5 administrative subdivisions are themselves divided in 48 communes. Like all other communes in the French Republic, these are municipalities in which local residents with either a French or another EU citizenship elect a municipal council and a mayor in charge of managing local affairs within the commune. Municipal elections occur every six years on the same date as in the rest of the French Republic (the last municipal elections took place in 2020).\n30 communes are further subdivided in 98 associated communes which have each a delegate mayor and a registry office. These 30 communes were subdivided in associated communes either because they have a large land territory (particularly in the larger islands such as Tahiti or Nuku Hiva) or because they are made up of atolls distant from each other (particularly in the Tuamotu archipelago), which led to the creation of associated communes for each inhabited atoll.\n17 communes (out of French Polynesia's 48 communes) have banded together in three separate communities of communes. These indirectly elected intercommunal councils are still relatively new in French Polynesia, and unlike in metropolitan France and its overseas regions it is not mandatory for the communes in French Polynesia to join an intercommunal council. The three intercommunal councils in existence as of 2022, all formed on a voluntary basis, were:\nThese communities of communes, as elsewhere in the French Republic, are not full-fledged territorial collectivities, but only federations of communes. From a legal standpoint, the only territorial collectivities in French Polynesia are the overseas collectivity of French Polynesia and the 48 communes.\nDemographics.\nTotal population was 278,786 according to the August 18, 2022 census, 68.7% of whom lived on the island of Tahiti alone. The urban area of Papeete, the capital city, has 136,771 inhabitants (2017 census).\nAt the 2017 census, 89.0% of people living in French Polynesia had been born there (up from 87.3% in 2007); 8.1% had been born in Metropolitan France (down from 9.3% in 2007); 1.2% were born elsewhere in overseas France (down from 1.4% in 2007); and 1.7% were from foreign countries (down from 2.0% in 2007). The population of natives of Metropolitan France living in French Polynesia has declined in relative terms since the 1980s, but in absolute terms their population peaked at the 2007 census, when 24,265 lived in French Polynesia (not counting their children born there). With the local economic crisis, their population declined to 22,278 at the 2012 census, and 22,387 at the 2017 census.\n1 Persons born abroad of French parents, such as Pieds-Noirs and children of French expatriates.\n2 An immigrant is by French definition a person born in a foreign country and who had no French citizenship at birth. An immigrant may have acquired French citizenship since moving to France, but is still listed as an immigrant in French statistics. On the other hand, persons born in France with foreign citizenship (the children of immigrants) are not listed as immigrants.\nSource: ISPF\nAt the 1988 census, the last census which asked questions regarding ethnicity, 66.5% of people were ethnically unmixed Polynesians, 7.1% were ethnically Polynesians with light European or East Asian mixing, 11.9% were Europeans (mostly French), 9.3% were people of mixed European and Polynesian descent, the so-called Demis (literally meaning \"Half\"), and 4.7% were East Asians (mainly Chinese).\nChinese, Demis, and the white populace are essentially concentrated on the island of Tahiti, particularly in the urban area of Papeete, where their share of the population is thus much greater than in French Polynesia overall. Despite a long history of ethnic mixing, ethnic tensions have been growing in recent years, with politicians using a xenophobic discourse and fanning the flame of nationalism.\nHistorical population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCulture.\nLanguages.\nAll the indigenous languages of French Polynesia are Polynesian. French Polynesia has been linguistically diverse since ancient times, with each community having its own local speech variety. These dialects can be grouped into seven languages on the basis of mutual intelligibility: Tahitian, Tuamotuan, Rapa, Austral, North Marquesan, South Marquesan, and Mangarevan. Some of these, especially Tuamotuan, are really dialect continua formed by a patchwork of different dialects. The distinction between languages and dialects is notoriously difficult to establish, and so some authors may view two varieties as dialects of the same language, while others may view them as distinct languages. In this way, North and South Marquesan are often grouped together as a single Marquesan language, and Rapa is often viewed as part of Austral subfamily. At the same time, Ra'ivavae is often viewed as distinct from them.\nFrench is the sole official language of French Polynesia. An organic law of 12 April 1996 states that \"French is the official language, Tahitian and other Polynesian languages can be used.\" At the 2017 census, among the population whose age was 15 and older, 73.9% of people reported that the language they spoke the most at home was French (up from 68.6% at the 2007 census), 20.2% reported that the language they spoke the most at home was Tahitian (down from 24.3% at the 2007 census), 2.6% reported Marquesan and 0.2% the related Mangareva language (same percentages for both at the 2007 census), 1.2% reported any of the Austral languages (down from 1.3% at the 2007 census), 1.0% reported Tuamotuan (down from 1.5% at the 2007 census), 0.6% reported a Chinese dialect (41% of which was Hakka) (down from 1.0% at the 2007 census), and 0.4% another language (more than half of which was English) (down from 0.5% at the 2007 census).\nAt the same census, 95.2% of people whose age was 15 or older reported that they could speak, read and write French (up from 94.7% at the 2007 census), whereas only 1.3% reported that they had no knowledge of French (down from 2.0% at the 2007 census). 86.5% of people whose age was 15 or older reported that they had some form of knowledge of at least one Polynesian language (up from 86.4% at the 2007 census but down from 87.8% at the 2012 census), whereas 13.5% reported that they had no knowledge of any of the Polynesian languages (down from 13.6% at the 2007 census but up from 12.2% at the 2012 census).\nMusic.\nFrench Polynesia appeared in the world music scene in 1992, recorded by French musicologist Pascal Nabet-Meyer with the release of The Tahitian Choir's recordings of unaccompanied vocal Christian music called himene t\u0101rava. This form of singing is common in French Polynesia and the Cook Islands, and is notable for a unique drop in pitch at the end of the phrases, a characteristic formed by several different voices, accompanied by a steady grunting of staccato, nonlexical syllables.\nDance.\nTahitian dance as a movement art evolved alongside Tahitian oral transmission of cultural knowledge. In fact, dance movement or gesture has significance that supported the transmission of cultural knowledge. Dance styles include 'Aparima and 'upa'upa.\nHowever, after the London Missionary Society brought their religion to the islands, they pressured King P\u014dmare II (whom they had converted from traditional beliefs to their Reformed tradition) to introduce a new legal code. This code, now known as the P\u014dmare Code, came into effect in 1819 and banned numerous traditional practices including dancing, chants, floral costumes, tattooing and more.\nReligion.\nChristianity is the main religion of the islands. A majority of 54% belongs to various Protestant churches, especially the Maohi Protestant Church, which is the largest and accounts for more than 50% of the population. It traces its origins to P\u014dmare II, the king of Tahiti, who converted from traditional beliefs to the Reformed tradition brought to the islands by the London Missionary Society.\nCatholics constitute a large minority of 38.3% of the population (2019) which has its own ecclesiastical province, comprising the Metropolitan Archdiocese of Papeete and its only suffragan, the Diocese of Taiohae. The number and proportion of Catholics has increased significantly since 1950, when they represented 21.6% of the total population.\nData from 1991 revealed that Catholics were in the majority in the Tuamotu Islands, Gambier Islands and the Marquesas Islands, while Protestants formed the majority in the Austral Islands and several of the Society Islands such as Tahiti. This diversity is due to the fact that Protestant missionaries (from England and the United States) first came to one group of islands, and after French colonisation the Catholic Church spread to several more scattered islands, but also to the main island of Tahiti.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had 28,147 members as of 2018[ [update]]. Community of Christ, another denomination within the Latter-Day Saint tradition, claimed 9,256 total French Polynesian members as of 2018 including Mareva Arnaud Tchong who serves in the church's governing Council of Twelve Apostles. There were about 3,000 Jehovah's Witnesses in Tahiti as of 2014[ [update]], and an estimated 500 Muslims in French Polynesia.\nCuisine.\nFrench Polynesia produces a significant array of fruits and vegetables as natural local produce (especially coconut), which feature in many of the dishes of the islands, as does fresh seafood.\nFoods like faraoa 'ipo, poisson cru and r\u0113ti'a are commonly eaten. The islands of Tahiti and the Marquesas indulge in a unique food made by preserving breadfruit, known as \"ma\", which either can be baked further in the earth oven, or consumed directly mixed with fresh breadfruit as \"popoi mei\" (as is in the Marquesas).\nSports.\nFootball.\nThe sport of football in the island of Tahiti is run by the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Tahitienne de Football.\nVa'a.\nThe Polynesian traditional sport va'a is practiced in all the islands. French Polynesia hosts the Hawaiki nui va'a an international race between Tahiti, Huahine and Bora Bora.\nSurfing.\nFrench Polynesia is famous for its reef break waves. Teahupo'o is probably the most renowned, regularly ranked in the best waves of the world. This site hosts the annual Billabong Pro Tahiti surf competition, the 7th stop of the World Championship Tour, and hosted the surfing events of the 2024 Summer Olympics.\nKitesurfing.\nThere are many spots to practice kitesurfing in French Polynesia, with Tahiti, Moorea, Bora-Bora, Maupiti and Raivavae being among the most iconic.\nDiving.\nFrench Polynesia is internationally known for diving. Each archipelago offers opportunities for divers. Rangiroa and Fakarava in the Tuamotu islands are the most famous spots in the area.\nRugby.\nRugby is also popular in French Polynesia, specifically rugby union.\nTelevision.\nTelevision channels with local programming include Polyn\u00e9sie la 1\u00e8re (established in 1965) and Tahiti Nui Television (established in 2000). Channels from metropolitan France are also available.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nThe legal tender of French Polynesia is the CFP franc which has a fixed exchange rate with the euro. The nominal gross domestic product (GDP) of French Polynesia in 2019 was 6.02\u00a0billion U.S. dollars at market exchange rates, the seventh-largest economy in Oceania after Australia, New Zealand, Hawaii, Papua New Guinea, New Caledonia, and Guam. The GDP per capita was US$21,673 in 2019 (at market exchange rates, not at PPP), lower than in Hawaii, Australia, New Zealand, Guam, New Caledonia, the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Cook Islands, but higher than in all other independent insular states and dependent territories of Oceania.\nFrench Polynesia was severely affected by the 2008 financial crisis and subsequent Great Recession, and experienced as a result 4 years of recession from 2009 to 2012. French Polynesia renewed with economic growth in 2013, and experienced strong economic growth in the 2nd half of the 2010s, with an average real GDP growth rate of +2.8% per year from 2016 to 2019, before being affected by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, which has led to another recession.\nFrench Polynesia has a moderately developed economy, which is dependent on imported goods, tourism, and the financial assistance of mainland France. Tourist facilities are well developed and are available on the major islands. Main agricultural productions are coconuts (copra), vegetables and fruits. French Polynesia exports noni juice, a high quality vanilla, and the famous black Tahitian pearls which accounted for 55% of exports (in value) in 2008.\nFrench Polynesia's seafloor contains rich deposits of nickel, cobalt, manganese, and copper that are not exploited.\nIn 2008, French Polynesia's imports amounted to 2.2\u00a0billion U.S. dollars and exports amounted to 0.2\u00a0billion U.S. dollars.\n54,391\n42,274\n 63,997\n34,939\n37,794\n2,315\n21,673\n3,187\n2,278\n6,079\n13,352\n22,752\n4,435\n24,670\n15,992\n4,001\n5,275\n1,847\n10,567\n5,277\nTransportation.\nThere are 53 airports in French Polynesia; 46 are paved. Fa'a'\u0101 International Airport is the only international airport in French Polynesia. Each island has its own airport that serves flights to other islands. Air Tahiti is the main airline that flies around the islands.\nCommunication.\nIn 2017, Alcatel Submarine Networks, a unit of Nokia, launched a project to connect many of the islands in French Polynesia with underwater fiber optic cable. The project, called NATITUA, is intended to improve French Polynesian broadband connectivity by linking Tahiti to 10 islands in the Tuamotu and Marquesas archipelagos. In August 2018, a celebration was held to commemorate the arrival of a submarine cable from Papeete to the atoll of Hao, extending the network by about 1000 kilometres.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10738", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10738", "title": "French Polynesia/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "10739", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10739", "title": "Geography of French Polynesia", "text": " \nFrench Polynesia is located in Oceania. It is a group of six archipelagos in the South Pacific Ocean, about halfway between South America and Australia. Its area is about 4,167\u00a0km2 (around 130 islands), of which 3,827\u00a0km2 is land and 340\u00a0km2 is (inland) water. It has a coastline of 2,525\u00a0km but no land borders with other countries.\nPhysical geography.\nThere are 118 islands in French Polynesia (and many more islets or \"motus\" around atolls). Four of the islands are volcanic and one island is coral. Makatea in French Polynesia is one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the Pacific Ocean \u2013 the others are Banaba (Ocean Island) in Kiribati and Nauru. The terrain consists of a mixture of rugged high islands and low islands with reefs.\nIt is made up of six archipelagos. The largest and most populated island is Tahiti, in the Society Islands.\nThe archipelagos are:\nAside from Tahiti, some other important atolls, islands, and island groups in French Polynesia are: Ah\u0113, Bora Bora, Hiva 'Oa, Huahine, Mai'ao, Maupiti, Meheti'a, Mo'orea, Nuku Hiva, Raiatea, Taha'a, Tetiaroa, Tupua'i, and T\u016bpai. The country's highest point is Mont Orohena on Tahiti at 2,241 meters high.\nClimate.\nThe country has a tropical, but moderate climate.\n* Territorial sea: 12 nautical miles\n* Exclusive economic zone: 200 nautical miles\n Timber, fish, cobalt, hydropower\n* Arable land: 0.68%\n* Permanent crops: 6.28%\n* Other: 93.03% (2012)\n 10 km2 (2003)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10740", "revid": "1317692934", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10740", "title": "Demographics of French Polynesia", "text": "Demographic features of the population of French Polynesia include population density, ethnicity, religious affiliations and other aspects.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2021) (Post-censal estimates.): \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10741", "revid": "11745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10741", "title": "Politics of French Polynesia", "text": " \nPolitics of French Polynesia takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic French overseas collectivity, whereby the President of French Polynesia is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Assembly of French Polynesia.\nBetween 1946 and 2003, French Polynesia had the status of an overseas territory (, or ). In 2003 it became an overseas collectivity (, or ). Its statutory law of 27 February 2004 gives it the particular designation of \"overseas country\" to underline the large autonomy of the territory.\nExecutive branch.\nThe President of the French Republic is represented by the High Commissioner of the Republic in French Polynesia (\"Haut-Commissaire de la R\u00e9publique en Polyn\u00e9sie fran\u00e7aise\"). The government is headed by the President of French Polynesia. He submits as Council of Ministers a list of members of the Territorial Assembly, the Assembly of French Polynesia (\"Assembl\u00e9e de la Polyn\u00e9sie fran\u00e7aise\"), for approval by them to serve as ministers.\nLegislative branch.\nFrench Polynesia elects the Assembly of French Polynesia (\"Assembl\u00e9e de la Polyn\u00e9sie fran\u00e7aise\"), the unicameral legislature on the territorial level. The Assembly of French Polynesia has 57 members, elected for a five-year term by proportional representation in multi-seat constituencies. Since the territorial elections of March 6, 2001, the parity bill now binds that the number of women matches the number of men at the Assembly.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nThe members of the Assembly of French Polynesia are elected in 6 different electoral districts or electoral circumscriptions () which slightly differ from the administrative subdivisions (\"subdivisions administratives\") on the Tuamotus and the Gambier Islands. The 6 electoral circumscriptions (\"circonscriptions \u00e9lectorales\") are:\nJudicial branch.\nCourt of Appeal or Cour d'Appel; Court of the First Instance or Tribunal de Premiere Instance; Court of Administrative Law or Tribunal Administratif.\nAdministrative divisions.\nFrench Polynesia has five administrative subdivisions ():\n\"note:\" Clipperton Island (), just off the coast of Mexico, was administered by France from French Polynesia.\nInternational organization participation.\nESCAP (associate), FZ, ITUC, SPC, WMO\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "10742", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10742", "title": "Economy of French Polynesia", "text": "The economy of French Polynesia is one of a developed country with a service sector accounting for 75%. French Polynesia's GDP per capita is around $22,000, one of the highest in the Pacific region.\nHistory.\nPast economy.\nBefore French colonisation, the Polynesian islands that constitute nowadays French Polynesia, relied on a subsistence economy. Work was heavily organised and performed by the community as a whole under the direction of the ruling \"ari\u02bbi\" class and the priests (\"tahu\u02bba\"). Mountains were terraced for agriculture production, river banks were contained by stone walls, artificial soil was created on atolls in large trenches, and large systems made out of coral stone walls trapped and stocked live fish. Production outputs were divided by the ruling class between the population. James Cook's contact with the people of Tahiti following contact in later 18th century witnessed massive trade of fabrics, weaponry and other new foreign items with the use of nails (\"fao\") as a improptu form of currency due to its foreign iron highly coveted for its hardness and malleability.\nAfter the contact was established with European ships, foreign diseases killed large portions of the populations, and Christian beliefs and clergy produced a huge shift in the culture of those islands. With fewer population to feed, more land per capita was available, and the land use switched toward the limited production required by a family to live. Habitations moved toward seashores as the population relied more on the lagoon and sea trade. European ships stopped in those islands to purchase water, salted pork, dried fish and fresh fruits.\nAs French, English and Americans settled, part of the agriculture moved towards exports of oranges, copra, coffee, cotton, and vanilla. They also exported black pearls and sandalwood. Sandalwood nearly disappeared, cotton production was short-lived, as the US's South recovered from the American Civil War, and coffee and orange trees suffered from imported diseases that stopped those exports. Copra and vanilla prices and competition worldwide impacted heavily those productions in the second half of the 20th century, although they still exist. The guano mining at Makatea started in 1917 and stopped in 1966 when the stocks were depleted.\nIn 1962, France stationed military personnel in the region and started nuclear experimentations in Moruroa. French Polynesia's economy switched to services to support the military and the growing tourist industry.\n21st century.\nTourism accounts nowadays for about 13% of the GDP, and is a primary source of foreign currency earnings. The tourist industry was heavily impacted after the 9/11 terrorist attacks and the 2008 economic crises, and never really recovered since. There are around 160,000 tourists per year. The local government mostly focuses its action at developing a high-end market with luxurious hotels built with foreign investment and French tax cut incentives, but many of these investments close after a few years. The subsidized air company Air Tahiti Nui brings tourists from France, Los Angeles, Japan and China. Other companies also operate, like Air France and Air New Zealand.\nThe small manufacturing sector primarily processes agricultural products. Vanilla and pearls are its main exports.\nThe public administration is an important part of the GDP and a provider of stable employment. The French republic finances the functionaries working in education, justice, hospitals, gendarmerie (military police), and military. The local government controls its own administration, like the ministry of agriculture, and oversees the administration and buildings of some sectors like schools. The local government also influence a large part of the economy through subsidies and development programs.\nSome parts of the economy involve quasi-monopolistic groups due to the small economy size, the challenges of a country of small islands spread in a huge oceanic space, and the action of the government through subsidies and public companies. Some sectors show an important horizontal and vertical integration trend. Recently, the local government tries to maintain a healthy competition and regulate the growth of the biggest groups, but face many challenges. For example, it was unable to prevent a major supermarket group to develop its own vegetable production, ending its supplying contracts with local farmers. But it blocked the merger of two local shipping companies to avoid a monopoly on some trade routes. The price of shipping goods between islands is fixed by the government, and subsidies are provided for transporting some items like farming products or construction materials.\nSome products' price margins are controlled by the local government to reduce the disparity of prices between the different archipelagos. Import taxes and VAT are fixed and collected by the local government that also control what imports are allowed to protect its agriculture and nature from diseases and invasive species.\nThe majority of the population is of mixed Polynesian and European origin. Around 5% of the population is of Asian origin, descending from farm workers imported in the 19th century to work in the cotton fields. They are present in the administration and trading sector of the economy. The recent metropolitan population is mostly involved in the state administration and in small and medium-sized enterprises.\nAgriculture.\nMost Polynesians in agriculture farm traditional products like taro, ufi, casava and sweet potato to feed themselves and small surplus are sold for monetary income alongside a small fishing activity. Farmers of Asian origin tends to produce European and Asian vegetables for the local market.\nThe Moorea island developed pineapple production for local market and supplying the juice factory. Maupiti and Huahine produce watermelons. Tahiti and Tahaa have a small production of sugarcane for rum distillery.\nTahiti produces a small quantity of fresh milk, mostly for the local yogurt factory, as most of the population is used to drinking UHT and powdered milk from France and New Zealand. French Polynesia has a single slaughterhouse treating beef, pork, and chickens. The local beef meat production is very limited and mostly used to supply the local corned beef factory. Most of the meat comes from New Zealand, amounting to around 10% of the exports of fresh meat of this country. Two charcuteries produce ham, sausages, and p\u00e2t\u00e9s from local and imported pork.\nThe copra production is heavily subsidized as the local government treats it as a form of social support for the remote islands with a limited range of economic activities possibilities like Tuamotu atolls. The copra is milled by the Huilerie de Tahiti to produce coconut oil mostly used for the monoi. The coconut cake residue is used as a cattle and pork feed, and surplus used to be exported to New Zealand. \nVanilla production depends heavily on the situation in Madagascar. When a typhoon hit this main supplier of vanilla, the market price increased worldwide and the local Polynesian government started a heavy program of subsidies and loans to develop vanilla farms. As the Polynesian production increased and Madagascar recovered, prices dropped and a lot of Polynesian farmers stopped caring for their vanilla plants. The plants are fragile and require regular care of experienced farmers. Diseases and insects can heavily reduce the production, and the cost of chemical products used impact the farmer harder when the vanilla prices are low. As the vanilla production falls, the price increase and the government started a new program of development, starting a new cycle. Despite the high price of Tahitian dried vanilla on the international market, it usually still finds buyers in the high-end market because of the specificities of its cultivar and quality.\nIn the 1990s, the commercial production of Noni started because of the supposed benefits of the juice of this fruit. Exports were mostly directed toward the North American market. But this production was short-lived, falling quickly from 7000 tonnes in 2005 down to 2000 tonnes in 2008, as the plant can be easily farmed in any tropical climate, especially in countries with lower labor costs and more land.\nA small vineyard production exists in Rangiroa atoll and is aimed at the high-end market, capitalizing on its rarity and specificity of a vine grown on coral soil in a tropical island.\nElectricity.\nFrench Polynesia's electricity production in 2004 was 477 GWh. In 1998 59.72% of French Polynesia's electricity came from fossil fuel with the remainder from hydropower.\nCurrency.\nFrench Polynesia uses the Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique franc (CFPF), with 1 CFP franc subdivided into 100 centimes. The CFP franc was formerly linked at the exact official rate of 0.055 French francs to one Pacifique franc. When France switched its currency to the euro in 1999 this static link remained true, so that the rate is now about 119.26 Pacifique franc to one euro (1 euro being exactly 6.55957 French francs). In 2016 the exchange rate was 110.2 CFP francs per US dollar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10743", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10743", "title": "Telecommunications in French Polynesia", "text": " \nThis article is about communications systems in French Polynesia. \nThe Honotua fiber optic cable connected Tahiti to Hawaii in 2010, increasing Internet speeds to 20 gigabits per second from 500 megabits per second. The cable will also connect to Moorea and the Leeward Islands of Huahine, Raiatea and Bora Bora.\nTelephone.\nMain lines in use: 32,000 (1995)\nMobile cellular: 4,000 (1995)\nTelephone system:\nDomestic:\nN/A\nInternational:\nSatellite Earth station\u20141 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)\nRadio.\nRadio stations:\nAM 2, FM 14, shortwave 2 (1998)\nRadios:\n128,000 (1997)\nTelevision.\nTelevision stations:\n7 (plus 17 low-power repeaters) (1997)\nTelevisions:\n40,000 (1997)\nInternet.\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs):\nOPT (national operator),\nCountry code (Top Level Domain): PF\nITU Prefix: F\nAmateur radio prefix (Designated by France): FO\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10744", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10744", "title": "Transport in French Polynesia", "text": "Railways:\n0\u00a0km\nHighways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n2590\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"paved:\"\n1735\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"unpaved:\"\n855\u00a0km (1999)\nPorts and harbours:\nMataura, Papeete, Rikitea, Uturoa\nMerchant marine:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n10 ships (\u00a0gross tonnage\u00a0(GT) or over) totaling \u00a0GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT) \n&lt;br&gt;\"ships by type:\"\ncargo ship 3, passenger ship 2, passenger/cargo 3, refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off ship 1 (2003 est.)\nAirports:\n49 (2003 est.)\nAirports - with paved runways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n37\n&lt;br&gt;\"over 3,047 m:\"\n2\n&lt;br&gt;\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n5\n&lt;br&gt;\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n23\n&lt;br&gt;\"under 914 m:\"\n3 (2004 est.)\nAirports - with unpaved runways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n13\n&lt;br&gt;\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n5\n&lt;br&gt;\"under 914 m:\"\n8 (2004 est.)\nHeliports\n1 (2003 est.)"}
{"id": "10745", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10745", "title": "French Polynesia/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "10746", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10746", "title": "French Polynesia/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "10747", "revid": "50667825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10747", "title": "French Southern and Antarctic Lands", "text": "Overseas territory of France\nThe French Southern and Antarctic Lands (, TAAF) is an overseas territory ( or ) of France.\nIt consists of:\nThe territory is sometimes referred to as the French Southern Lands () or the French Southern Territories, usually to emphasize non-recognition of French sovereignty over Ad\u00e9lie Land as part of the Antarctic Treaty System.\nThe entire territory has no known permanently settled inhabitants. Approximately 150 (in the winter) to 310 (in the summer) people are usually present in the French Southern and Antarctic Lands at any time, but they are mainly made up of military personnel, officials, scientific researchers and support staff.\nOn 5 July 2019, the Crozet Islands, the Kerguelen Islands, and the Saint Paul and Amsterdam Islands were inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site as the \"French Austral Lands and Seas\" because of their pristine wilderness, biodiversity, and enormous bird colonies.\nAlthough the region's capital is based in R\u00e9union, this island is a member of the overseas departments and regions of France, and should not be confused with the overseas territories.\nHistory.\nThe French Southern and Antarctic Lands are an overseas territory of France that consist of the following:\nThe islands became known in the 16th century, when the Spanish discovered Amsterdam Island on 18 March 1522, which was later claimed and named by the Dutch. Saint Paul Island was discovered in 1559 by the Portuguese. The Crozet islands were discovered on 24 January 1772 by French explorer Marc-Joseph Marion du Fresne during an expedition. Adelie Land was the last to be discovered, in 1840 by the French during an expedition led by Jules Dumont d'Urville, who would later have a research station on the island named after him.\nThe entire territory has no known permanently settled inhabitants. It is mainly visited by military personnel, officials, scientific researchers, and support staff. In 2019, the Crozet Islands, Kerguelen Islands, and Saint Paul and Amsterdam Islands were inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site due to their pristine wilderness, biodiversity, and enormous bird colonies.\nOn 6 August 1955, French law reorganized the administration of the islands into a new overseas territory administered by France itself, changing the previous arrangement in which the territory was attached to Madagascar (then a French colony).\nThe Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean are partially claimed by the Comoros, Madagascar and Mauritius. The Malagasy and Mauritian claims, however, are significantly later than their access to independence. However, the agreement reached in October 2024 on the surrender to Mauritius of the Chagos Islands by Great Britain, in the heart of the Indian Ocean, notably home to the American base of Diego Garcia, has relaunched the debate in Madagascar.\nAdministration.\nThe French Southern and Antarctic Lands have formed a (an overseas territory) of France since 1955. Formerly, they were administered from Paris by an assisted by a secretary-general; since December 2004, however, their administrator has been a \"pr\u00e9fet\", currently Florence Jeanblanc-Risler, with headquarters in Saint Pierre on R\u00e9union Island.\nThe TAAF administration, the French Polar Institute Paul-\u00c9mile Victor (IPEV) and the French Navy jointly operate the icebreaker \"Astrolabe\" which is based out of Reunion. The vessel is used both to bring personnel and supplies to the Dumont d'Urville Station and for research and patrol duties. The French armed forces also maintain small troop contingents on some of the Scattered Islands in order to protect the French territorial claim.\nThe territory is divided into five districts:\nEach district is headed by a district chief, who has powers similar to those of a French mayor (including recording births and deaths and being an officer of judicial police).\nBecause there is no permanent population, there is no elected assembly, nor does the territory send representatives to the national parliament.\nGeography.\nThe territory includes the Crozet Islands, the Kerguelen Islands, and the Saint Paul and Amsterdam Islands in the southern Indian Ocean near 43\u00b0S, 67\u00b0E, along with Ad\u00e9lie Land, the sector of Antarctica claimed by France. Ad\u00e9lie Land, named by the French explorer Jules Dumont d\u2019Urville after his wife, covers about 432,000\u00a0km2 (167,000 sq mi). The islands, totaling 7,781\u00a0km2 (3,004 sq mi), have no indigenous inhabitants, although in 1997 there were approximately 100 researchers whose numbers varied from winter (July) to summer (January).\nAmsterdam Island and Saint Paul Island are both extinct volcanoes and have been delineated as the Amsterdam and Saint-Paul Islands temperate grasslands ecoregion. The highest point in the territory is Mont Ross on Kerguelen Island, standing at 1,850\u00a0m (6,070\u00a0ft). Notably, there are very few airstrips on the islands, existing only on islands with weather stations. The 1,232\u00a0km (766\u00a0mi) of coastline lacks ports or harbors, offering only offshore anchorages.\nThe islands in the Indian Ocean receive supplies via the special ship Marion Dufresne, which sails out of Le Port in R\u00e9union Island. Terre Ad\u00e9lie, the Antarctic sector claimed by France, is supplied by L\u2019Astrolabe, which sails out of Hobart in Tasmania.\nRegarding maritime activity, the territory maintains a merchant marine fleet totaling (as of 1999) 2,892,911 GRT/5,165,713 tonnes deadweight (DWT). This fleet includes seven bulk carriers, five cargo ships, ten chemical tankers, nine container ships, six liquefied gas carriers, 24 petroleum tankers, one refrigerated cargo ship, and ten roll-on/roll-off (RORO) carriers. Notably, this fleet operates under the French register, allowing French-owned ships to benefit from more liberal taxation and manning regulations than those permissible under the main French register. However, this register is expected to be replaced by the International French Register (Registre International Fran\u00e7ais, RIF) in the future.\nSovereignty dispute.\nMauritius, Madagascar, and the Comoros dispute France's sovereignty over these islands. Mauritius claims Tromelin Island and states that the island, discovered by France in 1722, was not ceded by the Treaty of Paris in 1814. Madagascar claims sovereignty over the Glorioso Islands (including Banc du Geyser), though the island group was never a part of the Malagasy Protectorate, having been a part of the Colony of Mayotte and dependencies, then a part of the French Comoros that had become a separately administered colony from Madagascar in 1946. The Comoros also claims the Glorioso Islands (including Banc du Geyser), as a part of the disputed French region of Mayotte. Furthermore, Madagascar has also claimed Bassas da India, Europa Island, and Juan de Nova Island since 1972, and a 1979 United Nations resolution (without binding force) demanded the cession of these islands to Madagascar. Seychelles claimed a part of the Scattered Islands too before the signing of the France\u2013Seychelles Maritime Boundary Agreement. A negotiation session between France and Madagascar took place in November 2020. In April 2025, France and Madagascar announced that they would meet in June 2025 to find a peaceful solution to the dispute. President Emmanuel Macron favors a form of co-management with Madagascar, rather than restitution. On June 20, 2025, Malagasy Foreign Minister Rasata Rafaravavitafika chaired a meeting of the scientific committee devoted to Madagascar's claim to the Scattered Islands. The objective of this meeting was to develop arguments for preserving Madagascar's sovereignty over the Scattered Islands, while moving forward in discussions with France. On June 24, 2025, the Malagasy platform \"Sehatry ny Raiamandreny\" (Sera) affirmed the indefatigability of Madagascar's claim to the territories of the Scattered Islands. The second commission, between France and Madagascar, will meet on June 30, 2025, for bilateral discussions on congestion, or the restitution of the Scattered Islands to Madagascar. On June 26, 2025, France published the lists of negotiators at the meeting of June 30, 2025, between Madagascar and France.\nFlora and fauna.\nDue to their isolation, the French islands in the southern Indian Ocean comprise one of the last remaining large wilderness areas on Earth. Furthermore, the islands are positioned along the Antarctic Convergence, where upwelling creates nutrient-rich waters. As a result, birds and marine mammals gather on the islands in great abundance. More than 50 million birds of 47 species breed on the islands, including more than half the breeding population of 16 different species. The largest populations of king penguins and the endangered Indian yellow-nosed albatross on Earth are found on the Crozet Islands and Amsterdam Island, respectively. Other threatened bird species with important populations on the islands include Eaton's pintail, MacGillivray's prion, and the Amsterdam albatross, which is one of four bird species endemic to the island group. The French Southern Lands also hold the second largest population of southern elephant seals on Earth, numbering roughly 200,000, and the third largest population of the Antarctic fur seal.\nBecause of their isolation and subpolar location, the French Southern Lands are relatively depauperate of vegetation, with both Saint-Paul and Crozet having no native tree or shrub species. However, eight of the 36 higher plant species are endemic. Some species of endemic invertebrates have also been recorded on the islands, including moths and flies which have lost their wings in the absence of predators.\nEconomy.\nThe territory's natural resources are limited to fish and crustaceans. Economic activity is limited to servicing meteorological and geophysical research stations and French and other fishing fleets.\nThe main fish resources are Patagonian toothfish and spiny lobster. Both are poached by foreign fleets; because of this, the French Navy, and occasionally other services, patrol the zone and arrest poaching vessels. Such arrests can result in heavy fines or the seizure of the ship.\nFrance previously sold licenses to foreign fisheries to fish the Patagonian toothfish; because of overfishing, it is now restricted to a small number of fisheries from R\u00e9union Island.\nThe territory takes in revenues of about \u20ac16 million a year.\nLocations and scientific stations.\nWhile the territory lacks a permanent civilian population, there are several inhabited research stations. \"\u00cele Amsterdam\" has a meteorological station. \"\u00celes Crozet\" contains the Alfred Faure research station with a population of about 20-30 people. One of the most populous research stations in the \"\u00celes Kerguelen\", Port-aux-Francais, contains 50-100 researchers. The \"\u00celes \u00c9parses\" contains a French military garrison and is a spot for meteorology. The Dumont d\u2019Urville station is a vital area for studying wildlife, the atmosphere and the ice caps.\nScattered Islands.\nThere are no permanent settlements on the islands, however the French Armed Forces maintain small troop contingents on some of the islands. There are also weather stations on all the islands apart from Bassas da India.\nCodes.\nThe French Southern Territories (i.e. the TAAF excluding Ad\u00e9lie Land) have been given the following country codes: FS (FIPS) and (ISO 3166-1 alpha-2).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10761", "revid": "32159694", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10761", "title": "History of French Guiana", "text": "The history of French Guiana dates back to the period prior to European colonization. Prior to the arrival of the first Europeans, there was no written history in the territory. It was originally inhabited by a number of Native American peoples, among them the Kalina (Caribs), Arawak, Galibi, Palikur, Teko, Wayampi (also known as Oyampi), and Wayana. The first Europeans arrived in the expeditions of Christopher Columbus, shortly before 1500.\nBeginnings of European involvement.\nRumours online proclaim that in 1498, French Guiana was visited by Europeans when Christopher Columbus sailed to the Guiaiean coast, which he named the \"Land of Pariahs\". Columbus had actually sailed to the coast of Venezuela from Trinidad, and he named the coastline \"Ysla Sancta\", as from his view the far away coast appeared to be an island. The term \"Land of Pariahs\" comes from the Gulf of Paria, the water that the lands Columbus had discovered were facing.\nIn 1608, the Grand Duchy of Tuscany sent an expedition to the area in order to create an Italian colony for the commerce of Amazonian products to Renaissance Italy, but the sudden death of Ferdinando I de' Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany, stopped it. In 1624, the French attempted to settle in the area but were forced to abandon it in the face of hostility from the Portuguese, who viewed it as a violation of the Treaty of Tordesillas. However, French settlers returned in 1630 and in 1643 managed to establish a settlement at Cayenne along with some small-scale plantations. This second attempt would again be abandoned following Native American attacks. In 1658, the Dutch West Indies Company seized French territory to establish the Dutch colony of Cayenne. The French returned once more in 1664, and founded a second settlement at Sinnamary (this was attacked by the Dutch in 1665).\nIn 1667, the English seized the area. Following the Treaty of Breda on 31 July 1667, the area was given back to France. The Dutch briefly occupied it for a period in 1676.\nConsolidation of French rule.\nAfter the Treaty of Paris in 1763, which deprived France of almost all her possessions in the Americas other than Guiana and a few islands, Louis XV sent thousands of settlers to Guiana who were lured there with stories of plentiful gold and easy fortunes to be made. Instead they found a land filled with hostile natives and tropical diseases. One and a half years later only a few hundred survived. These fled to three small islands which could be seen off shore and named them the Iles de Salut (or \"Islands of Salvation\"). The largest was called Royal Island, another St. Joseph (after the patron saint of the expedition), and the smallest of the islands, surrounded by strong currents, \u00cele du Diable (the infamous \"Devil's Island\"). When the survivors of this ill-fated expedition returned home, the terrible stories they told of the colony left a lasting impression in France.\nIn 1776, Pierre-Victor Malouet was appointed to the Colony, who brought in Jean Samuel Guisan to establish agriculture in the colony. The relatively good period ended in 1792 during the French Revolution, when the first prison for priests and political enemies opened in Sinnamary which set a precedent.\nDuring the French Revolution, the National Convention voted to abolish the French slave trade and slavery in France's overseas colonies in February 1794, months after enslaved Haitians had started a slave rebellion in the colony of Saint-Domingue. However, the 1794 decree was only implemented in Saint-Domingue, Guadeloupe, and French Guiana, while the colonies of Senegal, Mauritius, R\u00e9union and Martinique, and French India resisted the imposition of these laws.\nIn 1794, after the execution of Maximilien Robespierre, 193 of his followers were sent to French Guiana. In 1797, the republican general Pichegru and many deputies and journalists were also sent to the colony. When they arrived, they found that only 54 of the 193 deport\u00e9es sent out three years earlier were left; 11 had escaped and the rest had died of tropical fevers and other diseases. Pichegru managed to escape to the United States and then returned to France where he was eventually executed for plotting against Napoleon.\nLater on, slaves were brought out from Africa, and plantations were established along the more disease-free rivers. Exports of sugar, hardwood, Cayenne pepper, and other spices brought a certain prosperity to the colony for the first time. Cayenne, the capital, was surrounded by plantations, some of which had several thousand slaves.\n1800s and the Penal Era.\nIn 1809, an Anglo-Portuguese naval squadron took French Guiana (ousting governor Victor Hugues) and gave it to the Portuguese in Brazil. However, with the signing of the Treaty of Paris in 1814, the region was handed back to the French, though a Portuguese presence remained until 1817.\nIn 1848, France abolished slavery and the ex-slaves fled into the rainforest, setting up communities similar to the ones they had come from in Africa. Subsequently, called Maroons, they formed a sort of buffer zone between the Europeans (who settled along the coast and main rivers) and the unconquered (and often hostile) Native American tribes of the inland regions. Deprived of slave labor the plantations were soon taken over by the jungle, and the planters ruined.\nIn 1850, several shiploads of Indians, Malays, and Chinese were brought out to work the plantations but, instead, they set up shops in Cayenne and other settlements.\nIn 1852, the first shiploads of chained convicts arrived from France. In 1885, to get rid of habitual criminals and to increase the number of colonists, the French Parliament passed a law that anyone, male or female, who had more than three sentences for theft of more than three months each, would be sent to French Guiana as a \"rel\u00e9gu\u00e9\". This \" rel\u00e9gu\u00e9s\" was to be kept in prison there for six months but then freed to become settlers in the colony. However, this experiment failed dismally. The ex-prisoners, unable to make a living off the land, found themselves forced to revert to crime or to eke out a hand-to-mouth existence until they died. In fact, transportation to French Guiana as a \"rel\u00e9gu\u00e9\" amounted to a life sentence, and usually, a short life sentence, as most of the \"rel\u00e9gu\u00e9s\" died very quickly from disease and malnutrition.\nThe prisoners would arrive at St Laurent du Maroni before being transported to various camps throughout the country. The Iles du Salut was used to house political prisoners and for solitary confinement. The islands became notorious for the brutality of life there, centering on the notorious Devil's Island. Famous figures sent to the islands included Alfred Dreyfus (in 1895) and Henri Charri\u00e8re (in the 1930s). Charri\u00e8re managed to escape and later wrote a best-selling book called \"Papillon\".\nIn 1853, gold was discovered in the interior, precipitating border disputes with Brazil and Surinam (these were later settled in 1891, 1899, and 1915, although a small region of the border with Suriname remains in dispute). The Republic of Independent Guyana, in French \"La R\u00e9publique de la Guyane ind\u00e9pendante\" and commonly referred to by the name of the capital \"Counani\", was created in the area which was disputed by France (as part of French Guiana) and Brazil in the late 19th century.\n20th century.\nThe territory of Inini, consisting of most of the interior of French Guiana, was created in 1930. It was abolished in 1946.\nDuring World War II the local government declared its allegiance to the Vichy government, despite widespread support for Charles de Gaulle. This government was removed on 22 March 1943.\nFrench Guiana became an overseas \"d\u00e9partement\" of France on 19 March 1946.\nThe infamous penal colonies, including Devil's Island, were gradually phased out and then formally closed in 1951. At first, only those freed prisoners who could raise the fare for their return passage to France were able to go home, so French Guiana was haunted after the official closing of the prisons by numerous freed convicts leading an aimless existence in the colony.\nVisitors to the site in December 1954 reported being deeply shocked by the conditions and the constant screams from the cell block still in use for convicts who had gone insane and which had only tiny ventilation slots at the tops of the walls under the roof. Food was pushed in and bodies removed once a day.\nIn 1961, Brazilian president J\u00e2nio Quadros planned the annexation of French Guiana, but resigned, likely in a failed move to gain more political power, before he could execute the operation.\nIn 1964, Kourou was chosen to be the launch site for rockets, largely due to its favourable location near the equator. The Guiana Space Centre was built and became operational in 1968. This has provided some local employment and the mainly foreign technicians, and hundreds of troops stationed in the region to prevent sabotage, bring a little income to the local economy.\nThe 1970s saw the settlement of Hmong refugees from Laos in the county, primarily to the towns of Javouhey and Cacao. The Green Plan (\"Le Plan Vert\") of 1976 aimed to improve production, though it had only limited success. A movement for increased autonomy from France gained momentum in the 70s and 80s, along with the increasing success of the Parti Socialiste Guyanais.\nProtests by those calling for more autonomy from France have become increasingly vocal. Protests in 1996, 1997, and 2000 all ended in violence. While many Guianese wish to see more autonomy, support for complete independence is low.\n21st century.\nIn a 2010 referendum, French Guianans voted against autonomy.\nOn 20 March 2017, French Guianans began going on strike and demonstrating for more resources and infrastructure. 28 March 2017 saw the largest demonstration ever held in French Guiana.\nThe first woman to be elected to the Senate was Marie-Laure Phin\u00e9ra-Horth in 2020.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10762", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10762", "title": "Geography of French Guiana", "text": " \nFrench Guiana is an overseas region of France, located on the northern coast of South America between Suriname and Brazil. The country is part of Caribbean South America and borders the North Atlantic Ocean. It has low-lying plains with small mountains to the south. Its climate is split between tropical rainforest and tropical monsoon. \nFrench Guiana is situated on the northeast coast of South America between 2\u00b0 and 5\u00b0 latitude north and covers an area of 90,999\u00a0km2 (35,135 square miles). It is separated from Surinam (Dutch Guiana) by the Maroni River and two of its tributaries, the Aoua and Itany, in the west, and from Brazil by the Tumuc Humac Mountains in the south and the Oyapock River in the east. Its 320-km (200-mile) Atlantic coastline is bordered by several rocky islands\u00a0\u2013 the \u00celes du Salut (Devil's Island, Royale and Saint-Joseph), the P\u00e8re and M\u00e8re Islands, Malingre Island and R\u00e9mire Island, and the two Conn\u00e9tables\u2014which are all part of French Guiana.\nStatistics.\nArea.\nLand: 83,534\u00a0km2\nLand boundaries.\nTotal: 1,183\u00a0km&lt;br&gt;\nBorder countries: Brazil 673\u00a0km, Suriname 510\u00a0km (disputed)&lt;br&gt;\nCoastline: 378\u00a0km\nMaritime claims.\nExclusive economic zone: \nterritorial sea: .\nLand cover.\nPrimary Forest: 95%\nNatural resources.\nBauxite, timber, gold (widely scattered), cinnabar, kaolin, fish, shrimp, rice, bananas.\nClimate.\nFrench Guiana's climate is tropical and hot with a K\u00f6ppen climate classification of tropical rainforest (A\"f\") throughout most of the country. Heavy showers, severe thunderstorms, and floodings are frequent, as is intense heat and humidity.\nAlthough French Guiana is very close to the equator, the trade winds which blow almost the year round refresh the coastal region and prevent the formation of great tropical storms. The annual mean temperature on the coast is . There are two principal seasons: \"summer\" from July to December and the \"rainy season\" the rest of the year, broken only by a Short \"March Summer.\"\nTerrain.\nFrench Guiana extends almost 400\u00a0km (250 miles) into the continent and is divided into two natural zones: a small, low, swampy coastal area called the \"Terres Basses,\" varying from 16 to 48\u00a0km in width, and a granite peneplain called the \"Terres Hautes,\" worn down by erosion into steps forming a series of low steep hills. Almost the entire country is covered by rain forest and its many large rivers and streams, although their courses are broken by rapids, constitute the only natural means of penetration into the interior. The main rivers, flowing in a general south\u2013north direction, are the Maroni, the Mana, the Iracoubo, the Sinnamary, the Kourou, the Mahury, the Approuague and the Oyapock.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain."}
{"id": "10763", "revid": "28991092", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10763", "title": "Demographics of French Guiana", "text": " \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Demographics of French Guiana are characterized by a young population with 44% below the age of 20 in 2017. The total population stood at 268,700 as of 1 January 2017. The demographic profile is a reflection of the territory's high fertility rates. Regarding nationality, as of 2010, 64.5% of the population had French nationality, while 35.5% were of foreign nationality with significant communities from Suriname, Haiti, and Brazil among others.\nPopulation.\nAccording to INSEE the population of French Guiana was 268,700 as of 1 January 2017. The population is very young: 44% are below the age of 20, while only 1.7% are 75 years or older. The age distribution is a reflection of the high fertility rates of French Guiana.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.01.2010) (Provisional) :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 01.I.2015): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2021): \nVital statistics.\nThe total fertility rate in French Guiana has remained high and is today considerably higher than in metropolitan France, and also higher than the average of the French overseas departments. It is largely responsible for the high population growth of French Guiana.\nInfant mortality rate.\nThe infant mortality in French Guiana is higher than in metropolitan France:\nLife expectancy.\nAt birth, life expectancy is 76.2 years for male children, and 82.8 for female (figures for 2011).\nEthnic groups.\nEstimates of the percentages of French Guiana ethnic composition vary, a situation compounded by the large proportion of immigrants.\nCreoles, or Mulattoes (people of mixed African and French ancestry), are the largest ethnic group, though estimates vary as to the exact percentage, depending upon whether the large Haitian community is included as well. Generally the Creole population is judged to be about 60 to 70% of the total population if Haitians (comprising roughly one-third of Creoles) are included, and 30 to 50% without.\nRoughly 41,000 people or 14% of the population of French Guiana is of European ancestry. The vast majority of these are of French heritage, though there are also people of Dutch, British, Spanish and Portuguese ancestry.\nThe main Asian communities are the Chinese (about 3-4%, primarily from Zhejiang province in mainland China and Hong Kong) and Hmong from Laos (1-2%). There are also smaller groups from various Caribbean islands, mainly Saint Lucia as well as Dominica. Other Asian groups include East Indians, Lebanese and Vietnamese.\nThe main groups living in the interior are the Maroons (formerly called \"Bush Negroes\") who are from African descent, and Amerindians. The Maroons, descendants of escaped African slaves, live primarily along the Maroni River. The main Maroon groups are the Saramaka, Ndyuka (both of whom also live in Suriname), and Boni (Aluku). The Maroons are the fastest growing ethnic group, and as of 2018 constitute about one-third of the total population with an estimated population of close to 100,000 people.\nThe main Amerindian groups (estimated population about 10,000) are the Aparai, Kalina, Lokono, Palikur, Teko, Wayampi and Wayana. The estimated population for the beginning of the 17th century was 30,000 people. Until the middle of the 20th century, there was a sharp decline in population to almost 1,200 people in 1961 which was mainly caused by European diseases. Improved health care managed to turn the tide.\nNationality.\nOn January 1, 2010, 64.5% of the population had French nationality, while 35.5% had a foreign nationality. Of these, Surinamese (13.8% of the total population), Haitians (8.8%) and Brazilians (8.7%) were the largest groups. Smaller groups included people with nationality of Guyana (1.7%), Colombia (1.0%), China (0.5%), the Dominican Republic (0.4%) and Peru (0.2%).\nLanguages.\nFrench and French Guianese Creole are the most widely spoken languages. There are also several native languages, including Arawakan (Arawak and Palik\u00far), Cariban (Carib and Wayana), and Tupi-Guarani (Emerillon and Wayampi) languages. Other languages spoken include Hakka Chinese and Javanese.\nThe official language, like for all overseas departments and territories of France, is French.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe dominant religion of French Guiana is Catholicism; some of the Maroons and Amerindian people maintain their own religions, however large tribes like the Kalina, Ndyuka have been Christianized.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10764", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10764", "title": "Politics of French Guiana", "text": " \nFrench Guiana is not a separate territory but is both an overseas r\u00e9gion and overseas department of France, with the same government institutions as areas on the French mainland. The administrative center is Cayenne.\nThe President of France appoints a prefect (resident at the prefecture building in Cayenne) as his representative to head the local government of French Guiana. The Assembly of French Guiana replaced the General Council and the Regional Council in 2016.\nAs of 2020 the prefect is Thierry Queffelec. The President of the Guianese Assembly since 2021 is Gabriel Serville.\nKey issues and players.\nPolitics in French Guiana are dominated by the Guianese Socialist Party, which has a close association with the Socialist Party in mainland France.\nA chronic issue affecting French Guiana is the influx of illegal immigrants and clandestine gold prospectors from Brazil and Suriname. The border between the department and Suriname is formed by the Maroni River, which flows through rain forest and is difficult for the Gendarmerie and the French Foreign Legion to patrol.\nThere have been several phases launched by the French government to combat illegal gold mining in French Guiana, beginning with Operation Anaconda beginning in 2003, followed by Operation Harpie in 2008, 2009 and Operation Harpie Reinforce in 2010. Colonel Fran\u00e7ois M\u00fcller, the commander of French Guiana's gendarme, believes these operations have been successful. However, after each operation ends, Brazilian miners, known as garimpeiros, return. Soon after Operation Harpie Reinforce began, an altercation took place between French authorities and Brazilian miners. On March 12, 2010, a team of French soldiers and border police were attacked while returning from a successful operation, during which \"the soldiers had arrested 15 miners, confiscated three boats, and seized 617 grams of gold... currently worth about $22,317\". Garimpeiros returned to retrieve the lost loot and colleagues. \"The soldiers fired warning shots and rubber \"flash balls\" but the miners managed to retake one of their boats and about 500\u00a0grammes of gold. \"The violent reaction by the garimpeiros can be explained by the exceptional take of 617 grammes of gold, about 20 percent of the quantity seized in 2009 during the battle against illegal mining\", said Phillipe Duporge, the director of French Guiana's border police, at a press conference the next day.\"\nGeneral Council of French Guiana.\nThe General Council of French Guiana is the deliberative executive assembly and is composed of 19 members who are elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms. It is led by the President of the General Council of French Guiana.\nRegional Council of Guiana.\nThe Regional Council of French Guiana is the elected assembly or regional council and is composed of 31 members who are elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms.\nParliamentary representation.\nGuiana elects two senators to the French Senate. The first woman to be elected to the Senate was Marie-Laure Phin\u00e9ra-Horth in 2020.\nCurrent deputies.\nGuiana also elects two deputies to the French National Assembly. The last elections were held in June 2022. The Decolonization and Social Emancipation Movement has one deputy, Jean-Victor Castor, and La France Insoumise has one deputy, Davy Rimane.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10765", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10765", "title": "Economy of French Guiana", "text": "The economy of French Guiana is tied closely to that of mainland France through subsidies and imports. Besides the French space center at Kourou, fishing and forestry are the most important economic activities in French Guiana. The large reserves of tropical hardwoods, not fully exploited, support an expanding sawmill industry which provides saw logs for export. Cultivation of crops is limited to the coastal area, where the population is largely concentrated; rice and manioc are the major crops. French Guiana is heavily dependent on imports of food and energy. Unemployment is a serious problem, particularly among younger workers.\nBudget:\n\"revenues:\"\n$135,5\u00a0million\n\"expenditures:\"\n$135,5\u00a0million, including capital expenditures of $105\u00a0million (1996)\nElectricity - production:\n465,2 GWh (2003)\nElectricity - production by source:\n\"fossil fuel:\"\n100%\n\"hydro:\"\n0%\n\"nuclear:\"\n0%\n\"other:\"\n0% (1998)\nElectricity - consumption:\n432,6 GWh (2003)\nElectricity - exports:\n0 kWh (2003)\nElectricity - imports:\n0 kWh (2003)\nA combined power plant with 55 MW solar, 3 MW hydrogen fuel cell, 20MW/38MWh battery and 16 MW hydrogen electrolyser with 88MWh storage began construction in 2021.\nAgriculture - products:\nrice, manioc (tapioca), sugar, cocoa, vegetables, bananas; cattle, pigs, poultry\nCurrency:\nEuro\nFiscal year:\ncalendar year\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The economic accounts of Guyana in 2006: first results\" (PDF). Retrieved 2008-01-14.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "10766", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10766", "title": "Telecommunications in French Guiana", "text": " \nThere are telecommunications in French Guiana.\nTelephones.\nIn 1923, there were 117 telephones in use, with 241 miles of wire. The number of telephones was approximately 6,800 by 1975, approximately 13,700 by 1982 and 18,100 by 1989. There were 47,000 telephone main lines in use in 1995, and 51,000 in 2001. There were 138,200 mobile cellular phones in 2002.\nTelephone system:\n&lt;br&gt;\"domestic:\"\nfair open wire and microwave radio relay system\n&lt;br&gt;\"international:\"\nsatellite earth station \u2013 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)\nTelegraphs.\nIn 1923, there were nine telegraph offices, with 205 miles of wire.\nRadio.\nRadio Cayenne began to broadcast on 9 June 1951, with regular broadcasts from January 1953. In 1998, radio stations were broadcast on AM 2, FM 14 (including 6 repeaters) and shortwave 6 (including 5 repeaters). There were 7,100 radio receivers by 1975. There were 104,000 radios in 1997.\nTelevision.\nThere were three television stations (plus eight low-power repeaters) in 1997. There were 3,000 television receivers by 1975. There were 30,000 televisions in 1997.\nInternet.\nThere number of internet users was 2,000 in 2000, and 3,200 in 2002. There were two internet service providers in 2000. \nThe top-level domain country code is .gf.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10767", "revid": "5229428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10767", "title": "Transport in French Guiana", "text": "Transport in French Guiana consists of transport by road, boat, bus, and airplane. There is a railway line within the Guiana Space Centre to transport spacecraft. The road network is mainly concentrated in the coastal region. The interior of Guiana is accessed by plane or boat. There is one main airport, however there are several smaller airstrips in the interior.\nHighways.\nAs of 2018, there are 440 kilometres of national roads, 408 kilometres of departmental road, and 1,311 kilometres of municipal roads. There is no motorway.\nFollowing a treaty between France and Brazil signed in July 2005, the Oyapock River Bridge over the Oyapock River was built and completed in 2011, becoming the first land crossing ever between French Guiana and the rest of the world (there is a ferry crossing to Albina, Suriname). The bridge was officially opened on 18 March 2017, however the border post introduction on the Brazilian caused additional delays. As of 2020, it possible to drive uninterrupted from Cayenne to Macap\u00e1, the capital of the state of Amap\u00e1 in Brazil.\nRailways.\nA short railway is used within the Guiana Space Centre (this short railway is for transporting spacecraft inside the base to the launch pad, not for passenger use). The railway is double tracked and used by unpowered rail cars (tanker cars, flatcars and launch table transporter platforms fitted with bogies) and are towed by rubber wheeled vehicles with railway wheels or bogies to ride along the rail tracks (Road\u2013rail vehicles).\nFrom 1880s to sometime after 1926 a steam narrow gauge railway was used for gold mines in Saint-Elie and two other lines were partially built and never used.\nTwo prison railways were built in the 1890s. One line connected Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni to Saint-Jean-du-Maroni. Another line went to Charvein. The railway lines were abandoned after prisons closed and disappeared sometime after 1946.\nThere are no other railways in French Guiana and none have existed for revenue passenger service, and there are no connections to neighbouring countries. Some maps - including some on Wikipedia - depicting railway density give the impression of railways existing in French Guiana due to conflating the existing railways in the metropole with the lack of same in French Guiana, thus creating a statistical artifact.\nAirports.\nThe main international airport of French Guiana is Cayenne \u2013 F\u00e9lix Ebou\u00e9 Airport. The secondary international airport is the Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni Airport.\nIn October 2020, the Camopi Airport was upgraded for regular passenger transport.\nThere are six smaller restricted airports:\nPublic transport.\nThe CACL (Communaut\u00e9 d\u2019Agglom\u00e9ration du Centre Littoral) provides bus service for the urban area of Cayenne and its suburbs. As of 2021, there are six urban bus lines. School transport is also handled by CACL.\nSince early 2010, an agreement was established between the General Council, responsible for organizing transport between the towns, and Taxi Co. The new public service became known as TIG (Long Distance Transport of Guyana).\nAs of 2021, TIG provides nine bus lines to towns outside the urban area of Cayenne.\nHarbours.\nThe main harbour is Degrad des Cannes. The harbour was built in 1972, and handles all international cargo from and to French Guiana. In 2007, the port handled about 700,000 tonnes of cargo. The port also includes as a marina.\nOther harbours include Cayenne, Kourou, Larivot in Matoury, and Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10768", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10768", "title": "Military of French Guiana", "text": ""}
{"id": "10770", "revid": "50979000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10770", "title": "Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut", "text": "French film director (1932\u20131984)\nFran\u00e7ois Roland Truffaut ( , ; ; 6 February 1932 \u2013 21 October 1984) was a French filmmaker, actor, and critic. He is widely regarded as one of the founders of the French New Wave. He came under the tutelage of film critic Andre Bazin as a young man and was hired to write for Bazin's \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\", where he became a proponent of the \"auteur\" theory, which posits that a film's director is its true author. \"The 400 Blows\" (1959), starring Jean-Pierre L\u00e9aud as Truffaut's alter-ego Antoine Doinel, was a defining film of the New Wave. Truffaut supplied the story for another milestone of the movement, \"Breathless\" (1960), directed by his \"Cahiers\" colleague Jean-Luc Godard.\nHis other notable films include \"Shoot the Piano Player\" (1960), \"Jules and Jim\" (1962), \"The Soft Skin\" (1964), \"Two English Girls\" (1971) and \"The Last Metro\" (1980). Truffaut's \"Day for Night\" (1973) earned him the BAFTA Award for Best Film and the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. He played the doctor in \"The Wild Child\" (1970), the director of the film-within-the-film in \"Day For Night\" and the scientist in Steven Spielberg's \"Close Encounters of the Third Kind\" (1977). He starred in \"The Green Room\" (1978), based on Henry James's \"The Altar of the Dead\". He wrote \"Hitchcock/Truffaut\" (1966), a book-length interview with his hero Alfred Hitchcock which tied for second on \"Sight and Sound\"'s list of the greatest books on film. Truffaut paid homage to Hitchcock in \"The Bride Wore Black\" (1968), \"Mississippi Mermaid\" (1969) and his last film, \"Confidentially Yours\" (1983).\nHe was married from 1957 until 1964 to Madeleine Morgenstern, in 1968 became engaged to leading actress Claude Jade from three of his films, and lived together with Fanny Ardant, actress in his two last films, until his death. David Thomson writes that \"for many people who love film Truffaut will always seem like the most accessible and engaging crest of the New Wave.\"\nEarly life.\nTruffaut was born in Paris on 6 February 1932. His mother was Janine de Montferrand. His mother's future husband, Roland Truffaut, accepted him as an adopted son and gave him his surname. He was passed around to live with various nannies and his grandmother for a number of years. His grandmother instilled in him her love of books and music. He lived with her until her death, when Truffaut was eight years old. It was only after her death that he lived with his parents. Truffaut's biological father's identity is unknown, but a private detective agency in 1968 revealed that its inquiry into the matter led to a Roland Levy, a Jewish dentist from Bayonne. Truffaut's mother's family disputed the finding but Truffaut believed and embraced it.\nTruffaut often stayed with friends and tried to be out of the house as much as possible. He knew Robert Lachenay from childhood, and they were lifelong best friends. Lachenay was the inspiration for the character Ren\u00e9 Bigey in \"The 400 Blows\" and worked as an assistant on some of Truffaut's films. Cinema offered Truffaut the greatest escape from an unsatisfying home life. He was eight years old when he saw his first movie, Abel Gance's \"Paradis Perdu\" (\"Paradise Lost\", 1939), beginning his obsession. He frequently skipped school and sneaked into theaters because he lacked the money for admission. At age eleven, he read \u00c9mile Zola's \"Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Raquin\" (1868), which inspired him to become a novelist. After being expelled from several schools, at age 14 he decided to become self-taught. Two of his academic goals were to watch three movies a day and read three books a week.\n\"What switched me to films was the flood of American pictures into Paris after the Liberation\". Truffaut frequented Henri Langlois's Cin\u00e9math\u00e8que Fran\u00e7aise, where he was exposed to countless foreign films, becoming familiar with American cinema and directors such as John Ford, Howard Hawks and Nicholas Ray, as well as British director Alfred Hitchcock.\nCareer.\nAndr\u00e9 Bazin.\nAfter starting his own film club in 1948, Truffaut met Andr\u00e9 Bazin, who had a great effect on his professional and personal life. Bazin was a critic and the head of another film society at the time. He became a personal friend of Truffaut's and helped him out of various financial and criminal situations during his formative years.\nTruffaut joined the French Army in 1950, aged 18, but spent the next two years trying to escape. He was arrested for attempting to desert the army and incarcerated in military prison. Bazin used his political contacts to get Truffaut released and set him up with a job at his new film magazine, \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\".\n\"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\".\nOver the next few years, Truffaut became a critic (and later editor) at \"Cahiers\", where he became notorious for his brutal, unforgiving reviews. He was called \"The Gravedigger of French Cinema\" and was the only French critic not invited to the 1958 Cannes Film Festival. He supported Bazin in developing one of the most influential theories of cinema, the auteur theory.\nIn 1954, Truffaut wrote an article in \"Cahiers du cin\u00e9ma\", \"Une Certaine Tendance du Cin\u00e9ma Fran\u00e7ais\" (\"A Certain Trend of French Cinema\"), in which he attacked the state of French films, lambasting certain screenwriters and producers, and listing eight directors he considered incapable of devising the kinds of \"vile\" and \"grotesque\" characters and storylines he called characteristic of the mainstream French film industry: Jean Renoir, Robert Bresson, Jean Cocteau, Jacques Becker, Abel Gance, Max Ophuls, Jacques Tati and Roger Leenhardt. The article caused a storm of controversy and landed Truffaut an offer to write for the nationally circulated, more widely read cultural weekly \"Arts-Lettres-Spectacles\". Truffaut wrote more than 500 film articles for that publication over the next four years.\nTruffaut later devised the auteur theory, according to which the director was the \"author\" of his work and great directors such as Renoir or Hitchcock have distinct styles and themes that permeate their films. Although his theory was not widely accepted then, it gained some support in the 1960s from American critic Andrew Sarris. In 1966, Truffaut published his book-length interview with Hitchcock, \"Hitchcock/Truffaut\".\nShort films.\nAfter having been a critic, Truffaut decided to make films. He began with the short film \"Une Visite\" (1955) and followed it with \"Les Mistons\" (1957).\n\"The 400 Blows\".\nAfter seeing Orson Welles's \"Touch of Evil\" at the Expo 58, Truffaut made his directorial debut with \"The 400 Blows\" (1959), which received considerable critical and commercial acclaim. He won the Best Director award at the 1959 Cannes Film Festival. The film follows the character of Antoine Doinel through his perilous misadventures in school, an unhappy home life and later reform school. It is highly autobiographical. Both Truffaut and Doinel were only children of loveless marriages; they both committed petty crimes of theft and truancy from the military. Truffaut cast Jean-Pierre L\u00e9aud as Doinel. L\u00e9aud was seen as an ordinary boy of 14 who auditioned for the role after seeing a flyer, but interviews after the film's release (one is included on the Criterion DVD of the film) reveal L\u00e9aud's natural sophistication and an instinctive understanding of acting for the camera. L\u00e9aud and Truffaut collaborated on several films over the years. Their most noteworthy collaboration was the continuation of Doinel's story in a series of films called \"The Antoine Doinel Cycle\".\nThe primary focus of \"The 400 Blows\" is Doinel's life. The film follows him through his troubled adolescence. He is caught in between an unstable parental relationship and an isolated youth. From birth Truffaut was thrown into a troublesome situation. As he was born out of wedlock, his birth had to remain a secret because of the stigma of illegitimacy. He was registered as \"a child born to an unknown father\" in hospital records and looked after by a nurse for an extended period of time. His mother eventually married and her husband gave Fran\u00e7ois his surname, Truffaut.\n\"The 400 Blows\" marked the beginning of the French New Wave movement, led by such directors as Jean-Luc Godard, Claude Chabrol and Jacques Rivette. The New Wave dealt with a self-conscious rejection of traditional cinema structure, a topic on which Truffaut had been writing for years. Thomson writes that \"The 400 Blows\" \"securely tied the new films to Renoir, Vigo, and the French tradition of location shooting, flowing camera, and offhand lyricism.\" \"Time\" included it on its list of the one hundred greatest films since the magazine's founding, with Richard Schickel writing: \"Partly autobiographical, both realistic and gently experimental in manner, it tells the story of a mischievous boy flirting with full-scale delinquency. TIME thought the director 'impressively objective and mature.' It did not mention his uncanny ability to achieve cinematic elegance on a shoestring. Or, more important, his ability to enlist sympathy for his protagonist without unduly sentimentalizing him.\" Truffaut provided the premise for another landmark New Wave film, Godard's \"Breathless\" (1960).\n\"Shoot the Piano Player\".\nFollowing the success of \"The 400 Blows\", Truffaut featured disjunctive editing and seemingly random voiceovers in his next film, \"Shoot the Piano Player\" (1960), starring Charles Aznavour. Truffaut has said that in the middle of filming, he realized that he hated gangsters. But since gangsters were a main part of the story, he toned up the comical aspect of the characters and made the movie more to his liking.\nWhile \"Shoot the Piano Player\" was much appreciated by critics, it performed poorly at the box office. Truffaut never again experimented as heavily. Referring to the film's digressions, Thomson calls it \"the kind of film Laurence Sterne might have made\".\n\"Jules and Jim\" and \"The Soft Skin\".\nTruffaut directed \"Jules and Jim\" (1962), the story of a m\u00e9nage \u00e0 trois starring Oskar Werner, Henri Serre and Jeanne Moreau. Pauline Kael defended the film against charges of immorality: \"\"Jules and Jim\" is not only one of the most beautiful films ever made, and the greatest motion picture of recent years, it is also, viewed as a work of art, exquisitely and impeccably \"moral\". Truffaut does not use the screen for messages or special pleading or to sell sex for money; he uses the film medium to express his love and knowledge of life as completely as he can.\"\nThomson writes that \"The speed of farce chasing pathos was very influential, not least on the writers of \"Bonnie and Clyde\". In \"Jules et Jim\", Truffaut formed his most fruitful collaboration, with the novelist Henri-Pierre Roch\u00e9, author of \"Les Deux Anglaises\" and of a situation dear to Truffaut\u2014the passionate triangle in which three people are trapped, all in love with all, all reluctant to hurt the others.\" In 1963, Truffaut was approached to direct \"Bonnie and Clyde\", with a treatment written by \"Esquire\" journalists David Newman and Robert Benton intended to introduce the French New Wave to Hollywood. Although he was interested enough to help in script development, Truffaut ultimately declined, but not before interesting Godard and American actor and would-be producer Warren Beatty, who proceeded with the film with director Arthur Penn.\nTruffaut's fourth film, \"The Soft Skin\" (1964), was not acclaimed on its release.\n\"Fahrenheit 451\".\nTruffaut's first non-French film was a 1966 adaptation of Ray Bradbury's classic science fiction novel \"Fahrenheit 451\", showcasing Truffaut's love of books. His only English-speaking film, made on location in England, was a great challenge for Truffaut, because he barely spoke English himself. Shot by cinematographer Nicolas Roeg, it was Truffaut's first film in color. The larger-scale production was difficult for Truffaut, as he had only worked only with small crews and budgets. The shoot was also strained by a conflict with Oskar Werner, who was unhappy with his character and stormed off set, leaving Truffaut to shoot scenes using a body double shot from behind. The film was a commercial failure, and Truffaut never worked outside France again. The film's cult standing has steadily grown, although some critics remain dubious of it as an adaptation. A 2014 consideration of the film by Charles Silver praises it.\nThrillers and \"Stolen Kisses\".\n\"Stolen Kisses\" (1968) was a continuation of the Antoine Doinel Cycle starring Claude Jade as Antoine's fianc\u00e9e and later wife Christine Darbon. During its filming Truffaut fell in love with Jade and was briefly engaged to her. It was a big hit on the international art circuit. A short time later, Jade made her Hollywood debut in Hitchcock's \"Topaz\".\nTruffaut worked on projects with varied subjects. \"The Bride Wore Black\" (1968), a brutal tale of revenge, is a stylish homage to the films of Hitchcock, once again starring Moreau. \"Mississippi Mermaid\" (1969), with Catherine Deneuve and Jean-Paul Belmondo, is an identity-bending romantic thriller. Both films are based on novels by Cornell Woolrich.\n\"The Wild Child\" (1970) included Truffaut's acting debut in the lead role of 18th-century physician Jean Marc Gaspard Itard, who treated the feral child Victor of Aveyron.\nDoinel marries Christine.\n\"Bed and Board\" (1970) was another Antoine Doinel film, also with Jade, now L\u00e9aud's on-screen-wife.\n\"Two English Girls\" (1971), a story of \"Proust and the Bront\u00eb sisters\" is the female reflection of the love story in \"Jules et Jim\". It is based on a story by Roch\u00e9, who wrote \"Jules and Jim\", about a man who falls equally in love with two sisters, and their love affair over a period of years.\n\"Such a Gorgeous Kid Like Me\" (1972) was a screwball comedy.\n\"Day for Night\".\n\"Day for Night\" won Truffaut an Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. It is probably his most reflective work, telling the story of a film crew trying to finish a film while dealing with the personal and professional problems that accompany making a movie. Truffaut plays the director of the film-within-the film, \"Meet Pamela\". \"Day For Night\" features scenes from his previous films. It is considered his best film since his early work. Thomson notes \"the pleasure with all cinema's tricks and the way it makes them clear to a lay audience.\" \"Time\" magazine placed it on its list of 100 Best Films of the Century, with Schickel writing: \"Truffaut perfectly captures the romance and hysteria, the guiding obsessions, the lunatic distractions and the desperate improvisations of a company shooting a film, which may not be as great as they delude themselves into thinking it is.\"\nIn 1975, Truffaut gained more notoriety with \"The Story of Ad\u00e8le H.\"; Isabelle Adjani in the title role earned a nomination for an Academy Award for Best Actress. \"Small Change\" (1976) was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film.\nFinal films.\n\"The Man Who Loved Women\" (1977), a romantic drama, was a minor hit.\nTruffaut appeared in Steven Spielberg's \"Close Encounters of the Third Kind\" (1977) as scientist Claude Lacombe. He also starred in his own \"The Green Room\" (1978), based on Henry James's \"The Altar of the Dead\". It was a box-office flop, so he made \"Love on the Run\" (1979) starring L\u00e9aud and Jade as the final movie of the Doinel Cycle.\nOne of Truffaut's final films gave him an international revival. \"The Last Metro\" (1980) garnered 12 C\u00e9sar Award nominations and 10 wins, including Best Director.\nTruffaut's last film was black and white, making it a bookend to his career: \"Confidentially Yours\" (1981), Truffaut's homage to Hitchcock. It touches on numerous Hitchcockian themes such as private guilt \"vis-\u00e0-vis\" public innocence, a woman investigating a murder, and anonymous locations.\nLegacy.\nMany filmmakers admire Truffaut, and homages to his work have appeared in films such as \"Almost Famous\", \"Face\" and \"The Diving Bell and the Butterfly\" and in Haruki Murakami's novel \"Kafka on the Shore\". In conversation with Michael Ondaatje, film editor Walter Murch mentions the influence Truffaut had on him as a young man, saying he was \"electrified\" by the freeze-frame at the end of \"The 400 Blows\", and that Godard's \"Breathless\" and Truffaut's \"Shoot the Piano Player\" reinforced the idea that he could make films. In the estimation of the historian Tony Judt, \"it was the incomparable Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut who would come to incarnate the style and impact of the New Wave...Truffaut was not only the main theorist behind the revolution in French cinema, he was also by far its most consistently successful practitioner\". Known as a lifelong cinephile, Truffaut once (according to the 1993 documentary film \"\") threw a hitchhiker out of his car after learning that he did not like films.\nRoger Ebert included \"The 400 Blows\" in his canon of Great Movies, writing of Truffaut: one of his most curious, haunting films is \"The Green Room\" (1978), based on the Henry James story \"The Altar of the Dead\", about a man and a woman who share a passion for remembering their dead loved ones. Jonathan Rosenbaum, who thinks \"The Green Room\" may be Truffaut's best film, told me he thinks of it as the director's homage to the auteur theory. That theory, created by Bazin and his disciples (Truffaut, Godard, Resnais, Chabrol, Rohmer, Malle), declared that the director was the true author of a film\u2014not the studio, the screenwriter, the star, the genre. If the figures in the green room stand for the great directors of the past, perhaps there is a shrine there now to Truffaut. One likes to think of the ghost of Antoine Doinel lighting a candle before it.\nCommentary on other filmmakers.\nIn his book \"The Film in My Life\" Truffat wrote \"I demand that a film express either the joy of making cinema or the agony of making cinema.\"\nTruffaut expressed his admiration for filmmakers such as Luis Bu\u00f1uel, Ingmar Bergman, Robert Bresson, Roberto Rossellini and Alfred Hitchcock. He wrote \"Hitchcock/Truffaut\", a book about Hitchcock, based on a lengthy series of interviews.\nOf Jean Renoir, he said: \"I think Renoir is the only filmmaker who's practically infallible, who has never made a mistake on film. And I think if he never made mistakes, it's because he always found solutions based on simplicity\u2014human solutions. He's one film director who never pretended. He never tried to have a style, and if you know his work\u2014which is very comprehensive, since he dealt with all sorts of subjects\u2014when you get stuck, especially as a young filmmaker, you can think of how Renoir would have handled the situation, and you generally find a solution\". Truffaut named his production company \"Les Films du Carrosse\" after Renoir's \"The Golden Coach\" (La Carrosse d'Or).\nTruffaut called German filmmaker Werner Herzog \"the most important film director alive.\"\nTruffaut and Jean-Luc Godard, his colleague from \"Les Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\", worked together closely during their start as film directors although they had different working methods. Tensions came to the surface after May 68: Godard wanted a more political, specifically Marxist cinema, Truffaut was critical of creating films for primarily political purposes. In 1973, Godard wrote Truffaut a lengthy and raucous private letter peppered with accusations and insinuations, several times stating that as a filmmaker \"you're a liar\" and that his latest film (\"Day for Night\") had been unsatisfying, lying and evasive: \"You're a liar, because the scene between you and Jacqueline Bisset last week at \"Francis\" [a Paris restaurant] isn't included in your movie, and one also can't help wondering why the director is the only guy who isn't sleeping around in \"Day for Night\"\" (Truffaut directed the film, wrote it and played the role of the director). Godard also implied that Truffaut had gone commercial and easy.\nTruffaut replied with an angry 20-page letter in which he accused Godard of being a radical-chic hypocrite, a man who believed everyone to be \"equal\" in theory only. \"The Ursula Andress of militancy\u2014like Brando\u2014a piece of shit on a pedestal.\" Godard later tried to reconcile with Truffaut, but they never spoke to or saw each other again. After Truffaut's death, Godard wrote the introduction to a generous selection of his correspondence, and included his own 1973 letter. He also offered a long tribute in his film \"Histoire(s) du cin\u00e9ma\".\nTruffaut was philosophically opposed to attempts to portray anti-war themes through cinema, famously stating that \"there is no such thing as an anti-war film\" due to the medium's inherent glorification of such subjects, no matter how they are portrayed.\nPersonal life.\nTruffaut was married to Madeleine Morgenstern from 1957 to 1965, and they had two daughters, Laura (born 1959) and Eva (born 1961). Madeleine was the daughter of Ignace Morgenstern, managing director of one of France's largest film distribution companies, Cocinor, and was largely responsible for securing funding for Truffaut's first films.\nIn 1968, Truffaut was engaged to actress Claude Jade (\"Stolen Kisses\", \"Bed and Board\", \"Love on the Run\"); he and Fanny Ardant (\"The Woman Next Door\", \"Confidentially Yours\") lived together from 1981 to 1984 and had a daughter, Jos\u00e9phine Truffaut (born 28 September 1983).\nUnusually for a Frenchman, Truffaut took no particular interest in food. He also had a \"fetishistic collection of Eiffel Towers\". \nTruffaut was an atheist, but had great respect for the Catholic Church and requested a Requiem Mass for his funeral.\nDeath.\nIn July 1983, following his first stroke and being diagnosed with a brain tumour, Truffaut rented France Gall's and Michel Berger's house outside Honfleur, Normandy. He was expected to attend his friend Milo\u0161 Forman's \"Amadeus\" premiere when he died on 21 October 1984, aged 52, at the American Hospital of Paris in Neuilly-sur-Seine in France.\nAt the time of his death, he was said to have numerous further films in preparation. He is buried in Montmartre Cemetery.\nAwards and nominations.\nAcademy Awards\nBAFTA Awards\nBerlin International Film Festival\nCannes Film Festival\nC\u00e9sar Awards\nMar del Plata International Film Festival\nVenice International Film Festival\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10772", "revid": "50916705", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10772", "title": "Fair use", "text": "Concept in United States copyright law\nFair use is a doctrine in United States law that permits limited use of copyrighted material without having to first acquire permission from the copyright holder. Fair use is one of the limitations to copyright intended to balance the interests of copyright holders with the public interest in the wider distribution and use of creative works by allowing as a defense to copyright infringement claims certain limited uses that might otherwise be considered infringement. The U.S. \"fair use doctrine\" is generally broader than the \"fair dealing\" rights known in most countries that inherited English Common Law. The fair use right is a general exception that applies to all different kinds of uses with all types of works. In the U.S., fair use right/exception is based on a flexible proportionality test that examines the purpose of the use, the nature of the copyrighted work, the amount used, and the impact on the market of the original work.\nThe doctrine of \"fair use\" originated as a judicially created common law during the 18th and 19th centuries as a way of preventing copyright law from being too rigidly applied and \"stifling the very creativity which [copyright] law is designed to foster.\" Though originally a common law doctrine, it was enshrined in statutory law when the U.S. Congress passed the Copyright Act of 1976. The U.S. Supreme Court has issued several major decisions clarifying and reaffirming the fair use doctrine since the 1980s, the most recent being in the 2023 decision \"Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, Inc. v. Goldsmith.\"\nHistory.\nThe 1710 Statute of Anne, an act of the Parliament of Great Britain, created copyright law to replace a system of private ordering enforced by the Stationers' Company. The Statute of Anne did not provide for legal unauthorized use of material protected by copyright. In \"Gyles v Wilcox\", the Court of Chancery established the doctrine of \"fair abridgement\", which permitted unauthorized abridgement of copyrighted works under certain circumstances. Over time, this doctrine evolved into the modern concepts of fair use and fair dealing. Fair use was a common-law (i.e. created by judges as a legal precedent) doctrine in the U.S. until it was incorporated into the Copyright Act of 1976, \u00a0https://.\nThe term \"fair use\" originated in the United States. Although related, the limitations and exceptions to copyright for teaching and library archiving in the U.S. are located in a different section of the statute. A similar-sounding principle, fair dealing, exists in some other common law jurisdictions but in fact it is more similar in principle to the enumerated exceptions found under civil law systems. Civil law jurisdictions have other limitations and exceptions to copyright.\nIn response to perceived over-expansion of copyrights, several electronic civil liberties and free expression organizations began in the 1990s to add fair use cases to their dockets and concerns. These include the Electronic Frontier Foundation (\"EFF\"), the American Civil Liberties Union, the National Coalition Against Censorship, the American Library Association, numerous clinical programs at law schools, and others. The \"Chilling Effects\" archive was established in 2002 as a coalition of several law school clinics and the EFF to document the use of cease and desist letters. In 2006 Stanford University began an initiative called the \"Fair Use Project\" (FUP) to help artists, particularly filmmakers, fight lawsuits brought against them by large corporations.\nU.S. fair use factors.\nExamples of fair use in United States copyright law include commentary, criticism, news reporting, research, and scholarship, as well as parody and search engines. Fair use provides for the legal, unlicensed citation or incorporation of copyrighted material in another author's work under a four-factor test.\nThe U.S. Supreme Court has traditionally characterized fair use as an affirmative defense, but in \"Lenz v. Universal Music Corp.\" (2015) (the \"dancing baby\" case), the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit concluded that fair use was not merely a defense to an infringement claim, but was an expressly authorized right, and an exception to the exclusive rights granted to the author of a creative work by copyright law: \"Fair use is therefore distinct from affirmative defenses where a use infringes a copyright, but there is no liability due to a valid excuse, e.g., misuse of a copyright.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0https://\nNotwithstanding the provisions of sections \u00a0https:// and \u00a0https://, the fair use of a copyrighted work, including such use by reproduction in copies or phonorecords or by any other means specified by that section, for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research, is not an infringement of copyright. In determining whether the use made of a work in any particular case is a fair use the factors to be considered shall include:\nThe fact that a work is unpublished shall not itself bar a finding of fair use if such finding is made upon consideration of all the above factors.\nThe four factors of analysis for fair use set forth above derive from the opinion of Joseph Story in \"Folsom v. Marsh\", in which the defendant had copied 353 pages from the plaintiff's 12-volume biography of George Washington in order to produce a separate two-volume work of his own. The court rejected the defendant's fair use defense with the following explanation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[A] reviewer may fairly cite largely from the original work, if his design be really and truly to use the passages for the purposes of fair and reasonable criticism. On the other hand, it is as clear, that if he thus cites the most important parts of the work, with a view, not to criticize, but to supersede the use of the original work, and substitute the review for it, such a use will be deemed in law a piracy ...\nIn short, we must often ... look to the nature and objects of the selections made, the quantity and value of the materials used, and the degree in which the use may prejudice the sale, or diminish the profits, or supersede the objects, of the original work.\nThe statutory fair use factors quoted above come from the Copyright Act of 1976, which is codified at \u00a0https://. They were intended by Congress to clarify rather than to replace, the prior judge-made law. As Judge Pierre N. Leval has written, the statute does not \"define or explain [fair use's] contours or objectives\". While it \"leav[es] open the possibility that other factors may bear on the question, the statute identifies none.\" That is, courts are entitled to consider other factors in addition to the four statutory factors.\n1. Purpose and character of the use.\nThe first factor is \"the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes\". To justify the use as fair, one must demonstrate how it either advances knowledge or the progress of the arts through the addition of something new.\nIn the 1841 copyright case \"Folsom v. Marsh\", Justice Joseph Story wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[A] reviewer may fairly cite largely from the original work, if his design be really and truly to use the passages for the purposes of fair and reasonable criticism. On the other hand, it is as clear, that if he thus cites the most important parts of the work, with a view, not to criticise, but to supersede the use of the original work, and substitute the review for it, such a use will be deemed in law a piracy.\nA key consideration in later fair use cases is the extent to which the use is \"transformative\". In the 1994 decision \"Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music Inc\", the U.S. Supreme Court held that when the purpose of the use is transformative, this makes the first factor more likely to favor fair use. Before the \"Campbell\" decision, federal Judge Pierre Leval argued that transformativeness is central to the fair use analysis in his 1990 article, Toward a Fair Use Standard. \"Blanch v. Koons\" is another example of a fair use case that focused on transformativeness. In 2006, Jeff Koons used a photograph taken by commercial photographer Andrea Blanch in a collage painting. Koons appropriated a central portion of an advertisement she had been commissioned to shoot for a magazine. Koons prevailed in part because his use was found transformative under the first fair use factor.\nThe \"Campbell\" case also addressed the subfactor mentioned in the quotation above, \"whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes\". In an earlier case, \"Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc.\", the Supreme Court had stated that \"every commercial use of copyrighted material is presumptively ... unfair.\" In \"Campbell\", the court clarified that this is not a \"hard evidentiary presumption\" and that even the tendency that commercial purpose will \"weigh against a finding of fair use ... will vary with the context.\" The \"Campbell\" court held that hip-hop group 2 Live Crew's parody of the song \"Oh, Pretty Woman\" was fair use, even though the parody was sold for profit. Thus, having a commercial purpose does not preclude a use from being found fair, even though it makes it less likely.\nLikewise, the noncommercial purpose of a use makes it more likely to be found a fair use, but it does not make it a fair use automatically. For instance, in \"L.A. Times v. Free Republic\", the court found that the noncommercial use of \"Los Angeles Times\" content by the Free Republic website was not fair use, since it allowed the public to obtain material at no cost that they would otherwise pay for. Richard Story similarly ruled in \"Code Revision Commission and State of Georgia v. Public.Resource.Org, Inc.\" that despite the fact that it is a non-profit and did not sell the work, the service profited from its unauthorized publication of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated because of \"the attention, recognition, and contributions\" it received in association with the work.\nAnother factor is whether the use fulfills any of the preamble purposes, also mentioned in the legislation above, as these have been interpreted as \"illustrative\" of transformative use.\nIn determining that Prince's appropriation art could constitute fair use and that many of his works were transformative fair uses of Cariou's photographs, the Second Circuit in \"Cariou v. Prince\", 714 F.3d 694 (2d. Cir. 2013) shed light on how transformative use is determined. \"What is critical is how the work in question appears to the reasonable observer, not simply what an artist might say about a particular piece or body of work.\" The district court's conclusion that Prince's work was not transformative is partly based on Prince's deposition testimony that he \"do[es]n't really have a message\", and that he was not \"trying to create anything with a new meaning or a new message\". However, the artist's intended message \"is not dispositive\". Instead, the focus of the transformative use inquiry is how the artworks will \"reasonably be perceived\".\nThe transformativeness inquiry is a deceptively simple test to determine whether a new work has a different purpose and character from an original work. However, courts have not been consistent in deciding whether something is transformative. For instance, in Seltzer v. Green Day, Inc., 725 F.3d 1170 (9th Cir. 2013), the court found that Green Day's use of Seltzer's copyrighted Scream Icon was transformative. The court held that Green Day's modifications to the original Scream Icon conveyed new information and aesthetics from the original piece.\nConversely, the Second Circuit came to the opposite conclusion in a similar situation in Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, Inc. v. Goldsmith, 11 F.4th 26 (2d. Cir. 2021). In that case, the Warhol Foundation sought a declaratory judgment that Warhol's use of one of Goldsmith's celebrity photographs was fair use. The court held that Warhol's use was not transformative because Warhol merely imposed his own style on Goldsmith's photograph and retained the photograph's essential elements.\n2. Nature of the copyrighted work.\nAlthough the Supreme Court has ruled that the availability of copyright protection should not depend on the artistic quality or merit of a work, fair use analyses consider certain aspects of the work to be relevant, such as whether it is fictional or non-fictional.\nTo prevent the private ownership of work that rightfully belongs in the public domain, facts and ideas are not protected by copyright\u2014only their particular expression or fixation merits such protection. On the other hand, the social usefulness of freely available information can weigh against the appropriateness of copyright for certain fixations. The Zapruder film of the assassination of President Kennedy, for example, was purchased and copyrighted by \"Time\" magazine. Yet its copyright was not upheld, in the name of the public interest, when \"Time\" tried to enjoin the reproduction of stills from the film in a history book on the subject in \"Time Inc v. Bernard Geis Associates\".\nIn the decisions of the Second Circuit in \"Salinger v. Random House\" and in \"New Era Publications Int'l v. Henry Holt &amp; Co\", the aspect of whether the copied work has been previously published was considered crucial, assuming the right of the original author to control the circumstances of the publication of his work or preference not to publish at all. However, Judge Pierre N. Leval views this importation of certain aspects of France's \"droit moral d'artiste\" (moral rights of the artist) into American copyright law as \"bizarre and contradictory\" because it sometimes grants greater protection to works that were created for private purposes that have little to do with the public goals of copyright law, than to those works that copyright was initially conceived to protect. This is not to claim that unpublished works, or, more specifically, works not intended for publication, do not deserve legal protection, but that any such protection should come from laws about privacy, rather than laws about copyright. The statutory fair use provision was amended in response to these concerns by adding a final sentence: \"The fact that a work is unpublished shall not itself bar a finding of fair use if such finding is made upon consideration of all the above factors.\"\n3. Amount and substantiality.\nThe third factor assesses the amount and substantiality of the copyrighted work that has been used. In general, the less that is used in relation to the whole, the more likely the use will be considered fair.\nUsing most or all of a work does not bar a finding of fair use. It simply makes the third factor less favorable to the defendant. For instance, in \"Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc.\" copying entire television programs for private viewing was upheld as fair use, at least when the copying is done for the purposes of time-shifting. In \"Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corporation\", the Ninth Circuit held that copying an entire photo to use as a thumbnail in online search results did not even weigh against fair use, \"if the secondary user only copies as much as is necessary for his or her intended use\".\nHowever, even the use of a small percentage of a work can make the third factor unfavorable to the defendant, because the \"substantiality\" of the portion used is considered in addition to the amount used. For instance, in \"Harper &amp; Row v. Nation Enterprises\", the U.S. Supreme Court held that a news article's quotation of fewer than 400 words from President Ford's 200,000-word memoir was sufficient to make the third fair use factor weigh against the defendants, because the portion taken was the \"heart of the work\". This use was ultimately found not to be fair.\n4. Effect upon work's value.\nThe fourth factor measures the effect that the allegedly infringing use has had on the copyright owner's ability to exploit his original work. The court not only investigates whether the defendant's specific use of the work has significantly harmed the copyright owner's market, but also whether such uses in general, if widespread, would harm the potential market of the original. The burden of proof here rests on the copyright owner, who must demonstrate the impact of the infringement on commercial use of the work.\nFor example, in \"Sony Corp v. Universal City Studios\", the copyright owner, Universal, failed to provide any empirical evidence that the use of Betamax had either reduced their viewership or negatively impacted their business. In \"Harper &amp; Row,\" the case regarding President Ford's memoirs, the Supreme Court labeled the fourth factor \"the single most important element of fair use\" and it has enjoyed some level of primacy in fair use analyses ever since. Yet the Supreme Court's more recent announcement in \"Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music Inc\" that \"all [four factors] are to be explored, and the results weighed together, in light of the purposes of copyright\" has helped modulate this emphasis in interpretation.\nIn evaluating the fourth factor, courts often consider two kinds of harm to the potential market for the original work.\nCourts recognize that certain kinds of market harm do not negate fair use, such as when a parody or negative review impairs the market of the original work. Copyright considerations may not shield a work against adverse criticism.\nAdditional factors.\nAs explained by Judge Leval, courts are permitted to include additional factors in their analysis.\nOne such factor is acknowledgement of the copyrighted source. Giving the name of the photographer or author may help, but it does not automatically make a use fair. While plagiarism and copyright infringement are related matters, they are not identical. Plagiarism (using someone's words, ideas, images, etc. without acknowledgment) is a matter of professional ethics, while copyright is a matter of law, and protects exact expression, \"not\" ideas. One can plagiarize even a work that is not protected by copyright, for example by passing off a line from Shakespeare as one's own. Conversely, attribution prevents accusations of plagiarism, but it does not prevent infringement of copyright. For example, reprinting a copyrighted book without permission, while citing the original author, would be copyright infringement but not plagiarism.\nProcedure and practice.\nThe U.S. Supreme Court described fair use as an affirmative defense in \"Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc.\" This means that in litigation on copyright infringement, the defendant bears the burden of raising and proving that the use was fair and not an infringement. Thus, fair use need not even be raised as a defense unless the plaintiff first shows (or the defendant concedes) a case of copyright infringement. If the work was not copyrightable, the term had expired, or the defendant's work borrowed only a small amount, for instance, then the plaintiff cannot make out a case of infringement, and the defendant need not even raise the fair use defense. In addition, fair use is only one of many limitations, exceptions, and defenses to copyright infringement. Thus, a case can be defeated without relying on fair use. For instance, the Audio Home Recording Act establishes that it is legal, using certain technologies, to make copies of audio recordings for non-commercial personal use.\nSome copyright owners claim infringement even in circumstances where the fair use defense would likely succeed, in hopes that the user will refrain from the use rather than spending resources in their defense. Strategic lawsuit against public participation (SLAPP) cases that allege copyright infringement, patent infringement, defamation, or libel may come into conflict with the defendant's right to freedom of speech, and that possibility has prompted some jurisdictions to pass anti-SLAPP legislation that raises the plaintiff's burdens and risk.\nAlthough fair use ostensibly permits certain uses without liability, many content creators and publishers try to avoid a potential court battle by seeking a legally unnecessary license from copyright owners for \"any\" use of non-public domain material, even in situations where a fair use defense would likely succeed. The simple reason is that the license terms negotiated with the copyright owner may be much less expensive than defending against a copyright suit, or having the mere possibility of a lawsuit threaten the publication of a work in which a publisher has invested significant resources.\nFair use rights take precedence over the author's interest. Thus the copyright holder cannot use a non-binding disclaimer, or notification, to revoke the right of fair use on works. However, binding agreements such as contracts or licence agreements may take precedence over fair use rights.\nThe practical effect of the fair use doctrine is that a number of conventional uses of copyrighted works are not considered infringing. For instance, quoting from a copyrighted work in order to criticize or comment upon it or teach students about it, is considered a fair use. Certain well-established uses cause few problems. A teacher who prints a few copies of a poem to illustrate a technique will have no problem on all four of the above factors (except possibly on amount and substantiality), but some cases are not so clear. All the factors are considered and balanced in each case: a book reviewer who quotes a paragraph as an example of the author's style will probably fall under fair use even though they may sell their review commercially; but a non-profit educational website that reproduces whole articles from technical magazines will probably be found to infringe if the publisher can demonstrate that the website affects the market for the magazine, even though the website itself is non-commercial.\nFair use is decided on a case-by-case basis, on the entirety of circumstances. The same act done by different means or for a different purpose can gain or lose fair use status.\nFair use in particular areas.\nComputer code.\nThe \"Oracle America, Inc. v. Google, Inc.\" case revolves around the use of application programming interfaces (APIs) used to define functionality of the Java programming language, created by Sun Microsystems and now owned by Oracle Corporation. Google used the APIs' definition and their structure, sequence and organization (SSO) in creating the Android operating system to support the mobile device market. Oracle had sued Google in 2010 over both patent and copyright violations, but after two cycles, the case matter was narrowed down to whether Google's use of the definition and SSO of Oracle's Java APIs (determined to be copyrightable) was within fair use. The Federal Circuit Court of Appeals has ruled against Google, stating that while Google could defend its use in the nature of the copyrighted work, its use was not transformative, and more significantly, it commercially harmed Oracle as they were also seeking entry to the mobile market. However, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed this decision, deciding that Google's actions satisfy all four tests for fair use, and that granting Oracle exclusive rights to use Java APIs on mobile markets \"would interfere with, not further, copyright's basic creativity objectives.\"\nDocumentary films.\nIn April 2006, the filmmakers of the \"Loose Change\" series were served with a lawsuit by Jules and G\u00e9d\u00e9on Naudet over the film's use of their footage, specifically footage of the firefighters discussing the collapse of the World Trade Center.\nWith the help of an intellectual property lawyer, the creators of Loose Change successfully argued that a majority of the footage used was for historical purposes and was significantly transformed in the context of the film. They agreed to remove a few shots that were used as B-roll and served no purpose to the greater discussion. The case was settled and a potential multimillion-dollar lawsuit was avoided.\n\"This Film Is Not Yet Rated\" also relied on fair use to feature several clips from copyrighted Hollywood productions. The director had originally planned to license these clips from their studio owners but discovered that studio licensing agreements would have prohibited him from using this material to criticize the entertainment industry. This prompted him to invoke the fair use doctrine, which permits limited use of copyrighted material to provide analysis and criticism of published works.\nFile sharing.\nIn 2009, fair use appeared as a defense in lawsuits against filesharing. Charles Nesson argued that file-sharing qualifies as fair use in his defense of alleged filesharer Joel Tenenbaum. Kiwi Camara, defending alleged filesharer Jammie Thomas, announced a similar defense.\nHowever, the Court in the case at bar rejected the idea that file-sharing is fair use.\nInternet publication.\nA U.S. court case from 2003, \"Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corp.,\" provides and develops the relationship between thumbnails, inline linking, and fair use. In the lower District Court case on a motion for summary judgment, Arriba Soft's use of thumbnail pictures and inline linking from Kelly's website in Arriba Soft's image search engine was found not to be fair use. That decision was appealed and contested by Internet rights activists such as the Electronic Frontier Foundation, who argued that it was fair use.\nOn appeal, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals found in favor of the defendant, Arriba Soft. In reaching its decision, the court utilized the statutory four-factor analysis. First, it found the purpose of creating the thumbnail images as previews to be sufficiently transformative, noting that they were not meant to be viewed at high resolution as the original artwork was. Second, the photographs had already been published, diminishing the significance of their nature as creative works. Third, although normally making a \"full\" replication of a copyrighted work may appear to violate copyright, here it was found to be reasonable and necessary in light of the intended use. Lastly, the court found that the market for the original photographs would not be substantially diminished by the creation of the thumbnails. To the contrary, the thumbnail searches could increase the exposure of the originals. In looking at all these factors as a whole, the court found that the thumbnails were fair use and remanded the case to the lower court for trial after issuing a revised opinion on July 7, 2003. The remaining issues were resolved with a default judgment after Arriba Soft had experienced significant financial problems and failed to reach a negotiated settlement.\nIn August 2008, Judge Jeremy Fogel of the Northern District of California ruled in \"Lenz v. Universal Music Corp.\" that copyright holders cannot order a deletion of an online file without determining whether that posting reflected \"fair use\" of the copyrighted material. The case involved Stephanie Lenz, a writer and editor from Gallitzin, Pennsylvania, who made a home video of her thirteen-month-old son dancing to Prince's song \"Let's Go Crazy\" and posted the video on YouTube. Four months later, Universal Music, the owner of the copyright to the song, ordered YouTube to remove the video under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. Lenz notified YouTube immediately that her video was within the scope of fair use, and she demanded that it be restored. YouTube complied after six weeks, rather than the two weeks required by the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. Lenz then sued Universal Music in California for her legal costs, claiming the music company had acted in bad faith by ordering removal of a video that represented fair use of the song. On appeal, the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled that a copyright owner must affirmatively consider whether the complained of conduct constituted fair use before sending a takedown notice under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, rather than waiting for the alleged infringer to assert fair use. 801 F.3d 1126 (9th Cir. 2015). \"Even if, as Universal urges, fair use is classified as an 'affirmative defense,' we hold\u2014for the purposes of the DMCA\u2014fair use is uniquely situated in copyright law so as to be treated differently than traditional affirmative defenses. We conclude that because 17 U.S.C. \u00a7\u00a0107 created a type of non-infringing use, fair use is \"authorized by the law\" and a copyright holder must consider the existence of fair use before sending a takedown notification under \u00a7\u00a0512(c).\"\nIn June 2011, Judge Philip Pro of the District of Nevada ruled in \"Righthaven v. Hoehn\" that the posting of an entire editorial article from the \"Las Vegas Review-Journal\" in a comment as part of an online discussion was unarguably fair use. Judge Pro noted that \"Noncommercial, nonprofit use is presumptively fair. ... Hoehn posted the Work as part of an online discussion. ... This purpose is consistent with comment, for which 17 U.S.C. \u00a7\u00a0107 provides fair use protection. ... It is undisputed that Hoehn posted the entire work in his comment on the Website. ... wholesale copying does not preclude a finding of fair use. ... there is no genuine issue of material fact that Hoehn's use of the Work was fair and summary judgment is appropriate.\" On appeal, the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled that Righthaven did not even have the standing needed to sue Hoehn for copyright infringement in the first place.\nProfessional communities.\nIn addition to considering the four fair use factors, courts deciding fair use cases also look to the standards and practices of the professional community where the case comes from. Among the communities are documentarians, librarians, makers of Open Courseware, visual art educators, and communications professors.\nSuch codes of best practices have permitted communities of practice to make more informed risk assessments in employing fair use in their daily practice. For instance, broadcasters, cablecasters, and distributors typically require filmmakers to obtain errors and omissions insurance before the distributor will take on the film. Such insurance protects against errors and omissions made during the copyright clearance of material in the film. Before the \"Documentary Filmmakers' Statement of Best Practices in Fair Use\" was created in 2005, it was nearly impossible to obtain errors and omissions insurance for copyright clearance work that relied in part on fair use. This meant documentarians had either to obtain a license for the material or to cut it from their films. In many cases, it was impossible to license the material because the filmmaker sought to use it in a critical way. Soon after the best practices statement was released, all errors and omissions insurers in the U.S. shifted to begin offering routine fair use coverage.\nMusic sampling.\nBefore 1991, sampling in certain genres of music was accepted practice and the copyright considerations were viewed as largely irrelevant. The strict decision against rapper Biz Markie's appropriation of a Gilbert O'Sullivan song in the case \"Grand Upright Music, Ltd. v. Warner Bros. Records Inc.\" changed practices and opinions overnight. Samples now had to be licensed, as long as they rose \"to a level of legally cognizable appropriation\". This left the door open for the \"de minimis\" doctrine, for short or unrecognizable samples; such uses would not rise to the level of copyright infringement, because under the \"de minimis\" doctrine, \"the law does not care about trifles\". However, in 2004, the Sixth Circuit effectively eliminated the \"de minimis\" doctrine in the \"Bridgeport Music, Inc. v. Dimension Films\" case, holding that artists must \"get a license or do not sample\". The Court later clarified that its opinion did not apply to fair use, but between \"Grand Upright\" and \"Bridgeport\", practice had effectively shifted to eliminate unlicensed sampling.\nParody.\nProducers or creators of parodies of a copyrighted work have been sued for infringement by the targets of their ridicule, even though such use may be protected as fair use. These fair use cases distinguish between parodies, which use a work in order to poke fun at or comment on the work itself, and satire, which comments on something else. Courts have been more willing to grant fair use protections to parodies than to satires, but the ultimate outcome in either circumstance will turn on the application of the four fair use factors.\nFor example, when Tom Forsythe appropriated Barbie dolls for his photography project \"Food Chain Barbie\" (depicting several copies of the doll naked and disheveled and about to be baked in an oven, blended in a food mixer, and the like), Mattel lost its copyright infringement lawsuit against him because his work effectively parodies Barbie and the values she represents. In \"Rogers v. Koons\", Jeff Koons tried to justify his appropriation of Art Rogers' photograph \"Puppies\" in his sculpture \"String of Puppies\" with the same parody defense. Koons lost because his work was not presented as a parody of Rogers' photograph in particular, but as a satire of society at large. This was insufficient to render the use fair.\nIn \"Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music Inc\" the U.S. Supreme Court recognized parody as a potential fair use, even when done for profit. Roy Orbison's, Acuff-Rose Music, had sued 2 Live Crew in 1989 for their use of Orbison's \"Oh, Pretty Woman\" in a mocking rap version with altered lyrics. The Supreme Court viewed 2 Live Crew's version as a ridiculing commentary on the earlier work, and ruled that when the parody was itself the product rather than mere advertising, commercial nature did not bar the defense. The \"Campbell\" court also distinguished parodies from satire, which they described as a broader social critique not intrinsically tied to ridicule of a specific work and so not deserving of the same use exceptions as parody because the satirist's ideas are capable of expression without the use of the other particular work.\nA number of appellate decisions have recognized that a parody may be a protected fair use, including the Second (\"Leibovitz v. Paramount Pictures Corp.\"); the Ninth (\"Mattel v. Walking Mountain Productions\"); and the Eleventh Circuits (\"Suntrust Bank v. Houghton Mifflin Co.\"). In the 2001 \"Suntrust Bank\" case, Suntrust Bank and the Margaret Mitchell estate unsuccessfully brought suit to halt the publication of \"The Wind Done Gone\", which reused many of the characters and situations from \"Gone with the Wind\" but told the events from the point of view of the enslaved people rather than the slaveholders. The Eleventh Circuit, applying \"Campbell\", found that \"The Wind Done Gone\" was fair use and vacated the district court's injunction against its publication.\nCases in which a satirical use was found to be fair include \"Blanch v. Koons\" and \"Williams v. Columbia Broadcasting Systems\".\nText and data mining.\nThe transformative nature of computer based analytical processes such as text mining, web mining and data mining has led many to form the view that such uses would be protected under fair use. This view was substantiated by the rulings of Judge Denny Chin in \"Authors Guild, Inc. v. Google, Inc.\", a case involving mass digitisation of millions of books from research library collections. As part of the ruling that found the book digitisation project was fair use, the judge stated \"Google Books is also transformative in the sense that it has transformed book text into data for purposes of substantive research, including data mining and text mining in new areas\".\nText and data mining was subject to further review in \"Authors Guild v. HathiTrust\", a case derived from the same digitization project mentioned above. Judge Harold Baer, in finding that the defendant's uses were transformative, stated that \"the search capabilities of the [HathiTrust Digital Library] have already given rise to new methods of academic inquiry such as text mining\".\nArtificial intelligence training.\nAs of September 2025 there seems to be no country where legislative acts regulating copyright status of AI-generated materials have been passed, and the United States is the only country where courts of first instance reached decisions in a small number of cases with many more lawsuits pending. In a case of a non-generative AI model a court rejected a fair use defense in 2024 (see \"Thomson Reuters v. Ross Intelligence\"), while a generative AI model was found to be was a \"spectacularly transformative\" fair use in \"Bartz v. Anthropic\" in 2025. Nevertheless, the circumstances of the two cases are rather different to allow for a generalization. \nIn its May 2025 report the United States Copyright Office expressed skepticism that all AI training is a transformative fair use, particularly when it's done commercially and results in outputs that compete with original works. The USCO also stated that analogizing AI training to human learning is \"mistaken\".\nReverse engineering.\nThere is a substantial body of fair use law regarding reverse engineering of computer software, hardware, network protocols, encryption and access control systems.\nSocial media.\nIn May 2015, artist Richard Prince released an exhibit of photographs at the Gagosian Gallery in New York, entitled \"New Portraits\". His exhibit consisted of screenshots of Instagram users' pictures, which were largely unaltered, with Prince's commentary added beneath. Although no Instagram users authorized Prince to use their pictures, Prince argued that the addition of his own commentary the pictures constituted fair use, such that he did not need permission to use the pictures or to pay royalties for his use. One of the pieces sold for $90,000. With regard to the works presented by Painter, the gallery where the pictures were showcased posted notices that \"All images are subject to copyright.\" Several lawsuits were filed against Painter over the New Portraits exhibit. In 2024, Richard Prince and the galleries were ordered to pay $900,000 to the photographers.\nInfluence internationally.\nWhile U.S. fair use law has been influential in some countries, some countries have fair use criteria drastically different from those in the U.S., and some countries do not have a fair use framework at all. Some countries have the concept of fair dealing instead of fair use, while others use different systems of limitations and exceptions to copyright. Many countries have some reference to an exemption for educational use, though the extent of this exemption varies widely.\nSources differ on whether fair use is fully recognized by countries other than the United States. American University's \"infojustice.org\" published a compilation of portions of over 40 nations' laws that explicitly mention fair use or fair dealing, and asserts that some of the fair dealing laws, such as Canada's, have evolved (such as through judicial precedents) to be quite close to those of the United States. This compilation includes fair use provisions from Bangladesh, Israel, South Korea, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Uganda, and the United States. However, the 2009 release of \"International Copyright Law and Practice\" says that while some other countries recognize similar exceptions to copyright, only the United States and Israel fully recognize the concept of fair use.\nThe International Intellectual Property Alliance (IIPA), a lobby group of U.S. copyright industry bodies, has objected to international adoption of U.S.-style fair use exceptions, alleging that such laws have a dependency on common law and long-term legal precedent that may not exist outside the United States.\nIsrael.\nIn November 2007, the Israeli Knesset passed a new copyright law that included a U.S.-style fair use exception. The law, which took effect in May 2008, permits the fair use of copyrighted works for purposes such as private study, research, criticism, review, news reporting, quotation, or instruction or testing by an educational institution. The law sets up four factors, similar to the U.S. fair use factors (see above), for determining whether a use is fair.\nOn September 2, 2009, the Tel Aviv District court ruled in \"The Football Association Premier League Ltd. v. Ploni\" that fair use is a user right. The court also ruled that streaming of live soccer games on the Internet is fair use. In doing so, the court analyzed the four fair use factors adopted in 2007 and cited U.S. case law, including \"Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corp.\" and \"Perfect 10, Inc. v. Amazon.com, Inc.\".\nMalaysia.\nAn amendment in 2012 to the section 13(2)(a) of the Copyright Act 1987 created an exception called 'fair dealing' which is not restricted in its purpose. The four factors for fair use as specified in US law are included.\nPoland.\nFair use (, lit.\u2009'allowed use') exists in Polish law and is covered by the Polish copyright law articles 23 to 35.\nCompared to the United States, Polish fair use distinguishes between private and public use. In Poland, when the use is public, its use risks fines. The defendant must also prove that his use was private when accused that it was not, or that other mitigating circumstances apply. Finally, Polish law treats all cases in which private material was made public as a potential copyright infringement, where fair use can apply, but has to be proven by reasonable circumstances.\nSingapore.\nSection 35 of the Singaporean Copyright Act 1987 has been amended in 2004 to allow a 'fair dealing' exception for any purpose. The four fair use factors similar to US law are included in the new section 35.\nSouth Korea.\nThe Korean Copyright Act was amended to include a fair use provision, Article 35\u20133, in 2012. The law outlines a four-factor test similar to that used under U.S. law:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFair dealing.\nFair dealing allows specific exceptions to copyright protections. The open-ended concept of fair use is generally not observed in jurisdictions where fair dealing is in place, although this does vary. Fair dealing is established in legislation in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Singapore, India, South Africa and the United Kingdom, among others.\nAustralia.\nWhile Australian copyright exceptions are based on the Fair Dealing system, since 1998 a series of Australian government inquiries have examined, and in most cases recommended, the introduction of a \"flexible and open\" Fair Use system into Australian copyright law. From 1998 to 2017 there have been eight Australian government inquiries which have considered the question of whether fair use should be adopted in Australia. Six reviews have recommended Australia adopt a \"Fair Use\" model of copyright exceptions: two enquiries specifically into the Copyright Act (1998, 2014); and four broader reviews (both 2004, 2013, 2016). One review (2000) recommended against the introduction of fair use and another (2005) issued no final report. Two of the recommendations were specifically in response to the stricter copyright rules introduced as part of the Australia\u2013United States Free Trade Agreement (AUSFTA), while the most recent two, by the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) and the Productivity Commission (PC) were with reference to strengthening Australia's \"digital economy\".\nCanada.\nThe \"Copyright Act of Canada\" establishes fair dealing in Canada, which allows specific exceptions to copyright protection. In 1985, the Sub-Committee on the Revision of Copyright rejected replacing fair dealing with an open-ended system, and in 1986 the Canadian government agreed that \"the present fair dealing provisions should not be replaced by the substantially wider 'fair use' concept\". Since then, the Canadian fair dealing exception has broadened. It is now similar in effect to U.S. fair use, even though the frameworks are different.\n\"CCH Canadian Ltd v. Law Society of Upper Canada\" [2004] 1 S.C.R. 339,https:// is a landmark Supreme Court of Canada case that establishes the bounds of fair dealing in Canadian copyright law. The Law Society of Upper Canada was sued for copyright infringement for providing photocopy services to researchers. The Court unanimously held that the Law Society's practice fell within the bounds of fair dealing.\nUnited Kingdom.\nWithin the United Kingdom, fair dealing is a legal doctrine that provides an exception to the nation's copyright law in cases where the copyright infringement is for the purposes of non-commercial research or study, criticism or review, or for the reporting of current events.\nPolicy arguments.\nA balanced copyright law provides an economic benefit to many high-tech businesses such as search engines and software developers. Fair use is also crucial to non-technology industries such as insurance, legal services, and newspaper publishers.\nOn September 12, 2007, the Computer and Communications Industry Association (CCIA), a group representing companies including Google Inc., Microsoft Inc., Oracle Corporation, Sun Microsystems, Yahoo! and other high-tech companies, released a study that found that fair use exceptions to US copyright laws were responsible for more than $4.5\u00a0trillion in annual revenue for the United States economy representing one-sixth of the total US GDP. The study was conducted using a methodology developed by the World Intellectual Property Organization.\nThe study found that fair use dependent industries are directly responsible for more than eighteen percent of US economic growth and nearly eleven million American jobs. \"As the United States economy becomes increasingly knowledge-based, the concept of fair use can no longer be discussed and legislated in the abstract. It is the very foundation of the digital age and a cornerstone of our economy,\" said Ed Black, President and CEO of CCIA. \"Much of the unprecedented economic growth of the past ten years can actually be credited to the doctrine of fair use, as the Internet itself depends on the ability to use content in a limited and unlicensed manner.\"\nFair Use Week.\nFair Use Week is an international event that celebrates fair use and fair dealing. Fair Use Week was first proposed on a Fair Use Allies mailing list, which was an outgrowth of the Library Code of Best Practices Capstone Event, celebrating the development and promulgation of ARL's \"Code of Best Practices in Fair Use for Academic and Research Libraries\". While the idea was not taken up nationally, Copyright Advisor at Harvard University, launched the first ever Fair Use Week at Harvard University in February 2014, with a full week of activities celebrating fair use. The first Fair Use Week included blog posts from national and international fair use experts, live fair use panels, fair use workshops, and a Fair Use Stories Tumblr blog, where people from the world of art, music, film, and academia shared stories about the importance of fair use to their community. The first Fair Use Week was so successful that in 2015 ARL teamed up with Courtney and helped organize the Second Annual Fair Use Week, with participation from many more institutions. ARL also launched an official Fair Use Week website, which was transferred from Pia Hunter, who attended the Library Code of Best Practices Capstone Event and had originally purchased the domain name fairuseweek.org.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10773", "revid": "12949512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10773", "title": "Flying car", "text": "Car that can be flown in much the same way as a car may be driven\nA flying car or roadable aircraft is a type of vehicle which can function both as a road vehicle and as an aircraft. As used here, this includes vehicles which drive as motorcycles when on the road. The term \"flying car\" is also sometimes used to include hovercars and/or VTOL personal air vehicles. Many prototypes have been built since the early 20th century, using a variety of flight technologies. Most have been designed to take off and land conventionally using a runway. Although VTOL projects are increasing, none has yet been built in more than a handful of numbers.\nTheir appearance is often predicted by futurologists, and many concept designs have been promoted. Their failure to become a practical reality has led to the catchphrase \"Where's my flying car?\", as a paradigm for the failure of predicted technologies to appear. Flying cars are also a popular theme in fantasy and science fiction stories.\nHistory.\nEarly 20th century.\nIn 1901 German immigrant to the U.S. Gustave Whitehead claimed to have flown a powered aircraft, described as able to propel itself along roads to the site of the flying experiment. Consensus among historians is that Whitehead's no. 21 did not achieve sustained self-powered flight.\nAircraft designer Glenn Curtiss built his Autoplane in 1917. It had a pusher propeller for flight, with removable flight surfaces including a triplane wing, canard foreplane and twin tails. It was able to hop, but not fly.\nIn 1935, Constantinos Vlachos built a prototype of a 'tri-phibian' vehicle with a circular wing, but it caught fire after the engine exploded while he was demonstrating it in Washington, D.C. Vlachos was badly injured and spent several months in hospital. The machine is most notable for a newsreel that captured the incident.\nThe Autogiro Company of America AC-35 was a prototype roadable autogyro, flown on 26 March 1936 by test pilot James G. Ray. Forward thrust was initially provided by twin counter-rotating propellers for thrust, later replaced with a single propeller. On 26 October 1936, the aircraft was converted to roadable configuration. Ray drove it to the main entrance of the Commerce Building, Washington, D.C., where it was accepted by John H. Geisse, chief of the Aeronautics Branch. Although it had been successfully tested, it did not enter production.\nThe first fixed wing roadable aircraft to fly was built by Waldo Waterman. Waterman had been associated with Glenn Curtiss when pioneering amphibious aircraft at North Island on San Diego Bay in the 1910s. On 21 February 1937, Waterman's Arrowbile first took to the air.\n The Arrowbile was a development of Waterman's tailless aircraft, the Whatsit. It had a wingspan of and a length of . On the ground and in the air it was powered by a Studebaker engine. It could fly at and drive at .\nIn 1942, the British army built the Hafner Rotabuggy, an experimental roadable autogyro that was developed with the intention of air-dropping off-road vehicles. In developed form the Rotabuggy achieved a flight speed of . However, the introduction of gliders that could carry vehicles (such as the Waco Hadrian and Airspeed Horsa) led to the project's cancellation.\nLate 20th century.\nAlthough several designs (such as the ConVairCar) have flown, none have enjoyed commercial success, and those that have flown are not widely known by the general public. The most successful example, in that several were made and one is still flying, is the 1949 Taylor Aerocar.\nIn 1946, the Fulton FA-2 Airphibian was an American-made flying car designed by Robert Edison Fulton Jr., it was an aluminum-bodied car, built with independent suspension, aircraft-sized wheels, and a six-cylinder 165\u00a0hp engine. The fabric wings were easily attached to the fuselage, converting the car into a plane. Four prototypes were built. Charles Lindbergh flew it in 1950 and, although it was not a commercial success (financial costs of airworthiness certification forced him to relinquish control of the company, which never developed it further), it is now in the Smithsonian.\nThe Aerocar, designed and built by Molt Taylor, made a successful flight in December 1949, and in following years versions underwent a series of road and flying tests. Chuck Berry featured the concept in his 1956 song \"You Can't Catch Me\", and in December 1956 the Civil Aviation Authority approved the design for mass production, but despite wide publicity and an improved version produced in 1989, Taylor did not succeed in getting the flying car into production. In total, six Aerocars were built. It is considered to be one of the first practical flying cars.\nOne notable design was Henry Smolinski's Mizar, made by mating the rear end of a Cessna Skymaster with a Ford Pinto, but it disintegrated during test flights killing Smolinski and the pilot.\nProject Prodigal was a British Army concept in the late 1950s early 1960s for a \"Jumping Jeep\" to overcome obstacles on the battlefield with entrants were BAC Boulton Paul, Bristol Siddeley, Folland, Handley Page Saunders Roe, Short Brothers Vickers-Armstrongs and Westland.\nMoller began developing VTOL craft in the late 1960s, but no Moller vehicle has ever achieved free flight out of ground effect. The Moller Skycar M400 was a project for a personal VTOL (vertical take-off and landing) aircraft which is powered by four pairs of in-tandem Wankel rotary engines. The proposed Autovolantor model had an all-electric version powered by Altairnano batteries. The company has been dormant since 2015.\nIn the mid-1980s, former Boeing engineer Fred Barker founded Flight Innovations Inc. and began the development of the Sky Commuter, a small duct fans-based VTOL aircraft. It was a compact, two-passenger and was made primarily of composite materials. In 2008, the remaining prototype was sold for \u00a386k on eBay.\n21st century.\nIn 2009 the U.S., the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) initiated the $65 million Transformer program to develop a four-person roadable aircraft by 2015. The vehicle was to have had VTOL capability and a range. AAI Corporation and Lockheed Martin were awarded contracts. The program was cancelled in 2013.\nThe Parajet Skycar utilises a paramotor for propulsion and a parafoil for lift. The main body consists of a modified dune buggy. It has a top speed of and a maximum range of in flight. On the ground it has a top speed of and a maximum range of . Parajet flew and drove its prototype from London to Timbuktu in January 2009.\nThe Maverick Flying Dune Buggy was designed by the Indigenous People's Technology and Education Center of Florida as an off-road vehicle that could unfurl an advanced parachute and then travel by air over impassable terrain when roadways were no longer usable. The 'Maverick' vehicle is powered by a engine that can also drive a five-bladed pusher propeller. It was initially conceived in order to help minister to remote Amazon rainforest communities, but will also be marketed for visual pipeline inspection and other similar activities in desolate areas or difficult terrain.\nThe Plane Driven PD-1 Roadable Glastar is a modification to the Glastar Sportsman GS-2 to make a practical roadable aircraft. The approach is novel in that it uses a mostly stock aircraft with a modified landing gear \"pod\" that carries the engine for road propulsion. The wings fold along the side, and the main landing gear and engine pod slide aft in driving configuration to compensate for the rearward center of gravity with the wings folded, and provide additional stability for road travel.\nThe Super Sky Cycle was an American homebuilt roadable gyroplane designed and manufactured by The Butterfly Aircraft LLC. It is a registered motorcycle.\nAt the 2014 Pioneers Festival at Wien (Austria) AeroMobil presented their version 3.0 of their flying car. The prototype was conceived as a vehicle that can be converted from an automobile to an aircraft. The version 2.5 proof-of-concept took 20 years to develop and first flew in 2013. CEO Juraj Vaculik said that the company planned to move flying cars to market: \"the plan is that in 2017 we'll be able to announce\u00a0... the first flying roadster.\" In 2016, AeroMobil was test-flying a prototype that obtained Slovak ultralight certification. When the final product will be available or how much it will cost is not yet specified. In 2018, it unveiled a concept that resembled a flying sportscar with VTOL capability. \nThe Aeromobil 2.5 has folding wings and a Rotax 912 engine. It can travel at with a range of , and flew for the first time in 2013. On 29 October 2014, Slovak startup AeroMobil s.r.o. unveiled AeroMobil 3.0 \nat Vienna Pioneers Festival.\nKlein Vision in Slovakia have developed a prototype AirCar, which drives like a sports car and for flight has a pusher propeller with twin tailbooms, and foldout wings. In June 2021, the prototype carried out a 35-minute flight between airports. It was type certified as an aircraft in January 2022.\nThe Terrafugia Transition is a roadable aircraft intended to be classed as a Personal Air Vehicle. It can fold its wings in 30 seconds and drive the front wheels, enabling it to operate both as a traditional road vehicle and as a general aviation aeroplane with a range of . An operational prototype was displayed at Oshkosh in 2008 and its first flight took place on 2009-03-05. It will carry two people plus luggage and its Rotax 912S engine operates on premium unleaded gas. It was approved by the FAA in June 2010.\nThe production-ready single-engine, roadable PAL-V Liberty autogyro, or gyrocopter, debuted at the Geneva Motor Show in March 2018, then became the first flying car in production, and was set to launch in 2020, with full production scheduled for 2021 in Gujarat, India. The PAL-V ONE is a hybrid of a gyrocopter with a leaning 3-wheel motorcycle. It has two seats and a 160\u00a0kW flight certified gasoline engine. It has a top speed of on land and in air, and weighs max.\nOn 15 April 2021, Los Altos, California, became home to the world's first consumer flying car showroom. However, as yet there are no certified flying cars in production.\nIn 2023 Doroni Aerospace earned an official FAA Airworthiness Certification. It is powered by ten independent propulsion systems. The company claimed a top speed of 140\u00a0mph and a 60-mile range. It includes two electric motors with patented ducted propellers. The machine is 23\u00a0ft long and 14\u00a0ft wide.\nDesign.\nA flying car must be capable of safe and reliable operation both on public roads and in the air. Current types require manual control by both a driver and a pilot. For mass adoption, it would also need to be environmentally friendly, able to fly without a fully qualified pilot at the controls, and come at affordable purchase and running costs.\nDesign configurations vary widely, from modified road vehicles such as the AVE Mizar at one extreme to modified aircraft such as the Plane Driven PD-1 at the other. Most are dedicated flying car designs. While wheeled propulsion is necessary on the road, in the air lift may be generated by fixed wings, helicopter rotors or direct engine power. The Alef Model A project offers an unusual configuration in which the body of the car is hollow and the sides are slabs; in the air it rolls sideways so that the slabs become a biplane wing. The cabin remains upright.\nLift.\nLike other aircraft, lift in flight is provided by a fixed wing, spinning rotor or direct powered lift. The powered helicopter rotor and direct lift both offer VTOL capability, while the fixed wing and autogyro rotor take off conventionally from a runway.\nThe simplest and earliest approach was to take a driveable car and attach removable flying surfaces and propeller. However, when on the road, such a design must either tow its removable parts on a separate trailer or leave them behind and drive back to them before taking off again.\nOther conventional takeoff fixed-wing designs, such as the Terrafugia Transition, include folding wings that the car carries with it when driven on the road.\nVertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) is attractive, as it avoids the need for a runway and greatly increases operational flexibility. Typical designs include rotorcraft and ducted fan powered lift configurations. Most design concepts have inherent problems.\nRotorcraft include helicopters with powered rotors and autogyros with free-spinning rotors. For road use, a rotor must, like many naval helicopters, be either two-bladed or foldable. The quadcopter requires only a simple control system with no tail. The autogyro relies on a separate thrust system to build up airspeed, spin the rotor and generate lift. However, some autogyros have rotors that can be spun up on the ground and then disengaged, allowing the aircraft to jump-start vertically. The PAL-V Liberty is an example of the autogyro type.\nDucted-fan aircraft such as the Moller Skycar tend to easily lose stability and have been unable to travel at greater than 30\u201340 knots.\nPower.\nThe flying car places unique demands on the vehicle power train. For a given all-up weight, an aero engine must deliver higher power than its typical road equivalent. However, on the road the vehicle must handle well and not be overpowered. Power must also be diverted between the airborne and road drive mechanisms. Some designs therefore have multiple engines, with the road engine being supplemented, or even replaced by, additional flight engines.\nAs with other vehicles, power has traditionally been supplied by internal combustion engines, but electric power is undergoing rapid development. It is coming into increasing use on road vehicles, but the weight of the batteries currently makes it unsuited to aircraft. However its low environmental signature makes it attractive for the short trips and dense urban environments envisaged for the flying car.\nOn the road, most flying cars drive the road wheels in the conventional way. A few use the aircraft propeller in similar manner to an airboat, but this is inefficient.\nIn the air, a flying car will typically obtain forward thrust from one or more propellers or ducted fans. A few have a powered helicopter rotor. Jet engines are not used due to the ground hazard posed by the hot, high-velocity exhaust stream.\nSafety.\nIn order to operate safely, a flying car must be certified independently as both a road vehicle and an aircraft, by the respective authorities. The person controlling the vehicle must also be licensed as both driver and pilot, and the vehicle maintained according to both regimes.\nMechanically, the requirements of powered flight are so challenging that every opportunity must be taken to keep weight to a minimum. A typical airframe is therefore lightweight and easily damaged. On the other hand, a road vehicle must be able to withstand significant impact loads from casual incidents while stationary, as well as low-speed and high-speed impacts, and the high strength this demands can add considerable weight. A practical flying car must be both strong enough to pass road safety standards and light enough to fly. Any propeller or rotor blade also creates a hazard to passers-by when on the ground, especially if it is spinning; they must be permanently shrouded, or folded away on landing.\nFor widespread adoption, as envisaged in the near future, it will not be practicable for every driver to qualify as a pilot and the rigorous maintenance currently demanded for aircraft will be uneconomic. Flying cars will have to become largely autonomous and highly reliable. The density of traffic will require automated routing and collision-avoidance systems. To manage the inevitable periodic failures and emergency landings, there will need to be sufficient designated landing sites across built-up areas. In addition, poor weather conditions could make the craft unsafe to fly.\nRegulatory regimes are being developed in anticipation of a large increase in the numbers of autonomous flying cars and personal air vehicles in the near future, and compliance with these regimes will be necessary for safe flight.\nControl.\nA basic flying car requires the person at the controls to be both a qualified road driver and aircraft pilot. This is impractical for the majority of people and so wider adoption will require computer systems to de-skill piloting. These skills include aircraft manoeuvring, navigation and emergency procedures, all in potentially crowded airspace. The onboard control system will also need to interact with other systems such as air traffic control and collision-risk monitoring. A practical flying car may need to be capable of full autonomy, in which people are present only as passengers.\nEnvironment.\nA flying car capable of widespread use must operate acceptably within a heavily populated urban environment. The lift and propulsion systems must be quiet enough not to cause a nuisance, and must not create excessive pollution. For example, pollution emissions standards for road vehicles must be met.\nThe clear environmental benefits of electric power are a strong incentive for its development.\nCost.\nThe needs for the propulsion system to be both small and powerful, the vehicle structure both light and strong, and the control systems fully integrated and autonomous, can only be met at present, if at all, using advanced and expensive technologies. This may prove a significant barrier to widespread adoption.\nFlying cars are used for relatively short distances at high frequency. They travel at lower speeds and altitudes than conventional passenger aircraft. However optimal fuel efficiency for aeroplanes is obtained at higher speeds and altitudes, so a flying car's energy efficiency will be lower than that of a conventional aircraft. Similarly, the flying car's road performance is compromised by the requirements of flight and the need to carry around the various extra parts, so it is also less economical than a conventional motor car.\nIndustry groups.\nIn April 2012, the International Flying Car Association was established to be the \"central resource center for information and communication between the flying car industry, news networks, governments, and those seeking further information worldwide\". Because flying cars need practical regulations that are mostly dealt with on a regional level, several regional associations were established as well, with the European Flying Car Association (EFCA) representing these national member associations on a pan-European level (51 independent countries, including the European Union Member States, the Accession Candidates and Russia, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine). The associations are also organizing racing competitions for roadable aircraft in Europe, the European Roadable Aircraft Prix (ERAP), mainly to increase awareness about this type of aircraft among a broader audience.\nPopular culture.\nThe flying car was and remains a common feature of conceptions of the future, both predicted and imaginary.\nAnticipation.\nFlying cars have been under development since the early days of motor transport and aviation, and many futurologists have predicted their imminent arrival. Aircraft manufacturer Glenn Curtiss unveiled his unflyable Autoplane in 1917. In 1940, vehicle manufacturer Henry Ford predicted that; \"Mark my word: a combination airplane and motorcar is coming. You may smile, but it will come.\u201d\nFrom 1945, industrial designer Norman Bel Geddes promoted his concept for a streamlined flying car with folding wings. In the late 1950s, Ford's Advanced Design studio publicised a 3/8 scale concept car model, the Volante Tri-Athodyne. It featured three ducted fans, each with its own motor, that would lift it off the ground and move it through the air. Ford admitted that \"the day where there will be an aero-car in every garage is still some time off\", also suggesting that \"the Volante indicates one direction that the styling of such a vehicle would take\".\nWhere's my flying car?\nDespite a century of anticipation, no flying car has yet proved a practical proposition and they remain an experimental curiosity. This long-term failure to make any impact on society has led to the meme, \"Where's my flying car?\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Here we are, less than a month until the turn of the millennium, and what I want to know is, what happened to the flying cars? We're about to become Americans of the 21st century. People have been predicting what we'd be like for more than 100 years, and our accoutrements don't entirely live up to expectations.\u00a0... Our failure to produce flying cars seems like a particular betrayal since it was so central to our image.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This new millennium sucks! It's exactly the same as the old millennium! You know why? No flying cars!\u2014\u200a\nThe question \"Where's my flying car?\" has become emblematic of the wider failure of many modern technologies to match futuristic visions that were promoted in earlier decades.\nFictional flying cars.\nThe flying car has been depicted in many works of fantasy and science fiction. Some notable examples include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10774", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10774", "title": "French language/Proven", "text": ""}
{"id": "10775", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10775", "title": "Film editing", "text": "Creative and technical part of the post-production process of filmmaking\nFilm editing is both a creative and a technical part of the post-production process of filmmaking. The term is derived from the traditional process of working with film which increasingly involves the use of digital technology. When putting together some sort of video composition, typically, one would need a collection of shots and footages that vary from one another. The act of adjusting the shots someone has already taken, and turning them into something new is known as film editing.\nThe film editor works with raw footage, selecting shots and combining them into sequences which create a finished motion picture. Film editing is described as an art or skill, the only art that is unique to cinema, separating filmmaking from other art forms that preceded it, although there are close parallels to the editing process in other art forms such as poetry and novel writing. Film editing is an extremely important tool when attempting to intrigue a viewer. When done properly, a film's editing can captivate a viewer and fly completely under the radar. Because of this, film editing has been given the name \"the invisible art.\"\nOn its most fundamental level, film editing is the art, technique and practice of assembling shots into a coherent sequence. The job of an editor is not simply to mechanically put pieces of a film together, cut off film slates or edit dialogue scenes. A film editor must creatively work with the layers of images, story, dialogue, music, pacing, as well as the actors' performances to effectively \"re-imagine\" and even rewrite the film to craft a cohesive whole. Editors usually play a dynamic role in the making of a film. An editor must select only the most quality shots, removing all unnecessary frames to ensure the shot is clean. Sometimes, auteurist film directors edit their own films, for example, Akira Kurosawa, Bahram Beyzai, Steven Soderbergh, and the Coen brothers.\nAccording to \"Film Art, An Introduction\", by Bordwell and Thompson, there are four basic areas of film editing that the editor has full control over. The first dimension is the graphic relations between a shot A and shot B. The shots are analyzed in terms of their graphic configurations, including light and dark, lines and shapes, volumes and depths, movement and stasis. The director makes deliberate choices regarding the composition, lighting, color, and movement within each shot, as well as the transitions between them. There are several techniques used by editors to establish graphic relations between shots. These include maintaining overall brightness consistency, keeping important elements in the center of the frame, playing with color differences, and creating visual matches or continuities between shots.\nThe second dimension is the rhythmic relationship between shot A and shot B. The duration of each shot, determined by the number of frames or length of film, contributes to the overall rhythm of the film. The filmmaker has control over the editing rhythm by adjusting the length of shots in relation to each other. Shot duration can be used to create specific effects and emphasize moments in the film. For example, a brief flash of white frames can convey a sudden impact or a violent moment. On the other hand, lengthening or adding seconds to a shot can allow for audience reaction or to accentuate an action. The length of shots can also be used to establish a rhythmic pattern, such as creating a steady beat or gradually slowing down or accelerating the tempo.\nThe third dimension is the spatial relationship between shot A and shot B. Editing allows the filmmaker to construct film space and imply a relationship between different points in space. The filmmaker can juxtapose shots to establish spatial holes or construct a whole space out of component parts. For example, the filmmaker can start with a shot that establishes a spatial hole and then follow it with a shot of a part of that space, creating an analytical breakdown.\nThe final dimension that an editor has control over is the temporal relation between shot A and shot B. Editing plays a crucial role in manipulating the time of action in a film. It allows filmmakers to control the order, duration, and frequency of events, thus shaping the narrative and influencing the audience's perception of time. Through editing, shots can be rearranged, flashbacks and flash-forwards can be employed, and the duration of actions can be compressed or expanded. The main point is that editing gives filmmakers the power to control and manipulate the temporal aspects of storytelling in film.\nBetween graphic, rhythmic, spatial, and temporal relationships between two shots, an editor has various ways to add a creative element to the film, and enhance the overall viewing experience.\nWith the advent of digital editing in non-linear editing systems, film editors and their assistants have become responsible for many areas of filmmaking that used to be the responsibility of others. For instance, in past years, picture editors dealt only with just that\u2014picture. Sound, music, and (more recently) visual effects editors dealt with the practicalities of other aspects of the editing process, usually under the direction of the picture editor and director. However, digital systems have increasingly put these responsibilities on the picture editor. It is common, especially on lower budget films, for the editor to sometimes cut in temporary music, mock up visual effects and add temporary sound effects or other sound replacements. These temporary elements are usually replaced with more refined final elements produced by the sound, music and visual effects teams hired to complete the picture. The importance of an editor has become increasingly pivotal to the quality and success of a film due to the multiple roles that have been added to their job.\nHistory.\nEarly films were short films that were one long, static, and locked-down shot. Motion in the shot was all that was necessary to amuse an audience, so the first films simply showed activity such as traffic moving along a city street. There was no story and no editing. Each film ran as long as there was film in the camera.\nThe use of film editing to establish continuity, involving action moving from one sequence into another, is attributed to British film pioneer Robert W. Paul's \"Come Along, Do!\", made in 1898 and one of the first films to feature more than one shot. In the first shot, an elderly couple is outside an art exhibition having lunch and then follow other people inside through the door. The second shot shows what they do inside. Paul's 'Cinematograph Camera No. 1' of 1896 was the first camera to feature reverse-cranking, which allowed the same film footage to be exposed several times and thereby to create super-positions and multiple exposures. One of the first films to use this technique, Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s's \"The Four Troublesome Heads\" from 1898, was produced with Paul's camera.\nThe further development of action continuity in multi-shot films continued in 1899\u20131900 at the Brighton School in England, where it was definitively established by George Albert Smith and James Williamson. In that year, Smith made \"As Seen Through a Telescope\", in which the main shot shows street scene with a young man tying the shoelace and then caressing the foot of his girlfriend, while an old man observes this through a telescope. There is then a cut to close shot of the hands on the girl's foot shown inside a black circular mask, and then a cut back to the continuation of the original scene.\nEven more remarkable was James Williamson's \"Attack on a China Mission Station\", made around the same time in 1900. The first shot shows the gate to the mission station from the outside being attacked and broken open by Chinese Boxer rebels, then there is a cut to the garden of the mission station where a pitched battle ensues. An armed party of British sailors arrived to defeat the Boxers and rescue the missionary's family. The film used the first \"reverse angle\" cut in film history.\nJames Williamson concentrated on making films taking action from one place shown in one shot to the next shown in another shot in films like \"Stop Thief!\" and \"Fire!\", made in 1901, and many others. He also experimented with the close-up, and made perhaps the most extreme one of all in \"The Big Swallow\", when his character approaches the camera and appears to swallow it. These two filmmakers of the Brighton School also pioneered the editing of the film; they tinted their work with color and used trick photography to enhance the narrative. By 1900, their films were extended scenes of up to five minutes long.\nOther filmmakers then took up all these ideas including the American Edwin S. Porter, who started making films for the Edison Company in 1901. Porter worked on a number of minor films before making \"Life of an American Fireman\" in 1903. The film was the first American film with a plot, featuring action, and even a closeup of a hand pulling a fire alarm. The film comprised a continuous narrative over seven scenes, rendered in a total of nine shots. He put a dissolve between every shot, just as Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s was already doing, and he frequently had the same action repeated across the dissolves. His film, \"The Great Train Robbery\" (1903), had a running time of twelve minutes, with twenty separate shots and ten different indoor and outdoor locations. He used cross-cutting editing method to show simultaneous action in different places.\nThese early film directors discovered important aspects of motion picture language: that the screen image does not need to show a complete person from head to toe and that splicing together two shots creates in the viewer's mind a contextual relationship. These were the key discoveries that made all non-live or non live-on-videotape narrative motion pictures and television possible\u2014that shots (in this case, whole scenes since each shot is a complete scene) can be photographed at widely different locations over a period of time (hours, days or even months) and combined into a narrative whole. That is, \"The Great Train Robbery\" contains scenes shot on sets of a telegraph station, a railroad car interior, and a dance hall, with outdoor scenes at a railroad water tower, on the train itself, at a point along the track, and in the woods. But when the robbers leave the telegraph station interior (set) and emerge at the water tower, the audience believes they went immediately from one to the other. Or that when they climb on the train in one shot and enter the baggage car (a set) in the next, the audience believes they are on the same train.\nSometime around 1918, Russian director Lev Kuleshov did an experiment that proves this point. (See Kuleshov Experiment) He took an old film clip of a headshot of a noted Russian actor and intercut the shot with a shot of a bowl of soup, then with a child playing with a teddy bear, then with a shot an elderly woman in a casket. When he showed the film to people they praised the actor's acting\u2014the hunger in his face when he saw the soup, the delight in the child, and the grief when looking at the dead woman. Of course, the shot of the actor was years before the other shots and he never \"saw\" any of the items. The simple act of juxtaposing the shots in a sequence made the relationship.\nFilm editing technology.\nBefore the widespread use of digital non-linear editing systems, the initial editing of all films was done with a positive copy of the film negative called a film workprint (cutting copy in UK) by physically cutting and splicing together pieces of film. Strips of footage would be hand cut and attached together with tape and then later in time, glue. Editors were very precise; if they made a wrong cut or needed a fresh positive print, it cost the production money and time for the lab to reprint the footage. Additionally, each reprint put the negative at risk of damage. With the invention of a splicer and threading the machine with a viewer such as a Moviola, or \"flatbed\" machine such as a K.-E.-M. or Steenbeck, the editing process sped up a little bit and cuts came out cleaner and more precise. The Moviola editing practice is non-linear, allowing the editor to make choices faster, a great advantage to editing episodic films for television which have very short timelines to complete the work. All film studios and production companies who produced films for television provided this tool for their editors. Flatbed editing machines were used for playback and refinement of cuts, particularly in feature films and films made for television because they were less noisy and cleaner to work with. \nThey were used extensively for documentary and drama production within the BBC's Film Department. Operated by a team of two, an editor and assistant editor, this tactile process required significant skill but allowed for editors to work extremely efficiently.\nModern film editing has evolved significantly since it was first introduced to the film and entertainment industry. Some other new aspects of editing have been introduced such as color grading and digital workflows. As mentioned earlier, over the course of time, new technology has exponentially enhanced the quality of pictures in films. One of the most important steps in this process was transitioning from analog to digital filmmaking. By doing this, it gives the ability editors to immediately playback scenes, duplication and much more. Additionally digital has simplified and reduced the cost of filmmaking. Digital film is not only cheaper, but lasts longer, is safer, and is overall more efficient. Color grading is a post production process, where the editor manipulates or enhances the color of images, or environments in order to create a color tone. Doing this can alter the setting, tone, and mood of the entirety of scenes, and can enhance reactions that would otherwise have the possibility of being dull or out of place. Color grading is vital to the film editing process, and is technology that allows editors to enhance a story.\nToday, most films are edited digitally (on systems such as Media Composer, Final Cut Pro X or Premiere Pro) and bypass the film positive workprint altogether. In the past, the use of a film positive (not the original negative) allowed the editor to do as much experimenting as he or she wished, without the risk of damaging the original. With digital editing, editors can experiment just as much as before except with the footage completely transferred to a computer hard drive.\nWhen the film workprint had been cut to a satisfactory state, it was then used to make an edit decision list (EDL). The negative cutter referred to this list while processing the negative, splitting the shots into rolls, which were then contact printed to produce the final film print or answer print. Today, production companies have the option of bypassing negative cutting altogether. With the advent of digital intermediate (\"DI\"), the physical negative does not necessarily need to be physically cut and hot spliced together; rather the negative is optically scanned into the computer(s) and a cut list is confirmed by a DI editor.\nWomen in film editing.\nIn the early years of film, editing was considered a technical job; editors were expected to \"cut out the bad bits\" and string the film together. Indeed, when the Motion Picture Editors Guild was formed, they chose to be \"below the line\", that is, not a creative guild, but a technical one. Women were not usually able to break into the \"creative\" positions; directors, cinematographers, producers, and executives were almost always men. Editing afforded creative women a place to assert their mark on the filmmaking process. The history of film has included many women editors such as Dede Allen, Anne Bauchens, Margaret Booth, Barbara McLean, Anne V. Coates, Adrienne Fazan, Verna Fields, Blanche Sewell and Eda Warren.\nPost-production editing.\nThe post-production process of editing a film is typically divided into three distinct stages, commonly referred to as the editor's cut, the director's cut, and the final cut. In the 21st century, it is extremely rare to perform editing by literally cutting strips of film. It would be more technically accurate to say that an editor prepares an \"assembly\" of digital video clips, but the word \"cut\" remains in widespread use.\nAn editor's cut (sometimes referred to as the \"assembly edit\" or \"rough cut\") is normally the first pass of what the final film will be when it reaches picture lock. It is the \"most basic cut possible\". For many reasons, as explained further in the production board article, the scenes in most films are not shot in the order in which they appear in the script. The editor's main task at this stage is to arrange all the scenes in the correct order.\nThe film editor usually starts working while principal photography starts. Sometimes, prior to cutting, the editor and director will have seen and discussed \"dailies\" (raw footage shot each day) as shooting progresses. As production schedules have shortened over the years, this co-viewing happens less often. Screening dailies gives the editor a general idea of the director's intentions. \nBecause it is the first pass and generally includes everything, the editor's cut is usually much longer than the final film. The editor continues to refine the cut while shooting continues, and often the entire editing process goes on for many months and sometimes more than a year, depending on the film. The editor's cut is an opportunity for the editor to shape the story and present their vision of how the film should unfold. It provides a solid foundation for further collaboration with the director, allowing them to assess the initial assembly and provide feedback or guidance on the creative direction. \nMeanwhile, the producer, the studio, and the investors are anxious at this point and are curious about viewing the work in progress, but the director and editor always insist that they cannot see the editor's cut because \"it in no way resembles a well-made movie\". The pace is choppy and flat, there is no music, the dialogue has not been properly mixed and sounds hollow. Having seen a horrible early version of a film, it is very hard for most people to fairly judge a newer version on its merits. \nWhen shooting is finished, the director can then turn his or her full attention to collaborating with the editor and further refining the cut of the film. This is the time that is set aside where the film editor's first cut is molded to fit the director's vision. In the United States, under the rules of the Directors Guild of America (DGA), directors receive a minimum of ten weeks after completion of principal photography for a major motion picture intended for theatrical distribution to prepare their first cut. Under DGA rules, the director and editor are supposed to be protected from micromanagement by the studio and the producer during this part of the editing process; the studio cannot force the director to screen the film for anyone until the minimum period of ten weeks is complete.\nWhile collaborating on what is referred to as the \"director's cut\", the director and the editor go over the entire movie in great detail; scenes and shots are reordered, removed, shortened and otherwise tweaked. It is a \"painstakingly slow process\". Every mistake captured on camera during production will be played again and again in the editing room, so \"the editor must be sensitive to the director's ego\". The narrative pace of an editor's cut is usually too slow. Scenes that seemed like good ideas during pre-production and principal photography often turn out to be boring, time-consuming tangents on the screen and must be ruthlessly trimmed and tightened up. The narrative is sharpened and the story is polished. Often it is discovered that there are plot holes, missing shots or even missing segments which might require that new scenes be filmed (i.e., pick-up shots). \nThe director's cut typically involves multiple iterations and discussions until both the director and editor are satisfied with the overall direction of the film. The goal is to align the film with the director's artistic vision and narrative objectives. \nDuring this lengthy period of time working closely and collaborating one-on-one for many hours in the editing room\u2014a period that is normally far longer than the entire preceding film production\u2014many directors and editors form a unique artistic bond. At its greatest extent, when a director and editor develop a strong working relationship, the director may trust the editor to supervise the remaining stages of post-production. This frees up the director to start work early on other films. \nFilm editors traditionally discarded unused shots by literally throwing strips of film onto the floor. This led to the common entertainment industry expression that actors' performances ended up on the \"cutting-room floor\". Nowadays, it is rare for unused shots to be literally discarded or destroyed. More often, they are saved for bonus reels or blooper reels for home video releases. \nOften after the director has had their chance to oversee a cut, the subsequent cuts are supervised by one or more producers, who represent the production company or film studio. The studio \"usually has the final say\" if the director does not have contractual control over the final cut. Sometimes the producer is able to provide valuable input, especially if the director has become too close emotionally to the project. There have been several conflicts in the past between directors and studios, sometimes leading to the use of the \"Alan Smithee\" credit signifying when a director no longer wants to be associated with the final release. \nSometimes, a studio may show a nearly finished version of the final cut to a test audience to assess how an audience will react to the film, then revise the film further based on audience feedback.\nThe final cut is the last stage of post-production editing and represents the definitive version of the film. It is the result of the collaborative efforts between the director, editor, producer, and other key stakeholders. The final cut reflects the agreed-upon creative decisions and serves as the basis for distribution and exhibition. At that point, the sound editor can begin to finalize the soundtrack and the composer can time scenes to finish writing the film score.\nMise-en-sc\u00e8ne.\nMise-en-sc\u00e8ne is a complex film studies concept which is difficult to define. Ed Sikov has attempted to define it as \"the totality of expressive content within the image\". It is used to describe all the visual content seen on the screen and all the information communicated by that content, both in each individual shot and as an interrelated sequence of shots. \nFilm editing was traditionally seen as merely a method to erase mistakes and allow \"for spatial and temporal variety\" (by cutting between different camera angles of a scene). As explained above, film editing is now understood to be a deeply creative process in its own right. There is overlap and juxtaposition between the two concepts, insofar as the concept of mise-en-sc\u00e8ne can include the relationship of each shot to other shots arranged as a sequence and how that sequence itself can be expressive.\nMethods of montage.\nIn motion picture terminology, a montage (from the French for \"putting together\" or \"assembly\") is a film editing technique.\nThere are at least three senses of the term:\nAlthough film director D. W. Griffith was not part of the montage school, he was one of the early proponents of the power of editing\u00a0\u2014 mastering cross-cutting to show parallel action in different locations, and codifying film grammar in other ways as well. Griffith's work in the teens was highly regarded by Lev Kuleshov and other Soviet filmmakers and greatly influenced their understanding of editing.\nKuleshov was among the first to theorize about the relatively young medium of the cinema in the 1920s. For him, the unique essence of the cinema\u00a0\u2014 that which could be duplicated in no other medium\u00a0\u2014 is editing. He argues that editing a film is like constructing a building. Brick-by-brick (shot-by-shot) the building (film) is erected. His often-cited Kuleshov Experiment established that montage can lead the viewer to reach certain conclusions about the action in a film. Montage works because viewers infer meaning based on context. Sergei Eisenstein was briefly a student of Kuleshov's, but the two parted ways because they had different ideas of montage. Eisenstein regarded montage as a dialectical means of creating meaning. By contrasting unrelated shots he tried to provoke associations in the viewer, which were induced by shocks. But Eisenstein did not always do his own editing, and some of his most important films were edited by Esfir Tobak.\nA montage sequence consists of a series of short shots that are edited into a sequence to condense narrative. It is usually used to advance the story as a whole (often to suggest the passage of time), rather than to create symbolic meaning. In many cases, a song plays in the background to enhance the mood or reinforce the message being conveyed. One famous example of montage was seen in the 1968 film \"\", depicting the start of man's first development from apes to humans. Another example that is employed in many films is the sports montage. The sports montage shows the star athlete training over a period of time, each shot having more improvement than the last. Classic examples include Rocky and the Karate Kid.\nThe word's association with Sergei Eisenstein is often condensed\u2014too simply\u2014into the idea of \"juxtaposition\" or into two words: \"collision montage,\" whereby two adjacent shots that oppose each other on formal parameters or on the content of their images are cut against each other to create a new meaning not contained in the respective shots: Shot a + Shot b = New Meaning c.\nThe association of collision montage with Eisenstein is not surprising. He consistently maintained that the mind functions dialectically, in the Hegelian sense, that the contradiction between opposing ideas (thesis versus antithesis) is resolved by a higher truth, synthesis. He argued that conflict was the basis of \"all\" art, and never failed to see montage in other cultures. For example, he saw montage as a guiding principle in the construction of \"Japanese hieroglyphics in which two independent ideographic characters ('shots') are juxtaposed and \"explode\" into a concept. Thus:\n Eye + Water = Crying\n Door + Ear = Eavesdropping\n Child + Mouth = Screaming\n Mouth + Dog = Barking\n Mouth + Bird = Singing.\"\nHe also found montage in Japanese haiku, where short sense perceptions are juxtaposed and synthesized into a new meaning, as in this example:\n A lonely crow\n On a leafless bough\n One autumn eve.\n\u2014 Matsuo Basho\nAs Dudley Andrew notes, \"The collision of attractions from line to line produces the unified psychological effect which is the hallmark of haiku and montage.\"\nContinuity editing and alternatives.\nContinuity editing, developed in the early 1900s, aimed to create a coherent and smooth storytelling experience in films. It relied on consistent graphic qualities, balanced composition, and controlled editing rhythms to ensure narrative continuity and engage the audience. For example, whether an actor's costume remains the same from one scene to the next, or whether a glass of milk held by a character is full or empty throughout the scene. Because films are typically shot out of sequence, the script supervisor will keep a record of continuity and provide that to the film editor for reference. The editor may try to maintain continuity of elements, or may intentionally create a discontinuous sequence for stylistic or narrative effect.\nThe technique of continuity editing, part of the classical Hollywood style, was developed by early European and American directors, in particular, D.W. Griffith in his films such as \"The Birth of a Nation\" and \"Intolerance\". The classical style embraces temporal and spatial continuity as a way of advancing the narrative, using such techniques as the 180 degree rule, Establishing shot, and Shot reverse shot. The 180-degree system in film editing ensures consistency in shot composition by keeping relative positions of characters or objects in the frame consistent. It also maintains consistent eye-lines and screen direction to avoid disorientation and confusion for the audience, allowing for clear spatial delineation and a smooth narrative experience. Often, continuity editing means finding a balance between literal continuity and perceived continuity. For instance, editors may condense action across cuts in a non-distracting way. A character walking from one place to another may \"skip\" a section of floor from one side of a cut to the other, but the cut is constructed to appear continuous so as not to distract the viewer.\nEarly Russian filmmakers such as Lev Kuleshov (already mentioned) further explored and theorized about editing and its ideological nature. Sergei Eisenstein developed a system of editing that was unconcerned with the rules of the continuity system of classical Hollywood that he called Intellectual montage.\nAlternatives to traditional editing were also explored by early surrealist and Dada filmmakers such as Luis Bu\u00f1uel (director of the 1929 \"Un Chien Andalou\") and Ren\u00e9 Clair (director of 1924's \"Entr'acte\" which starred famous Dada artists Marcel Duchamp and Man Ray).\nFilmmakers have explored alternatives to continuity editing, focusing on graphic and rhythmic possibilities in their films. Experimental filmmakers like Stan Brakhage and Bruce Conner have used purely graphic elements to join shots, emphasizing light, texture, and shape rather than narrative coherence. Non-narrative films have prioritized rhythmic relations among shots, even employing single-frame shots for extreme rhythmic effects. Narrative filmmakers, such as Busby Berkeley and Yasujiro Ow, have occasionally subordinated narrative concerns to graphic or rhythmic patterns, while films influenced by music videos often feature pulsating rhythmic editing that de-emphasizes spatial and temporal dimensions.\nThe French New Wave filmmakers such as Jean-Luc Godard and Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut and their American counterparts such as Andy Warhol and John Cassavetes also pushed the limits of editing technique during the late 1950s and throughout the 1960s. French New Wave films and the non-narrative films of the 1960s used a carefree editing style and did not conform to the traditional editing etiquette of Hollywood films. Like its Dada and surrealist predecessors, French New Wave editing often drew attention to itself by its lack of continuity, its demystifying self-reflexive nature (reminding the audience that they were watching a film), and by the overt use of jump cuts or the insertion of material not often related to any narrative. Three of the most influential editors of French New Wave films were the women who (in combination) edited 15 of Godard's films: Francoise Collin, Agnes Guillemot, and Cecile Decugis, and another notable editor is Marie-Jos\u00e8phe Yoyotte, the first black woman editor in French cinema and editor of \"The 400 Blows\".\nSince the late 20th century Post-classical editing has seen faster editing styles with nonlinear, discontinuous action.\nSignificance.\nVsevolod Pudovkin noted that the editing process is the one phase of production that is truly unique to motion pictures. Every other aspect of filmmaking originated in a different medium than film (photography, art direction, writing, sound recording), but editing is the one process that is unique to film. Filmmaker Stanley Kubrick was quoted as saying: \"I love editing. I think I like it more than any other phase of filmmaking. If I wanted to be frivolous, I might say that everything that precedes editing is merely a way of producing a film to edit.\"\nFilm editing is significant because it shapes the narrative structure, visual and aesthetic impact, rhythm and pacing, emotional resonance, and overall storytelling of a film. Editors possess a unique creative power to manipulate and arrange shots, allowing them to craft a cinematic experience that engages, entertains, and emotionally connects with the audience. Film editing is a distinct art form within the filmmaking process, enabling filmmakers to realize their vision and bring stories to life on the screen.\nAccording to writer-director Preston Sturges: [T]here is a law of natural cutting and that this replicates what an audience in a legitimate theater does for itself. The more nearly the film cutter approaches this law of natural interest, the more invisible will be his cutting. If the camera moves from one person to another at the exact moment that one in the legitimate theatre would have turned his head, one will not be conscious of a cut. If the camera misses by a quarter of a second, one will get a jolt. There is one other requirement: the two shots must be approximate of the same tone value. If one cuts from black to white, it is jarring. At any given moment, the camera must point at the exact spot the audience wishes to look at. To find that spot is absurdly easy: one has only to remember where one was looking at the time the scene was made.\nAssistant editors.\nAssistant editors aid the editor and director in collecting and organizing all the elements needed to edit the film. The Motion Picture Editors Guild defines an assistant editor as \"a person who is assigned to assist an Editor. His or her duties shall be such as are assigned and performed under the immediate direction, supervision, and responsibility of the editor.\" When editing is finished, they oversee the various lists and instructions necessary to put the film into its final form. Editors of large budget features will usually have a team of assistants working for them. The first assistant editor is in charge of this team and may do a small bit of picture editing as well, if necessary. Assistant editors are responsible for collecting, organizing, and managing all the elements needed for the editing process. This includes footage, sound files, music tracks, visual effects assets, and other media assets. They ensure that everything is properly labeled, logged, and stored in an organized manner, making it easier for the editor to access and work with the materials efficiently. Assistant editors serve as a bridge between the editing team and other departments, facilitating communication and collaboration. They often work closely with the director, editor, visual effects artists, sound designers, and other post-production professionals, relaying information, managing deliverables, and coordinating schedules. Often assistant editors will perform temporary sound, music, and visual effects work. The other assistants will have set tasks, usually helping each other when necessary to complete the many time-sensitive tasks at hand. In addition, an apprentice editor may be on hand to help the assistants. An apprentice is usually someone who is learning the ropes of assisting.\nTelevision shows typically have one assistant per editor. This assistant is responsible for every task required to bring the show to the final form. Lower budget features and documentaries will also commonly have only one assistant. Higher budget films and shows tend to have more than one assistant editor, and in some cases, there can be a full team of assistants.\nThe organizational aspects job could best be compared to database management. When a film is shot, every piece of picture or sound is coded with numbers and timecode. It is the assistant's job to keep track of these numbers in a database, which, in non-linear editing, is linked to the computer program. The editor and director cut the film using digital copies of the original film and sound, commonly referred to as an \"offline\" edit. When the cut is finished, it is the assistant's job to bring the film or television show \"online\". They create lists and instructions that tell the picture and sound finishers how to put the edit back together with the high-quality original elements. Assistant editing can be seen as a career path to eventually becoming an editor. Many assistants, however, do not choose to pursue advancement to the editor, and are very happy at the assistant level, working long and rewarding careers on many films and television shows.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\nFurther reading\nExternal links.\nWikibooks\nWikiversity"}
{"id": "10776", "revid": "50123802", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10776", "title": "Freestyle", "text": "Freestyle may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10777", "revid": "50832030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10777", "title": "Friedrich W\u00f6hler", "text": "German chemist (1800\u20131882)\nFriedrich W\u00f6hler FRS(For) HonFRSE (; 31 July 1800\u00a0\u2013 23 September 1882) was a German chemist known for his work in both organic and inorganic chemistry, being the first to isolate the chemical elements beryllium and yttrium in pure metallic form. He was the first to prepare several inorganic compounds, including silane and silicon nitride.\nW\u00f6hler is also known for seminal contributions in organic chemistry, in particular, the W\u00f6hler synthesis of urea. His synthesis of the organic compound urea in the laboratory from inorganic substances contradicted the belief that organic compounds could only be produced by living organisms due to a \"life force\" known as Vitalism . However, the exact extent of W\u00f6hler's role in diminishing the belief in vitalism is considered by some to be questionable.\nBiography.\nFriedrich W\u00f6hler was born in Eschersheim, Germany, on 31 July 1800. He was the son of a veterinarian. As a boy, he showed interest in mineral collecting, drawing, and science. His secondary education was at the Frankfurt Gymnasium. During his time at the gymnasium, W\u00f6hler began chemical experimentation in a home laboratory provided by his father. He began his higher education at Marburg University in 1820.\nOn 2 September 1823, W\u00f6hler passed his examinations as a Doctor of Medicine, Surgery, and Obstetrics at Heidelberg University, having studied in the laboratory of chemist Leopold Gmelin. Gmelin encouraged him to focus on chemistry and arranged for W\u00f6hler to conduct research under the direction of chemist Jacob Berzelius in Stockholm, Sweden. W\u00f6hler's time in Stockholm with Berzelius marked the beginning of a long personal and professional relationship between the two scientists. W\u00f6hler translated many of Berzelius's scientific writings into German for international publication. In his lifetime, W\u00f6hler wrote about 275 books, editions, and papers.\nFrom 1826 to 1831, W\u00f6hler taught chemistry at the Gewerbeschule in Berlin. From 1831 until 1836, he taught at the \"H\u00f6here Gewerbeschule\" at Kassel. In the spring of 1836, W\u00f6hler became Friedrich Stromeyer's successor as an Ordinary Professor of Chemistry at the University of G\u00f6ttingen, where he occupied the chair of chemistry for 46 years, until his death in 1882. During his time at G\u00f6ttingen approximately 8000 research students were trained in his laboratory. In 1834, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.\nContributions to chemistry.\nInorganic chemistry.\nW\u00f6hler investigated more than twenty\u2010five chemical elements during his career. Hans Christian \u00d8rsted was the first to separate the element aluminium in 1825, using a reduction of aluminium chloride with a potassium amalgam. Although \u00d8rsted published his findings on the isolation of aluminium in the form of small particles, no other investigators successfully replicated his findings until 1936. \u00d8rsted is now credited with discovering aluminium. \u00d8rsted's findings on aluminium preparation were developed further by W\u00f6hler, with \u00d8rsted's permission. W\u00f6hler modified \u00d8rsted's methods, substituting potassium metal for potassium amalgam for the reduction of aluminium chloride. Using this improved method, W\u00f6hler isolated aluminium powder in pure form on 22 October 1827. He showed that the aluminium powder could convert to solid balls of pure metallic aluminium in 1845. For this work, W\u00f6hler is credited with the first isolation of aluminium in pure form.\nIn 1828, W\u00f6hler was the first to isolate the element beryllium in pure metallic form (also independently isolated by Antoine Bussy). In the same year, he became the first to isolate the element yttrium in pure metallic form. He achieved these preparations by heating the anhydrous chlorides of beryllium and yttrium with potassium metal.\nIn 1850, W\u00f6hler determined that what was believed until then to be metallic titanium was a mixture of titanium, carbon, and nitrogen, from which he derived the purest form isolated to that time. (Elemental titanium was later isolated in completely pure form in 1910 by Matthew A. Hunter.) He also developed a chemical synthesis of calcium carbide and silicon nitride.\nW\u00f6hler, working with French chemist Sainte Claire Deville, isolated the element boron in a crystalline form. He also isolated the element silicon in a crystalline form. Crystalline forms of these two elements were previously unknown. In 1856, working with Heinrich Buff, W\u00f6hler prepared the inorganic compound silane (SiH4). He prepared the first samples of boron nitride by melting together boric acid and potassium cyanide. He also developed a method for the preparation of calcium carbide.\nW\u00f6hler had an interest in the chemical composition of meteorites. He showed that some meteoric stones contain organic matter. He analyzed meteorites, and for many years wrote the digest on the literature of meteorites in the \"Jahresberichte \u00fcber die Fortschritte der Chemie\". W\u00f6hler accumulated the best private collection of meteoric stones and irons that existed.\nOrganic chemistry.\nIn 1832, lacking his own laboratory facilities at Kassel, W\u00f6hler worked with Justus Liebig in his Giessen laboratory. In that year, W\u00f6hler and Liebig published an investigation of the oil of bitter almonds. Through their detailed analysis of the chemical composition of this oil, they proved by their experiments that a group of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms can behave chemically as if it were the equivalent of a single atom, take the place of an atom in a chemical compound, and be exchanged for other atoms in chemical compounds. Specifically, their research on the oil of bitter almonds showed that a group of elements with the chemical composition C7H5O can be thought of as a single functional group, which came to be known as a benzoyl radical. In this way, the investigations of W\u00f6hler and Liebig established a new concept in organic chemistry referred to as compound radicals, which had a profound influence on the development of organic chemistry. Many more functional groups were later identified by subsequent investigators with wide utility in chemistry.\nLiebig and W\u00f6hler explored the concept of chemical isomerism, the idea that two chemical compounds with identical chemical compositions could be different substances because of different arrangements of the atoms in the chemical structure. Aspects of chemical isomerism originated in the research of Berzelius. Liebig and W\u00f6hler investigated silver fulminate and silver cyanate. These two compounds have the same chemical composition yet are chemically different. Silver fulminate is explosive, while silver cyanate is a stable compound. Liebig and W\u00f6hler recognized these as examples of structural isomerism, which was a significant advance in understanding chemical isomerism.\nW\u00f6hler has also been regarded as a pioneering researcher in organic chemistry as a result of his 1828 demonstration of the laboratory synthesis of urea from ammonium cyanate, in a chemical reaction that came to be known as the \"W\u00f6hler synthesis\". Urea and ammonium cyanate are further examples of structural isomers of chemical compounds. Heating ammonium cyanate converts it into urea, which is its isomer. In a letter to Swedish chemist J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius the same year, he wrote, 'In a manner of speaking, I can no longer hold my chemical water. I must tell you that I can make urea without the use of kidneys of any animal, be it man or dog.'\nW\u00f6hler's demonstration of urea synthesis has become regarded as a refutation of vitalism, the hypothesis that living things are alive because of some special \"vital force\".\nIt was the beginning of the end for one popular vitalist hypothesis, the idea that \"organic\" compounds could be made only by living things.\nIn responding to W\u00f6hler, J\u00f6ns Jakob Berzelius acknowledged that W\u00f6hler's results were highly significant for the understanding of organic chemistry, calling the findings a \"jewel\" for W\u00f6hler's \"laurel wreath\". Both scientists also recognized the work's importance to the study of isomerism, a new area of research.\nW\u00f6hler's role in overturning vitalism is said to have become exaggerated over time. This tendency can be traced back to Hermann Kopp's \"History of Chemistry\" (in four volumes, 1843\u20131847). He emphasized the importance of W\u00f6hler's research as a refutation of vitalism but ignored its importance in understanding chemical isomerism, setting a tone for subsequent writers.\nThe notion that W\u00f6hler single-handedly overturned vitalism also gained popularity after it appeared in a popular history of chemistry published in 1931, which, \"ignoring all pretense of historical accuracy, turned W\u00f6hler into a crusader\".\nContrary to what was thought in W\u00f6hler's time, cyanate is not a purely inorganic anion, as it is formed in various metabolic pathways. Thus the conversion of ammonium cyanate into urea was not an example of production of an organic compound from an inorganic precursor.\nEducation reform.\nOnce W\u00f6hler became a professor at the University of G\u00f6ttingen, students traveled from around the world to be instructed by him. W\u00f6hler saw particular success in his students after giving them hands-on experience in the lab. This practice was later adopted around the world, becoming the chemistry lab co-requisite that is required at most universities today.\nW\u00f6hler also allowed his students to participate and aid him in his research, which was not typical at the time. This practice became nearly universal, normalizing the undergraduate and graduate-level research that is a requirement for numerous degrees today.\nFinal days and legacy.\nW\u00f6hler's discoveries had a significant influence on the theoretical basis of chemistry. The journals of every year from 1820 to 1881 contain his original scientific contributions. The \"Scientific American\" supplement for 1882 stated that \"for two or three of his researches he deserves the highest honor a scientific man can obtain, but the sum of his work is overwhelming. Had he never lived, the aspect of chemistry would be very different from that it is now\".\nW\u00f6hler's notable research students included chemists Georg Ludwig Carius, Heinrich Limpricht, Rudolph Fittig, Adolph Wilhelm Hermann Kolbe, Albert Niemann, Vojt\u011bch \u0160afa\u0159\u00edk, Wilhelm K\u00fchne, and Augustus Voelcker.\nW\u00f6hler was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of London in 1854. He was an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. In 1862, W\u00f6hler was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society.\n\"The Life and Work of Friedrich W\u00f6hler (1800\u20131882)\" (2005) by Robin Keen is considered to be \"the first detailed scientific biography\" of W\u00f6hler.\nOn the 100th anniversary of W\u00f6hler's death, the West German government issued a stamp depicting the structure of urea with its synthesis formula listed directly below.\nFamily.\nW\u00f6hler's first marriage was in 1828, to his cousin Franziska Maria W\u00f6hler (1811\u20131832). The couple had two children, a son (August) and a daughter (Sophie). After Franziska's death, he married Julie Pfeiffer (1813\u20131886) in 1834, with whom he had four daughters: Fanny, Helene, Emilie, and Pauline.\nFurther works.\nFurther works from W\u00f6hler:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10778", "revid": "770058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10778", "title": "Funk", "text": "Music genre\nFunk is a music genre that originated in African-American communities in the mid-1960s when musicians created a rhythmic, danceable new form of music through a mixture of various music genres that were popular among African-Americans in the mid-20th century. It deemphasizes melody and chord progressions and focuses on a strong rhythmic groove of a bassline played by an electric bassist and a drum part played by a percussionist, often at slower tempos than other popular music. Funk typically consists of a complex percussive groove with rhythm instruments playing interlocking grooves that create a \"hypnotic\" and \"danceable\" feel. Early funk, specifically James Brown, fused jazz and blues, and added a syncopated drum groove.\nFunk originated in the mid-1960s, with James Brown's development of a signature groove that emphasized the downbeat\u2014with a heavy emphasis on the first beat of every measure (\"The One\"), and the application of swung 16th notes and syncopation on all basslines, drum patterns, and guitar riffs. Rock- and psychedelia-influenced musicians Sly and the Family Stone and Parliament-Funkadelic fostered more eclectic examples of the genre beginning in the late 1960s. Other musical groups developed Brown's innovations during the 1970s and the 1980s, including Kool and the Gang, Ohio Players, Fatback Band, Jimmy Castor Bunch, Bootsy Collins, Earth, Wind &amp; Fire, B.T. Express, Hamilton Bohannon, One Way, Lakeside, Dazz Band, The Gap Band, Slave, Aurra, Roger Troutman &amp; Zapp, Con Funk Shun, Cameo, Bar-Kays and Chic. \nFunk derivatives include avant-funk, an avant-garde strain of funk; boogie, a hybrid of electronic music and funk; funk metal; G-funk, a mix of gangsta rap and psychedelic funk; Timba, a form of funky Cuban dance music; and funk jam. It is also the main influence of Washington go-go, a funk subgenre. Funk samples and breakbeats have been used extensively in hip hop and electronic dance music.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"funk\" initially referred (and still refers) to a strong odor. It is originally derived from Latin (which means \"to smoke\") via Old French and, in this sense, it was first documented in English in 1620. In 1784, \"funky\" meaning \"musty\" was first documented, which, in turn, led to a sense of \"earthy\" that was taken up around 1900 in early jazz slang for something \"deeply or strongly felt\". Even though in white culture, the term \"funk\" can have negative connotations of odor or being in a bad mood (\"in a funk\"), in African communities, the term \"funk\", while still linked to body odor, had the positive sense that a musician's hard-working, honest effort led to sweat, and from their \"physical exertion\" came an \"exquisite\" and \"superlative\" performance.\nIn early jam sessions, musicians would encourage one another to \"get down\" by telling one another, \"Now, put some \"stank\" on it!\" At least as early as 1907, jazz songs carried titles such as \"Funky\". The first example is an unrecorded number by Buddy Bolden, remembered as either \"Funky Butt\" or \"Buddy Bolden's Blues\", with improvised lyrics that were, according to Donald M. Marquis, either \"comical and light\" or \"crude and downright obscene\" but, in one way or another, referring to the sweaty atmosphere at dances where Bolden's band played. As late as the 1950s and early 1960s, when \"funk\" and \"funky\" were used increasingly in the context of jazz music, the terms still were considered indelicate and inappropriate for use in polite company. According to one source, New Orleans-born drummer Earl Palmer \"was the first to use the word 'funky' to explain to other musicians that their music should be made more syncopated and danceable.\" The style later evolved into a rather hard-driving, insistent rhythm, implying a more \"carnal quality\". This early form of the music set the pattern for later musicians. The music was identified as slow, sexy, loose, riff-oriented and danceable.\nThe meaning of \"funk\" continues to captivate the genre of black music, feeling, and knowledge. Recent scholarship in black studies has taken the term \"funk\" in its many iterations to consider the range of black movement and culture. In particular, L.H. Stallings's \"Funk the Erotic: Transaesthetics and Black Sexual Cultures\" explores these multiple meanings of \"funk\" as a way to theorize sexuality, culture, and western hegemony within the many locations of \"funk\": \"street parties, drama/theater, strippers and strip clubs, pornography, and self-published fiction.\"\nCharacteristics.\nRhythm and tempo.\nLike soul, funk is based on dance music, so it has a strong \"rhythmic role\". The sound of funk is as much based on the \"spaces between the notes\" as the notes that are played; as such, rests between notes are important. While there are rhythmic similarities between funk and disco, funk has a \"central dance beat that's slower, sexier and more syncopated than disco\", and funk rhythm section musicians add more \"subtextures\", complexity and \"personality\" onto the main beat than a programmed synth-based disco ensemble.\nBefore funk, most pop music was based on sequences of eighth notes, because the fast tempos made further subdivisions of the beat infeasible. The innovation of funk was that by using slower tempos (surely influenced by the revival of blues in the early 1960s), funk \"created space for further rhythmic subdivision, so a bar of could now accommodate possible 16 note placements.\" Specifically, by having the guitar and drums play in \"motoring\" sixteenth-note rhythms, it created the opportunity for the other instruments to play \"more syncopated, broken-up style\", which facilitated a move to more \"liberated\" basslines. Together, these \"interlocking parts\" created a \"hypnotic\" and \"danceable feel\".\nA great deal of funk is rhythmically based on a two-celled onbeat/offbeat structure, which originated in sub-Saharan African music traditions. New Orleans appropriated the bifurcated structure from the Afro-Cuban mambo and conga in the late 1940s, and made it its own. New Orleans funk, as it was called, gained international acclaim largely because James Brown's rhythm section used it to great effect.\nHarmony.\nFunk uses the same richly colored extended chords found in bebop jazz, such as minor chords with added sevenths and elevenths, or dominant seventh chords with altered ninths. Some examples of chords used in funk are minor eleventh chords (e.g., F minor 11th); dominant seventh with added sharp ninth and a suspended fourth (e.g., C7 (#9) sus 4); dominant ninth chords (e.g., F9); and minor sixth chords (e.g., C minor 6). The six-ninth chord is used in funk (e.g., F 6/9); it is a major chord with an added sixth and ninth. In funk, minor seventh chords are more common than minor triads because minor triads were found to be too thin-sounding. Some of the best known and most skillful soloists in funk have jazz backgrounds. Trombonist Fred Wesley and saxophonists Pee Wee Ellis and Maceo Parker are among the most notable musicians in the funk music genre, having worked with James Brown, George Clinton and Prince.\nUnlike bebop jazz, with its complex, rapid-fire chord changes, funk often uses a static single-chord or two-chord vamp (often alternating a minor seventh chord and a related dominant seventh chord, such as A minor to D7) during all or part of a song, with melodo-harmonic movement and a complex, driving rhythmic feel. Even though some funk songs are mainly one-chord vamps, the rhythm section musicians may embellish this chord by moving it up or down a semitone or a tone to create chromatic passing chords. For example, the verse section of \"Play That Funky Music\" (by Wild Cherry) mainly uses an E ninth chord, but it also uses F#9 and F9.\nThe chords used in funk songs typically imply a Dorian or Mixolydian mode, as opposed to the major or natural minor tonalities of most popular music. Melodic content was derived by mixing these modes with the blues scale. In the 1970s, jazz music drew upon funk to create a new subgenre of jazz-funk, which can be heard in recordings by Miles Davis (\"Live-Evil\", \"On the Corner\"), and Herbie Hancock (\"Head Hunters\").\nImprovisation.\nFunk continues the African musical tradition of improvisation, in that in a funk band, the group would typically \"feel\" when to change, by \"jamming\" and \"grooving\", even in the studio recording stage, which might only be based on the skeleton framework for each song. Funk uses \"collective improvisation\", in which musicians at rehearsals would have what was metaphorically a musical \"conversation\", an approach which extended to the onstage performances.\nInstruments.\nBass guitar.\nFunk creates an intense groove by using strong guitar riffs and basslines played on electric bass. Like Motown recordings, funk songs use basslines as the centerpiece of songs. Indeed, funk has been called the style in which the bassline is most prominent in the songs, with the bass playing the \"hook\" of the song. Early funk basslines used syncopation (typically syncopated eighth notes), but with the addition of more of a \"driving feel\" than in New Orleans funk, and they used blues scale notes along with the major third above the root. Later funk basslines use sixteenth note syncopation, blues scales, and repetitive patterns, often with leaps of an octave or a larger interval.\nFunk basslines emphasize repetitive patterns, locked-in grooves, continuous playing, and slap and popping bass. Slapping and popping uses a mixture of thumb-slapped low notes (also called \"thumped\") and finger \"popped\" (or plucked) high notes, allowing the bass to have a drum-like rhythmic role, which became a distinctive element of funk. Notable slap and funky players include Bernard Edwards (Chic), Robert \"Kool\" Bell, Mark Adams (Slave), Johnny Flippin (Fatback) and Bootsy Collins. While slap and funky is important, some influential bassists who play funk, such as Rocco Prestia (from Tower of Power), did not use the approach, and instead used a typical fingerstyle method based on James Jamerson's Motown playing style. Larry Graham from Sly and the Family Stone is an influential bassist.\nFunk bass has an \"earthy, percussive kind of feel\", in part due to the use of muted, rhythmic ghost notes (also called \"dead notes\"). Some funk bass players use electronic effects units to alter the tone of their instrument, such as \"envelope filters\" (an auto-wah effect that creates a \"gooey, slurpy, quacky, and syrupy\" sound) and imitate keyboard synthesizer bass tones (e.g., the Mutron envelope filter) and overdriven fuzz bass effects, which are used to create the \"classic fuzz tone that sounds like old school Funk records\". Other effects that are used include the flanger and bass chorus. Collins also used a Mu-Tron Octave Divider, an octave pedal that, like the Octavia pedal popularized by Hendrix, can double a note an octave above and below to create a \"futuristic and fat low-end sound\".\nDrums.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOne could argue that no music form highlights the drummer more than funk. The fat grooves, the dirty backbeats, the snap of a tight snare, the syncopated hits with a stellar horn section, the deep pocket against a smooth bass line\u2026you're probably groovin' in your seat just thinking about it. Funk music is all about the beat, and it's no coincidence that many of our most influential drummers have made a name for themselves playing the style.\n Jeff Schaller of \"Modern Drummer\" (December 28, 2011) https://\nFunk drumming creates a groove by emphasizing the drummer's \"feel and emotion\", which including \"occasional tempo fluctuations\", the use of swing feel in some songs (e.g., \"Cissy Strut\" by The Meters and \"I'll Take You There\" by The Staple Singers, which have a half-swung feel), and less use of fills (as they can lessen the groove). Drum fills are \"few and economical\", to ensure that the drumming stays \"in the pocket\", with a steady tempo and groove. These playing techniques are supplemented by a set-up for the drum kit that often includes muffled bass drums and toms and tightly tuned snare drums. Double bass drumming sounds are often done by funk drummers with a single pedal, an approach which \"accents the second note... [and] deadens the drumhead's resonance\", which gives a short, muffled bass drum sound.\nJames Brown used two drummers such as Clyde Stubblefield and John 'Jabo' Starks in recording and soul shows. By using two drummers, the JB band was able to maintain a \"solid syncopated\" rhythmic sound, which contributed to the band's distinctive \"Funky Drummer\" rhythm.\nIn Tower of Power drummer David Garibaldi's playing, there are many ghost notes and rim shots. A key part of the funk drumming style is using the hi-hat, with opening and closing the hi-hats during playing (to create \"splash\" accent effects) being an important approach. Two-handed sixteenth notes on the hi-hats, sometimes with a degree of swing feel, is used in funk.\nJim Payne states that funk drumming uses a \"wide-open\" approach to improvisation around rhythmic ideas from Latin music, ostinatos, that are repeated \"with only slight variations\", an approach which he says causes the \"mesmerizing\" nature of funk. Payne states that funk can be thought of as \"rock played in a more syncopated manner\", particularly with the bass drum, which plays syncopated eighth-note and sixteenth-note patterns that were innovated by drummer Clive Williams (with Joe Tex); George Brown (with Kool &amp; the Gang) and James \"Diamond\" Williams (with The Ohio Players). As with rock, the snare provides backbeats in most funk (albeit with additional soft ghost notes).\nElectric guitar.\nIn funk, guitarists often mix playing chords of a short duration (nicknamed \"stabs\") with faster rhythms and riffs. Guitarists playing rhythmic parts often play sixteenth notes, including with percussive ghost notes. Chord extensions are favored, such as ninth chords. Typically, funk uses \"two interlocking [electric] guitar parts\", with a rhythm guitarist and a \"tenor guitarist\" who plays single notes. The two guitarists trade off their lines to create a \"call-and-response, intertwined pocket.\" If a band only has one guitarist, this effect may be recreated by overdubbing in the studio, or, in a live show, by having a single guitarist play both parts, to the degree that this is possible.\nIn funk bands, guitarists typically play in a percussive style, using a style of picking called the \"chank\" or \"chicken scratch\", in which the guitar strings are pressed lightly against the fingerboard and then quickly released just enough to get a muted \"scratching\" sound that is produced by rapid rhythmic strumming of the opposite hand near the bridge. Early examples of that technique used on rhythm and blues are heard on the Johnny Otis song \"Willie and the Hand Jive\" in 1957, with future James Brown band guitar player Jimmy Nolen. The technique can be broken down into three approaches: the \"chika\", the \"chank\" and the \"choke\". With the \"chika\" comes a muted sound of strings being hit against the fingerboard; \"chank\" is a staccato attack done by releasing the chord with the fretting hand after strumming it; and \"choking\" generally uses all the strings being strummed and heavily muted. \nThe result of these factors was a rhythm guitar sound that seemed to float somewhere between the low-end thump of the electric bass and the cutting tone of the snare and hi-hats, with a rhythmically melodic feel that fell deep in the pocket. Guitarist Jimmy Nolen, longtime guitarist for James Brown, developed this technique. On Brown's \"Give It Up or Turnit a Loose\" (1969), however, Jimmy Nolen's guitar part has a bare bones tonal structure. The pattern of attack-points is the emphasis, not the pattern of pitches. The guitar is used the way that an African drum, or idiophone would be used. Nolen created a \"clean, trebly tone\" by using \"hollow-body jazz guitars with single-coil P-90 pickups\" plugged into a Fender Twin Reverb amp with the mid turned down low and the treble turned up high.\nFunk guitarists playing rhythm guitar generally avoid distortion effects and amp overdrive to get a clean sound, and given the importance of a crisp, high sound, Fender Stratocasters and Telecasters were widely used for their cutting treble tone. The mids are often cut by guitarists to help the guitar sound different from the horn section, keyboards and other instruments. Given the focus on providing a rhythmic groove, and the lack of emphasis on instrumental guitar melodies and guitar solos, sustain is not sought out by funk rhythm guitarists. Funk rhythm guitarists use compressor volume-control effects to enhance the sound of muted notes, which boosts the \"clucking\" sound and adds \"percussive excitement to funk rhythms\" (an approach used by Nile Rodgers).\nGuitarist Eddie Hazel from Funkadelic is notable for his solo improvisation (particularly for the solo on \"Maggot Brain\") and guitar riffs, the tone of which was shaped by a Maestro FZ-1 Fuzz-Tone pedal. Hazel, along with guitarist Ernie Isley of the Isley Brothers, was influenced by Jimi Hendrix's improvised, wah-wah infused solos. Ernie Isley was tutored at an early age by Hendrix, when Hendrix was a part of the Isley Brothers backing band and temporarily lived in the Isleys' household. Funk guitarists use the wah-wah sound effect along with muting the notes to create a percussive sound for their guitar riffs. The phaser effect is often used in funk and R&amp;B guitar playing for its filter sweeping sound effect, an example being the Isley Brothers' song \"Who's That Lady\". Michael Hampton, another P-Funk guitarist, was able to play Hazel's virtuosic solo on \"Maggot Brain\", using a solo approach that added in string bends and Hendrix-style feedback.\nKeyboards.\nA range of keyboard instruments are used in funk. Acoustic piano is used in funk, including in \"September\" by Earth Wind &amp; Fire and \"Will It Go Round in Circles\" by Billy Preston. The electric piano is used on songs such as Herbie Hancock's \"Chameleon\" (a Fender Rhodes) and \"Mercy, Mercy, Mercy\" by Joe Zawinul (a Wurlitzer). The clavinet is used for its percussive tone, and it can be heard in songs such as Stevie Wonder's \"Superstition\" and \"Higher Ground\" and Bill Withers' \"Use Me\". The Hammond B-3 organ is used in funk, in songs such as \"Cissy Strut\" by The Meters and \"Love the One You're With\" (with Aretha Franklin singing and Billy Preston on keyboards).\nBernie Worrell's range of keyboards from his recordings with Parliament Funkadelic demonstrate the wide range of keyboards used in funk, as they include the Hammond organ (\"Funky Woman\", \"Hit It and Quit It\", \"Wars of Armageddon\"); RMI electric piano (\"I Wanna Know If It's Good to You?\", \"Free Your Mind\", \"Loose Booty\"); acoustic piano (\"Funky Dollar Bill\", \"Jimmy's Got a Little Bit of Bitch in Him\"); clavinet (\"Joyful Process\", \"Up for the Down Stroke\", \"Red Hot Mama\"); Minimoog synthesizer (\"Atmosphere\", \"Flash Light\", \"Aqua Boogie\", \"Knee Deep\", \"Let's Take It to the Stage\"); and ARP string ensemble synth (\"Chocolate City\", \"Give Up the Funk (Tear the Roof off the Sucker)\", \"Undisco Kidd\").\nSynthesizers were used in funk both to add to the deep sound of the electric bass, or even to replace the electric bass altogether in some songs. Funk synthesizer bass, most often a Minimoog, was used because it could create layered sounds and new electronic tones that were not feasible on electric bass.\nVocals and lyrics.\nIn the 1970s, funk used many of the same vocal styles that were used in African-American music in the 1960s, including singing influences from blues, gospel, jazz and doo-wop. Like these other African-American styles, funk used \"[y]ells, shouts, hollers, moans, humming, and melodic riffs\", along with styles such as call and response and narration of stories (like the African oral tradition approach). The call and response in funk can be between the lead singer and the band members who act as backup vocalists.\nAs funk emerged from soul, the vocals in funk share soul's approach; however, funk vocals tend to be \"more punctuated, energetic, rhythmically percussive[,] and less embellished\" with ornaments, and the vocal lines tend to resemble horn parts and have \"pushed\" rhythms. Funk bands such as Earth, Wind &amp; Fire have harmony vocal parts. Songs like \"Super Bad\" by James Brown included \"double-voice\" along with \"yells, shouts and screams\". Funk singers used a \"black aesthetic\" to perform that made use of \"colorful and lively exchange of gestures, facial expressions, body posture, and vocal phrases\" to create an engaging performance.\nThe lyrics in funk music addressed issues faced by the African American community in the United States during the 1970s, which arose due to the move away from an industrial, working-class economy to an information economy, which harmed the Black working class. Funk songs by The Ohio Players, Earth, Wind &amp; Fire, and James Brown raised issues faced by lower-income Blacks in their song lyrics, such as poor \"economic conditions and themes of poor inner-city life in the black communities\".\nThe Funkadelic song \"One Nation Under A Groove\" (1978) is about the challenges that Blacks overcame during the 1960s civil rights movement, and it includes an exhortation for Blacks in the 1970s to capitalize on the new \"social and political opportunities\" that had become available in the 1970s. The Isley Brothers song \"Fight the Power\" (1975) has a political message. Parliament's song \"Chocolate City\" (1975) metaphorically refers to Washington, D.C., and other US cities that have a mainly Black population, and it draws attention to the potential power that Black voters wield and suggests that a Black President be considered in the future.\nThe political themes of funk songs and the aiming of the messages to a Black audience echoed the new image of Blacks that was created in Blaxploitation films, which depicted \"African-American men and women standing their ground and fighting for what was right\". Both funk and Blaxploitation films addressed issues faced by Blacks and told stories from a Black perspective. Another link between 1970s funk and Blaxploitation films is that many of these films used funk soundtracks (e.g., Curtis Mayfield for \"Superfly\"; James Brown and Fred Wesley for \"Black Caesar\" and War for \"Youngblood\").\nFunk songs included metaphorical language that was understood best by listeners who were \"familiar with the black aesthetic and [black] vernacular\". For example, funk songs included expressions such as \"shake your money maker\", \"funk yourself right out\" and \"move your boogie body\". Another example is the use of \"bad\" in the song \"Super Bad\" (1970), which black listeners knew meant \"good\" or \"great\".\nIn the 1970s, to get around radio obscenity restrictions, funk artists would use words that sounded like non-allowed words and double entendres to get around these restrictions. For example, The Ohio Players had a song entitled \"Fopp\" which referred to \"Fopp me right, don't you fopp me wrong/We'll be foppin' all night long...\". Some funk songs used made-up words which suggested that they were \"writing lyrics in a constant haze of marijuana smoke\", such as Parliament's \"Aqua Boogie (A Psychoalphadiscobetabioaquadoloop)\", which includes words such as \"bioaquadoloop\". The mainstream white listener base was often not able to understand funk's lyrical messages, which contributed to funk's lack of popular music chart success with white audiences during the 1970s.\nOther instruments.\nHorn section arrangements with groups of brass instruments are often used in funk songs. Funk horn sections could include saxophone (often tenor sax), trumpet, trombone, and for larger horn sections, such as quintets and sextets, a baritone sax. Horn sections played \"rhythmic and syncopated\" parts, often with \"offbeat phrases\" that emphasize \"rhythmic displacement\". Funk song introductions are an important place for horn arrangements.\nFunk horn sections performed in a \"rhythmic percussive style\" that mimicked the approach used by funk rhythm guitarists. Horn sections would \"punctuate\" the lyrics by playing in the spaces between vocals, using \"short staccato rhythmic blast[s]\". Notable funk horn players included Alfred \"PeeWee\" Ellis, trombonist Fred Wesley, and alto sax player Maceo Parker. Notable funk horn sections including the Phoenix Horns (with Earth, Wind &amp; Fire), the Horny Horns (with Parliament), the Memphis Horns (with Isaac Hayes), and MFSB (with Curtis Mayfield).\nThe instruments in funk horn sections varied. If there were two horn players, it could be trumpet and sax, trumpet and trombone, or two saxes. A standard horn trio would consist of trumpet, sax, and trombone, but trios of one trumpet with two saxes, or two trumpets with one sax, were also fairly common. A quartet would be set up the same as a standard horn trio, but with an extra trumpet, sax, or (less frequently) trombone player. Quintets would either be a trio of saxes (typically alto/tenor/baritone, or tenor/tenor/baritone) with a trumpet and a trombone, or a pair each of trumpets and saxes with one trombone. With six instruments, the horn section would usually be two trumpets, three saxes, and a trombone. \nNotable songs with funk horn sections include:\nIn bands or shows where hiring a horn section is not feasible, a keyboardist can play the horn parts on a synthesizer with brass patches; however, choosing an authentic-sounding synthesizer and brass patch is important. In the 2010s, with micro-MIDI synths, it may even have been possible to have another instrumentalist play the keyboard brass parts, thus enabling the keyboardist to continue to comp throughout the song.\nCostumes and style.\nFunk bands in the 1970s adopted Afro-American fashion and style, including \"Bell-bottom pants, platform shoes, hoop earring[s], Afros [hairstyles], leather vests... beaded necklaces\", dashiki shirts, jumpsuits and boots. In contrast to earlier bands such as The Temptations, which wore \"matching suits\" and \"neat haircuts\" to appeal to white mainstream audiences, funk bands adopted an \"African spirit\" in their outfits and style. George Clinton and Parliament are known for their imaginative costumes and \"freedom of dress\", which included bedsheets acting as robes and capes.\nHistory.\nFunk was formed through a mixture of various music genres that were popular among African Americans in the mid-20th century. Musicologist Anne Danielsen wrote that funk might be placed in the lineage of rhythm and blues, jazz, and soul. Sociologist Darby E. Southgate wrote that funk is \"an amalgam of gospel, soul, jazz fusion, rhythm and blues, and black rock.\"\nThe distinctive characteristics of African-American musical expression are rooted in sub-Saharan African music traditions, and find their earliest expression in spirituals, work chants/songs, praise shouts, gospel, blues, and \"body rhythms\" (hambone, patting juba, and ring shout clapping and stomping patterns).\nLike other styles of African-American musical expression including jazz, soul music and R&amp;B, funk music accompanied many protest movements during and after the Civil Rights Movement. \nNew Orleans.\nGerhard Kubik notes that with the exception of New Orleans, early blues lacked complex polyrhythms, and there was a \"very specific absence of asymmetric time-line patterns (key patterns) in virtually all early twentieth century African-American music\u00a0... only in some New Orleans genres does a hint of simple time line patterns occasionally appear in the form of transient so-called 'stomp' patterns or stop-time chorus. These do not function in the same way as African time lines.\"\nIn the late 1940s this changed somewhat when the two-celled time line structure was brought into New Orleans blues. New Orleans musicians were especially receptive to Afro-Cuban influences precisely at the time when R&amp;B was first forming. Dave Bartholomew and Professor Longhair (Henry Roeland Byrd) incorporated Afro-Cuban instruments, as well as the clave pattern and related two-celled figures in songs such as \"Carnival Day\" (Bartholomew 1949) and \"Mardi Gras In New Orleans\" (Longhair 1949). Robert Palmer reports that, in the 1940s, Professor Longhair listened to and played with musicians from the islands and \"fell under the spell of Perez Prado's mambo records.\" Professor Longhair's particular style was known locally as \"rumba-boogie\".\nOne of Longhair's great contributions was his particular approach of adopting two-celled, clave-based patterns into New Orleans rhythm and blues (R&amp;B). Longhair's rhythmic approach became a basic template of funk. According to Dr. John (Malcolm John \"Mac\" Rebennack Jr.), the Professor \"put funk into music\u00a0... Longhair's thing had a direct bearing I'd say on a large portion of the funk music that evolved in New Orleans.\" In his \"Mardi Gras in New Orleans\", the pianist employs the 2-3 clave onbeat/offbeat motif in a rumba-boogie \"guajeo\".\nThe syncopated, but straight subdivision feel of Cuban music (as opposed to swung subdivisions) took root in New Orleans R&amp;B during this time. Alexander Stewart states: \"Eventually, musicians from outside of New Orleans began to learn some of the rhythmic practices [of the Crescent City]. Most important of these were James Brown and the drummers and arrangers he employed. Brown's early repertoire had used mostly shuffle rhythms, and some of his most successful songs were ballads (e.g. \"Please, Please, Please\" (1956), \"Bewildered\" (1961), \"I Don't Mind\" (1961)). Brown's change to a funkier brand of soul required metre and a different style of drumming.\" Stewart makes the point: \"The singular style of rhythm &amp; blues that emerged from New Orleans in the years after World War II played an important role in the development of funk. In a related development, the underlying rhythms of American popular music underwent a basic, yet generally unacknowledged transition from triplet or shuffle feel to even or straight eighth notes.\"\n1960s.\nJames Brown.\nJames Brown credited Little Richard's 1950s R&amp;B road band, The Upsetters from New Orleans, as \"the first to put the funk into the rhythm\" of rock and roll. Following his temporary exit from secular music to become an evangelist in 1957, some of Little Richard's band members joined Brown and the Famous Flames, beginning a long string of hits for them in 1958. By the mid-1960s, James Brown had developed his signature groove that emphasized the downbeat\u2014with heavy emphasis on the first beat of every measure to etch his distinctive sound, rather than the backbeat that typified African-American music. Brown often cued his band with the command \"On the one!,\" changing the percussion emphasis/accent from the one-two-three-four backbeat of traditional soul music to the one-two-three-four downbeat \u2013 but with an even-note syncopated guitar rhythm (on quarter notes two and four) featuring a hard-driving, repetitive brassy swing. This one-three beat launched the shift in Brown's signature music style, starting with his 1964 hit single, \"Out of Sight\" and his 1965 hits, \"Papa's Got a Brand New Bag\" and \"I Got You (I Feel Good)\".\nBrown's style of funk was based on interlocking, contrapuntal parts: syncopated basslines, 16th beat drum patterns, and syncopated guitar riffs. The main guitar ostinatos for \"Ain't it Funky\" (c. late 1960s) are an example of Brown's refinement of New Orleans funk\u2014 an irresistibly danceable riff, stripped down to its rhythmic essence. On \"Ain't it Funky\" the tonal structure is barebones. Brown's innovations led to him and his band becoming the seminal funk act; they also pushed the funk music style further to the forefront with releases such as \"Cold Sweat\" (1967), \"Mother Popcorn\" (1969) and \"Get Up (I Feel Like Being A) Sex Machine\" (1970), discarding even the twelve-bar blues featured in his earlier music. Instead, Brown's music was overlaid with \"catchy, anthemic vocals\" based on \"extensive vamps\" in which he also used his voice as \"a percussive instrument with frequent rhythmic grunts and with rhythm-section patterns\u00a0... [resembling] West African polyrhythms\" \u2013 a tradition evident in African-American work songs and chants. Throughout his career, Brown's frenzied vocals, frequently punctuated with screams and grunts, channeled the \"ecstatic ambiance of the black church\" in a secular context.\nAfter 1965, Brown's bandleader and arranger was Alfred \"Pee Wee\" Ellis. Ellis credits Clyde Stubblefield's adoption of New Orleans drumming techniques, as the basis of modern funk: \"If, in a studio, you said 'play it funky' that could imply almost anything. But 'give me a New Orleans beat' \u2013 you got exactly what you wanted. And Clyde Stubblefield was just the epitome of this funky drumming.\" Stewart states that the popular feel was passed along from \"New Orleans\u2014through James Brown's music, to the popular music of the 1970s.\" Concerning the various funk motifs, Stewart states that this model \"...is different from a time line (such as clave and tresillo) in that it is not an exact pattern, but more of a loose organizing principle.\"\nIn a 1990 interview, Brown offered his reason for switching the rhythm of his music: \"I changed from the upbeat to the downbeat\u00a0... Simple as that, really.\" According to Maceo Parker, Brown's former saxophonist, playing on the downbeat was at first hard for him and took some getting used to. Reflecting back to his early days with Brown's band, Parker reported that he had difficulty playing \"on the one\" during solo performances, since he was used to hearing and playing with the accent on the second beat.\nParliament-Funkadelic.\nA new group of musicians began to further develop the \"funk rock\" approach. Innovations were prominently made by George Clinton, with his bands Parliament and Funkadelic. Together, they produced a new kind of funk sound heavily influenced by jazz and psychedelic rock. The two groups shared members and are often referred to collectively as \"Parliament-Funkadelic\". The breakout popularity of Parliament-Funkadelic gave rise to the term \"P-Funk\", which referred to the music by George Clinton's bands, and defined a new subgenre. Clinton played a principal role in several other bands, including Parlet, the Horny Horns, and the Brides of Funkenstein, all part of the P-Funk conglomerate. \"P-funk\" also came to mean something in its quintessence, of superior quality, or \"sui generis\".\nFollowing the work of Jimi Hendrix in the late 1960s, artists such as Sly and the Family Stone combined the psychedelic rock of Hendrix with funk, borrowing wah pedals, fuzz boxes, echo chambers, and vocal distorters from the former, as well as blues rock and jazz. In the following years, groups such as Clinton's Parliament-Funkadelic continued this sensibility, employing synthesizers and rock-oriented guitar work.\nLate 1960s \u2013 early 1970s.\nOther musical groups picked up on the rhythms and vocal style developed by James Brown and his band, and the funk style began to grow. Dyke and the Blazers, based in Phoenix, Arizona, released \"Funky Broadway\" in 1967, perhaps the first record of the soul music era to have the word \"funky\" in the title. In 1969 Jimmy McGriff released \"Electric Funk\", featuring his distinctive organ over a blazing horn section. Meanwhile, on the West Coast, Charles Wright &amp; the Watts 103rd Street Rhythm Band was releasing funk tracks beginning with its first album in 1967, culminating in the classic single \"Express Yourself\" in 1971. Also from the West Coast area, more specifically Oakland, California, came the band Tower of Power (TOP), which formed in 1968. Their debut album, \"East Bay Grease\", released 1970, is considered a milestone in funk. Throughout the 1970s, TOP had many hits, and the band helped to make funk music a successful genre, with a broader audience.\nIn 1970, Sly &amp; the Family Stone's \"Thank You (Falettinme Be Mice Elf Agin)\" reached #1 on the charts, as did \"Family Affair\" in 1971. Notably, these afforded the group and the genre crossover success and greater recognition, yet such success escaped comparatively talented and moderately popular funk band peers. The Meters defined funk in New Orleans, starting with their top ten R&amp;B hits \"Sophisticated Cissy\" and \"Cissy Strut\" in 1969. Another group who defined funk around this time were the Isley Brothers, whose funky 1969 #1 R&amp;B hit, \"It's Your Thing\", signaled a breakthrough in African-American music, bridging the gaps of the jazzy sounds of Brown, the psychedelic rock of Jimi Hendrix, and the upbeat soul of Sly &amp; the Family Stone and Mother's Finest. The Temptations, who had previously helped to define the \"Motown Sound\" \u2013 a distinct blend of pop-soul \u2013 adopted this new psychedelic sound towards the end of the 1960s as well. Their producer, Norman Whitfield, became an innovator in the field of psychedelic soul, creating hits with a newer, funkier sound for many Motown acts, including \"War\" by Edwin Starr, \"Smiling Faces Sometimes\" by the Undisputed Truth and \"Papa Was A Rollin' Stone\" by the Temptations. Motown producers Frank Wilson (\"Keep On Truckin'\") and Hal Davis (\"Dancing Machine\") followed suit. Stevie Wonder and Marvin Gaye also adopted funk beats for some of their biggest hits in the 1970s, such as \"Superstition\" and \"You Haven't Done Nothin'\", and \"I Want You\" and \"Got To Give It Up\", respectively.\n1970s.\nThe 1970s were the era of highest mainstream visibility for funk music. In addition to Parliament Funkadelic, artists like Sly and the Family Stone, Rufus &amp; Chaka Khan, Bootsy's Rubber Band, the Isley Brothers, Ohio Players, Con Funk Shun, Kool and the Gang, the Bar-Kays, Commodores, Roy Ayers, Curtis Mayfield, and Stevie Wonder, among others, got radio play. Disco music owed a great deal to funk. Many early disco songs and performers came directly from funk-oriented backgrounds. Some disco music hits, such as all of Barry White's hits, \"Kung Fu Fighting\" by Biddu and Carl Douglas, Donna Summer's \"Love To Love You Baby\", Diana Ross' \"Love Hangover\", KC and the Sunshine Band's \"I'm Your Boogie Man\", \"I'm Every Woman\" by Chaka Khan (also known as the Queen of Funk), and Chic's \"Le Freak\" conspicuously include riffs and rhythms derived from funk. In 1976, Rose Royce scored a number-one hit with a purely dance-funk record, \"Car Wash\". Even with the arrival of disco, funk became increasingly popular well into the early 1980s.\nFunk music was also exported to Africa, and it melded with African singing and rhythms to form Afrobeat. Nigerian musician Fela Kuti, who was heavily influenced by James Brown's music, is credited with creating the style and terming it \"Afrobeat\".\nJazz funk.\nJazz-funk is a subgenre of jazz music characterized by a strong back beat (groove), electrified sounds and an early prevalence of analog synthesizers. The integration of funk, soul, and R&amp;B music and styles into jazz resulted in the creation of a genre whose spectrum is quite wide and ranges from strong jazz improvisation to soul, funk or disco with jazz arrangements, jazz riffs, and jazz solos, and sometimes soul vocals. Jazz-funk is primarily an American genre, where it was popular throughout the 1970s and the early 1980s, but it also achieved noted appeal on the club circuit in England during the mid-1970s. Similar genres include soul jazz and jazz fusion, but neither entirely overlap with jazz-funk. Notably jazz-funk is less vocal, more arranged and featured more improvisation than soul jazz, and retains a strong feel of groove and R&amp;B versus some of the jazz fusion production.\n1980s synth-funk.\nIn the 1980s, largely as a reaction against what was seen as the over-indulgence of disco, many of the core elements that formed the foundation of the P-Funk formula began to be usurped by electronic instruments, drum machines and synthesizers. Horn sections of saxophones and trumpets were replaced by synth keyboards, and the horns that remained were given simplified lines, and few horn solos were given to soloists. The classic electric keyboards of funk, like the Hammond B3 organ, the Hohner Clavinet and/or the Fender Rhodes piano, began to be replaced by the new digital synthesizers such as the Yamaha DX7 and microprocessor-controlled analog synthesizers like the Prophet-5 and Oberheim OB-X. Electronic drum machines such as the Roland TR-808, Linn LM-1, and Oberheim DMX began to replace the \"funky drummers\" of the past, and the slap and pop style of bass playing were often replaced by synth keyboard basslines. Lyrics of funk songs began to change from suggestive double entendres to more graphic and sexually explicit content.\nInfluenced by Kraftwerk and Yellow Magic Orchestra, American hip hop DJ Afrika Bambaataa developed electro-funk, a minimalist machine-driven style of funk with his single \"Planet Rock\" in 1982. Also known simply as electro, this style of funk was driven by synthesizers and the electronic rhythm of the TR-808 drum machine. The single \"Renegades of Funk\" followed in 1983. Michael Jackson was also influenced by electro-funk. In the 1980s, techno-funk music used the TR-808 programmable drum machine, while Kraftwerk and Yellow Magic Orchestra influenced electro-funk artists such as Afrika Bambaataa and Mantronix.\nRick James was the first funk musician of the 1980s to assume the funk mantle dominated by P-Funk in the 1970s. His 1981 album \"Street Songs\", with the singles \"Give It to Me Baby\" and \"Super Freak\", resulted in James becoming a star, and paved the way for the future direction of explicitness in funk.\nPrince formed the Time, originally conceived as an opening act for him and based on his \"Minneapolis sound\", a hybrid mixture of funk, R&amp;B, rock, pop and new wave. Eventually, the band went on to define their own style of stripped-down funk based on tight musicianship and sexual themes.\nSimilar to Prince, other bands emerged during the P-Funk era and began to incorporate uninhibited sexuality, dance-oriented themes, synthesizers and other electronic technologies to continue to craft funk hits. These included Cameo, Zapp, the Gap Band, the Bar-Kays, and the Dazz Band, who all found their biggest hits in the early 1980s. By the latter half of the 1980s, pure funk had lost its commercial impact; however, pop artists from Michael Jackson to Culture Club often used funk beats.\nLate 1980s to 2000s nu-funk.\nWhile funk was driven away from radio by slick commercial hip hop, contemporary R&amp;B and new jack swing, its influence continued to spread. Artists like Steve Arrington and Cameo still received major airplay and had huge global followings. Rock bands began adopting elements of funk into their sound, creating new combinations of \"funk rock\" and \"funk metal\". Extreme, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Living Colour, Jane's Addiction, Prince, Primus, Urban Dance Squad, Fishbone, Faith No More, Rage Against the Machine, Infectious Grooves, and Incubus spread the approach and styles garnered from funk pioneers to new audiences in the mid-to-late 1980s and the 1990s. These bands later inspired the underground mid-1990s funkcore movement and other funk-inspired artists like Outkast, Malina Moye, Van Hunt, and Gnarls Barkley.\nIn the 1990s, artists like Me'shell Ndegeocello, Brooklyn Funk Essentials and the (predominantly UK-based) acid jazz movement\u2014including artists and bands such as Jamiroquai, Incognito, Galliano, Omar, Los Tetas and the Brand New Heavies\u2014carried on with strong elements of funk. However, they never came close to reaching the commercial success of funk in its heyday\u2014with the exception of Jamiroquai, whose album \"Travelling Without Moving\" sold about 7 million units worldwide and remains the best-selling funk album in history. Meanwhile, in Australia and New Zealand, bands playing the pub circuit, such as Supergroove, Skunkhour and the Truth, preserved a more instrumental form of funk.\nSince the late 1980s, hip hop artists have regularly sampled old funk tunes. James Brown is said to be the most sampled artist in the history of hip hop, while P-Funk is the second most sampled artist; samples of old Parliament and Funkadelic songs formed the basis of West Coast G-funk.\nOriginal beats that feature funk-styled bass or rhythm guitar riffs are also not uncommon. Dr. Dre (considered the progenitor of the G-funk genre) has freely acknowledged to being heavily influenced by George Clinton's psychedelia: \"Back in the 70s that's all people were doing: getting high, wearing Afros, bell-bottoms and listening to Parliament-Funkadelic. That's why I called my album \"The Chronic\" and based my music and the concepts like I did: because his shit was a big influence on my music. Very big\". Digital Underground was a large contributor to the rebirth of funk in the 1990s by educating their listeners with knowledge about the history of funk and its artists. George Clinton branded Digital Underground as \"Sons of the P\", as their second full-length release is also titled. DU's first release, \"Sex Packets\", was full of funk samples, with the most widely known, \"The Humpty Dance\", sampling Parliament's \"Let's Play House\". A very strong funk album of DU's was their 1996 release \"Future Rhythm\". Much of contemporary club dance music, drum and bass in particular has heavily sampled funk drum breaks.\nFunk is a major element of certain artists identified with the jam band scene of the late 1990s and 2000s. In the late 1990s, the band Phish developed a live sound called \"cow funk\" (a.k.a. \"space funk\"), which consisted of extended danceable deep bass grooves, and often emphasized heavy \"wah\" pedal and other psychedelic effects from the guitar player and layered Clavinet from the keyboard player. Phish began playing funkier jams in their sets around 1996, and 1998's \"The Story of the Ghost\" was heavily influenced by funk. While Phish's funk was traditional in the sense that it often accented beat 1 of the time signature, it was also highly exploratory and involved building jams towards energetic peaks before transitioning into highly composed progressive rock and roll.\nMedeski Martin &amp; Wood, Robert Randolph &amp; the Family Band, Galactic, Jam Underground, Soulive, and Karl Denson's Tiny Universe all drew heavily from the funk tradition. Dumpstaphunk builds upon the New Orleans tradition of funk, with their gritty, low-ended grooves and soulful four-part vocals. \nSince the mid-1990s the nu-funk or funk revivalist scene, centered on the deep funk collectors scene, is producing new material influenced by the sounds of rare funk 45s. Labels include Desco, Soul Fire, Daptone, Timmion, Neapolitan, Bananarama, Kay-Dee, and Tramp. These labels often release on 45\u00a0rpm records. Although specializing in music for rare funk DJs, there has been some crossover into the mainstream music industry, such as Sharon Jones' 2005 appearance on \"Late Night with Conan O'Brien\". Those who mix acid jazz, acid house, trip hop, and other genres with funk include Tom Tom Club, Brainticket, Groove Armada, et al.\n2010s funktronica.\nDuring the 2000s and early 2010s, some punk funk bands such as Out Hud and Mongolian MonkFish performed in the indie rock scene. Indie band Rilo Kiley, in keeping with their tendency to explore a variety of rockish styles, incorporated funk into their song \"The Moneymaker\" on the album \"Under the Blacklight\". Prince, with his later albums, gave a rebirth to the funk sound with songs like \"The Everlasting Now\", \"Musicology\", \"Ol' Skool Company\", and \"Black Sweat\". Particle, for instance, is part of a scene which combined the elements of digital music made with computers, synthesizers, and samples with analog instruments, sounds, and improvisational and compositional elements of funk.\nDerivatives.\nFrom the early 1970s onwards, funk has developed various subgenres. While George Clinton and the Parliament were making a harder variation of funk, bands such as Kool and the Gang, Ohio Players and Earth, Wind and Fire were making disco-influenced funk music. Amadou &amp; Mariam also produced music that blended traditional Malian sounds with rock guitars, Syrian violins, Cuban trumpets, Egyptian ney, Indian tablas, and Dogon percussion. These elements were called \"Afro-Funk\".\nFunk rock.\nFunk rock (also written as \"funk-rock\" or \"funk/rock\") fuses funk and rock elements. Its earliest incarnation was heard in the late 1960s through the mid-1970s by musicians such as Jimi Hendrix, Frank Zappa, Gary Wright, David Bowie, Mother's Finest, and Funkadelic on their earlier albums.\nMany instruments may be incorporated into funk rock, but the overall sound is defined by a definitive bass or drum beat and electric guitars. The bass and drum rhythms are influenced by funk music but with more intensity, while the guitar can be funk- or rock-influenced, usually with distortion. Prince, Jesse Johnson, Red Hot Chili Peppers and Fishbone are major artists in funk rock.\nAvant-funk.\nThe term \"avant-funk\" has been used to describe acts who combined funk with art rock's concerns. Simon Frith described the style as an application of progressive rock mentality to rhythm rather than melody and harmony. Simon Reynolds characterized avant-funk as a kind of psychedelia in which \"oblivion was to be attained not through rising above the body, rather through immersion in the physical, self loss through animalism.\"\nActs in the genre include German krautrock band Can and American funk artists Sly Stone and George Clinton. A wave of early 1980s UK and US post-punk artists (including Public Image Ltd, Talking Heads, the Pop Group, Gang of Four, Bauhaus, Cabaret Voltaire, Defunkt, A Certain Ratio, and 23 Skidoo) embraced black dance music styles such as disco and funk. The artists of the late 1970s New York no wave scene also explored avant-funk, influenced by figures such as Ornette Coleman. Reynolds noted these artists' preoccupations with issues such as alienation, repression and technocracy of Western modernity.\nGo-go.\nGo-go originated in the Washington, D.C., area with which it remains associated, along with other spots in the Mid-Atlantic. Inspired by singers such as Chuck Brown, the \"Godfather of Go-go\", it is a blend of funk, rhythm and blues, and early hip hop, with a focus on lo-fi percussion instruments and in-person jamming in place of dance tracks. As such, it is primarily a dance music with an emphasis on live audience call and response. Go-go rhythms are also incorporated into street percussion.\nBoogie.\nBoogie is an electronic music mainly influenced by funk and post-disco. The minimalist approach of boogie, consisting of synthesizers and keyboards, helped to establish electro and house music. Boogie, unlike electro, emphasizes the slapping techniques of bass guitar but also bass synthesizers. Artists include Vicky \"D\", Komiko, Peech Boys, Kashif, and later Evelyn King.\nElectro funk.\nElectro funk is a hybrid of electronic music and funk. It essentially follows the same form as funk, and retains funk's characteristics, but is made entirely (or partially) with a use of electronic instruments such as the TR-808. Vocoders or talkboxes were commonly implemented to transform the vocals. The pioneering electro band Zapp commonly used such instruments in their music. Bootsy Collins also began to incorporate a more electronic sound on later solo albums. Other artists include Herbie Hancock, Afrika Bambaataa, Egyptian Lover, Vaughan Mason &amp; Crew, Midnight Star and Cybotron.\nFunk metal.\nFunk metal (sometimes typeset differently such as \"funk-metal\") is a fusion genre of music which emerged in the 1980s, as part of the alternative metal movement. It typically incorporates elements of funk and heavy metal (often thrash metal), and in some cases other styles, such as punk and experimental music. It features hard-driving heavy metal guitar riffs, the pounding bass rhythms characteristic of funk, and sometimes hip hop-style rhymes into an alternative rock approach to songwriting. A primary example is the all-African-American rock band Living Colour, who have been said to be \"funk-metal pioneers\" by \"Rolling Stone\". During the late 1980s and early 1990s, the style was most prevalent in California \u2013 particularly Los Angeles and San Francisco.\nG-funk.\nG-funk is a fusion genre of music which combines gangsta rap and funk. It is generally considered to have been invented by West Coast rappers and made famous by Dr. Dre. It incorporates multi-layered and melodic synthesizers, slow hypnotic grooves, a deep bass, background female vocals, the extensive sampling of P-Funk tunes, and a high-pitched portamento saw wave synthesizer lead. Unlike other earlier rap acts that also utilized funk samples (such as EPMD and the Bomb Squad), G-funk often used fewer, unaltered samples per song.\nTimba funk.\nTimba is a form of funky Cuban popular dance music. By 1990, several Cuban bands had incorporated elements of funk and hip-hop into their arrangements, and expanded upon the instrumentation of the traditional conjunto with an American drum set, saxophones and a two-keyboard format. Timba bands like La Charanga Habanera or Bamboleo often have horns or other instruments playing short parts of tunes by Earth, Wind and Fire, Kool and the Gang or other U.S. funk bands. While many funk motifs exhibit a clave-based structure, they are created intuitively, without a conscious intent of aligning the various parts to a guide-pattern. Timba incorporates funk motifs into an overt and intentional clave structure.\nSocial impact.\nWomen and funk.\nDespite funk's popularity in modern music, few people have examined the work of funk women. Notable funk women include Chaka Khan, Labelle, Brides of Funkenstein, Klymaxx, Mother's Finest, Lyn Collins, Betty Davis and Teena Marie. As cultural critic Cheryl Keyes explains in her essay \"She Was Too Black for Rock and Too Hard for Soul: (Re)discovering the Musical Career of Betty Mabry Davis\", most of the scholarship around funk has focused on the cultural work of men. She states that \"Betty Davis is an artist whose name has gone unheralded as a pioneer in the annals of funk and rock. Most writing on these musical genres has traditionally placed male artists like Jimi Hendrix, George Clinton (of Parliament-Funkadelic), and bassist Larry Graham as trendsetters in the shaping of a rock music sensibility.\"\nIn \"The Feminist Funk Power of Betty Davis and Ren\u00e9e Stout\", Nikki A. Greene notes that Davis' provocative and controversial style helped her rise to popularity in the 1970s as she focused on sexually motivated, self-empowered subject matter. Furthermore, this affected the young artist's ability to draw large audiences and commercial success. Greene also notes that Davis was never made an official spokesperson or champion for the civil rights and feminist movements of the time, although more recently her work has become a symbol of sexual liberation for women of color. Davis' song \"If I'm In Luck I Just Might Get Picked Up\", on her self-titled debut album, sparked controversy, and was banned by the Detroit NAACP. Maureen Mahan, a musicologist and anthropologist, examines Davis' impact on the music industry and the American public in her article \"They Say She's Different: Race, Gender, Genre, and the Liberated Black Femininity of Betty Davis\".\nLaina Dawes, the author of \"What Are You Doing Here: A Black Woman's Life and Liberation in Heavy Metal\", believes respectability politics is the reason artists like Davis do not get the same recognition as their male counterparts: \"I blame what I call respectability politics as part of the reason the funk-rock some of the women from the '70s aren't better known. Despite the importance of their music and presence, many of the funk-rock females represented the aggressive behavior and sexuality that many people were not comfortable with.\"\nAccording to Francesca T. Royster, in Rickey Vincent's book \"Funk: The Music, The People, and The Rhythm of The One\", he analyzes the impact of Labelle but only in limited sections. Royster criticizes Vincent's analysis of the group, stating: \"It is a shame, then, that Vincent gives such minimal attention to Labelle's performances in his study. This reflects, unfortunately, a still consistent sexism that shapes the evaluation of funk music. In \"Funk\", Vincent's analysis of Labelle is brief\u2014sharing a single paragraph with the Pointer Sisters in his three-page sub chapter, 'Funky Women.' He writes that while 'Lady Marmalade' 'blew the lid off of the standards of sexual innuendo and skyrocketed the group's star status,' the band's 'glittery image slipped into the disco undertow and was ultimately wasted as the trio broke up in search of solo status\" (Vincent, 1996, 192). Many female artists who are considered to be in the genre of funk, also share songs in the disco, soul, and R&amp;B genres; Labelle falls into this category of women who are split among genres due to a critical view of music theory and the history of sexism in the United States.\nIn the 21st century, artists like Janelle Mon\u00e1e have opened the doors for more scholarship and analysis on the female impact on the funk music genre. Mon\u00e1e's style bends concepts of gender, sexuality, and self-expression in a manner similar to the way some male pioneers in funk broke boundaries. Her albums center on Afro-futuristic concepts, centering on elements of female and black empowerment and visions of a dystopian future. In his article \"Janelle Mon\u00e1e and Afro-sonic Feminist Funk\", Matthew Valnes writes that Monae's involvement in the funk genre is juxtaposed with the traditional view of funk as a male-centered genre. Valnes acknowledges that funk is male-dominated, but provides insight to the societal circumstances that led to this situation.\nMon\u00e1e's influences include her mentor Prince, Funkadelic, Lauryn Hill, and other funk and R&amp;B artists, but according to Emily Lordi, \"[Betty] Davis is seldom listed among Janelle Mon\u00e1e's many influences, and certainly the younger singer's high-tech concepts, virtuosic performances, and meticulously produced songs are far removed from Davis's proto-punk aesthetic. But... like Davis, she also is closely linked with a visionary male mentor (Prince). The title of Mon\u00e1e's 2013 album, \"The Electric Lady\", alludes to Hendrix's \"Electric Ladyland\", but it also implicitly cites the coterie of women that inspired Hendrix himself: that group, called the Cosmic Ladies or Electric Ladies, was together led by Hendrix's lover Devon Wilson and Betty Davis.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10779", "revid": "4968133", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10779", "title": "Frequency", "text": "Number of occurrences or cycles per unit time\nFrequency is the number of occurrences of a repeating event per unit of time. Frequency is an important parameter used in science and engineering to specify the rate of oscillatory and vibratory phenomena, such as mechanical vibrations, audio signals (sound), radio waves, and light.\nThe interval of time between events is called the period. It is the reciprocal of the frequency. For example, if a heart beats at a frequency of 120 times per minute (2\u00a0hertz), its period is one half of a second.\nSpecial definitions of frequency are used in certain contexts, such as the angular frequency in rotational or cyclical properties, when the rate of angular progress is measured. Spatial frequency is defined for properties that vary or occur repeatedly in geometry or space.\nThe unit of measurement of frequency in the International System of Units (SI) is the hertz, having the symbol Hz.\nDefinitions and units.\nFor cyclical phenomena such as oscillations, waves, or for examples of simple harmonic motion, the term \"frequency\" is defined as the number of cycles or repetitions per unit of time. The conventional symbol for frequency is \"f\" or \"\u03bd\" (the Greek letter nu) is also used. The \"period\" \"T\" is the time taken to complete one cycle of an oscillation or rotation. The frequency and the period are related by the equation\nformula_1\nThe term \"temporal frequency\" is used to emphasise that the frequency is characterised by the number of occurrences of a repeating event per unit time.\nThe SI unit of frequency is the hertz (Hz), named after the German physicist Heinrich Hertz by the International Electrotechnical Commission in 1930. It was adopted by the CGPM (Conf\u00e9rence g\u00e9n\u00e9rale des poids et mesures) in 1960, officially replacing the previous name, \"cycle per second\" (cps). The SI unit for the period, as for all measurements of time, is the second. A traditional unit of frequency used with rotating mechanical devices, where it is termed \"rotational frequency\", is revolution per minute, abbreviated r/min or rpm. Sixty rpm is equivalent to one hertz.\nPeriod versus frequency.\nAs a matter of convenience, longer and slower waves, such as ocean surface waves, are more typically described by wave period rather than frequency. Short and fast waves, like audio and radio, are usually described by their frequency. Some commonly used conversions are listed below:\nRelated quantities.\n d\"N\"/d\"t\"; it is a type of frequency applied to rotational motion.\nIn wave propagation.\nFor periodic waves in nondispersive media (that is, media in which the wave speed is independent of frequency), frequency has an inverse relationship to the wavelength, \"\u03bb\" (lambda). Even in dispersive media, the frequency \"f\" of a sinusoidal wave is equal to the phase velocity \"v\" of the wave divided by the wavelength \"\u03bb\" of the wave:\nformula_6\nIn the special case of electromagnetic waves in vacuum, then \"v\" = \"c\", where \"c\" is the speed of light in vacuum, and this expression becomes\nformula_7\nWhen monochromatic waves travel from one medium to another, their frequency remains the same\u2014only their wavelength and speed change.\nMeasurement.\nMeasurement of frequency can be done in the following ways:\nCounting.\nCalculating the frequency of a repeating event is accomplished by counting the number of times that event occurs within a specific time period, then dividing the count by the period. For example, if 71 events occur within 15 seconds the frequency is:\nformula_8\nIf the number of counts is not very large, it is more accurate to measure the time interval for a predetermined number of occurrences, rather than the number of occurrences within a specified time. The latter method introduces a random error into the count of between zero and one count, so on average half a count. This is called \"gating error\" and causes an average error in the calculated frequency of formula_9, or a fractional error of formula_10 where formula_11 is the timing interval and formula_12 is the measured frequency. This error decreases with frequency, so it is generally a problem at low frequencies where the number of counts \"N\" is small.\nStroboscope.\nAn old method of measuring the frequency of rotating or vibrating objects is to use a stroboscope. This is an intense repetitively flashing light (strobe light) whose frequency can be adjusted with a calibrated timing circuit. The strobe light is pointed at the rotating object and the frequency adjusted up and down. When the frequency of the strobe equals the frequency of the rotating or vibrating object, the object completes one cycle of oscillation and returns to its original position between the flashes of light, so when illuminated by the strobe the object appears stationary. Then the frequency can be read from the calibrated readout on the stroboscope. A downside of this method is that an object rotating at an integer multiple of the strobing frequency will also appear stationary.\nFrequency counter.\nHigher frequencies are usually measured with a frequency counter. This is an electronic instrument which measures the frequency of an applied repetitive electronic signal and displays the result in hertz on a digital display. It uses digital logic to count the number of cycles during a time interval established by a precision quartz time base. Cyclic processes that are not electrical, such as the rotation rate of a shaft, mechanical vibrations, or sound waves, can be converted to a repetitive electronic signal by transducers and the signal applied to a frequency counter. As of 2018, frequency counters can cover the range up to about 100\u00a0GHz. This represents the limit of direct counting methods; frequencies above this must be measured by indirect methods.\nHeterodyne methods.\nAbove the range of frequency counters, frequencies of electromagnetic signals are often measured indirectly utilizing heterodyning (frequency conversion). A reference signal of a known frequency near the unknown frequency is mixed with the unknown frequency in a nonlinear mixing device such as a diode. This creates a heterodyne or \"beat\" signal at the difference between the two frequencies. If the two signals are close together in frequency the heterodyne is low enough to be measured by a frequency counter. This process only measures the difference between the unknown frequency and the reference frequency. To convert higher frequencies, several stages of heterodyning can be used. Current research is extending this method to infrared and light frequencies (optical heterodyne detection).\nExamples.\nLight.\nVisible light is an electromagnetic wave, consisting of oscillating electric and magnetic fields traveling through space. The frequency of the wave determines its color: 400 THz ( Hz) is red light, 800 THz () is violet light, and between these (in the range 400\u2013800 THz) are all the other colors of the visible spectrum. An electromagnetic wave with a frequency less than will be invisible to the human eye; such waves are called infrared (IR) radiation. At even lower frequency, the wave is called a microwave, and at still lower frequencies it is called a radio wave. Likewise, an electromagnetic wave with a frequency higher than will also be invisible to the human eye; such waves are called ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Even higher-frequency waves are called X-rays, and higher still are gamma rays.\nAll of these waves, from the lowest-frequency radio waves to the highest-frequency gamma rays, are fundamentally the same, and they are all called electromagnetic radiation. They all travel through vacuum at the same speed (the speed of light), giving them wavelengths inversely proportional to their frequencies.\nformula_13\nwhere \"c\" is the speed of light (\"c\" in vacuum or less in other media), \"f\" is the frequency and \"\u03bb\" is the wavelength.\nIn dispersive media, such as glass, the speed depends somewhat on frequency, so the wavelength is not quite inversely proportional to frequency.\nSound.\nSound propagates as mechanical vibration waves of pressure and displacement, in air or other substances. In general, frequency components of a sound determine its \"color\", its timbre. When speaking about the frequency (in singular) of a sound, it means the property that most determines its pitch.\nThe frequencies an ear can hear are limited to a specific range of frequencies. The audible frequency range for humans is typically given as being between about 20\u00a0Hz and 20,000\u00a0Hz (20\u00a0kHz), though the high frequency limit usually reduces with age. Other species have different hearing ranges. For example, some dog breeds can perceive vibrations up to 60,000\u00a0Hz.\nIn many media, such as air, the speed of sound is approximately independent of frequency, so the wavelength of the sound waves (distance between repetitions) is approximately inversely proportional to frequency.\nLine current.\nIn Europe, Africa, Australia, southern South America, most of Asia, and Russia, the frequency of the alternating current in household electrical outlets is 50\u00a0Hz (close to the tone G), whereas in North America and northern South America, the frequency of the alternating current in household electrical outlets is 60\u00a0Hz (between the tones B\u266d and B; that is, a minor third above the European frequency). The frequency of the 'hum' in an audio recording can show in which of these general regions the recording was made.\nAperiodic frequency.\nAperiodic frequency is the rate of incidence or occurrence of non-cyclic phenomena, including random processes such as radioactive decay. It is expressed with the unit reciprocal second (s\u22121) or, in the case of radioactivity, with the unit becquerel.\nIt is formulated as a quotient, \n\"f\" = \"N\"/\u0394\"t\", \ninvolving the number of entities counted or the number of events happened (\"N\") during a given time duration (\u0394\"t\"); it is a physical quantity of type temporal rate.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10781", "revid": "1319405680", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10781", "title": "Film festival", "text": "Dedicated event to screen films\nA film festival is an organized, extended presentation of films in one or more cinemas or screening venues, usually annually and in a single city or region. Some film festivals show films outdoors or online.\nFilms may be of recent date and, depending on the festival's focus, can include both international and domestic releases. Some film festivals focus on a specific format of film, such as documentary, or runtime, such as short film festivals, or genre, such as horror films, category of filmmakers, such as women, production country/region or subject matter.\nFilm festivals can be competitive or non-competitive, and are often regarded within the film industry as launchpads for new filmmakers and indie films, as well as boosters for established filmmakers and studio productions. The films are either invited by festival curators or selected by festival programmers from submissions made by the filmmakers, film producers, production companies, sales agents, or distributors. Often, audiences have the opportunity to watch films premiering months before their commercial release, or films that may not benefit from a wide release and would otherwise be hard to find.\nThe oldest film festival in the world is the Venice Film Festival. The most prestigious film festivals in the world, known as the \"Big Five\", are (listed chronologically according to the date of foundation): Venice, Cannes, Berlin (the original \"Big Three\"), Toronto, and Sundance. Other major festivals include Karlovy Vary, Locarno, San Sebasti\u00e1n, SXSW, Telluride, Tribeca, and the three largest and most prestigious genre festivals, Sitges, Fantasia and Fantastic Fest.\nHistory.\nThe Venice Film Festival in Italy began in 1932 and is the oldest film festival still running.\nMainland Europe's biggest independent film festival is \u00c9CU The European Independent Film Festival, which started in 2006 and takes place every spring in Paris, France. Edinburgh International Film Festival is the longest-running festival in Great Britain as well as the longest continually running film festival in the world.\nAustralia's first and longest-running film festival is the Melbourne International Film Festival (1952), followed by the Sydney Film Festival (1954).\nNorth America's first and longest-running short film festival is the Yorkton Film Festival, established in 1947. \nThe 1948 Cleveland, Ohio Film Festival was the first film festival in the United States to recognize educational, industrial, training, travel, and other types of sponsored films.\nThe longest continuously running film festival in the United States is the Columbus International Film &amp; Animation Festival, also known as The Chris Awards, which began in 1953. According to the Film Arts Foundation in San Francisco, \" 'The Chris Awards' is one of the most prestigious documentaries, educational, business, and informational competitions in the U.S.; it is the oldest of its kind in North America and celebrating its 54th year\". It was followed four years later by the San Francisco International Film Festival, held in March 1957, which emphasized feature-length dramatic films. The festival played a major role in introducing foreign films to American audiences. Films in the first year included Akira Kurosawa's \"Throne of Blood\" and Satyajit Ray's .\nToday, thousands of film festivals take place around the world\u2014from high-profile festivals such as Sundance Film Festival (Park City, Utah), Newport Beach Film Festival and Slamdance Film Festival, to horror festivals such as FrightFest, Screamfest, Telluride Horror Show, and the Park City Film Music Festival, the first American film festival dedicated to honoring music in film.\nFilm Funding competitions such as Writers and Filmmakers were introduced when the cost of production could be lowered significantly, and internet technology allowed for the collaboration of film production.\nFilm festivals have evolved significantly since the COVID-19 pandemic. Many festivals opted for virtual or hybrid festivals. The film industry, which was already in upheaval due to streaming options, has faced another major shift, and movies showcased at festivals have an even shorter runway to online launches.\nNotable film festivals.\nThe \"Big Five\" film festivals are considered to be Venice, Cannes, Berlin, Toronto, and Sundance.\nThe Toronto International Film Festival is the most popular festival in North America. \"Time\" wrote it had \"grown from its place as the most influential fall film festival to the most influential film festival, period\".\nThe Seattle International Film Festival is credited as being the largest film festival in the United States, regularly showing over 400 films in a month across the city.\nCompetitive feature films.\nThe festivals in Berlin, Cairo, Cannes, Goa, Karlovy Vary, Locarno, Mar del Plata, Moscow, San Sebasti\u00e1n, Shanghai, Tallinn, Tokyo, Venice, and Warsaw are accredited by the International Federation of Film Producers Associations (FIAPF) in the category of competitive feature films. As a rule, for films to compete, they must first be released during the festivals and not in any other previous venue beforehand.\nGenre films.\nSitges Film Festival in Spain, Fantasia International Film Festival in Canada, and Fantastic Fest in the United States are generally considered to be the three largest and most prestigious festivals for fantastic and horror films. Other important genre festivals include Beyond Fest, Brooklyn Horror Film Festival, Brussels International Fantastic Film Festival, Bucheon International Fantastic Film Festival, Fantaspoa, Fantasporto, FilmQuest, FrightFest, Neuchatel International Fantastic Film Festival, Nightmares Film Festival, Overlook Film Festival, Screamfest, Telluride Horror Show and Toronto After Dark.\nSome general film festivals also have sections for genre films, the most prestigious ones being the Midnight section at Sundance Film Festival, the Midnighter section at SXSW, the Midnight Madness at TIFF and the Midnight section at Tribeca Festival.\nExperimental films.\nAnn Arbor Film Festival started in 1963. It is the oldest continually operated experimental film festival in North America and has become one of the premier film festivals for independent and, primarily, experimental filmmakers to showcase work.\nIndependent films.\nIn the U.S., Telluride Film Festival, Sundance Film Festival, Austin Film Festival, Austin's South by Southwest, NYC's Tribeca Festival, and Slamdance Film Festival are all considered significant festivals for independent film. The Zero Film Festival is significant as the first and only festival exclusive to self-financed filmmakers. The biggest independent film festival in the UK is Raindance Film Festival. The British Urban Film Festival (which specifically caters to Black and minority interests) was officially recognized in the 2020 New Year Honours list.\nSponsored films.\nThe 1948 Cleveland Film Festival was the first film festival in the United States to honor educational, industrial, training, travel, and other types of sponsored films. In June 1948, six hundred people watched one or more of the 65 films screened at the one-day Cleveland Film Festival held in General Electric\u2019s Lighting Institute at Nela Park.\nIn the second year of the Cleveland Film Festival, 99 16 mm films were shown and \u201cOscars\u201d were awarded in eleven classifications. \nHaving an entry, or better yet, winning an award at the Cleveland Film Festival, was a significant event. Ads for studios and dozens of movies appeared in \"Business Screen Magazine\" in the late 1940s and early 1950s, promoting the film or studio as a winner at the Cleveland Film Festival.\nBy 1956, sponsored film festivals had become ubiquitous. In addition to dozens of city-sponsored film festivals, many organizations sponsored film festivals. \nIn 1957, the Cleveland Film Council, the organizers of the Cleveland Film Festival, ceased operation of the festival. Sponsored film festivals continued on, but never meant as much after that. \nSubject-specific films.\nA few film festivals have focused on highlighting specific issues, topics, or subjects. These festivals have included mainstream and independent films. Some examples include military films, health-related film festivals, and human rights film festivals.\nThere are festivals, especially in the US, that highlight and promote films made by or about various ethnic groups and nationalities or feature the cinema from a specific foreign country. These include , , Mexican-Americans, Arabs, , Italian, German, French, Palestinian, and . The Deauville American Film Festival in France is devoted to the cinema of the United States.\nLGBTQ+ and Women's film festivals are also popular.\nNorth American film festivals.\nTribeca Festival, one of the most prestigious in North America, ranks first worldwide in terms of audience attendance and 11th in terms of media attendance.\nThe San Francisco International Film Festival, founded by Irving \"Bud\" Levin in 1957, is the oldest continuous annual film festival in the United States. It highlights current trends in international filmmaking and video production with an emphasis on work that has not yet secured American distribution.\nThe Newport Beach Film Festival, founded by Gregg Schwenk in 1999, has emerged as the largest international cinema event in coastal Southern California, attracting over 56,000 attendees to Orange County, California. The Festival partners with over 40 non-profit organizations and pairs each with a film that aligns with their mission. The films featured include World, North America, U.S., and West Coast premieres, as well as the International Spotlight Series, which celebrates foreign language films.\nThe Vancouver International Film Festival, founded in 1958, is one of the largest film festivals in North America. It focuses on East Asian films, Canadian films, and nonfiction films. In 2016, the audience reached 133,000 and the festival featured 324 films.\nThe Toronto International Film Festival, founded by Bill Marshall, Henk Van der Kolk, and Dusty Cohl, is one of North America's most important film festivals, and is the most widely attended.\nThe Chicago International Film Festival, founded in 1964, is North America's longest-running competitive film festival. The 60th Chicago International Film Festival, scheduled for October, will host over 40,000 attendees from around the world. The Festival's program, screening 175+ films from more than 50 countries, is presented in sections including the International Competition, New Directors Competition, Documentary, Black Perspectives, City &amp; State, and Special Presentations.\nThe Cleveland International Film Festival (CIFF), founded in 1977, is the largest film festival in Ohio and among the longest-running film festivals in the United States. The film festival is held at the Playhouse Square, which are a series of elegant theaters built in the early 1920s, and the largest performing arts center in the United States outside of New York City (only Lincoln Center is larger).\nThe Ottawa Canadian Film Festival, abbreviated OCanFilmFest, was co-founded by Ottawa-based filmmakers Jith Paul, Ed Kucerak, and Blair Campbell in 2015. It features films of various durations and genres from filmmakers across Canada.\nThe Sundance Film Festival founded by Sterling Van Wagenen (then head of Wildwood, Robert Redford's company), John Earle, and Cirina Hampton Catania (both serving on the Utah Film Commission at the time) is a significant festival for independent film.\nThe Woodstock Film Festival was launched in 2000 by filmmakers Meira Blaustein and Laurent Rejto to bring high-quality, independent films to the Hudson Valley region of New York. In 2010, Indiewire named the Woodstock Film Festival among the top 50 independent film festivals worldwide.\nThe Regina International Film Festival and Awards (RIFFA) founded by John Thimothy, one of the top leading international film festivals in western Canada (Regina, Saskatchewan) represented 35 countries in 2018 festival. RIFFA annual Award show and red carpet arrival event are getting noticed in the contemporary film and fashion industries in Western Canada.\nToronto's Hot Docs, founded by filmmaker Paul Jay, is a North American documentary film festival. Toronto has the largest number of film festivals in the world, ranging from cultural, independent, and historic films.\nThe Seattle International Film Festival, which screens 270 features and approximately 150 short films, is the largest American film festival in terms of the number of feature productions.\nThe Expresi\u00f3n en Corto International Film Festival is the largest competitive film festival in Mexico. It specializes in emerging talent and is held in the last week of each July in the two colonial cities of San Miguel de Allende and Guanajuato.\nOther Mexican festivals include the Guadalajara International Film Festival in Guadalajara, Oaxaca Film Fest, the Morelia International Film Festival in Morelia, Michoacan Mexico, and the Los Cabos International Film Festival founded by Scott Cross, Sean Cross, and Eduardo Sanchez Navarro, in Los Cabos, Baja Sur, Mexico are considered the most important film festivals in Latin America. In 2015, \"Variety\" called the Los Cabos International Film Festival the \"Cannes of Latin America\".\nSouth American film festivals.\nThe Cartagena Film Festival, founded by Victor Nieto in 1960, is the oldest in Latin America. The Festival de Gramado (or Gramado Film Festival) Gramado, Brazil.\nThe Lima Film Festival is the leading film festival in Peru and one of the most important in Latin America. It is focused on Latin-American cinema and is organized each year by the Pontifical Catholic University of Peru.\nThe Valdivia International Film Festival is held annually in the city of Valdivia. It is arguably the most important film festival in Chile. There is also Filmambiente, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, an international festival on environmental films and videos.\nThe Caribbean.\nFor Spanish-speaking countries, the Dominican International Film Festival occurs annually in Puerto Plata, Dominican Republic. As well as the Havana Film Festival was founded in 1979 and is the oldest continuous annual film festival in the Caribbean. Its focus is on Latin American cinema.\nThe Trinidad and Tobago Film Festival, founded in 2006, is dedicated to screening the newest films from the English-, Spanish, French- and Dutch-speaking Caribbean and the region's diaspora. It also seeks to facilitate the growth of Caribbean cinema by offering a wide-ranging industry programme and networking opportunities.\nThe Lusca Fantastic Film Fest (formerly Puerto Rico Horror Film Fest) was also founded in 2006 and is the first and only international fantastic film festival in the Caribbean devoted to sci-fi, thriller, fantasy, dark humor, bizarre, horror, anime, adventure, virtual reality, and animation in short and feature films.\nEuropean festivals.\nThe most important European film festivals are the Venice Film Festival (late summer to early autumn), the Cannes Film Festival (late spring to early summer), and the Berlin International Film Festival (late winter to early spring), founded in 1932, 1946, and 1951, respectively. The Edinburgh International Film Festival, founded in 1946, is the world's oldest continually running film festival.\nAnimation.\nMany film festivals are dedicated exclusively to animation.\nVarious regional festivals occur in various countries. The Austin Film Festival is accredited by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts &amp; Sciences, which makes all its jury-award-winning narrative short and animated short films eligible for an Academy Award.\nAfrican festivals.\nSeveral significant film festivals are held regularly in Africa. The Cairo International Film Festival in Cairo was established in 1976, the biannual Panafrican Film and Television Festival of Ouagadougou (FESPACO) in Burkina Faso was established in 1969 and accepts competition-only films by African filmmakers and chiefly produced in Africa. The annual Durban International Film Festival in South Africa and Zanzibar International Film Festival in Tanzania have grown in importance for the film and entertainment industry, as they often screen the African premieres of many international films. The Nairobi Film Festival (NBO), established in 2016 with a special focus on screening exceptional films from around the world that are rarely presented in Nairobi's mainstream cinema, has also grown in popularity over the years, improving the cinema-going culture in Kenya.\nThe Sahara International Film Festival, held annually in the Sahrawi refugee camps in western Algeria near the border of Western Sahara, is notable as the only film festival in the world to take place in a refugee camp. The festival aims to provide cultural entertainment and educational opportunities to refugees and raise awareness of the plight of the Sahrawi people, who have been exiled from their native Western Sahara for more than three decades.\nAsian film festivals.\nIndia.\nThe International Film Festival of India in Goa, organized by the government of India, was founded in 1952.\nChennai International Film Festival has been organized since 2002 by the Indo Cine Appreciation Foundation (ICAF), the Government of Tamil Nadu, the South Indian Film Chamber of Commerce, and the Film Federation of India.\nThe Jaipur International Film Festival was founded in 2009 and International Film Festival of Kerala organized by the Government of Kerala held annually at Thiruvananthapuram.\nThe International Documentary and Short Film Festival of Kerala (IDSFFK), hosted by the Kerala State Chalachitra Academy, is a major documentary and short film festival.\nThe Mumbai Women's International Film Festival (MWIFF) is an annual film festival in Mumbai that features films made by women directors and technicians.\nThe Calcutta International Cult Films Festival (CICFF) is a popular international film festival based in Kolkata which showcases international cult films.\nYathaKatha International Film &amp; Literature Festival (YKIFLF) is an annual film and literature festival in Mumbai showcasing literature collaboration in cinema via various constructive discussions and forums. 3rd edition of the festival was held from 28 November-1 December 2024 in Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.\nOthers.\nNotable festivals include the Hong Kong International Film Festival (HKIFF), Busan International Film Festival (BIFF), Kathmandu International Mountain Film Festival, Melbourne International Film Festival (MIFF) and World Film Carnival Singapore.\nArab World film festivals.\nThere are several major film festivals in the Arab world, such as the Beirut International Film Festival, Cairo International Film Festival, the only international competitive feature film festival recognized by the FIAPF in the Arab world and Africa, as well as the oldest in this category, Carthage Film Festival, the oldest festival in Africa and the Arab world, Alexandria International Film Festival, and Marrakech International Film Festival.\nFestival administration.\nBusiness model.\nAlthough there are notable for-profit festivals such as SXSW, most festivals operate on a nonprofit membership-based model, with a combination of ticket sales, membership fees, and corporate sponsorship constituting the majority of revenue. Unlike other arts nonprofits (performing arts, museums, etc.), film festivals typically receive few donations from the general public and are occasionally organized as nonprofit business associations instead of public charities. Film industry members often have significant curatorial input, and corporate sponsors are given opportunities to promote their brand to festival audiences in exchange for cash contributions. Private parties, usually to raise investments for film projects, constitute significant \"fringe\" events. More prominent festivals often maintain year-round staff who frequently engage in community and charitable projects outside the festival season.\nEntry fee.\nWhile entries from established film professionals are usually considered pluses by the organizers, most festivals require new or relatively unknown filmmakers to pay an entry fee to have their works considered for screening. This is especially so in more significant film festivals, such as the Calcutta International Cult Films Festival, Jaipur International Film Festival, Toronto International Film Festival, Sundance Film Festival, South by Southwest, Montreal World Film Festival, and even smaller \"boutique\" festivals such as the Miami International Film Festival, British Urban Film Festival and Mumbai Women's International Film Festival.\nOn the other hand, some festivals\u2014usually those accepting fewer films and perhaps not attracting as many big names in their audiences as do Sundance and Telluride, require no entry fee. Many smaller film festivals in the United States, such as the Stony Brook Film Festival on Long Island, the Northwest Filmmakers' Festival, and the Sicilian Film Festival in Miami), are examples.\nThe Portland International Film Festival charges an entry fee but waives it for filmmakers from the Northwestern United States, and some others with regional focuses have similar approaches.\nSeveral film festival submission portal websites exist to streamline filmmakers' entries into multiple festivals. They provide databases of festival calls for entry and offer filmmakers a convenient \"describe once, submit many\" service.\nScreening out of competition.\nThe core tradition of film festivals is competition, or judging which films most deserve various forms of recognition. Some festivals, such as the famous Cannes Film Festival, may screen films that are considered close to competition-quality without being included in the competition; the films are said to be screened \"out of competition\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "10782", "revid": "16752040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10782", "title": "List of film genres", "text": ""}
{"id": "10783", "revid": "252195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10783", "title": "History of film", "text": "The history of film chronicles the development of a visual art form created using film technologies that began in the late 19th century.\nThe advent of film as an artistic medium is not clearly defined. There were earlier cinematographic screenings by others like the first showing of life sized pictures in motion 1894 in Berlin by Ottomar Ansch\u00fctz; however, the commercial, public screening of ten Lumi\u00e8re brothers' short films in Paris on 28 December 1895, can be regarded as the breakthrough of projected cinematographic motion pictures. The earliest films were in black and white, under a minute long, without recorded sound, and consisted of a single shot from a steady camera. The first decade saw film move from a novelty, to an established mass entertainment industry, with film production companies and studios established throughout the world. Conventions toward a general cinematic language developed, with film editing, camera movements and other cinematic techniques contributing specific roles in the narrative of films.\nPopular new media, including television (mainstream since the 1950s), home video (1980s), and the internet (1990s), influenced the distribution and consumption of films. Film production usually responded with content to fit the new media, and technical innovations (including widescreen (1950s), 3D, and 4D film) and more spectacular films to keep theatrical screenings attractive. Systems that were cheaper and more easily handled (including 8mm film, video, and smartphone cameras) allowed for an increasing number of people to create films of varying qualities, for any purpose including home movies and video art. The technical quality was usually lower than professional movies, but improved with digital video and affordable, high-quality digital cameras. Improving over time, digital production methods became more popular during the 1990s, resulting in increasingly realistic visual effects and popular feature-length computer animations.\nVarious film genres have emerged during the history of film, and enjoyed variable degrees of success.\nPrecursors.\nThe use of film as an art form traces its origins to several earlier traditions in the arts such as (oral) storytelling, literature, theatre, opera, and visual arts. Cantastoria and similar ancient traditions combined storytelling with series of images that were shown or indicated one after the other. Predecessors to film that had already used light and shadows to create art before the advent of modern film technology include shadowgraphy, shadow puppetry, camera obscura, and the magic lantern.\nShadowgraphy and shadow puppetry represent early examples of the intent to use moving imagery for entertainment and storytelling. Thought to have originated in the Far East, the art form used shadows cast by hands or objects to assist in the creation of narratives. Shadow puppetry enjoyed popularity for centuries around Asia, notably in Java, and eventually spread to Europe during the Age of Enlightenment.\nBy the 16th century, entertainers often conjured images of ghostly apparitions, using techniques such as camera obscura and other forms of projection to enhance their performances. Magic lantern shows developed in the latter half of the 17th century seem to have continued this tradition with images of death, monsters and other scary figures. Around 1790, this practice was developed into a type of multimedia ghost show known as phantasmagoria. These popular shows entertained audiences using mechanical slides, rear projection, mobile projectors, superimposition, dissolves, live actors, smoke (on which projections may have been cast), odors, sounds and even electric shocks. While many first magic lantern shows were intended to frighten viewers, advances by projectionists allowed for creative and even educational storytelling that could appeal to wider family audiences. Newly pioneered techniques such as the use of dissolving views and the chromatrope allowed for smoother transitions between two projected images and aided in providing stronger narratives.\nIn 1833, scientific study of a stroboscopic illusion in spoked wheels by Joseph Plateau, Michael Faraday and Simon Stampfer led to the invention of the Fantascope, also known as the stroboscopic disk or the phenakistiscope, which was popular in several European countries for a while. Plateau thought it could be further developed for use in phantasmagoria and Stampfer imagined a system for longer scenes with strips on rollers, as well as a transparent version (probably intended for projection). Plateau, Charles Wheatstone, Antoine Claudet and others tried to combine the technique with the stereoscope (introduced in 1838) and photography (introduced in 1839) for a more complete illusion of reality, but for decades such experiments were mostly hindered by the need for long exposure times, with motion blur around objects that moved while the reflected light fell on the photo-sensitive chemicals. A few people managed to get decent results from stop motion techniques, but these were only very rarely marketed and no form of animated photography had much cultural impact before the advent of chronophotography.\nMost early photographic sequences, known as chronophotography, were not initially intended to be viewed in motion and were typically presented as a serious, even scientific, method of studying locomotion. The sequences almost exclusively involved humans or animals performing a simple movement in front of the camera. Starting in 1878 with the publication of \"The Horse in Motion\" cabinet cards, photographer Eadweard Muybridge began making hundreds of chronophotographic studies of the motion of animals and humans in real-time. He was soon followed by other chronophotographers like \u00c9tienne-Jules Marey, Georges Demen\u00ff, Albert Londe and Ottomar Ansch\u00fctz. In 1879, Muybridge started lecturing on animal locomotion and used his Zoopraxiscope to project animations of the contours of his recordings, traced onto glass discs.\nIn 1887, the German inventor and photographer Ottomar Ansch\u00fctz started presenting his chronophotographic recordings in motion, using a device he called the Elektrischen Schnellseher (also known as the Electrotachyscope), which displayed short loops on a small milk glass screen. By 1891, he had started mass production of a more economical, coin-operated peep-box viewing device of the same name that was exhibited at international exhibitions and fairs. Some machines were installed for longer periods, including some at The Crystal Palace in London, and in several U.S. stores. Shifting the focus of the medium from technical and scientific interest in motion to entertainment for the masses, he recorded wrestlers, dancers, acrobats, and scenes of everyday life. Nearly 34,000 people paid to see his shows at the Berlin Exhibition Park in summer 1892. Others saw it in London or at the 1893 Chicago World's Fair. Though little evidence remains for most of these recordings, some scenes probably depicted staged comical sequences. Extant records suggest some of his output directly influenced later works by the Edison Company, such as the 1894 film \"Fred Ott's Sneeze\".\nAdvances towards motion picture projection technologies were based on the popularity of magic lanterns, chronophotographic demonstrations, and other closely related forms of projected entertainment such as illustrated songs. From October 1892 to March 1900, inventor \u00c9mile Reynaud exhibited his Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Optique (\"Optical Theatre\") film system at the Mus\u00e9e Gr\u00e9vin in Paris. Reynaud's device, which projected a series of animated stories such as \"Pauvre Pierrot\" and \"Autour d'une cabine\", was displayed to over 500,000 visitors over the course of 12,800 shows. On 25, 29 and 30 November 1894, Ottomar Ansch\u00fctz projected moving images from Electrotachyscope discs on a large screen in the darkened Grand Auditorium of a Post Office Building in Berlin, the first showing of life sized pictures in motion. From 22 February to 30 March 1895, a commercial 1.5-hour program of 40 different scenes was screened for audiences of 300 people at the old Reichstag and received circa 4,000 visitors.\nNovelty era (1890s \u2013 early 1900s).\nAdvances towards projection.\nThroughout the late 19th century, several inventors such as Wordsworth Donisthorpe, Louis Le Prince, William Friese-Greene, and the Skladanowsky brothers made pioneering contributions to the development of devices that could capture and display moving images, laying the groundwork for the emergence of cinema as an artistic medium. The scenes in these experiments primarily served to demonstrate the technology itself and were usually filmed with family, friends or passing traffic as the moving subjects. The earliest surviving film, known today as the \"Roundhay Garden Scene\" (1888), was captured by Louis Le Prince and briefly depicted members of his family in motion.\nIn June 1889, American inventor Thomas Edison assigned a lab assistant, William Kennedy Dickson, to help develop a device that could produce visuals to accompany the sounds produced from the phonograph. Building upon previous machines by Muybridge, Marey, Ansch\u00fctz and others, Dickson and his team created the Kinetoscope peep-box viewer, with celluloid loops containing about half a minute of motion picture entertainment. After an early preview on 20 May 1891, Edison introduced the machine in 1893. Many of the movies presented on the Kinetoscope showcased well-known vaudeville acts performing in Edison's Black Maria studio. The Kinetoscope quickly became a global sensation with multiple viewing parlors across major cities by 1895. As the initial novelty of the images wore off, the Edison Company was slow to diversify their repertoire of films and waning public interest caused business to slow by Spring 1895. To remedy declining profits, experiments, such as \"The Dickson Experimental Sound Film\", were conducted in an attempt to achieve the device's original goal of providing visual accompaniment for sound recordings. Limitations in syncing the sound to the visuals, however, prevented widespread application. During that same period, inventors began advancing technologies towards film projection that would eventually overtake Edison's peep-box format. \nThe Skladanowsky brothers, used their self-made Bioscop to display the first moving picture show to a paying audience on 1 November 1895, in Berlin. But they did not have the quality or financial resources to acquire momentum. Most of these films never passed the experimental stage and their efforts garnered little public attention until after cinema had become successful.\nIn the latter half of 1895, brothers Auguste and Louis Lumi\u00e8re filmed a number of short scenes with their invention, the Cin\u00e9matographe. On 28 December 1895, the brothers gave their first commercial screening in Paris (though evidence exists of demonstrations of the device to small audiences as early as October 1895). The screening consisted of ten films and lasted roughly 20 minutes. The program consisted mainly of actuality films such as \"Workers Leaving the Lumi\u00e8re Factory\" as truthful documents of the world, but the show also included the staged comedy \"L'Arroseur Arros\u00e9\". The most advanced demonstration of film projection thus far, the Cin\u00e9matographe was an instant success, bringing in an average of 2,500 to 3,000 francs daily by the end of January 1896. Following the first screening, the order and selection of films were changed often.\nThe Lumi\u00e8re brothers' primary business interests were in selling cameras and film equipment to exhibitors, not the actual production of films. Despite this, filmmakers across the world were inspired by the potential of film as exhibitors brought their shows to new countries. This era of filmmaking, dubbed by film historian Tom Gunning as \"the cinema of attractions\", offered a relatively cheap and simple way of providing entertainment to the masses. Rather than focusing on stories, Gunning argues, filmmakers mainly relied on the ability to delight audiences through the \"illusory power\" of viewing sequences in motion, much as they did in the Kinetoscope era that preceded it. Despite this, early experimentation with fiction filmmaking (both in actuality film and other genres) did occur. Films were mostly screened inside temporary storefront spaces, in tents of traveling exhibitors at fairs, or as \"dumb\" acts in vaudeville programs. During this period, before the process of post-production was clearly defined, exhibitors were allowed to exercise their creative freedom in their presentations. To enhance the viewers' experience, some showings were accompanied by live musicians in an orchestra, a theatre organ, live sound effects and commentary spoken by the showman or projectionist.\nExperiments in film editing, special effects, narrative construction, and camera movement during this period by filmmakers in France, England, and the United States became influential in establishing an identity for film going forward. At both the Edison and Lumi\u00e8re studios, loose narratives such as the 1895 Edison film, \"Washday Troubles,\" established short relationship dynamics and simple storylines. In 1896, \"La F\u00e9e aux Choux\" (\"The Fairy of the Cabbages\") was first released. Directed and edited by Alice Guy, the story is arguably the earliest narrative film in history, as well as the first film to be directed by a woman. That same year, the Edison Manufacturing Company released \"The May Irwin Kiss\" in May to widespread financial success. The film, which featured the first kiss in cinematic history, led to the earliest known calls for film censorship.\nAnother early film producer was Australia's Limelight Department. Commencing in 1898, it was operated by The Salvation Army in Melbourne, Australia. The Limelight Department produced evangelistic material for use by the Salvation Army, including lantern slides as early as 1891, as well as private and government contracts. In its nineteen years of operation, the Limelight Department produced about 300 films of various lengths, making it one of largest film producers of its time. The Limelight Department made a 1904 film by Joseph Perry called Bushranging in North Queensland, which is believed to be the first ever film about bushrangers.\nProliferation of actualities and newsreels.\nIn its infancy, film was rarely recognized as an art form by presenters or audiences. Regarded by the upper class as a \"vulgar\" and \"lowbrow\" form of cheap entertainment, films largely appealed to the working class and were often too short to hold any strong narrative potential. Initial advertisements promoted the technologies used to screen films rather than the films themselves. As the devices became more familiar to audiences, their potential for capturing and recreating events was exploited primarily in the form of newsreels and actualities. During the creation of these films, cinematographers often drew upon aesthetic values established by past art forms such as framing and the intentional placement of the camera in the composition of their image. In a 1955 article for \"The Quarterly of Film Radio and television,\" film producer and historian Kenneth Macgowan asserted that the intentional staging and recreation of events for newsreels \"brought storytelling to the screen\".\nWith the advertisement of film technologies over content, actualities initially began as a \"series of views\" that often contained shots of beautiful and lively places or performance acts. Following the success of their 1895 screening, The Lumi\u00e8re brothers established a company and sent cameramen across the world to capture new subjects for presentation. After the cinematographer shot scenes, they often exhibited their recordings locally and then sent them back to the company factory in Lyon to make duplicate prints for sale to whoever wanted them. In the process of filming actualities, especially those of real events, filmmakers discovered and experimented with multiple camera techniques to accommodate for their unpredictable nature. Due to the short length (often only one shot) of many actualities, catalogue records indicate that production companies marketed to exhibitors by promoting multiple actualities with related subject matters that could be purchased to complement each other. Exhibitors who bought the films often presented them in a program and would provide spoken accompaniment to explain the action on screen to audiences.\nThe first paying audience for a motion picture gathered at Madison Square Garden to see a staged actuality that purported itself to be a boxing fight filmed by Woodville Latham using a device called the Eidoloscope on May 20, 1895. Commissioned by Latham, the French inventor Eugene Augustin Lauste created the device with additional expertise from William Kennedy Dickson and crafted a mechanism that came to be known as the Latham loop, which allowed for longer continuous runtimes and was less abrasive on the celluloid film.\nIn subsequent years, screenings of actualities and newsreels proved to be profitable. In 1897, \"The Corbett-Fitzsimmons Fight\" was released. The film was a complete recording of a heavyweight world championship boxing match at Carson City, Nevada. It generated more income in box office than in live gate receipts and was the longest film produced at the time. Audiences had probably been drawn to the Corbett-Fitzsimmons film en masse because James J. Corbett (a.k.a. Gentleman Jim) had become a matinee idol since he had played a fictionalized version of himself in a stage play.\nFrom 1910 on, regular newsreels were exhibited and soon became a popular way of discovering the news before the advent of television\u00a0\u2013 the British Antarctic Expedition to the South Pole was filmed for the newsreels as were the suffragette demonstrations that were happening at the same time. F. Percy Smith was an early nature documentary pioneer working for Charles Urban when he pioneered the use of time lapse and micro cinematography in his 1910 documentary on the growth of flowers.\nExperimentation with narrative filmmaking.\nFrance: Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s, Path\u00e9 Fr\u00e8res, Gaumont.\nFollowing the successful exhibition of the Cin\u00e9matographe, development of a motion picture industry rapidly accelerated in France. Multiple filmmakers experimented with the technology as they worked to attain the same success that the Lumi\u00e8re brothers had with their screening. These filmmakers established new companies such as the Star Film Company, Path\u00e9 Fr\u00e8res, and Gaumont.\nThe most widely cited progenitor of narrative filmmaking is the French filmmaker, Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s. M\u00e9li\u00e8s was an illusionist who had previously used magic lantern projections to enhance his magic act. In 1895, M\u00e9li\u00e8s attended the demonstration of the Cinematographe and recognized the potential of the device to aid his act. He attempted to buy a device from the Lumi\u00e8re brothers, but they refused. Months later, he bought a camera from Robert W. Paul and began experiments with the device by creating actualities. During this period of experimentation, M\u00e9li\u00e8s discovered and implemented various special effects including the stop trick, the multiple exposure, and the use of dissolves in his films. At the end of 1896, M\u00e9li\u00e8s established the Star Film Company and started producing, directing, and distributing a body of work that would eventually contain over 500 short films. Recognizing the narrative potential afforded by combining his theater background with the newly discovered effects for the camera, M\u00e9li\u00e8s designed an elaborate stage that contained trapdoors and a fly system. The stage construction and editing techniques allowed for the development of more complex stories, such as the 1896 film, \"Le Manoir du Diable\" (\"The House of the Devil\"), regarded as a first in the horror film genre, and the 1899 film \"Cendrillon\" (\"Cinderella\"). In M\u00e9li\u00e8s' films, he based the placement of the camera on the theatrical construct of proscenium framing, the metaphorical plane or fourth wall that divides the actors and the audience. Throughout his career, M\u00e9li\u00e8s consistently placed the camera in a fixed position and eventually fell out of favor with audiences as other filmmakers experimented with more complex and creative techniques. M\u00e9li\u00e8s is most widely known today for his 1902 film, \"Le Voyage Dans La Lune (A Trip to the Moon)\", where he used his expertise in effects and narrative construction to create the first science fiction film.\nIn 1900, Charles Path\u00e9 began film production under the Path\u00e9-Fr\u00e8res brand, with Ferdinand Zecca hired to lead the creative process. Prior to this focus on production, Path\u00e9 had become involved with the industry by exhibiting and selling what were likely counterfeit versions of the Kinetoscope in his phonograph shop. With the creative leadership of Zecca and the capability to mass-produce copies of the films through a partnership with a French toolmaking company, Charles Path\u00e9 sought to make Path\u00e9-Fr\u00e8res the leading film producer in the country. Within the next few years, Path\u00e9-Fr\u00e8res became the largest film studio in the world, with satellite offices in major cities and an expanding selection of films available for presentation. The company's films were varied in content, with directors specializing in various genres for fairground presentations throughout the early 1900s.\nGaumont was the main regional rival of Path\u00e9-Fr\u00e8res. Founded in 1895 by L\u00e9on Gaumont, the firm initially sold photographic equipment and began film production in 1897, under the direction of Alice Guy, the industry's first female director. Her earlier films share many characteristics and themes with her contemporary competitors, such as the Lumi\u00e8res and M\u00e9li\u00e8s. She explored dance and travel films, often combining the two, such as \"Le Bol\u00e9ro\" performed by Miss Saharet (1905) and \"Tango\" (1905). Many of Guy's early dance films were popular in music-hall attractions such as the serpentine dance films \u2013 also a staple of the Lumi\u00e8res and Thomas Edison film catalogs. In 1906, she made \"The Life of Christ\", a big-budget production for the time, which included 300 extras.\nGermany: Oskar Messter.\nGerman inventor and film tycoon Oskar Messter was an important figure in the early years of cinema. His firm Messter Film was one of the dominant German producers before the rise of UFA, with which it merged eventually. Messter first added a Geneva drive on the projectors to oscillatingly cause intermittent movement to advance the frames of the film and he set up the first film studio in Germany in 1900.\nFrom 1896, Messter was interested in the search of a method of reproduction and synchronization of the sound effects of the cinematographic performance at the time of the silent movies. So Messter invented the Tonbilder Biophon to show films, in which a gramophone played Unter den Linden accompanying the projection of animated images, but it was not a simple add on but to precisely match the series of musical pieces with moving images. In effect, to add sound to the silent cinema, it was necessary to solve problems of synchronization, since the image and the sound were recorded and reproduced by separated devices, which were difficult to initiate and to maintain rigged. On August 31, 1903, Messter held the first sound projection that took place in Germany at the \"Apollo\" Theater in Berlin.\nEngland: Robert W Paul, Cecil Hepworth, The Brighton School.\nBoth Cecil Hepworth and Robert W. Paul experimented with the use of different camera techniques in their films. Paul's 'Cinematograph Camera No. 1' of 1895 was the first camera to feature reverse-cranking, which allowed the same film footage to be exposed several times, thereby creating multiple exposures. This technique was first used in his 1901 film \"Scrooge, or, Marley's Ghost\". Both filmmakers experimented with the speeds of the camera to generate new effects. Paul shot scenes from \"On a Runaway Motor Car through Piccadilly Circus\" (1899) by cranking the camera apparatus very slowly. When the film was projected at the usual 16 frames per second, the scenery appeared to be passing at great speed. Hepworth used the opposite effect in \"The Indian Chief and the Seidlitz Powder\" (1901). The Chief's movements are sped up by cranking the camera much faster than 16 frames per second, producing what modern audiences would call a \"slow motion\" effect.\nThe first films to move from single shots to successive scenes began around the turn of the 20th century. Due to the loss of many early films, a conclusive shift from static singular shots to a series of scenes can be hard to determine. Despite these limitations, Michael Brooke of the British Film Institute attributes real film continuity, involving action moving from one sequence into another, to Robert W. Paul's 1898 film, \"Come Along, Do!\". Only a still from the second shot remains extant today. Released in 1901, the British film \"Attack on a China Mission\" was one of the first films to show a continuity of action across multiple scenes. The use of the intertitle to explain actions and dialogue on screen began in the early 1900s. Filmed intertitles were first used in Robert W. Paul's film, \"Scrooge, or Marley's Ghost.\" In most countries, intertitles gradually came to be used to provide dialogue and narration for the film, thus dispensing the need for narration provided by exhibitors.\nDevelopment of continuous action across multiple shots was furthered in England by a loosely associated group of film pioneers collectively termed \"the Brighton School\". These filmmakers included George Albert Smith and James Williamson, among others. Smith and Williamson experimented with action continuity and were likely the first to incorporate the use of inserts and close-ups between shots. A basic technique for trick cinematography was the double exposure of the film in the camera. The effect was pioneered by Smith in the 1898 film, \"Photographing a Ghost\". According to Smith's catalogue records, the (now lost) film chronicles a photographer's struggle to capture a ghost on camera. Using the double exposure of the film, Smith overlaid a transparent ghostly figure onto the background in a comical manner to taunt the photographer. Smith's \"The Corsican Brothers\" was described in the catalogue of the Warwick Trading Company in 1900: \"By extremely careful photography the ghost appears *quite transparent*. After indicating that he has been killed by a sword-thrust, and appealing for vengeance, he disappears. A 'vision' then appears showing the fatal duel in the snow.\" Smith also initiated the special effects technique of reverse motion. He did this by repeating the action a second time, while filming it with an inverted camera, and then joining the tail of the second negative to that of the first. The first films made using this device were \"Tipsy, Topsy, Turvy\" and \"The Awkward Sign Painter\". The earliest surviving example of this technique is Smith's \"The House That Jack Built\", made before September 1900. Cecil Hepworth took this technique further by printing the negatives of the forward motion in reverse frame by frame, producing a print in which the original action was exactly reversed. To do this he built a special printer in which the negative running through a projector was projected into the gate of a camera through a special lens giving a same-size image. This arrangement came to be called a \"projection printer\", and eventually an \"optical printer\".\nIn 1898, George Albert Smith experimented with close-ups, filming shots of a man drinking beer and a woman using sniffing tobacco. The following year, Smith made \"The Kiss in the Tunnel,\" a sequence consisting of three shots: a train enters a tunnel; a man and a woman exchange a brief kiss in the darkness and then return to their seats; the train exits the tunnel. Smith created the scenario in response to the success of a genre known as a phantom ride. In a phantom ride film, cameras would capture the motion and surroundings from the front of a moving train. The separate shots, when edited together, formed a distinct sequence of events and established causality from one shot to the next. Following \"The Kiss in the Tunnel\", Smith more definitively experimented with continuity of action across successive shots and began using inserts in his films, such as \"Grandma's Reading Glass\" and \"Mary Jane's Mishap\". In 1900, Smith made \"As Seen Through a Telescope.\" The main shot shows a street scene with a young man tying the shoelace and then caressing the foot of his girlfriend, while an old man observes this through a telescope. There is then a cut to close shot of the hands on the girl's foot shown inside a black circular mask, and then a cut back to the continuation of the original scene.\nJames Williamson perfected narrative building techniques in his 1900 film, \"Attack on a China Mission\". The film, which film historian John Barnes later described as having \"the most fully developed narrative of any film made in England up to that time\", opens as the first shot shows Chinese Boxer rebels at the gate; it then cuts to the missionary family in the garden, where a fight ensues. The wife signals to British sailors from the balcony, who come and rescue them. The film also used the first \"reverse angle\" cut in film history. The following year, Williamson created \"The Big Swallow\". In the film. a man becomes irritated by the presence of the filmmaker and \"swallows\" the camera and its operator through the use of interpolated close-up shots. He combined these effects, along with superimpositions, use of wipe transitions to denote a scene change, and other techniques to create a film language, or \"film grammar\". James Williamson's use of continuous action in his 1901 film, \"Stop Thief!\" stimulated a film genre known as the \"chase film.\" In the film, a tramp steals a leg of mutton from a butcher's boy in the first shot, is chased by the butcher's boy and assorted dogs in the following shot, and is finally caught by the dogs in the third shot.\nUnited States: The Edison Company and Edwin S. Porter.\n\"The Execution of Mary Stuart\", produced in 1895 by the Edison Company for viewing with the Kinetoscope, showed Mary Queen of Scots being executed in full view of the camera. The effect, known as the stop trick, was achieved by replacing the actor with a dummy for the final shot. The technique used in the film is seen as one of the earliest known uses of special effects in film.\nThe American filmmaker Edwin S. Porter started making films for the Edison Company in 1901. A former projectionist hired by Thomas Edison to develop his new projection model known as the Vitascope, Porter was inspired in part by the works of M\u00e9li\u00e8s, Smith, and Williamson and drew upon their newly crafted techniques to further the development of continuous narrative through editing. When he began making longer films in 1902, he put a dissolve between every shot, just as Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s was already doing, and he frequently had the same action repeated across the dissolves.\nIn 1902, Porter shot \"Life of an American Fireman\" for the Edison Manufacturing Company and distributed the film the following year. In the film, Porter combined stock footage from previous Edison films with newly shot footage and spliced them together to convey a dramatic story of the rescue of a woman and her child by heroic firemen.\nPorter's film, \"The Great Train Robbery\" (1903), had a running time of twelve minutes, with twenty separate shots and ten different indoor and outdoor locations. The film is seen as a first in the Western film genre and is significant for the use of shots suggesting simultaneous action occurring at different locations. Porter's use of both staged and real outdoor environments helped to create a sense of space while the placement of the camera in a wider shot established depth and allowed for an extended duration of motion on screen. \"The Great Train Robbery\" served as one of the vehicles that would launch the film medium into mass popularity. That same year, the Miles Brothers opened the first film exchange in the country, which allowed permanent exhibitors to rent films from the company at a lower cost than the producers that sold their films outright.\nJohn P. Harris opened the first permanent theater devoted exclusively to the presentation of films, the nickelodeon, in 1905 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The idea rapidly took off and by 1908, there were around 8,000 nickelodeon theaters across the country. With the arrival of the nickelodeon, audience demand for a larger quantity of story films with a variety of subjects and locations led to a need to hire more creative talent and caused studios to invest in more elaborate stage designs.\nIn 1908, Thomas Edison spearheaded the creation of a corporate trust between the major film companies in America known as the Motion Picture Patents Company (MPPC) to limit infringement on his patents. Members of the trust controlled every aspect of the filmmaking process from the creation of film stock, the production of films, and the distribution to cinemas through licensing arrangements. The trust led to increased quality filmmaking spurred by internal competition and placed limits on the number of foreign films to encourage the growth of the American film industry, but it also discouraged the creation of feature films. By 1915, the MPPC had lost most of its hold on the film industry as the companies moved towards the wider production of feature films.\nDuring the 1900s, the leader in the United States was the French group Path\u00e9, which held almost 50% of the global market on its own.\nContinued international growth (1900s\u20131910s).\nNew film producing countries.\nWith the worldwide film boom, more countries now joined Britain, France, Germany and the United States in serious film production. In Italy, production was spread over several centers, Turin was the first major film production centre, and Milan and Naples gave birth to the first film magazines. In Turin, Ambrosio was the first company in the field in 1905, and remained the largest in the country through this period. Its most substantial rival was Cines in Rome, which started producing in 1906. The great strength of the Italian industry was historical epics, with large casts and massive scenery. As early as 1911, Giovanni Pastrone's two-reel \"La Caduta di Troia (The Fall of Troy)\" made a big impression worldwide, and it was followed by even bigger productions like \"Quo Vadis?\" (1912), which ran for 90 minutes, and Pastrone's \"Cabiria\" of 1914, which ran for two and a half hours.\nItalian companies also had a strong line in slapstick comedy, with actors like Andr\u00e9 Deed, known locally as \"Cretinetti\", and elsewhere as \"Foolshead\" and \"Gribouille\", achieving worldwide fame with his almost surrealistic gags.\nThe most important film-producing country in Northern Europe up until the First World War was Denmark. The Nordisk company was set up there in 1906 by Ole Olsen, a fairground showman, and after a brief period imitating the successes of French and British filmmakers, in 1907 he produced 67 films, most directed by Viggo Larsen, with sensational subjects like \"Den hvide Slavinde (The White Slave)\", \"Isbj\u00f8rnejagt (Polar Bear Hunt)\" and \"L\u00f8vejagten (The Lion Hunt)\". By 1910, new smaller Danish companies began joining the business, and besides making more films about the white slave trade, they contributed other new subjects. The most important of these finds was Asta Nielsen in \"Afgrunden (The Abyss)\", directed by Urban Gad for Kosmorama, This combined the circus, sex, jealousy and murder, all put over with great conviction, and pushed the other Danish filmmakers further in this direction. By 1912, the Danish film companies were multiplying rapidly.\nThe Swedish film industry was smaller and slower to get started than the Danish industry. Here, Charles Magnusson, a newsreel cameraman for the Svenskabiografteatern cinema chain, started fiction film production for them in 1909, directing a number of the films himself. Production increased in 1912, when the company engaged Victor Sj\u00f6str\u00f6m and Mauritz Stiller as directors. They started out by imitating the subjects favoured by the Danish film industry, but by 1913 they were producing their own strikingly original work, which sold very well.\nRussia began its film industry in 1908 with Path\u00e9 shooting some fiction subjects there, and then the creation of real Russian film companies by Aleksandr Drankov and Aleksandr Khanzhonkov. The Khanzhonkov company quickly became much the largest Russian film company, and remained so until 1918.\nIn Germany, Oskar Messter had been involved in film-making from 1896, but did not make a significant number of films per year until 1910. When the worldwide film boom started, he, and the few other people in the German film business, continued to sell prints of their own films outright, which put them at a disadvantage. It was only when Paul Davidson, the owner of a chain of cinemas, brought Asta Nielsen and Urban Gad to Germany from Denmark in 1911, and set up a production company, Projektions-AG \"Union\" (PAGU), that a change-over to renting prints began. Messter replied with a series of longer films starring Henny Porten, but although these did well in the German-speaking world, they were not particularly successful internationally, unlike the Asta Nielsen films. Another of the growing German film producers just before World War I was the German branch of the French \u00c9clair company, Deutsche \u00c9clair. This was expropriated by the German government, and turned into DECLA when the war started. But altogether, German producers only had a minor part of the German market in 1914.\nOverall, from the mid-1910s onwards, American films had the largest share of the market in all European countries except France where Path\u00e9 remained the leader with more than 40% of the market share alone, followed by Gaumont which was also ahead of the American studios. The American films had just pushed the local production out of first place on the eve of World War I. Path\u00e9 Fr\u00e8res expanded and significantly shaped the American film business, creating many \"firsts\" in the film industry, such as adding titles and subtitles to films for the first time, releasing scrolls for the first time, introducing film posters for the first time, producing color pictures for the first time, taking out commercial bills for the first time, contacting exhibitors and studying their needs for the first time. The world's largest film supplier, Path\u00e9, is limited to the U.S. market, which has reached a saturation level, so the U.S. seeks additional profits from foreign markets. Movies are defined as \"pure\" American phenomenon in the United States.\nFilm technique.\nNew film techniques that were introduced in this period include the use of artificial lighting, fire effects and low-key lighting (i.e. lighting in which most of the frame is dark) for enhanced atmosphere during sinister scenes.\nContinuity of action from shot to shot was also refined, such as in Path\u00e9's \"le Cheval emball\u00e9 (The Runaway Horse)\" (1907) where cross-cutting between parallel actions is used. D. W. Griffith also began using cross-cutting in the film \"The Fatal Hour\", made in July 1908. Another development was the use of the point of view shot, first used in 1910 in Vitagraph's \"Back to Nature\". Insert shots were also used for artistic purposes; the Italian film \"La mala planta (The Evil Plant)\", directed by Mario Caserini had an insert shot of a snake slithering over the \"Evil Plant\". By 1914 it was widely held in the American film industry that cross-cutting was most generally useful because it made possible the elimination of uninteresting parts of the action that play no part in advancing the drama.\nIn 1909, 35mm became the internationally recognized theatrical film gauge.\nAs films grew longer, specialist writers were employed to simplify more complex stories derived from novels or plays into a form that could be contained on one reel. Genres began to be used as categories; the main division was into comedy and drama, but these categories were further subdivided.\nIntertitles containing lines of dialogue began to be used consistently from 1908 onwards, such as in Vitagraph's \"An Auto Heroine; or, The Race for the Vitagraph Cup and How It Was Won\". The dialogue was eventually inserted into the middle of the scene and became commonplace by 1912. The introduction of dialogue titles transformed the nature of film narrative. When dialogue titles came to be always cut into a scene just after a character starts speaking, and then left with a cut to the character just before they finish speaking, then one had something that was effectively the equivalent of a present-day sound film.\nDuring World War I and industry.\nThe years of the First World War were a complex transitional period for the film industry. The exhibition of films changed from short one-reel programmes to feature films. Exhibition venues became larger and began charging higher prices.\nIn the United States, these changes brought destruction to many film companies, the Vitagraph company being an exception. Film production began to shift to Los Angeles during World War I. The Universal Film Manufacturing Company was formed in 1912 as an umbrella company. New entrants included the Jesse Lasky Feature Play Company, and Famous Players, both formed in 1913, and later amalgamated into Famous Players\u2013Lasky. The biggest success of these years was David Wark Griffith's \"The Birth of a Nation\" (1915). Griffith followed this up with the even bigger \"Intolerance\" (1916), but, due to the high quality of film produced in the US, the market for their films was high.\nIn France, film production shut down due to the general military mobilization of the country at the start of the war. Although film production began again in 1915, it was on a reduced scale, and the biggest companies gradually retired from production. Italian film production held up better, although so called \"diva films\", starring anguished female leads were a commercial failure. In Denmark, the Nordisk company increased its production so much in 1915 and 1916 that it could not sell all its films, which led to a very sharp decline in Danish production, and the end of Denmark's importance on the world film scene.\nThe German film industry was seriously weakened by the war. The most important of the new film producers at the time was Joe May, who made a series of thrillers and adventure films through the war years, but Ernst Lubitsch also came into prominence with a series of very successful comedies and dramas.\nNew techniques.\nAt this time, studios were blacked out to allow shooting to be unaffected by changing sunlight. This was replaced with floodlights and spotlights. The widespread adoption of irising-in and out to begin and end scenes caught on in this period. This is the revelation of a film shot in a circular mask, which gradually gets larger until it expands beyond the frame. Other shaped slits were used, including vertical and diagonal apertures.\nA new idea taken over from still photography was \"soft focus\". This began in 1915, with some shots being intentionally thrown out of focus for expressive effect, as in Mary Pickford starrer \"Fanchon the Cricket\".\nIt was during this period that camera effects intended to convey the subjective feelings of characters in a film really began to be established. These could now be done as Point of View (POV) shots, as in Sidney Drew's \"The Story of the Glove\" (1915), where a wobbly hand-held shot of a door and its keyhole represents the POV of a drunken man. The use of anamorphic (in the general sense of distorted shape) images first appears in these years when Abel Gance directed \"la Folie du Docteur Tube (The Madness of Dr. Tube)\". In this film the effect of a drug administered to a group of people was suggested by shooting the scenes reflected in a distorting mirror of the fair-ground type.\nSymbolic effects taken over from conventional literary and artistic tradition continued to make some appearances in films during these years. In D. W. Griffith's \"The Avenging Conscience\" (1914), the title \"The birth of the evil thought\" precedes a series of three shots of the protagonist looking at a spider, and ants eating an insect. Symbolist art and literature from the turn of the century also had a more general effect on a small number of films made in Italy and Russia. The supine acceptance of death resulting from passion and forbidden longings was a major feature of this art, and states of delirium dwelt on at length were important as well.\nThe use of insert shots, i.e. close-ups of objects other than faces, had already been established by the Brighton school, but were infrequently used before 1914. It is really only with Griffith's \"The Avenging Conscience\" that a new phase in the use of the Insert Shot starts. As well as the symbolic inserts already mentioned, the film also made extensive use of large numbers of Big Close Up shots of clutching hands and tapping feet as a means of emphasizing those parts of the body as indicators of psychological tension.\nAtmospheric inserts were developed in Europe in the late 1910s. This kind of shot is one in a scene which neither contains any of the characters in the story, nor is a Point of View shot seen by one of them. An early example is when Maurice Tourneur directed \"The Pride of the Clan\" (1917), in which there is a series of shots of waves beating on a rocky shore to demonstrate the harsh lives of the fishing folk. Maurice Elvey's \"Nelson; The Story of England's Immortal Naval Hero\" (1919) has a symbolic sequence dissolving from a picture of Kaiser Wilhelm II to a peacock, and then to a battleship.\nBy 1914, continuity cinema was the established mode of commercial cinema. One of the advanced continuity techniques involved an accurate and smooth transition from one shot to another. Cutting to \"different\" angles within a scene also became well-established as a technique for dissecting a scene into shots in American films. If the direction of the shot changes by more than ninety degrees, it is called a reverse-angle cutting. The leading figure in the full development of reverse-angle cutting was Ralph Ince in his films, such as \"The Right Girl\" and \"His Phantom Sweetheart\".\nThe use of flash-back structures continued to develop in this period, with the usual way of entering and leaving a flash-back being through a dissolve. The Vitagraph Company's \"The Man That Might Have Been\" (William J. Humphrey, 1914), is even more complex, with a series of reveries and flash-backs that contrast the protagonist's real passage through life with what might have been, if his son had not died.\nAfter 1914, cross cutting between parallel actions came to be used\u00a0\u2013 more so in American films than in European ones. Cross-cutting was used to get new effects of contrast, such as the cross-cut sequence in Cecil B. DeMille's \"The Whispering Chorus\" (1918), in which a supposedly dead husband is having a liaison with a Chinese prostitute in an opium den, while simultaneously his unknowing wife is being remarried in church.\nSilent film tinting, too, gained popularity during these periods. Amber tinting meant daytime, or vividly-lit nighttime, blue tints meant dawn or dimly-lit night, red tinting represented fire scenes, green tinting meant a mysterious atmosphere, and brown tints (aka sepia toning) were used usually for full-length films instead of individual scenes. D.W. Griffiths' \"The Birth of a Nation\" (1915), John S. Robertson's \"Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde\" (1920), and the Robert Wiene's \"The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari\" (1920) are some notable examples of tinted silent films.\n\"The Photo-Drama of Creation\", first shown to audiences in 1914, was the first major screenplay to incorporate synchronized sound, moving film, and color slides. Until 1927, most motion pictures were produced without sound. This period is commonly referred to as the silent era of film.\nFilm art.\nThe general trend in the development of cinema, led from the United States, was towards using the newly developed specifically filmic devices for expression of the narrative content of film stories, and combining this with the standard dramatic structures already in use in commercial theatre. D. W. Griffith had the highest standing among American directors in the industry, because of the dramatic excitement he conveyed to the audience through his films. Cecil B. DeMille's \"The Cheat\" (1915), brought out the moral dilemmas facing their characters in a more subtle way than Griffith. DeMille was also in closer touch with the reality of contemporary American life. Maurice Tourneur was also highly ranked for the pictorial beauties of his films, together with the subtlety of his handling of fantasy, while at the same time he was capable of getting greater naturalism from his actors at appropriate moments, as in \"A Girl's Folly\" (1917).\nSidney Drew was the leader in developing \"polite comedy\", while slapstick was refined by Fatty Arbuckle and Charles Chaplin, who both started with Mack Sennett's Keystone company. They reduced the usual frenetic pace of Sennett's films to give the audience a chance to appreciate the subtlety and finesse of their movement, and the cleverness of their gags. By 1917 Chaplin was also introducing more dramatic plot into his films, and mixing the comedy with sentiment.\nIn Russia, Yevgeni Bauer put a slow intensity of acting combined with Symbolist overtones onto film in a unique way.\nIn Sweden, Victor Sj\u00f6str\u00f6m made a series of films that combined the realities of people's lives with their surroundings in a striking manner, while Mauritz Stiller developed sophisticated comedy to a new level.\nIn Germany, Ernst Lubitsch got his inspiration from the stage work of Max Reinhardt, both in bourgeois comedy and in spectacle, and applied this to his films, culminating in his \"die Puppe\" (\"The Doll\"), \"die Austernprinzessin\" (\"The Oyster Princess\") and \"Madame Dubarry\".\n1920s.\nGolden years of German cinema, Hollywood triumphant.\nAt the start of the First World War, French and Italian cinema had been the most globally popular. The war came as a devastating interruption to European film industries.\nThroughout the early 20th century, screen artists continued to learn how to work with cameras and create illusions using space and time in their shots. This newly introduced form of creativity made way for a whole new group of people to be introduced to stardom, including David W. Griffith, who made a name for himself with his 1915 film, \"The Birth of a Nation\". In 1920, there were two major changes to the film industry: the introduction of sound and the creation of studio systems. In the 1920s, talent who had been working independently began joining studios and working with other actors and directors. In 1927, \"The Jazz Singer\" was released, bringing sound to the motion picture industry.\nThe German cinema, marked by those times, saw the era of the German Expressionist film movement. Berlin was its center with the Filmstudio Babelsberg. The first Expressionist films made up for a lack of lavish budgets by using set designs with wildly non-realistic, geometrically absurd angles, along with designs painted on walls and floors to represent lights, shadows, and objects. The plots and stories of the Expressionist films often dealt with madness, insanity, betrayal and other \"intellectual\" topics triggered by the experiences of World War I. Films like \"The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari\" (1920), \"Nosferatu\" (1922) and \"M\" (1931) had a large international influence that can still be recognised in the works of current filmmakers, game designers and artists.\nMovies like \"Metropolis\" (1927) and \"Woman in the Moon\" (1929) partly created the genre of science fiction films and Lotte Reiniger became a pioneer in animation, producing animated feature films like The Adventures of Prince Achmed, the oldest surviving and oldest European made animated movie.\nMany German and German-based directors, actors, writers and others emigrated to the US when the Nazis gained power, giving Hollywood and the American film industry the final edge in its competition with other movie producing countries.\nThe American industry, or \"Hollywood\", as it was becoming known after its new geographical center in California, gained the position it has held, more or less, ever since: film factory for the world and exporting its product to most countries on earth.\nBy the 1920s, the United States reached what is still its era of greatest-ever output, producing an average of 800 \"feature\" films annually, or 82% of the global total (Eyman, 1997). The comedies of Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton, the swashbuckling adventures of Douglas Fairbanks and the romances of Clara Bow, to cite just a few examples, made these performers' faces well known on every continent. The Western visual norm that would become classical continuity editing was developed and exported \u2013 although its adoption was slower in some non-Western countries without strong realist traditions in art and drama, such as Japan.\nThis development was contemporary with the growth of the studio system and its greatest publicity method, the star system, which characterized American film for decades to come and provided models for other film industries. The studios' efficient, top-down control over all stages of their product enabled a new and ever-growing level of lavish production and technical sophistication. At the same time, the system's commercial regimentation and focus on glamorous escapism discouraged daring and ambition beyond a certain degree, a prime example being the brief but still legendary directing career of the iconoclastic Erich von Stroheim in the late teens and the 1920s.\nIn 1924, Sam Goldwyn, Louis B. Mayer, and the Metro Pictures Corporation create MGM.\n1930s.\nSound era.\nDuring late 1927, Warners released \"The Jazz Singer\", which was mostly silent but contained what is generally regarded as the first synchronized dialogue (and singing) in a feature film; however, this process was actually accomplished first by Charles Taze Russell in 1914 with the lengthy film \"The Photo-Drama of Creation\". This drama consisted of picture slides and moving pictures synchronized with phonograph records of talks and music. The early sound-on-disc processes such as Vitaphone were soon superseded by sound-on-film methods like Fox Movietone, DeForest Phonofilm, and RCA Photophone. The trend convinced the largely reluctant industrialists that \"talking pictures\", or \"talkies\", were the future. A lot of attempts were made before the success of \"The Jazz Singer\", that can be seen in the List of film sound systems. And in 1926, Warner Bros. Debuts the film \"Don Juan\" with synchronized sound effects and music.\nThe change was remarkably swift. By the end of 1929, Hollywood was almost all-talkie, with several competing sound systems (soon to be standardized). Total changeover was slightly slower in the rest of the world, principally for economic reasons. Cultural reasons were also a factor in countries like China and Japan, where silents co-existed successfully with sound well into the 1930s, indeed producing what would be some of the most revered classics in those countries, like Wu Yonggang's \"The Goddess\" (China, 1934) and Yasujir\u014d Ozu's \"I Was Born, But...\" (Japan, 1932). But even in Japan, a figure such as the benshi, the live narrator who was a major part of Japanese silent cinema, found his acting career was ending.\nSound further tightened the grip of major studios in numerous countries: the vast expense of the transition overwhelmed smaller competitors, while the novelty of sound lured vastly larger audiences for those producers that remained. In the case of the U.S., some historians credit sound with saving the Hollywood studio system in the face of the Great Depression (Parkinson, 1995). Thus began what is now often called \"The Golden Age of Hollywood\", which refers roughly to the period beginning with the introduction of sound until the late 1940s. The American cinema reached its peak of efficiently manufactured glamour and global appeal during this period. The top actors of the era are now thought of as the classic film stars, such as Clark Gable, Katharine Hepburn, Humphrey Bogart, Greta Garbo, and the greatest box office draw of the 1930s, child performer Shirley Temple.\nCreative impact of sound.\nCreatively, however, the rapid transition was a difficult one, and in some ways, film briefly reverted to the conditions of its earliest days. The late '20s were full of static, stagey talkies as artists in front of and behind the camera struggled with the stringent limitations of the early sound equipment and their own uncertainty as to how to use the new medium. Many stage performers, directors and writers were introduced to cinema as producers sought personnel experienced in dialogue-based storytelling. Many major silent filmmakers and actors were unable to adjust and found their careers severely curtailed or even ended.\nThis awkward period was fairly short-lived. 1929 was a watershed year: William Wellman with \"Chinatown Nights\" and \"The Man I Love\", Rouben Mamoulian with \"Applause\", Alfred Hitchcock with \"Blackmail\" (Britain's first sound feature), were among the directors to bring greater fluidity to talkies and experiment with the expressive use of sound (Eyman, 1997). In this, they both benefited from, and pushed further, technical advances in microphones and cameras, and capabilities for editing and post-synchronizing sound (rather than recording all sound directly at the time of filming).\nSound films emphasized and benefited different genres to a greater extent than silents did. Most obviously, the musical film was born; the first classic-style Hollywood musical was \"The Broadway Melody\" (1929), and the form would find its first major creator in choreographer/director Busby Berkeley (\"42nd Street\", 1933, \"Dames\", 1934). In France, avant-garde director Ren\u00e9 Clair made surreal use of song and dance in comedies like \"Under the Roofs of Paris\" (1930) and \"Le Million\" (1931). Universal Pictures began releasing gothic horror films like \"Dracula\" and \"Frankenstein\" (both 1931). In 1933, RKO Pictures released Merian C. Cooper's classic \"giant monster\" film \"King Kong\". The trend thrived best in India, where the influence of the country's traditional song-and-dance drama made the musical the basic form of most sound films (Cook, 1990); virtually unnoticed by the Western world for decades, this Indian popular cinema would nevertheless become the world's most prolific. (\"See also Bollywood.\")\nAt this time, American gangster films like \"Little Caesar\" and Wellman's \"The Public Enemy\" (both 1931) became popular. Dialogue now took precedence over slapstick in Hollywood comedies: the fast-paced, witty banter of \"The Front Page\" (1931) or \"It Happened One Night\" (1934), the sexual double entendres of Mae West (\"She Done Him Wrong\", 1933), or the often subversively anarchic nonsense talk of the Marx Brothers (\"Duck Soup\", 1933). Walt Disney, who had previously been in the short cartoon business, stepped into feature films with the first English-speaking animated feature \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\", released by RKO Pictures in 1937. 1939, a major year for American cinema, brought such films as \"The Wizard of Oz\" and \"Gone with The Wind\".\nColor in cinema.\nCirca 80 percent of the films of the 1890s to the 1920s had colours. Many made use of monochromatic film tinting dye baths, some had the frames painted in multiple transparent colours by hand, and since 1905 there was a mechanized stencil-process (Path\u00e9color).\nKinemacolor, the first commercially successful cinematographic colour process, produced films in two colours (red and cyan) from 1908 to 1914.\nTechnicolor's natural three-strip colour process was very successfully introduced in 1932 with Walt Disney's animated Academy Award-winning short \"Flowers and Trees\", directed by Burt Gillett. Technicolor was initially used mainly for musicals like \"The Wizard of Oz\" (1939), in costume films such as \"The Adventures of Robin Hood\", and in animation. Not long after television became prevalent in the early 1950s, colour became more or less standard for theatrical movies.\n1940s.\nWorld War II and its aftermath.\nThe desire for wartime propaganda against the opposition created a renaissance in the film industry in Britain, with realistic war dramas like \"49th Parallel\" (1941), \"Went the Day Well?\" (1942), \"The Way Ahead\" (1944) and No\u00ebl Coward and David Lean's celebrated naval film \"In Which We Serve\" in 1942, which won a special Academy Award. These existed alongside more flamboyant films like Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger's \"The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp\" (1943), \"A Canterbury Tale\" (1944) and \"A Matter of Life and Death\" (1946), as well as Laurence Olivier's 1944 film \"Henry V\", based on the Shakespearean history \"Henry V\". The success of \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" allowed Disney to make more animated features like \"Pinocchio\" (1940), \"Fantasia\" (1940), \"Dumbo\" (1941) and \"Bambi\" (1942).\nThe onset of US involvement in World War II also brought a proliferation of films as both patriotism and propaganda. American propaganda films included \"Desperate Journey\" (1942), \"Mrs. Miniver\" (1942), \"Forever and a Day\" (1943) and \"Objective, Burma!\" (1945). Notable American films from the war years include the anti-Nazi \"Watch on the Rhine\" (1943), scripted by Dashiell Hammett; \"Shadow of a Doubt\" (1943), Hitchcock's direction of a script by Thornton Wilder; the George M. Cohan biographical film, \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\" (1942), starring James Cagney, and the immensely popular \"Casablanca\", with Humphrey Bogart. Bogart would star in 36 films between 1934 and 1942 including John Huston's \"The Maltese Falcon\" (1941), one of the first films now considered a classic film noir. In 1941, RKO Pictures released \"Citizen Kane\" made by Orson Welles. It is often considered the greatest film of all time. It would set the stage for the modern motion picture, as it revolutionized film story telling.\nThe strictures of wartime also brought an interest in more fantastical subjects. These included Britain's Gainsborough melodramas (including \"The Man in Grey\" and \"The Wicked Lady\"), and films like \"Here Comes Mr. Jordan\", \"Heaven Can Wait\", \"I Married a Witch\" and \"Blithe Spirit\". Val Lewton also produced a series of atmospheric and influential small-budget horror films, some of the more famous examples being \"Cat People\", \"Isle of the Dead\" and \"The Body Snatcher\". The decade probably also saw the so-called \"women's pictures\", such as \"Now, Voyager\", \"Random Harvest\" and \"Mildred Pierce\" at the peak of their popularity.\n1946 saw RKO Radio releasing \"It's a Wonderful Life\" directed by Italian-born filmmaker Frank Capra. Soldiers returning from the war would provide the inspiration for films like \"The Best Years of Our Lives\", and many of those in the film industry had served in some capacity during the war. Samuel Fuller's experiences in World War II would influence his largely autobiographical films of later decades such as \"The Big Red One\". The Actors Studio was founded in October 1947 by Elia Kazan, Robert Lewis, and Cheryl Crawford, and the same year Oskar Fischinger filmed \"Motion Painting No. 1\".\nIn 1943, \"Ossessione\" was screened in Italy, marking the beginning of Italian neorealism. Major films of this type during the 1940s included \"Bicycle Thieves\", \"Rome, Open City\", and \"La Terra Trema\". In 1952 \"Umberto D\" was released, usually considered the last film of this type.\nIn the late 1940s, in Britain, Ealing Studios embarked on their series of celebrated comedies, including \"Whisky Galore!\", \"Passport to Pimlico\", \"Kind Hearts and Coronets\" and \"The Man in the White Suit\", and Carol Reed directed his influential thrillers \"Odd Man Out\", \"The Fallen Idol\" and \"The Third Man\". David Lean was also rapidly becoming a force in world cinema with \"Brief Encounter\" and his Dickens adaptations \"Great Expectations\" and \"Oliver Twist\", and Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger would experience the best of their creative partnership with films like \"Black Narcissus\" and \"The Red Shoes\".\n1950s.\nThe House Un-American Activities Committee investigated Hollywood in the early 1950s. Protested by the Hollywood Ten before the committee, the hearings resulted in the blacklisting of many actors, writers and directors, including Chayefsky, Charlie Chaplin, and Dalton Trumbo, and many of these fled to Europe, especially the United Kingdom.\nThe Cold War era zeitgeist translated into a type of near-paranoia manifested in themes such as invading armies of evil aliens (\"Invasion of the Body Snatchers\", \"The War of the Worlds\") and communist fifth columnists (\"The Manchurian Candidate\").\nDuring the immediate post-war years the cinematic industry was also threatened by television, and the increasing popularity of the medium meant that some film theatres would bankrupt and close. The demise of the \"studio system\" spurred the self-commentary of films like \"Sunset Boulevard\" (1950) and \"The Bad and the Beautiful\" (1952).\nIn 1950, the Lettrists avante-gardists caused riots at the Cannes Film Festival, when Isidore Isou's \"Treatise on Slime and Eternity\" was screened. After their criticism of Charlie Chaplin and split with the movement, the Ultra-Lettrists continued to cause disruptions when they showed their new hypergraphical techniques.\nThe most notorious film is Guy Debord's \"Howls for Sade\" of 1952.\nDistressed by the increasing number of closed theatres, studios and companies would find new and innovative ways to bring audiences back. These included attempts to widen their appeal with new screen formats. Cinemascope, which would remain a 20th Century Fox distinction until 1967, was announced with 1953's \"The Robe\". VistaVision, Cinerama, and Todd-AO boasted a \"bigger is better\" approach to marketing films to a dwindling US audience. This resulted in the revival of epic films to take advantage of the new big screen formats. Some of the most successful examples of these Biblical and historical spectaculars include \"The Ten Commandments\" (1956), \"The Vikings\" (1958), \"Ben-Hur\" (1959), \"Spartacus\" (1960) and \"El Cid\" (1961). Also during this period a number of other significant films were produced in Todd-AO, developed by Mike Todd shortly before his death, including \"Oklahoma!\" (1955), \"Around the World in 80 Days\" (1956), \"South Pacific\" (1958) and \"Cleopatra\" (1963) plus many more.\nGimmicks also proliferated to lure in audiences. The fad for 3-D film would last for only two years, 1952\u20131954, and helped sell \"House of Wax\" and \"Creature from the Black Lagoon\". Producer William Castle would tout films featuring \"Emergo\" \"Percepto\", the first of a series of gimmicks that would remain popular marketing tools for Castle and others throughout the 1960s.\nIn 1954, Dorothy Dandridge was nominated as the best actress at the Oscar for her role in the film Carman Jones. She became the first black woman to be nominated for this award.\nIn the U.S., a post-WW2 tendency toward questioning the establishment and societal norms and the early activism of the civil rights movement was reflected in Hollywood films such as \"Blackboard Jungle\" (1955), \"On the Waterfront\" (1954), Paddy Chayefsky's \"Marty\" and Reginald Rose's \"12 Angry Men\" (1957). Disney continued making animated films, notably; \"Cinderella\" (1950), \"Peter Pan\" (1953), \"Lady and the Tramp\" (1955), and \"Sleeping Beauty\" (1959). He began, however, getting more involved in live action films, producing classics like \"20,000 Leagues Under the Sea\" (1954), and \"Old Yeller\" (1957). Television began competing seriously with films projected in theatres, but surprisingly it promoted more filmgoing rather than curtailing it.\n\"Limelight\" is probably a unique film in at least one interesting respect. Its two leads, Charlie Chaplin and Claire Bloom, were in the industry in no less than three different centuries. In the 19th century, Chaplin made his theatrical debut at the age of eight, in 1897, in a clog dancing troupe, The Eight Lancaster Lads. In the 21st century, Bloom is still enjoying a full and productive career, having appeared in dozens of films and television series produced up to and including 2022. She received particular acclaim for her role in \"The King's Speech\" (2010).\nGolden age of Asian cinema.\nFollowing the end of World War II in the 1940s, the following decade, the 1950s, marked a 'golden age' for non-English world cinema, especially for Asian cinema. Many of the most critically acclaimed Asian films of all time were produced during this decade, including Yasujir\u014d Ozu's \"Tokyo Story\" (1953), Satyajit Ray's \"The Apu Trilogy\" (1955\u20131959) and \"Jalsaghar\" (1958), Kenji Mizoguchi's \"Ugetsu\" (1954) and \"Sansho the Bailiff\" (1954), Raj Kapoor's \"Awaara\" (1951), Mikio Naruse's \"Floating Clouds\" (1955), Guru Dutt's \"Pyaasa\" (1957) and \"Kaagaz Ke Phool\" (1959), and the Akira Kurosawa films \"Rashomon\" (1950), \"Ikiru\" (1952), \"Seven Samurai\" (1954) and \"Throne of Blood\" (1957).\nDuring Japanese cinema's 'Golden Age' of the 1950s, successful films included \"Rashomon\" (1950), \"Seven Samurai\" (1954) and \"The Hidden Fortress\" (1958) by Akira Kurosawa, as well as Yasujir\u014d Ozu's \"Tokyo Story\" (1953) and Ishir\u014d Honda's \"Godzilla\" (1954). These films have had a profound influence on world cinema. In particular, Kurosawa's \"Seven Samurai\" has been remade several times as Western films, such as \"The Magnificent Seven\" (1960) and \"Battle Beyond the Stars\" (1980), and has also inspired several Bollywood films, such as \"Sholay\" (1975) and \"China Gate\" (1998). \"Rashomon\" was also remade as \"The Outrage\" (1964), and inspired films with \"Rashomon effect\" storytelling methods, such as \"The Usual Suspects\" (1995) and \"Hero\" (2002). \"The Hidden Fortress\" was also an inspiration behind George Lucas' \"Star Wars\" (1977). Other famous Japanese filmmakers from this period include Kenji Mizoguchi, Mikio Naruse, Hiroshi Inagaki and Nagisa Oshima. Japanese cinema later became one of the main inspirations behind the New Hollywood movement of the 1960s to 1980s.\nDuring Indian cinema's 'Golden Age' of the 1950s, it was producing 200 films annually, while Indian independent films gained greater recognition through international film festivals. One of the most famous was \"The Apu Trilogy\" (1955\u20131959) from critically acclaimed Bengali film director Satyajit Ray, whose films had a profound influence on world cinema, with directors such as Akira Kurosawa, Martin Scorsese, James Ivory, Abbas Kiarostami, Elia Kazan, Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut, Steven Spielberg, Carlos Saura, Jean-Luc Godard, Isao Takahata, Gregory Nava, Ira Sachs, Wes Anderson and Danny Boyle being influenced by his cinematic style. According to Michael Sragow of \"The Atlantic Monthly\", the \"youthful coming-of-age dramas that have flooded art houses since the mid-fifties owe a tremendous debt to the Apu trilogy\". Subrata Mitra's cinematographic technique of bounce lighting also originates from \"The Apu Trilogy\". Other famous Indian filmmakers from this period include Guru Dutt, Ritwik Ghatak, Mrinal Sen, Raj Kapoor, Bimal Roy, K. Asif and Mehboob Khan.\nThe cinema of South Korea also experienced a 'Golden Age' in the 1950s, beginning with director Lee Kyu-hwan's tremendously successful remake of \"Chunhyang-jon\" (1955). That year also saw the release of \"Yangsan Province\" by the director Kim Ki-young, marking the beginning of his career. Both the quality and quantity of filmmaking had increased rapidly by the end of the 1950s. South Korean films, such as Lee Byeong-il's 1956 comedy \"Sijibganeun nal (The Wedding Day)\", had begun winning international awards. In contrast to the beginning of the 1950s, when only 5 films were made per year, 111 films were produced in South Korea in 1959.\nThe 1950s was also a 'Golden Age' for Philippine cinema, with the emergence of more artistic and mature films, and significant improvement in cinematic techniques among filmmakers. The studio system produced frenetic activity in the local film industry as many films were made annually and several local talents started to earn recognition abroad. The premiere Philippine directors of the era included Gerardo de Leon, Gregorio Fern\u00e1ndez, Eddie Romero, Lamberto Avellana, and Cirio Santiago.\n1960s.\nDuring the 1960s, the studio system in Hollywood declined, because many films were now being made on location in other countries, or using studio facilities abroad, such as Pinewood in the UK and Cinecitt\u00e0 in Rome. \"Hollywood\" films were still largely aimed at family audiences, and it was often the more old-fashioned films that produced the studios' biggest successes. Productions like \"Mary Poppins\" (1964), \"My Fair Lady\" (1964) and \"The Sound of Music\" (1965) were among the biggest money-makers of the decade. The growth in independent producers and production companies, and the increase in the power of individual actors also contributed to the decline of traditional Hollywood studio production.\nThere was also an increasing awareness of foreign language cinema in America during this period. During the late 1950s and 1960s, the French New Wave directors such as Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut and Jean-Luc Godard produced films such as \"Les quatre cents coups\", \"Breathless\" and \"Jules et Jim\" which broke the rules of Hollywood cinema's narrative structure. As well, audiences were becoming aware of Italian films like Federico Fellini's \"La Dolce Vita\" (1960), \"8\u00bd\" (1963) and the stark dramas of Sweden's Ingmar Bergman.\nIn Britain, the \"Free Cinema\" of Lindsay Anderson, Tony Richardson and others led to a group of realistic and innovative dramas including \"Saturday Night and Sunday Morning\", \"A Kind of Loving\" and \"This Sporting Life\". Other British films such as \"Repulsion\", \"Darling\", \"Alfie\", \"Blowup\" and \"Georgy Girl\" (all in 1965\u20131966) helped to reduce prohibitions of sex and nudity on screen, while the casual sex and violence of the James Bond films, beginning with \"Dr. No\" in 1962 would render the series popular worldwide.\nDuring the 1960s, Ousmane Semb\u00e8ne produced several French- and Wolof-language films and became the \"father\" of African Cinema. In Latin America, the dominance of the \"Hollywood\" model was challenged by many film makers. Fernando Solanas and Octavio Getino called for a politically engaged Third Cinema in contrast to Hollywood and the European auteur cinema.\nIn Egypt, the golden age of Egyptian cinema continued in the 1960s at the hands of many directors, and Egyptian cinema greatly appreciated women at that time, such as Soad Hosny. The Zulfikar brothers; Ezz El-Dine Zulfikar, Salah Zulfikar and Mahmoud Zulfikar were on a date with many productions, including Ezz El Dine Zulfikar's \"The River of Love\" (1960), Mahmoud Zulfikar's \"Soft Hands\" (1964), and \"Dearer Than My Life\" (1965) starring Salah Zulfikar and Salah Zulfikar Films production; \"My Wife, the Director General\" (1966) as well as Youssef Chahine's \"Saladin\" (1963).\nFurther, the nuclear paranoia of the age, and the threat of an apocalyptic nuclear exchange (like the 1962 close-call with the USSR during the Cuban Missile Crisis) prompted a reaction within the film community as well. Films like Stanley Kubrick's \"Dr. Strangelove\" and \"Fail Safe\" with Henry Fonda were produced in a Hollywood that was once known for its overt patriotism and wartime propaganda.\nIn documentary film the sixties saw the blossoming of Direct Cinema, an observational style of film making as well as the advent of more overtly partisan films like \"In the Year of the Pig\" about the Vietnam War by Emile de Antonio. By the late 1960s however, Hollywood filmmakers were beginning to create more innovative and ground-breaking films that reflected the social revolution taken over much of the western world such as \"Bonnie and Clyde\" (1967), \"The Graduate\" (1967), \"\" (1968), \"Rosemary's Baby\" (1968), \"Midnight Cowboy\" (1969), \"Easy Rider\" (1969) and \"The Wild Bunch\" (1969). \"Bonnie and Clyde\" is often considered the beginning of the so-called New Hollywood.\nIn Japanese cinema, Academy Award-winning director Akira Kurosawa produced \"Yojimbo\" (1961), which like his previous films also had a profound influence around the world. The influence of this film is most apparent in Sergio Leone's \"A Fistful of Dollars\" (1964) and Walter Hill's \"Last Man Standing\" (1996). \"Yojimbo\" was also the origin of the \"Man with No Name\" trend.\n1970s.\nThe New Hollywood was the period following the decline of the studio system during the 1950s and 1960s and the end of the production code, (which was replaced in 1968 by the MPAA film rating system). During the 1970s, filmmakers increasingly depicted explicit sexual content and showed gunfight and battle scenes that included graphic images of bloody deaths\u00a0\u2013 a notable example of this is Wes Craven's \"The Last House on the Left\" (1972).\nPost-classical cinema is the changing methods of storytelling of the New Hollywood producers. The new methods of drama and characterization played upon audience expectations acquired during the classical/Golden Age period: story chronology may be scrambled, storylines may feature unsettling \"twist endings\", main characters may behave in a morally ambiguous fashion, and the lines between the antagonist and protagonist may be blurred. The beginnings of post-classical storytelling may be seen in 1940s and 1950s film noir films, in films such as \"Rebel Without a Cause\" (1955), and in Hitchcock's \"Psycho\". 1971 marked the release of controversial films like \"Straw Dogs\", \"A Clockwork Orange\", \"The French Connection\" and \"Dirty Harry\". This sparked heated controversy over the perceived escalation of violence in cinema.\nDuring the 1970s, a new group of American filmmakers emerged, such as Martin Scorsese, Francis Ford Coppola, George Lucas, Woody Allen, Terrence Malick, and Robert Altman. This coincided with the increasing popularity of the auteur theory in film literature and the media, which posited that a film director's films express their personal vision and creative insights. The development of the auteur style of filmmaking helped to give these directors far greater control over their projects than would have been possible in earlier eras. This led to some great critical and commercial successes, like Scorsese's \"Taxi Driver\", Coppola's \"The Godfather\" films, William Friedkin's \"The Exorcist\", Altman's \"Nashville\", Allen's \"Annie Hall\" and \"Manhattan\", Malick's \"Badlands\" and \"Days of Heaven\", and Polish immigrant Roman Polanski's \"Chinatown\". It also, however, resulted in some failures, including Peter Bogdanovich's \"At Long Last Love\" and Michael Cimino's hugely expensive Western epic \"Heaven's Gate\", which helped to bring about the demise of its backer, United Artists.\nThe financial disaster of \"Heaven's Gate\" marked the end of the visionary \"auteur\" directors of the \"New Hollywood\", who had unrestrained creative and financial freedom to develop films. The phenomenal success in the 1970s of Spielberg's \"Jaws\" originated the concept of the modern \"blockbuster\". The enormous success of George Lucas' 1977 film \"Star Wars\" led to the increased popularization of blockbuster filmmaking, and the film's revolutionary use of special effects, sound editing and music has led it to become widely regarded as one of the most influential films in the medium's history. Hollywood studios increasingly focused on producing a smaller number of very large budget films with massive marketing and promotional campaigns. This trend had already been foreshadowed by the commercial success of disaster films such as \"The Poseidon Adventure\" and \"The Towering Inferno\".\nDuring the mid-1970s, more pornographic theatres, euphemistically called \"adult cinemas\", were established, and the legal production of hardcore pornographic films began. Porn films such as \"Deep Throat\" and its star Linda Lovelace became something of a popular culture phenomenon and resulted in a spate of similar sex films. The porn cinemas finally died out during the 1980s, when the popularization of the home VCR and pornography videotapes allowed audiences to watch sex films at home. In the early 1970s, English-language audiences became more aware of the new West German cinema, with Werner Herzog, Rainer Werner Fassbinder and Wim Wenders among its leading exponents.\nIn world cinema, the 1970s saw a dramatic increase in the popularity of martial arts films, largely due to its reinvention by Bruce Lee, who departed from the artistic style of traditional Chinese martial arts films and added a much greater sense of realism to them with his Jeet Kune Do style. This began with \"The Big Boss\" (1971), which was a major success across Asia. However, he did not gain fame in the Western world until shortly after his death in 1973, when \"Enter the Dragon\" was released. The film went on to become the most successful martial arts film in cinematic history, popularized the martial arts film genre across the world, and cemented Bruce Lee's status as a cultural icon. Hong Kong action cinema, however, was in decline due to a wave of \"Bruceploitation\" films. This trend eventually came to an end in 1978 with the martial arts comedy films, \"Snake in the Eagle's Shadow\" and \"Drunken Master\", directed by Yuen Woo-ping and starring Jackie Chan, laying the foundations for the rise of Hong Kong action cinema in the 1980s.\nWhile the musical film genre had declined in Hollywood by this time, musical films were quickly gaining popularity in the cinema of India, where the term \"Bollywood\" was coined for the growing Hindi film industry in Bombay (now Mumbai) that ended up dominating South Asian cinema, overtaking the more critically acclaimed Bengali film industry in popularity. Hindi filmmakers combined the Hollywood musical formula with the conventions of ancient Indian theatre to create a new film genre called \"Masala\", which dominated Indian cinema throughout the late 20th century. These \"Masala\" films portrayed action, comedy, drama, romance and melodrama all at once, with \"filmi\" song and dance routines thrown in. This trend began with films directed by Manmohan Desai and starring Amitabh Bachchan, who remains one of the most popular film stars in South Asia. The most popular Indian film of all time was \"Sholay\" (1975), a \"Masala\" film inspired by a real-life dacoit as well as Kurosawa's \"Seven Samurai\" and the Spaghetti Westerns.\nThe end of the decade saw the first major international marketing of Australian cinema, as Peter Weir's films \"Picnic at Hanging Rock\" and \"The Last Wave\" and Fred Schepisi's \"The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith\" gained critical acclaim. In 1979, Australian filmmaker George Miller also garnered international attention for his violent, low-budget action film \"Mad Max\".\n1980s.\nDuring the 1980s, audiences begin increasingly watching films on their home VCRs. In the early part of that decade, the film studios tried legal action to ban home ownership of VCRs as a violation of copyright, which proved unsuccessful. Eventually, the sale and rental of films on home video became a significant \"second venue\" for exhibition of films, and an additional source of revenue for the film industries. Direct-to-video (niche) markets usually offered lower quality, cheap productions that were not deemed very suitable for the general audiences of television and theatrical releases.\nThe Lucas\u2013Spielberg combine would dominate \"Hollywood\" cinema for much of the 1980s, and led to much imitation. Two follow-ups to \"Star Wars\", three to \"Jaws\", and three \"Indiana Jones\" films helped to make sequels of successful films more of an expectation than ever before. Lucas also launched THX Ltd, a division of Lucasfilm in 1982, while Spielberg enjoyed one of the decade's greatest successes in \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" the same year. 1982 also saw the release of Disney's \"Tron\" which was one of the first films from a major studio to use computer graphics extensively. American independent cinema struggled more during the decade, although Martin Scorsese's \"Raging Bull\" (1980), \"After Hours\" (1985), and \"The King of Comedy\" (1983) helped to establish him as one of the most critically acclaimed American film makers of the era. Also during 1983 \"Scarface\" was released, which was very profitable and resulted in even greater fame for its leading actor Al Pacino. Tim Burton's 1989 version of Bob Kane's creation, \"Batman\", saw Jack Nicholson's portrayal of the demented Joker, which earned him $60-$90m after including his percentage of the gross.\nBritish cinema was given a boost during the early 1980s by the arrival of David Puttnam's company Goldcrest Films. The films \"Chariots of Fire\", \"Gandhi\", \"The Killing Fields\" and \"A Room with a View\" appealed to a \"middlebrow\" audience which was increasingly being ignored by the major Hollywood studios. While the films of the 1970s had helped to define modern blockbuster motion pictures, the way \"Hollywood\" released its films would now change. Films, for the most part, would premiere in a wider number of theatres, although, to this day, some films still premiere using the route of the limited/roadshow release system. Against some expectations, the rise of the multiplex cinema did not allow less mainstream films to be shown, but simply allowed the major blockbusters to be given an even greater number of screenings. However, films that had been overlooked in cinemas were increasingly being given a second chance on home video.\nDuring the 1980s, Japanese cinema experienced a revival, largely due to the success of anime films. At the beginning of the 1980s, \"Space Battleship Yamato\" (1973) and \"Mobile Suit Gundam\" (1979), both of which were unsuccessful as television series, were remade as films and became hugely successful in Japan. In particular, \"Mobile Suit Gundam\" sparked the Gundam franchise of Real Robot mecha anime. The success of \"\" also sparked a Macross franchise of mecha anime. This was also the decade when Studio Ghibli was founded. The studio produced Hayao Miyazaki's first fantasy films, \"Nausica\u00e4 of the Valley of the Wind\" (1984) and \"Castle in the Sky\" (1986), as well as Isao Takahata's \"Grave of the Fireflies\" (1988), all of which were very successful in Japan and received worldwide critical acclaim. Original video animation (OVA) films also began during this decade; the most influential of these early OVA films was Noboru Ishiguro's cyberpunk film \"Megazone 23\" (1985). The most famous anime film of this decade was Katsuhiro Otomo's cyberpunk film \"Akira\" (1988), which although initially unsuccessful at Japanese theaters, went on to become an international success.\nHong Kong action cinema, which was in a state of decline due to endless Bruceploitation films after the death of Bruce Lee, also experienced a revival in the 1980s, largely due to the reinvention of the action film genre by Jackie Chan. He had previously combined the comedy film and martial arts film genres successfully in the 1978 films \"Snake in the Eagle's Shadow\" and \"Drunken Master\". The next step he took was in combining this comedy martial arts genre with a new emphasis on elaborate and highly dangerous stunts, reminiscent of the silent film era. The first film in this new style of action cinema was \"Project A\" (1983), which saw the formation of the Jackie Chan Stunt Team as well as the \"Three Brothers\" (Chan, Sammo Hung and Yuen Biao). The film added elaborate, dangerous stunts to the fights and slapstick humor, and became a huge success throughout the Far East. As a result, Chan continued this trend with martial arts action films containing even more elaborate and dangerous stunts, including \"Wheels on Meals\" (1984), \"Police Story\" (1985), \"Armour of God\" (1986), \"Project A Part II\" (1987), \"Police Story 2\" (1988), and \"Dragons Forever\" (1988). Other new trends which began in the 1980s were the \"girls with guns\" subgenre, for which Michelle Yeoh gained fame; and especially the \"heroic bloodshed\" genre, revolving around Triads, largely pioneered by John Woo and for which Chow Yun-fat became famous. These Hong Kong action trends were later adopted by many Hollywood action films in the 1990s and 2000s.\n1990s.\nThe early 1990s saw the development of a commercially successful independent cinema in the United States. Although cinema was increasingly dominated by special-effects films such as \"\" (1991), \"Jurassic Park\" (1993) and \"Titanic\" (1997), the latter of which became the highest-grossing film of all time at the time up until \"Avatar\" (2009), also directed by James Cameron, independent films like Steven Soderbergh's \"Sex, Lies, and Videotape\" (1989) and Quentin Tarantino's \"Reservoir Dogs\" (1992) had significant commercial success both at the cinema and on home video.\nFilmmakers associated with the Danish film movement Dogme 95 introduced a manifesto aimed to purify filmmaking. Its first few films gained worldwide critical acclaim, after which the movement slowly faded out.\nScorsese's \"Goodfellas\" was released in 1990. It is considered by many as one of the greatest movies to be made, particularly in the gangster genre. It is said to be the highest point of Scorsese's career.\nMajor American studios began to create their own \"independent\" production companies to finance and produce non-mainstream fare. One of the most successful independents of the 1990s, Miramax Films, was bought by Disney the year before the release of Tarantino's runaway hit \"Pulp Fiction\" in 1994. The same year marked the beginning of film and video distribution online. Animated films aimed at family audiences also regained their popularity, with Disney's \"Beauty and the Beast\" (1991), \"Aladdin\" (1992), and \"The Lion King\" (1994). During 1995, the first feature-length computer-animated feature, \"Toy Story\", was produced by Pixar Animation Studios and released by Disney. After the success of Toy Story, computer animation would grow to become the dominant technique for feature-length animation, which would allow competing film companies such as DreamWorks, 20th Century Fox and Warner Bros. to effectively compete with Disney with successful films of their own. During the late 1990s, another cinematic transition began, from physical film stock to digital cinema technology. Meanwhile, DVDs became the new standard for consumer video, replacing VHS tapes.\n2000s.\nSince the late 2000s streaming media platforms like YouTube provided means for anyone with access to internet and cameras (a standard feature of smartphones) to publish videos to the world. Also competing with the increasing popularity of video games and other forms of home entertainment, the industry once again started to make theatrical releases more attractive, with new 3D technologies and epic (fantasy and superhero) films becoming a mainstay in cinemas.\nThe documentary film also rose as a commercial genre for perhaps the first time, with the success of films such as \"March of the Penguins\" and Michael Moore's \"Bowling for Columbine\" and \"Fahrenheit 9/11\". A new genre was created with Martin Kunert and Eric Manes' \"Voices of Iraq\", when 150 inexpensive DV cameras were distributed across Iraq, transforming ordinary people into collaborative filmmakers. The success of \"Gladiator\" led to a revival of interest in epic cinema, and \"Moulin Rouge!\" renewed interest in musical cinema. Home theatre systems became increasingly sophisticated, as did some of the special edition DVDs designed to be shown on them. \"The Lord of the Rings trilogy\" was released on DVD in both the theatrical version and in a special extended version intended only for home cinema audiences.\nIn 2001, the \"Harry Potter\" film series began, and by its end in 2011, it had become the highest-grossing film franchise of all time until the Marvel Cinematic Universe passed it in 2015.\nDue to advances in film projection technology, feature films were now able to be released simultaneously to IMAX cinema, the first was in 2002's Disney animation \"Treasure Planet\"; and the first live action was in 2003's \"The Matrix Revolutions\" and a re-release of \"The Matrix Reloaded\". Later in the decade, \"The Dark Knight\" was the first major feature film to have been at least partially shot in IMAX technology.\nThere has been an increasing globalization of cinema during this decade, with foreign-language films gaining popularity in English-speaking markets. Examples of such films include \"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon\" (Mandarin), \"Am\u00e9lie\" (French), \"Lagaan\" (Hindi), \"Spirited Away\" (Japanese), \"City of God\" (Brazilian Portuguese), \"The Passion of the Christ\" (Aramaic), \"Apocalypto\" (Mayan) and \"Inglourious Basterds\" (multiple European languages). Italy is the most awarded country at the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, with 14 awards won, 3 Special Awards and 31 nominations.\nIn 2003, there was a revival in 3D film popularity the first being James Cameron's \"Ghosts of the Abyss\" which was released as the first full-length 3-D IMAX feature filmed with the Reality Camera System. This camera system used the latest HD video cameras, not film, and was built for Cameron by Emmy nominated Director of Photography Vince Pace, to his specifications. The same camera system was used to film \"\" (2003), \"Aliens of the Deep\" IMAX (2005), and \"The Adventures of Sharkboy and Lavagirl in 3-D\" (2005).\nAfter James Cameron's 3D film \"Avatar\" became the highest-grossing film of all time, 3D films gained brief popularity with many other films being released in 3D, with the best critical and financial successes being in the field of feature film animation such as Universal Pictures/Illumination Entertainment's \"Despicable Me\" and DreamWorks Animation's \"How To Train Your Dragon\", \"Shrek Forever After\" and \"Megamind\". \"Avatar\" is also note-worthy for pioneering highly sophisticated use of motion capture technology and influencing several other films such as \"Rise of the Planet of the Apes\".\n2010s.\nIn 2011, the largest film industries by number of feature films produced were those of India, the United States, China, Nigeria, and Japan. In Hollywood, superhero films greatly increased in popularity and financial success, with films based on Marvel and DC Comics released every year. The superhero genre was the most dominant in American box office receipts.\nThe list of top-grossing films was dominated by Disney, with 2019 having the most films in the top 50. The 2019 superhero film ' was the most successful movie of all-time at the box office. Other top earners included ', \"\", and \"Jurassic World\". Disney releases were frequently the top-grossing films annually in the latter half of the decade, with titles like \"Toy Story 3\", \"The Avengers\", and \"Frozen\". Disney's success culminated in the acquisition of 21st Century Fox by Disney.\nMajor film studios tried to emulate Disney's Marvel Cinematic Universe's success with their own franchises. Warner Bros. created franchises like DC Extended Universe. Disney produced live-action or photorealistic remakes of its classic animated films, such as \"Aladdin\", and \"The Lion King\". Film series based on young adult novels became popular, shifting from fantasy to dystopian sci-fi. Notable series included \"The Hunger Games\".\n\"The Tale of Princess Kaguya\", \"Summer 1993\", \"Leave No Trace\" and \"Minding the Gap\" achieved 100% ratings on Rotten Tomatoes. Other acclaimed films included \"\", \"The Social Network\", and \"Get Out\". Films like \"Portrait of a Lady on Fire\", \"The Tree of Life\", \"Moonlight\", and \"Parasite\" were frequently listed in critics' polls for the best films of the 2010s. In 2010, the first woman to win the Best Director Award in Oscar history appeared. Katherine Bigelow's \"The Hurt Locker\" won six awards. In 2020, \"Parasite\" became the first non-English-language film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture.\n2020s.\nCOVID-19 pandemic.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic resulted in the closure of film theaters around the world in response to lockdowns. Many films stated to release in the early 2020s faced delays, with others released on streaming services with little or no theatrical window. The era witnessed a profound transformation in how films are produced, distributed, and consumed globally. The pandemic led to a rapid acceleration in the shift towards streaming, as a primary means of film distribution. The film industry adapted and produced notable works that reflected changing dynamics of the era.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10784", "revid": "50174291", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10784", "title": "Cinema of France", "text": " \nThe cinema of France comprises the film industry and its film productions, whether made within the nation of France or by French film production companies abroad. It is the oldest and largest precursor of national cinemas in Europe, with primary influence also on the creation of national cinemas in Asia..\nThe Lumi\u00e8re brothers launched cinematography in 1895 with their \"L'Arriv\u00e9e d'un train en gare de La Ciotat\". By the early 1900s, French cinema led globally, with pioneers like M\u00e9li\u00e8s creating cinematic techniques and the first sci-fi film, \"A Trip to the Moon\" (1902). Studios like Path\u00e9 and Gaumont dominated, with Alice Guy-Blach\u00e9 directing hundreds of films. Post-WWI, French cinema declined as U.S. films flooded Europe, leading to import quotas. Between the wars, directors like Jean Renoir, Jean Vigo and Marcel Carn\u00e9 shaped French Poetic Realism. Renoir\u2019s \"La R\u00e8gle du Jeu\" (1939) and Carn\u00e9\u2019s \"Les Enfants du Paradis\" (1945) remain iconic, showcasing innovation despite war challenges.\nFrom the 1940s to the 1970s, French cinema flourished with the advent of the New Wave, led by critics-turned-directors like Jean-Luc Godard and Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut, producing groundbreaking films such as \"Breathless\" (1960) and \"The 400 Blows\" (1959). The movement, which inspired global filmmakers, faded by the late 1960s. Meanwhile, commercial French cinema gained popularity with comedies like \"La Grande Vadrouille\" (1966). Stars like Brigitte Bardot, Alain Delon and Catherine Deneuve rose to international fame. Directors like Bertrand Tavernier explored political and artistic themes. By the late 1970s, films like \"La Cage aux Folles\" (1978) achieved significant global success.\nFrance was able to produce several major box office successes into the 1990s such as \"Cyrano de Bergerac\" (1990), while certain film like \"La Femme Nikita\" (1990) and \"The Fifth Element\" (1997) reached an international audience.\nIn 2013, France was the second largest exporter of films in the world after the United States, and a 2014 study showed that French cinema was the most appreciated by global audiences after that of the US. According to industry tracker The Numbers, the fortunes of French film exports have since declined: in 2019, France had fallen to the position of 7th largest exporter by total box office revenue with a 2% share of the global market, and in 2023, 15th by the same metric with a 0.44% share. Overall, France sits fourth on the tracker's all-time box office chart behind the US, UK, and China.\nHistory.\nSilent era.\nLes fr\u00e8res Lumi\u00e8re released the first projection with the Cinematograph, in Paris on 28 December 1895, with first public showing in the Eden Theatre, La Ciotat. The French film industry in the late 19th century and early 20th century was the world's most important. Auguste and Louis Lumi\u00e8re invented the cin\u00e9matographe and their \"L'Arriv\u00e9e d'un train en gare de La Ciotat\" in Paris in 1895 is considered by many historians as the official birth of cinematography. French films during this period catered to a growing middle class and were mostly shown in caf\u00e9s and traveling fairs.\nThe early days of the industry, from 1896 to 1902, saw the dominance of four firms: Path\u00e9 Fr\u00e8res, the Gaumont, the Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s company, and the Lumi\u00e8res. M\u00e9li\u00e8s invented many of the techniques of cinematic grammar, and among his fantastic, surreal short subjects is the first science fiction film \"A Trip to the Moon\" (\"Le Voyage dans la Lune\") in 1902.\nIn 1902, the Lumi\u00e8res abandoned everything but the production of film stock, leaving M\u00e9li\u00e8s as the weakest player of the remaining three. (He would retire in 1914.) From 1904 to 1911, the Path\u00e9 Fr\u00e8res company led the world in film production and distribution.\nAt Gaumont, pioneer Alice Guy-Blach\u00e9 (M. Gaumont's former secretary) was made head of production and oversaw about 400 films, from her first, \"La F\u00e9e aux Choux\", in 1896, through 1906. She then continued her career in the United States, as did Maurice Tourneur and L\u00e9once Perret after World War I.\nIn 1907, Gaumont owned and operated the biggest movie studio in the world, and along with the boom in construction of \"luxury cinemas\" like the Gaumont-Palace and the Path\u00e9-Palace (both 1911), cinema became an economic challenger to theater by 1914.\nAfter World War I.\nAfter World War I, the French film industry suffered because of a lack of capital, and film production decreased as it did in most other European countries. This allowed the United States film industry to enter the European cinema market, because American films could be sold more cheaply than European productions, since the studios already had recouped their costs in the home market. When film studios in Europe began to fail, many European countries began to set import barriers. France installed an import quota of 1:7, meaning for every seven foreign films imported to France, one French film was to be produced and shown in French cinemas.\nDuring the period between World War I and World War II, Jacques Feyder and Jean Vigo became two of the founders of poetic realism in French cinema. They also dominated French impressionist cinema, along with Abel Gance, Germaine Dulac and Jean Epstein.\nIn 1931, Marcel Pagnol filmed the first of his great trilogy \"Marius\", \"Fanny\", and \"C\u00e9sar\". He followed this with other films including \"The Baker's Wife\". Other notable films of the 1930s included Ren\u00e9 Clair's \"Under the Roofs of Paris\" (1930), Jean Vigo's \"L'Atalante\" (1934), Jacques Feyder's \"Carnival in Flanders\" (1935), and Julien Duvivier's \"La belle equipe\" (1936). In 1935, renowned playwright and actor Sacha Guitry directed his first film and went on to make more than 30 films that were precursors to the New Wave era. In 1937, Jean Renoir, the son of painter Pierre-Auguste Renoir, directed \"La Grande Illusion\" (\"The Grand Illusion\"). In 1939, Renoir directed \"La R\u00e8gle du Jeu\" (\"The Rules of the Game\"). Several critics have cited this film as one of the greatest of all-time, particularly for its innovative camerawork, cinematography and sound editing.\nMarcel Carn\u00e9's (\"Children of Paradise\") was filmed during World War II and released in 1945. The three-hour film was extremely difficult to make due to the Nazi occupation. Set in Paris in 1828, it was voted Best French Film of the Century in a poll of 600 French critics and professionals in the late 1990s.\nPost\u2013World War II.\n1940s\u20131970s.\nAfter World War II, the French actress Leslie Caron and the French actor Louis Jourdan enjoyed success in the United States with several musical romantic comedies, notably \"An American in Paris\" (1951) and \"Gigi\" (1958), based on the 1944 novella of the same name by Colette.\nIn the magazine , founded by Andr\u00e9 Bazin and two other writers in 1951, film critics raised the level of discussion of the cinema, providing a platform for the birth of modern film theory. Several of the \"Cahiers\" critics, including Jean-Luc Godard, Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut, Claude Chabrol, Jacques Rivette and \u00c9ric Rohmer, went on to make films themselves, creating what was to become known as the French New Wave. Some of the first films of this new movement were Godard's \"Breathless\" (\"\u00c0 bout de souffle\", 1960), starring Jean-Paul Belmondo, Rivette's \"Paris Belongs to Us\" (\"Paris nous appartient\", 1958 \u2013 distributed in 1961), starring Jean-Claude Brialy and Truffaut's \"The 400 Blows\" (\"Les Quatre Cent Coups\", 1959) starring Jean-Pierre L\u00e9aud. Later works are \"Contempt\" (1963) by Godard starring Brigitte Bardot and Michel Piccoli and \"Stolen Kisses\" starring L\u00e9aud and Claude Jade. Because Truffaut followed the hero of his screen debut, Antoine Doinel, for twenty years, the last post-New-Wave-film is \"Love on the Run\" in which his heroes Antoine (L\u00e9aud) and Christine (Jade) get divorced.\nMany contemporaries of Godard and Truffaut followed suit, or achieved international critical acclaim with styles of their own, such as the minimalist films of Robert Bresson and Jean-Pierre Melville, the Hitchcockian-like thrillers of Henri-Georges Clouzot, and other New Wave films by Agn\u00e8s Varda and Alain Resnais. The movement, while an inspiration to other national cinemas and unmistakably a direct influence on the future New Hollywood directors, slowly faded by the end of the 1960s.\nDuring this period, French commercial film also made a name for itself. Immensely popular French comedies with Louis de Fun\u00e8s topped the French box office. The war comedy \"La Grande Vadrouille\" (1966), from G\u00e9rard Oury with Bourvil, de Fun\u00e8s and Terry-Thomas, was the most successful film in French theaters for more than 30 years. Another example was \"La Folie des grandeurs\" with Yves Montand. French cinema also was the birthplace for many subgenres of the crime film, most notably the modern caper film, starting with 1955's \"Rififi\" by American-born director Jules Dassin and followed by a large number of serious, noirish heist dramas as well as playful caper comedies throughout the sixties, and the \"polar,\" a typical French blend of film noir and detective fiction.\nIn addition, French movie stars began to claim fame abroad as well as at home. Popular actors of the period included Brigitte Bardot, Alain Delon, Romy Schneider, Catherine Deneuve, Jeanne Moreau, Simone Signoret, Yves Montand, Jean-Paul Belmondo and still Jean Gabin.\nSince the Sixties and the early Seventies they are completed and followed by Michel Piccoli and Philippe Noiret as character actors, Annie Girardot, Jean-Louis Trintignant, Jean-Pierre L\u00e9aud, Claude Jade, Isabelle Huppert, Anny Duperey, G\u00e9rard Depardieu, Patrick Dewaere, Jean-Pierre Cassel, Miou-Miou, Brigitte Fossey, St\u00e9phane Audran and Isabelle Adjani. During the Eightees they are added by a new generation including Sophie Marceau, Emmanuelle B\u00e9art, Jean-Hugues Anglade, Sabine Azema, Juliette Binoche and Daniel Auteuil.\nIn 1968, the May riots shook France. Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut had already organised demonstrations in February against Henri Langlois's removal as head of the Cin\u00e9math\u00e8que fran\u00e7aise and dedicated his film \"Stolen Kisses\", which was being made, to Langlois. The Cannes Film Festival is cancelled \u2013 on the initiative of Truffaut, Godard and Louis Malle. Jean-Luc Godard no longer works in the commercial film business for years. Political films such as Costa-Gavras' \"Z\" celebrate success. Chabrol continues his vivisection of the bourgeoisie (\"The Unfaithful Wife\") and Truffaut explores the possibility of bourgeois marital happiness (\"Bed and Board\").\nWhile Godard disappears from cinema after the Nouvelle Vague except for a few essays, Truffaut and Chabrol remain the leading directors whose artistic aspects remain commercially successful. Other directors of the 1970s in this effect are Bertrand Tavernier, Claude Sautet, Eric Rohmer, Claude Lelouch, Georges Lautner, Jean-Paul Rappeneau, Michel Deville Yves Boisset, Maurice Pialat, Bertrand Blier, Coline Serreau and Andr\u00e9 T\u00e9chin\u00e9 in purely entertainment films, it is G\u00e9rard Oury and \u00c9douard Molinaro.\nThe 1979 film \"La Cage aux Folles\" ran for well over a year at the Paris Theatre, an arthouse cinema in New York City, and was a commercial success at theaters throughout the country, in both urban and rural areas. It won the Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film, and for years it remained the most successful foreign film to be released in the United States.\n1980s.\nJean-Jacques Beineix's \"Diva\" (1981) sparked the beginning of the 1980s wave of French cinema. Movies which followed in its wake included \"Betty Blue\" (\"37\u00b02 le matin\", 1986) by Beineix, \"The Big Blue\" (\"Le Grand bleu\", 1988) by Luc Besson, and \"The Lovers on the Bridge\" (\"Les Amants du Pont-Neuf\", 1991) by L\u00e9os Carax. Made with a slick commercial style and emphasizing the alienation of their main characters, these films are representative of the style known as \"Cinema du look\".\n\"Camille Claudel\", directed by newcomer Bruno Nuytten and starring Isabelle Adjani and G\u00e9rard Depardieu, was a major commercial success in 1988, earning Adjani, who was also the film's co-producer, a C\u00e9sar Award for best actress. The historical drama film \"Jean de Florette\" (1986) and its sequel \"Manon des Sources\" (1986) were among the highest grossing French films in history and brought Daniel Auteuil international recognition.\nAccording to Rapha\u00ebl Bassan, in his article \u00ab\"The Angel\": Un m\u00e9t\u00e9ore dans le ciel de l'animation,\u00bb \"La Revue du cin\u00e9ma\", n\u00b0 393, avril 1984. , Patrick Bokanowski's \"The Angel\", shown in 1982 at the Cannes Film Festival, can be considered the beginnings of contemporary animation. The masks erase all human personality in the characters. Patrick Bokanowski would thus have total control over the \"matter\" of the image and its optical composition. This is especially noticeable throughout the film, with images taken through distorted objectives or a plastic work on the sets and costumes, for example in the scene of the designer. Patrick Bokanowski creates his own universe and obeys his own aesthetic logic. It takes us through a series of distorted areas, obscure visions, metamorphoses and synthetic objects. Indeed, in the film, the human may be viewed as a fetish object (for example, the doll hanging by a thread), with reference to Kafkaesque and Freudian theories on automata and the fear of man faced with something as complex as him. The ascent of the stairs would be the liberation of the ideas of death, culture, and sex that makes us reach the emblematic figure of the angel.\n1990s.\nJean-Paul Rappeneau's \"Cyrano de Bergerac\" was a major box-office success in 1990, earning several C\u00e9sar Awards, including best actor for G\u00e9rard Depardieu, as well as an Academy Award nomination for best foreign picture.\nLuc Besson made \"La Femme Nikita\" in 1990, a movie that inspired remakes in both United States and in Hong Kong. In 1994, he also made \"\" (starring Jean Reno and a young Natalie Portman), and in 1997 \"The Fifth Element\", which became a cult favorite and launched the career of Milla Jovovich.\nJean-Pierre Jeunet made \"Delicatessen\" and \"The City of Lost Children\" (\"La Cit\u00e9 des enfants perdus\"), both of which featured a distinctly fantastical style.\nIn 1992, Claude Sautet co-wrote (with Jacques Fieschi) and directed \"Un Coeur en Hiver\", considered by many to be a masterpiece. Mathieu Kassovitz's 1995 film \"Hate\" (\"La Haine\") received critical praise and made Vincent Cassel a star, and in 1997, Juliette Binoche won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her role in \"The English Patient\".\nThe success of Michel Ocelot's \"Kirikou and the Sorceress\" in 1998 rejuvenated the production of original feature-length animated films by such filmmakers as Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Laguionie and Sylvain Chomet.\n2000s.\nIn 2000, Philippe Binant realized the first digital cinema projection in Europe, with the DLP CINEMA technology developed by Texas Instruments, in Paris.\nIn 2001, after a brief stint in Hollywood, Jean-Pierre Jeunet returned to France with \"Am\u00e9lie\" (\"Le Fabuleux Destin d'Am\u00e9lie Poulain\") starring Audrey Tautou. It became the highest-grossing French-language film ever released in the United States. The following year, \"Brotherhood of the Wolf\" became the sixth-highest-grossing French-language film of all time in the United States and went on to gross more than $70 million worldwide.\nIn 2008, Marion Cotillard won the Academy Award for Best Actress and the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role for her portrayal of legendary French singer \u00c9dith Piaf in \"La Vie en Rose\", the first French-language performance to be so honored. The film won two Oscars and four BAFTAs and became the third-highest-grossing French-language film in the United States since 1980. Cotillard was the first female and second person to win both an Academy Award and C\u00e9sar Award for the same performance.\nAt the 2008 Cannes Film Festival, \"Entre les murs\" (\"The Class\") won the Palme d'Or, the 6th French victory at the festival. The 2000s also saw an increase in the number of individual competitive awards won by French artists at the Cannes Festival, for direction (Tony Gatlif, \"Exils\", 2004), screenplay (Agn\u00e8s Jaoui and Jean-Pierre Bacri, \"Look at Me\", 2004), female acting (Isabelle Huppert, \"The Piano Teacher\", 2001; Charlotte Gainsbourg, \"Antichrist\", 2009) and male acting (Jamel Debbouze, Samy Naceri, Roschdy Zem, Sami Bouajila and Bernard Blancan, \"Days of Glory\", 2006).\nThe 2008 rural comedy \"Bienvenue chez les Ch'tis\" drew an audience of more than 20 million, the first French film to do so. Its $193 million gross in France puts it just behind \"Titanic\" as the most successful film of all time in French theaters.\nIn the 2000s, several French directors made international productions, often in the action genre. These include G\u00e9rard Pir\u00e8s (\"Riders\", 2002), Pitof (\"Catwoman\", 2004), Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Richet (\"Assault on Precinct 13\", 2005), Florent Emilio Siri (\"Hostage\", 2005), Christophe Gans (\"Silent Hill\", 2006), Mathieu Kassovitz (\"Babylon A.D.\", 2008), Louis Leterrier (\"The Transporter\", 2002; \"Transporter 2\", 2005; Olivier Megaton directed \"Transporter 3\", 2008), Alexandre Aja (\"Mirrors\", 2008), and Pierre Morel (\"Taken\", 2009).\nSurveying the entire range of French filmmaking today, Tim Palmer calls contemporary cinema in France a kind of eco-system, in which commercial cinema co-exists with artistic radicalism, first-time directors (who make up about 40% of all France's directors each year) mingle with veterans, and there even occasionally emerges a fascinating pop-art hybridity, in which the features of intellectual and mass cinemas are interrelated (as in filmmakers like Valeria Bruni-Tedeschi, Olivier Assayas, Ma\u00efwenn, Sophie Filli\u00e8res, Serge Bozon, and others).\n2010s.\nOne of the most noticed and best reviewed films of 2010 was the drama \"Of Gods and Men\" (\"Des hommes et des dieux\"), about the assassination of seven monks in Tibhirine, Algeria. 2011 saw the release of \"The Artist\", a silent film shot in black and white by Michel Hazanavicius that reflected on the end of Hollywood's silent era.\nFrench cinema continued its upward trend of earning awards at the Cannes Festival, including the prestigious Grand Prix for \"Of Gods and Men\" (2010) and the Jury Prize for Poliss (2011); the Best Director Award for Mathieu Amalric (\"On Tour\", 2010); the Best Actress Award for Juliette Binoche (\"Certified Copy\", 2010); and the Best Actor Award for Jean Dujardin (\"The Artist\", 2011).\nIn 2011, the film \"The Intouchables\" became the most watched film in France (including the foreign films). After ten weeks nearly 17.5 million people had seen the film in France, the film was the second most-seen French movie of all time in France, and the third including foreign movies.\nIn 2012, with 226 million admissions (US$1,900 million) in the world for French films (582 films released in 84 countries), including 82 million admissions in France (US$700 million), 2012 was the fourth best year since 1985. With 144 million admissions outside France (US$1,200 million), 2012 was the best year since at least 1994 (since Unifrance collects data), and the French cinema reached a market share of 2.95% of worldwide admissions and of 4.86% of worldwide sales. Three films particularly contributed to this record year: \"Taken 2\", \"The Intouchables\" and \"The Artist\". In 2012, films shot in French ranked 4th in admissions (145 million) behind films shot in English (more than a billion admissions in the US alone), Hindi (?: no accurate data but estimated at 3 billion for the whole India/Indian languages) and Chinese (275 million in China plus a few million abroad), but above films shot in Korean (115 million admissions in South Korea plus a few millions abroad) and Japanese (102 million admissions in Japan plus a few million abroad, a record since 1973 et its 104 million admissions). French-language movies ranked 2nd in export (outside of French-speaking countries) after films in English. 2012 was also the year French animation studio Mac Guff was acquired by an American studio, Universal Pictures, through its Illumination Entertainment subsidiary. Illumination Mac Guff became the animation studio for some of the top English-language animated movies of the 2010s, including \"The Lorax\" and the \"Despicable Me\" franchise.\nIn 2015 French cinema sold 106 million tickets and grossed \u20ac600 million outside of the country. The highest-grossing film was \"Taken 3\" (\u20ac261.7 million) and the largest territory in admissions was China (14.7 million). In that year, France produced more films than any other European country, producing a record-breaking 300 feature-length films. France is one of the few countries where non-American productions have the biggest share; American films only represented 44.9% of total admissions in 2014. This is largely due to the commercial strength of domestic productions.\nFrench Acting.\n1920's.\nThe 1920's marked an important transformation period in the development of french acting styles. This decade saw French performers withdraw from nineteenth century theatrical acting conventions and advance to more expressive and modern acting styles. French cinema was breaking away from the traditional \"Cinema of Attractions\" and Melodramatic acting seen in earlier periods. This transition marked the start of more naturalistic acting and narrative filmmaking to create a more reality based performance. \nThese newer films could be described as French Impressionist films due to their acting style and the social climate going on in France at the time. During this time actors and directors collaborated to create depth within the film by their acting, cinematography, and editing styles. The actors could now convey their emotions subtlety but the editing and focus would create a new depiction of the character or scene and help to carry along the narrative. Some examples of these techniques are blurriness of the camera, light or dark lighting, editing cuts, and superimposed images. This foundation led actors to explore subtler characterizations to create a more complex storytelling experience. \nDuring this time, Parisian Avant-garde was paving a new wave of creativity for filmmakers. Avant-garde started in the 1900's and it is the new, experimental ideas that push boundaries in theater and cinema. Figures such as Man Ray, L\u00e9ger, and Duchamp inspired close interplay of directors, actors, and visual artists during this time and placed the actors and directors in a more open environment to experiment with acting styles, complex editing techniques, and eye catching images in the mise en scene. Many directors such as Ren\u00e9 Clair and Germaine Dulac were heavily influenced by surrealism and pushed their actors to experiment and use stylized emotion and dream like movements to create depth in the shot and the editing. The french Avant-garde reflected and influenced the new open, and unconventional wave of acting and directing. \nGovernment support.\nIn 2013, France was the second largest exporter of films in the world after the United States, and a 2014 study showed that French cinema was the most appreciated by global audiences after that of the US.\nFrance has had a very strong film industry, due in part to protections afforded by the French Government. The French government has implemented various measures aimed at supporting local film production and movie theaters. Canal+ has a broadcast license requiring it to support the production of movies. Some taxes are levied on movies and TV channels for use as subsidies for movie production. \nThe French national and regional governments also involve themselves in film production. For example, the award-winning documentary \"In the Land of the Deaf\" (\"Le Pays des sourds\"), created by Nicolas Philibert in 1992, was co-produced by multinational partners, reducing the financial risks inherent in the project and ensuring enhanced distribution opportunities.\nMovie theaters.\nOn 2 February 2000 in Paris, Philippe Binant realized the first digital cinema projection in Europe, with the DLP Cinema technology developed by Texas Instruments. \nIn 2011 Paris had the highest density of cinemas in the world, measured by the number of movie theaters per inhabitant, In most downtown Paris movie theaters, foreign or arthouse films movies are shown alongside mainstream movies. \nParis also boasts the Cit\u00e9 du cin\u00e9ma, a major studio north of the city, and Disney Studio, a theme park devoted to the cinema.\nFilm distribution and production companies.\nNotable French film distribution and/or production companies include:\nAllegations of sex abuse and coverups.\nIn February 2024, French actress and director Judith Godr\u00e8che called for the French film industry to \u201cface the truth\u201d on sexual violence and physical abuse during an appearance she made during the live broadcast of the 2024 Cesar Awards ceremony. Shortly before this, Godr\u00e8che claimed that she was sexually abused by prominent French directors Benoit Jacquot and Jacques Doillon. In May 2024, the French parliament launched a Commission to investigate reports of sex abuse in the French film industry. In July 2024, in the wake of the investigation, and later rape charge, against Jacquot for separate sex abuse allegations, it was reported that several men in the French filmmaking industry were facing a flurry of sex abuse allegations. It was also alleged that the industry provided a cover for abuse.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10785", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10785", "title": "Film history/Germany", "text": ""}
{"id": "10786", "revid": "47249055", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10786", "title": "Cinema of the Soviet Union", "text": " \nThe cinema of the Soviet Union includes films produced by the constituent republics of the Soviet Union reflecting elements of their pre-Soviet culture, language and history, albeit they were all regulated by the central government in Moscow. Most prolific in their republican films, after the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, were Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Ukraine, and, to a lesser degree, Lithuania, Belarus and Moldavia. At the same time, the nation's film industry, which was fully nationalized throughout most of the country's history, was guided by philosophies and laws propounded by the monopoly Soviet Communist Party which introduced a new view on the cinema, socialist realism, which was different from the one before or after the existence of the Soviet Union.\nHistorical outline.\nUpon the establishment of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) on November 7, 1917 (although the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics did not officially come into existence until December 30, 1922), what had formerly been the Russian Empire began quickly to come under the domination of a Soviet reorganization of all its institutions. From the outset, the leaders of this new state held that film would be the most ideal propaganda tool for the Soviet Union because of its widespread popularity among the established citizenry of the new land. Vladimir Lenin viewed film as the most important medium for educating the masses in the ways, means and successes of communism. As a consequence Lenin issued the \"Directives on the Film Business\" on January 17, 1922, which instructed the People's Commissariat for Education to systemise the film business, registering and numbering all films shown in the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, extracting rent from all privately owned cinemas and subject them to censorship.\nHowever, between World War I and the Russian Revolution, the Russian film industry and the infrastructure needed to support it (e.g., electrical power) had deteriorated to the point of unworkability. The majority of cinemas had been in the corridor between Moscow and Saint Petersburg, and most were out of commission. Additionally, many of the performers, producers, directors and other artists of pre-Soviet Russia had fled the country or were moving ahead of Red Army forces as they pushed further and further south into what remained of the Russian Empire. Furthermore, the new government did not have the funds to spare for an extensive reworking of the system of filmmaking. Thus, they initially opted for project approval and censorship guidelines while leaving what remained of the industry in private hands. As this amounted mostly to cinema houses, the first Soviet films consisted of recycled films of the Russian Empire and its imports, to the extent that these were not determined to be offensive to the new Soviet ideology. Ironically, the first new film released in Soviet Russia did not exactly fit this mold: this was \"Father Sergius\", a religious film completed during the last weeks of the Russian Empire but not yet exhibited. It appeared on Soviet screens in 1918.\nBeyond this, the government was principally able to fund only short, educational films, the most famous of which were the agitki \u2013 educational films intended to agitate, or energize and enthuse, the masses to participate fully in approved Soviet activities, and deal effectively with those who remained in opposition to the new order. These short (often one small reel) films were often simple visual aids and accompaniments to live lectures and speeches, and were carried from city to city, town to town, village to village (along with the lecturers) to educate the entire countryside, even reaching areas where film had not been previously seen. \nNewsreels, as documentaries, were the other major form of earliest Soviet cinema. Dziga Vertov's newsreel series \"Kino-Pravda\", the best known of these, lasted from 1922 to 1925 and had a propagandistic bent; Vertov used the series to promote socialist realism but also to experiment with cinema.\nStill, in 1921, there was not one functioning cinema in Moscow until late in the year. Its rapid success, using old Russian and imported feature films, jumpstarted the industry significantly, especially insofar as the government did not heavily or directly regulate what was shown, and by 1923 an additional 89 cinemas had opened. Despite extremely high taxation of ticket sales and film rentals, there was an incentive for individuals to begin making feature film product again \u2013 there were places to show the films \u2013 albeit they now had to conform their subject matter to a Soviet world view. In this context, the directors and writers who were in support of the objectives of communism assumed quick dominance in the industry, as they were the ones who could most reliably and convincingly turn out films that would satisfy government censors. \nNew talent joined the experienced remainder, and an artistic community assembled with the goal of defining \"Soviet film\" as something distinct and better from the output of \"decadent capitalism\". The leaders of this community viewed it essential to this goal to be free to experiment with the entire nature of film, a position which would result in several well-known creative efforts but would also result in an unforeseen counter-reaction by the increasingly solidifying administrators of the government-controlled society. \nIn 1924 Nikolai Lebedev wrote a book on the history of film he says is \"the first Soviet attempt at systematization of the meager available sources [on cinema] for the general reader\". Along with other articles written by Lebedev and published by \"Pravda\", \"Izvestia\" and \"Kino\". In the book he draws attention to the funding challenges that follow nationalization of Soviet cinema. In 1925 all film organizations merged to form \"Sovkino\". Under \"Sovkino\" the film industry was given a tax-free benefit and held a monopoly on all film-related exports and imports.\nSergei Eisenstein's \"Battleship Potemkin\" was released to wide acclaim in 1925; the film was heavily fictionalized and also propagandistic, giving the party line about the virtues of the proletariat. The \"kinokomitet\" or \"Film Committee\" established that same year published translations of important books about film theory by B\u00e9la Bal\u00e1zs, Rudolf Harms and L\u00e9on Moussinac.\nOne of the most popular films released in the 1930s was \"Circus\". Immediately after the end of World War II, color movies such as \"The Stone Flower\" (1946), \"Ballad of Siberia\" (1947), and \"Cossacks of the Kuban\" (1949) were released. Other notable films from the 1940s include \"Alexander Nevsky\" and \"Ivan the Terrible\".\nThe late 1950s and early 1960s marked changes in Soviet cinema. The period of de-Stalinization resulted in artists who had been purged being \"rehabilitated\" and their artistic credits being restored. This period marked a greater variety of topics depicted, decreasing censorship, and the development of more genre films in contrast to the socialist realism style prevalent under Stalin. The number of tickets sold was the primary way a film was deemed successful, but film professionals proposed considering other measures, such as financial success and relative popularity within less-popular genres. The Experimental Studio (ETK) opened in 1965 as an experiment in film production. The studio would rent sets as needed and would not have a permanent creative staff, but would instead employ artists by the project (in contrast to the overall Soviet film production system of the time). The studio would not receive artistic and efficiency bonuses as its method of payment, but would instead receive a percentage of the distribution of the film after it became profitable. This system was part of an increasing interest in developing individual artistic visions in film, along with the belief that different films would appeal to different subsets of the population rather than all films appealing to all moviegoers. This period produced \"Ballad of a Soldier\", which won the 1961 BAFTA Award for Best Film, and \"The Cranes Are Flying\".\nThe number of films produced in the USSR increased during this period, from six fiction films in 1951 to 125 fiction films in 1965. New graduates from the Film Institute resulted in more new directors, with a goal set for 30% of new films in 1967 to be directed by new filmmakers. Approximately 100 foreign films were released in the USSR in 1965 and 1966. Between 1945 and 1965, 71 movie theaters were built in Moscow (there were 101 theaters total in the city), and 7 more were set to open in 1966. The total number of film-showing facilities in the USSR rose from 78,000 seats in 1959 to 145,300 in 1965, with 10,400 widescreen theaters and 87 \"wide format\" (70mm or Cinerama). Theaters were mostly concentrated in urban areas, such that annual film attendance rates in 1964 were 20.6 films for city-dwellers and only 15.7 films for country-dwellers. To address this disparity, an experimental filmobile program was devised and tested in Belarus. The filmobile was a bus outfitted with 35-60 seats and the ability to show a film. The bus drove in a radius of six to ten miles collecting audience-members until it was full, at which point it stopped, showed the film, and drove the attendees back to their villages. The efforts to increase film-going were successful, with theater attendances rising from 3,611,00,000 in 1960 to 4,112,000,000 in 1964. According to Soviet statisticians, the average theater visits per person per year in the USSR was 18.3 in 1964 versus 12 in the USA and 8 in England and France.\n\"The Height\" is considered to be one of the best films of the 1950s (it also became the foundation of the bard movement).\nIn the 1980s there was a diversification of subject matter. Touchy issues could now be discussed openly. The results were films like \"Repentance\", which dealt with repression in Georgia, and the allegorical science fiction movie \"Kin-dza-dza!\". \nCensorship.\nAfter the death of Stalin, Soviet filmmakers were given a freer hand to film what they believed audiences wanted to see in their film's characters and stories. The industry remained a part of the government and any material that was found politically offensive or undesirable, was either removed, edited, reshot, or shelved. The definition of \"socialist realism\" was liberalized to allow development of more human characters, but communism still had to remain uncriticized in its fundamentals. Additionally, the degree of relative artistic liberality was changed from administration to administration.\nExamples created by censorship include:\nRevolution and Civil War.\nOn August 27, 1919, Vladimir Lenin nationalized the film industry and created post-imperial Soviet films \"when all control over film production and exhibition was ceded to the People\u2019s Commissariat of Education.\" The work of the nationalized motion-picture studios was administered by the All-Russian Photography and Motion Picture Department, which was reorganized in 1923 into Goskino, which in 1926 became Sovkino. The world's first state-filmmaking school, the First State School of Cinematography, was established in Moscow in 1919.\nDuring the Russian Civil War, agitation trains and ships visited soldiers, workers, and peasants. Lectures, reports, and political meetings were accompanied by newsreels about events at the various fronts.\n1920s.\nIn the 1920s, the documentary film group headed by Dziga Vertov blazed the trail from the conventional newsreel to the \"image centered publicistic film\", which became the basis of the Soviet film documentary. Typical of the 1920s were the topical news serial \"Kino-Pravda\" and the film \"Forward, Soviet!\" by Vertov, whose experiments and achievements in documentary films influenced the development of Russian and world cinematography. Other important films of the 1920s were Esfir Shub's historical-revolutionary films such as \"The Fall of the Romanov Dynasty\" which used montage editing techniques to repurpose old Imperial documentaries into a revolutionary theme. In 1924, filmmakers Sergei Eisenstein and Lev Kuleshov created the first association of Soviet filmmakers, the Association of Revolutionary Cinematography (ARK), to \"meet the ideological and artistic needs of the proletariat\". Although state controlled, \"the organization was characterized by a pluralism of political and artistic views until the late 1920s\". One of the most iconic developments in film during this period that is still used in films today was editing and montage to create meaning. This style of film making came to be known as the Kuleshov effect and was employed to conserve film stock due to shortages during that period. The film \"Hydropeat\" by Yuri Zhelyabuzhsky marked the beginning of popular science films. Feature-length agitation films in 1918\u201321 were important in the development of the film industry. Innovation in Russian filmmaking was expressed particularly in the work of Eisenstein. \"Battleship Potemkin\" was noteworthy for its innovative montage and metaphorical quality of its film language. It won world acclaim. Eisenstein developed concepts of the revolutionary epic in the film \"\". Also noteworthy was Vsevolod Pudovkin's adaptation of Maxim Gorky's \"Mother\" to the screen in 1926. Pudovkin developed themes of revolutionary history in the film \"The End of St. Petersburg\" (1927). Other noteworthy silent films were films dealing with contemporary life such as Boris Barnet's \"The House on Trubnaya\". The films of Yakov Protazanov were devoted to the revolutionary struggle and the shaping of a new way of life, such as \"Don Diego and Pelagia\" (1928). Ukrainian director Alexander Dovzhenko was noteworthy for the historical-revolutionary epic \"Zvenigora\", \"Arsenal\" and the poetic film \"Earth\".\n1930s.\nIn the early 1930s, Russian filmmakers applied socialist realism to their work. Among the most outstanding films was \"Chapaev\", a film about Russian revolutionaries and society during the Revolution and Civil War. Revolutionary history was developed in films such as \"Golden Mountains\" by Sergei Yutkevich, \"Outskirts\" by Boris Barnet, and the Maxim trilogy by Grigori Kozintsev and Leonid Trauberg: \"The Youth of Maxim\", \"The Return of Maxim\", and \"The Vyborg Side\". Also notable were biographical films about Vladimir Lenin such as Mikhail Romm's \"Lenin in October\" and \"Lenin in 1918\". The life of Russian society and everyday people were depicted in films such as \"Seven Brave Men\" and \"Komsomolsk\" by Sergei Gerasimov. The comedies of Grigori Aleksandrov such as \"Circus\", \"Volga-Volga\", and \"Tanya\" as well as \"The Rich Bride\" by Ivan Pyryev and \"By the Bluest of Seas\" by Boris Barnet focus on the psychology of the common person, enthusiasm for work and intolerance for remnants of the past. Many films focused on national heroes, including \"Alexander Nevsky\" by Sergei Eisenstein, \"Minin and Pozharsky\" by Vsevolod Pudovkin, and \"Bogdan Khmelnitsky\" by Igor Savchenko. There were adaptations of literary classics, particularly Mark Donskoy's trilogy of films about Maxim Gorky: \"The Childhood of Maxim Gorky\", ', and '.\nDuring the late 1920s and early 1930s the Stalin wing of the Communist Party consolidated its authority and set about transforming the Soviet Union on both the economic and cultural fronts. The economy moved from the market-based New Economic Policy (NEP) to a system of central planning. The new leadership declared a \"cultural revolution\" in which the party would exercise control over cultural affairs, including artistic expression. Cinema existed at the intersection of art and economics; so it was destined to be thoroughly reorganized in this episode of economic and cultural transformation.\nTo implement central planning in cinema, the new entity Soyuzkino was created in 1930. All the hitherto autonomous studios and distribution networks that had grown up under NEP's market would now be coordinated in their activities by this planning agency. Soyuzkino's authority also extended to the studios of the national republics such as VUFKU, which had enjoyed more independence during the 1920s. Soyuzkino consisted of an extended bureaucracy of economic planners and policy specialists who were charged to formulate annual production plans for the studios and then to monitor the distribution and exhibition of finished films.\nWith central planning came more centralized authority over creative decision making. Script development became a long, torturous process under this bureaucratic system, with various committees reviewing drafts and calling for cuts or revisions. In the 1930s censorship became more exacting with each passing year. Feature film projects would drag out for months or years and might be terminated at any point.\nAlexander Dovzhenko drew from Ukrainian folk culture in such films as \"Earth\" (1930)\nalong the way because of the capricious decision of one or another censoring committee.\nThis redundant oversight slowed down production and inhibited creativity. Although central planning was supposed to increase the film industry's productivity, production levels declined steadily through the 1930s. The industry was releasing over one-hundred features annually at the end of the NEP period, but that figure fell to seventy by 1932 and to forty-five by 1934. It never again reached triple digits during the remainder of the Stalin era. Veteran directors experienced precipitous career declines under this system of control; whereas Eisenstein was able to make four features between 1924 and 1929, he completed only one film, \"Alexander Nevsky\" (1938) during the entire decade of the 1930s. His planned adaptation of the Ivan Turgenev story \"Bezhin Meadow\" (1935\u201337) was halted during production in 1937 and officially banned, one of many promising film projects that fell victim to an exacting censorship system.\nMeanwhile, the USSR cut off its film contacts with the West. It stopped importing films after 1931 out of concern that foreign films exposed audiences to capitalist ideology. The industry also freed itself from dependency on foreign technologies. During its industrialization effort of the early 1930s, the USSR finally built an array of factories to supply the film industry with the nation's own technical resources.\nTo secure independence from the West, industry leaders mandated that the USSR develop its own sound technologies, rather than taking licenses on Western sound systems. Two Soviet scientists, Alexander Shorin in Leningrad (present-day St. Petersburg) and Pavel Tager in Moscow, conducted research through the late 1920s on complementary sound systems, which were ready for use by 1930. The implementation process, including the cost of refitting movie theaters, proved daunting, and the USSR did not complete the transition to sound until 1935. Nevertheless, several directors made innovative use of sound once the technology became available. In \"Enthusiasm: The Symphony of Donbass\" (1930), his documentary on coal mining and heavy industry, Dziga Vertov based his soundtrack on an elegantly orchestrated array of industrial noises. In \"The Deserter\" (1933) Pudovkin experimented with a form of \"sound counterpoint\" by exploiting tensions and ironic dissonances between sound elements and the image track. And in \"Alexander Nevsky\", Eisenstein collaborated with the composer Sergei Prokofiev on an \"operatic\" film style that elegantly coordinated the musical score and the image track.\nAs Soviet cinema made the transition to sound and central planning in the early 1930s, it was also put under a mandate to adopt a uniform film style, commonly identified as \"socialist realism\". In 1932 the party leadership ordered the literary community to abandon the avant-garde practices of the 1920s and to embrace socialist realism, a literary style that, in practice, was actually close to 19th-century realism. The other arts, including cinema, were subsequently instructed to develop the aesthetic equivalent. For cinema, this meant adopting a film style that would be legible to a broad audience, thus avoiding a possible split between the avant-garde and mainstream cinema that was evident in the late 1920s. The director of Soyuzkino and, later, GUKF, Boris Shumyatsky (1886\u20131938), served as chief executive of the Soviet film industry from 1931 to 1938, and was a harsh critic of the montage aesthetic. He championed a \"cinema for the millions\", which would use clear, linear narration. Although American movies were no longer being imported in the 1930s, the Hollywood model of continuity editing was readily available, and it had a successful track record with Soviet movie audiences. Soviet socialist realism was built on this style, which assured tidy storytelling. Various other strictures were then added to the doctrine: positive heroes to act as role models for viewers; lessons in good citizenship for spectators to embrace; and support for reigning policy decisions of the Communist Party.\nSuch aesthetic policies, enforced by the rigorous censorship apparatus of the USSR, resulted in a number of formulaic films. Apparently, they did succeed in sustaining a true \"cinema of the masses\". The 1930s witnessed some stellar examples of popular cinema. The single most successful film of the decade, in terms of both official praise and genuine affection from the mass audience, was \"Chapaev\" (1934), directed by the Vasilyev brothers. Based on the life of a martyred Red Army commander, the film was touted as a model of socialist realism, in that Chapayev and his followers battled heroically for the revolutionary cause. The film also humanized the title character, giving him personal foibles, an ironic sense of humour, and a rough peasant charm. These qualities endeared him to the viewing public: spectators reported seeing the film multiple times during its first run in 1934, and \"Chapaev\" was periodically re-released for subsequent generations of audiences.\nA genre that emerged in the 1930s to consistent popular acclaim was the musical comedy, and a master of that form was Grigori Aleksandrov (1903\u20131984). He effected a creative partnership with his wife, the brilliant comic actress and chanteuse Lyubov Orlova (1902\u20131975), in a series of crowd-pleasing musicals. Their pastoral comedy \"Volga-Volga\" (1938) was surpassed only by \"Chapaev\" in terms of box-office success. The fantasy element of their films, with lively musical numbers reviving the montage aesthetic, sometimes stretched the boundaries of socialist realism, but the genre could also allude to contemporary affairs. In Aleksandrov's 1940 musical \"Tanya\", Orlova plays a humble servant girl who rises through the ranks of the Soviet industrial leadership after developing clever labour-saving work methods. Audiences could enjoy the film's comic turn on the \"Cinderella\" story while also learning about the value of efficiency in the workplace.\n1940s.\nImmediately after the end of the Second World War, color movies such as \"The Stone Flower\" (1946), \"Ballad of Siberia\" (1947), and \"Cossacks of the Kuban\" (1949) were released.\nOther notable films from the 1940s include the black and white films, \"Alexander Nevsky\", \"Ivan the Terrible\" and \"Encounter at the Elbe\".\nThe Soviet film industry suffered during the period after World War II. On top of dealing with the severe physical and monetary losses of the war, Stalin's regime tightened social control and censorship to manage the effects recent exposure to the West had on the people. The postwar period was marked by an end of almost all autonomy in the Soviet Union. The \"Catalogue of Soviet Films\" recorded remarkably low numbers of films being produced from 1945 to 1953, with as few as nine films produced in 1951 and a maximum of twenty-three produced in 1952. These numbers do not, however, include many of the works which are not generally considered to be \"film\" in an elitist sense, such as filmed versions of theatrical works and operas, feature-length event documentaries and travelogues, short films for children, and experimental stereoscopic films. But compared to the four hundred to five hundred films produced every year by Hollywood, the Soviet film industry was practically dead.\nEven as the economy of the Soviet Union strengthened, film production continued to decrease. A resolution passed by the Council of Ministers in 1948 further crippled the film industry. The resolution criticized the work of the industry, saying that an emphasis placed on quantity over quality had ideologically weakened the films. Instead, the council insisted that every film produced must be a masterpiece for promoting communist ideas and the Soviet system. Often, Stalin had the ultimate decision on whether a newly produced film was appropriate for public viewing. In private screenings after meetings of the Politburo, the Minister of the Film Industry Ivan Bolshakov privately screened films for Stalin and top members of Soviet government. The strict limitations on content and complex, centralized process for approval drove many screenwriters away, and studios had much difficulty producing any of the quality films mandated by the 1948 resolution.\nTrophy films.\nMovie theaters in the postwar period faced the problem of satisfying the growing appetites of Soviet audiences for films while dealing with the shortage of newly produced works from studios. In response, cinemas played the same films for months at a time, many of them the works of the late 1930s. Anything new drew millions of people to the box office, and many theaters screened foreign films to attract larger audiences. Most of these foreign films were \"trophy films\", two thousand films brought into the country by the Red Army after the occupation of Germany and Eastern Europe in World War II. In the top secret minutes for the CPSU Committee Meeting on August 31, 1948, the committee permitted the Minister of the Film Industry to release fifty of these films in the Soviet Union. Of these fifty, Bolshakov was only allowed to release twenty-four for screening to the general public, mainly films made in Germany, Austria, Italy, and France. The other twenty-six films, consisting almost entirely of American films, were only allowed to be shown in private screenings. The minutes also include a separate list of permitted German musical films, which were mainly German and Italian film adaptations of famous operas. Most of the trophy films were released in 1948\u201349, but somewhat strangely, compiled lists of the released films include ones not previously mentioned in the official minutes of the Central Committee.\nThe public release of these trophy films seems contradictory in the context of the 1940s Soviet Union. The Soviet government allowed the exhibition of foreign films which contained far more subversive ideas than any a Soviet director would have ever attempted putting in a film at a time when Soviet artists found themselves unemployed because of censorship laws. Historians hypothesize many possible reasons why the Soviet government showed such seemingly inexplicable leniency toward the foreign films. The government may have granted cinemas the right to show the films so they could stay in business after the domestic film industry had declined. A second hypothesis speculates that the government saw the films as an easy source of money to help rebuild the nation after the war. The minutes of the CPSU Central Committee meeting seem to support the latter idea with instructions that the films are to bring in a net income of at least 750 million roubles to the State coffers over the course of a year from public and private screenings, and 250 million roubles of this were supposed to come from rentals to the trade union camera network.\nIn addition to releasing the films, the committee also charged Bolshakov and the Agitation and Propaganda Department of the CPSU Central Committee \"with making the necessary editorial corrections to the films and with providing an introductory text and carefully edited subtitles for each film.\" In general, the captured Nazi films were considered apolitical enough to be shown to the general populace. Still the Propaganda and Agitation Section of the Central Committee ran into trouble with the censoring of two films slated for release. The censors found it impossible to remove the \"Zionist\" ideas from \"Jud Suss\", an anti-Semitic, Nazi propaganda film. The censors also had trouble with a film adaptation of \"Of Mice and Men\" because of the representation of the poor as a detriment to society.\nThere is very little direct evidence of how Soviet audiences received the trophy films. Soviet magazines or newspapers never reviewed the films, there were no audience surveys, and no records exist of how many people viewed the films. To judge the reception and popularity of these foreign films, historians have mainly relied on anecdotal evidence. The German musical comedy \"The Woman of My Dreams\" received mixed reviews according to this evidence. \"Kultura i zhizn\" published a supposed survey compiled of readers' letters to the editor in March 1947 which criticize the film for being idealess, low brow, and even harmful. Bulat Okudzhava wrote a contradicting viewpoint in \"Druzhba Narodov\" in 1986, saying that everyone in the city of Tbilisi was crazy about the film. According to him, everywhere he went people were talking about the film and whistling the songs. Of the two accounts, film historians generally consider Okudzhava's more reliable than the one presented by \"Kultura i zhizn\". Films such as \"His Butler's Sister\", \"The Thief of Bagdad\", \"Waterloo Bridge\" and \"Sun Valley Serenade\", although not technically trophies as they had been purchased legally during the wartime alliance with America, were highly popular with Soviet audiences. In \"Vechernyaya Moskva\" (October 4, 1946), M. Chistiakov reprimanded theaters and the Soviet film industry for the fact that over a six-month timespan, sixty of the films shown had been tasteless Western films rather than Soviet ones. Even in criticism of the films and the crusading efforts of the anti-cosmopolitan campaign against the trophy films, it is clear to see they had quite an impact on Soviet society.\n1950s.\nNotable films include:\n1960s\u201370s.\nThe 1960s and 1970s saw the creation of many films, many of which molded Soviet and post-Soviet culture. They include:\nSince films were publicly funded by Goskino, Soviet directors were not preoccupied with commercial pressures. This contributed to the creation of philosophical and poetic films. Scripts had to be approved by a Goskino committee before the director would receive funding, and the production could be greenlighted, but in most cases, this did not amount to brazen censorship. As such, the directors Andrei Tarkovsky, Sergei Parajanov and Nikita Mikhalkov became known for the 'poetic' quality of their films. In keeping with Russian culture, tragi-comedies were very popular. These decades were also prominent in the production of the Eastern or Red Western.\nAnimation was a respected genre, with many directors experimenting with animation techniques. \"Tale of Tales\" (1979) by Yuri Norstein was twice given the title of \"Best Animated Film of All Eras and Nations\" by animation professionals from around the world, in 1984 and 2002.\nIn the year of the 60th anniversary of the Soviet cinema (1979), on April 25, a decision of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR established a commemorative \"Soviet Cinema Day\". It was then celebrated in the USSR each year on August 27, the day on which Vladimir Lenin signed a decree to nationalise the country's cinematic and photographic industries.\n1980s.\nThe policies of perestroika and glasnost saw a loosening of the censorship of earlier eras. A genre known as \"chernukha\" (roughly \"black stuff\"), including films such as \"Little Vera\", portrayed the harsher side of Soviet life. Notable films of this period include:\nNotable filmmakers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSoviet production units.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
