{"id": "14169", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14169", "title": "Heracleidae", "text": "Descendants of Heracles (ancient Greece)\nThe Heracleidae (; ) or Heraclids were the numerous descendants of Heracles, especially applied in a narrower sense to the descendants of Hyllus, the eldest of his four sons by Deianira (Hyllus was also sometimes thought of as Heracles' son by Melite). Other Heracleidae included Macaria, Lamos, Manto, Bianor, Tlepolemus, and Telephus. These Heraclids were a group of Dorian kings who conquered the Peloponnesian kingdoms of Mycenae, Sparta and Argos; according to the literary tradition in Greek mythology, they claimed a right to rule through their ancestor. Since Karl Otfried M\u00fcller's (1830, English translation 1839), I. ch. 3, their rise to dominance has been associated with a \"Dorian invasion\". Though details of genealogy differ from one ancient author to another, the cultural significance of the mythic theme, that the descendants of Heracles, exiled after his death, returned some generations later to reclaim land that their ancestors had held in Mycenaean Greece, was to assert the primal legitimacy of a traditional ruling clan that traced its origin, thus its legitimacy, to Heracles.\nIn the historical period, several dynasties claimed descent from Heracles, such as the Agiads and Eurypontids of Sparta, or the Temenids of Macedonia. In modern times, the same lineage has been claimed by the House of Burgundy and the kings of Castile.\nOrigin.\nHeracles, whom Zeus had originally intended to be ruler of Argos, Lacedaemon and Messenian Pylos, had been supplanted by the cunning of Hera, and his intended possessions had fallen into the hands of Eurystheus, king of Mycenae. After the death of Heracles, his children, after many wanderings, found refuge from Eurystheus at Athens. Eurystheus, on his demand for their surrender being refused, attacked Athens, but was defeated and slain. Hyllus and his brothers then invaded Peloponnesus, but after a year's stay were forced by a pestilence to quit. They withdrew to Thessaly, where Aegimius, the mythical ancestor of the Dorians, whom Heracles had assisted in war against the Lapithae, adopted Hyllus and made over to him a third part of his territory.\nAfter the death of Aegimius, his two sons, Pamphylus and Dymas, voluntarily submitted to Hyllus (who was, according to the Dorian tradition in Herodotus V. 72, really an Achaean), who thus became ruler of the Dorians, the three branches of that race being named after these three heroes. Desiring to reconquer his paternal inheritance, Hyllus consulted the Delphic oracle, which told him to wait for \"the third fruit\", (or \"the third crop\") and then enter Peloponnesus by \"a narrow passage by sea\". Accordingly, after three years, Hyllus marched across the isthmus of Corinth to attack Atreus, the successor of Eurystheus, but was slain in single combat by Echemus, king of Tegea. This second attempt was followed by a third under Cleodaeus and a fourth under Aristomachus, both unsuccessful.\nDorian invasion.\nAt last, Temenus, Cresphontes and Aristodemus, the sons of Aristomachus, complained to the oracle that its instructions had proved fatal to those who had followed them. They received the answer that by the \"third fruit\" the \"third generation\" was meant, and that the \"narrow passage\" was not the isthmus of Corinth, but the straits of Rhium. They accordingly built a fleet at Naupactus, but before they set sail, Aristodemus was struck by lightning (or shot by Apollo) and the fleet destroyed, because one of the Heracleidae had slain an Acarnanian soothsayer.\nThe oracle, being again consulted by Temenus, bade him offer an expiatory sacrifice and banish the murderer for ten years, and look out for a man with three eyes to act as guide. On his way back to Naupactus, Temenus fell in with Oxylus, an Aetolian, who had lost one eye, riding on a horse (thus making up the three eyes) and immediately pressed him into his service. According to another account, a mule on which Oxylus rode had lost an eye. The Heracleidae repaired their ships, sailed from Naupactus to Antirrhium, and thence to Rhium in Peloponnesus. A decisive battle was fought with Tisamenus, son of Orestes, the chief ruler in the peninsula, who was defeated and slain. This conquest was traditionally dated eighty years after the Trojan War.\nThe Heracleidae, who thus became practically masters of Peloponnesus, proceeded to distribute its territory among themselves by lot. Argos fell to Temenus, Lacedaemon to Procles and Eurysthenes, the twin sons of Aristodemus; and Messenia to Cresphontes (tradition maintains that Cresphontes cheated in order to obtain Messenia, which had the best land of all.) The fertile district of Elis had been reserved by agreement for Oxylus. The Heracleidae ruled in Lacedaemon until 221 BCE, but disappeared much earlier in the other countries.\nThis conquest of Peloponnesus by the Dorians, commonly called the \"Dorian invasion\" or the \"Return of the Heraclidae\", is represented as the recovery by the descendants of Heracles of the rightful inheritance of their hero ancestor and his sons. The Dorians followed the custom of other Greek tribes in claiming as ancestor for their ruling families one of the legendary heroes, but the traditions must not on that account be regarded as entirely mythical. They represent a joint invasion of Peloponnesus by Aetolians and Dorians, the latter having been driven southward from their original northern home under pressure from the Thessalians. It is noticeable that there is no mention of these Heraclidae or their invasion in Homer or Hesiod. Herodotus (vi. 52) speaks of poets who had celebrated their deeds, but these were limited to events immediately succeeding the death of Heracles.\nList of Heracleidae.\nAt Lydia.\nA Heraclid royal family ruled Lydia as well, but sources differ as to their maternal parentage and lineage. The Heraclids are widely agreed to have been descended from Heracles and a woman of Iardanus, but sources differ on whether this woman was his girl or his illustrious daughter, Queen Omphale. \nHerodotus writes that Heracles sired this dynasty with a slave-girl of Iardanus (who, since she was unnamed in Herodotus' account, might be Omphale). In this account, the first of this line to rule was their great-great-grandson, named Agron. After Agron, Lydia would be ruled by Heraclid kings over 22 generations for 505 years. This line of kings would include Meles, followed by his son Candaules. Candaules was infamous for his voyeuristic appetites (see candaulism and the Ring of Gyges). He would be overthrown and usurped by his servant Gyges, who would go on to found the Mermnad dynasty. \nHowever, most other sources say the Heraclids of Lydia were not descended from Iardanus' anonymous slave-girl, but from his daughter Omphale - a Lydian queen who held Heracles in servitude for a year. Their romance was characterised by an inversion of gender norms, with Omphale taking the masculine role and Heracles taking the feminine role in both social and sexual contexts. Pseudo-Apollodorus writes that the Lydian Heraclids were descended Omphale and Heracles' son Agelaus, who would go on to be an ancestor of Cr\u0153sus. Dionysus of Halicarnassus also writes that Heracles and Omphale sired royal children, such as Tyrrhenus, founder of the Etruscans. This might be supported by Pausanias, who writes that Heracles had a Lydian son named \"Tyrsenus,\" which is used in other texts as a variation of \"Tyrrhenus.\" According to Xanthus of Lydia, the Heraclid dynasty of Lydia traced their descent to a son of Heracles and Omphale named Tylon, and were called Tylonidai. \"Tylon\" is a variation of \"Tylos,\" a native Anatolian deity interpreted as Heracles.\nAt Sparta.\nAt Sparta, the Heraclids formed two dynasties ruling jointly: the Agiads and the Eurypontids. Other Spartiates also claimed Heraclid descent, such as Lysander.\nAt Corinth.\nAt Corinth the Heraclids ruled as the Bacchiadae dynasty before the aristocratic revolution, which brought a Bacchiad aristocracy into power.\nAt Argos.\nA descendant of Heracles, Temenus, was the first king of Argos, who later counted the famous tyrant Pheidon.\nAt Macedonia.\nAfter becoming the kings of Argos, the Heraclid line of Temenus would later go on to rule Macedonia. This was the Argead Dynasty of Macedonia (so-named because of its origins in Argos). It was established in Macedonia a Temenid descendant of Heracles, who left Argos and settled in Macedonia, establishing his own kingdom. However, sources differ as to which Temenid founded the Macedonian branch of the family. Herodotus and Thucydides write that the dynasty was founded by Perdiccas, who conquered the Macedonian plain and founded a fort, around which grew the kingdom.. However, later sources (including Marsyas of Pella, as well as Roman sources such as Livy) say the Argead dynasty was established in Macedonia by Caranus. According to Marsyas of Pella, Caranus did not just simply conquer Macedonia; he first received a prophecy from the Oracle at Delphi advising him to do so, and therefore had a divine justification for his expedition.\nThe Kingdom of Macedonia under the Argead dynasty would be famous for its global conquests under Alexander the Great, beginning the Hellenistic period. Under the reign of Philip II - Alexander's father and predecessor - the Argead Dynasty had extended its hegemony over all of Upper Macedonia, and had become the most powerful kingdom in the Aegean apart from Achaemenid Persia. Alexander the Great would continue Philip's conquests in Greece, and then conquer the Persian Empire, and expand as far as Egypt and India.\nIn modern times.\nIn modern times, Heraclid lineage has been claimed by the House of Burgundy and the kings of Castile. The seventeenth-century Spanish king Philip IV, a descendant of both houses, commissioned the artist Francisco de Zurbar\u00e1n to paint a series of ten works depicting Hercules, as part of the decoration of his Buen Retiro Palace; these artworks were considered an allegory for the legitimacy of his rule.\nIn Euripides' tragedy.\nThe Greek tragedians amplified the story, probably drawing inspiration from local legends which glorified the services rendered by Athens to the rulers of Peloponnesus.\nThe Heracleidae feature as the main subjects of Euripides' play, \"Heracleidae\". J. A. Spranger found the political subtext of \"Heracleidae\", never far to seek, so particularly apt in Athens towards the end of the peace of Nicias, in 419 BCE, that he suggested the date as that of the play's first performance.\nIn the tragedy, Iolaus, Heracles' old comrade and nephew, and Heracles' children, Macaria and her brothers and sisters have hidden from Eurystheus in Athens, ruled by King Demophon; as the first scene makes clear, they expect that the blood relationship of the kings with Heracles and their father's past indebtedness to Theseus will finally provide them sanctuary. As Eurystheus prepares to attack, an oracle tells Demophon that only the sacrifice of a noble woman to Persephone can guarantee an Athenian victory. Macaria volunteers for the sacrifice and a spring is named the Macarian spring in her honor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14170", "revid": "39076087", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14170", "title": "HIV", "text": "Human retrovirus, cause of AIDS\nThe human immunodeficiency viruses (HIV) are two species of \"Lentivirus\" (a subgroup of retrovirus) that infect humans. Over time, they cause acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), a condition in which progressive failure of the immune system allows life-threatening opportunistic infections and cancers to thrive. Without treatment, the average survival time after infection with HIV is estimated to be 9 to 11 years, depending on the HIV subtype.\nIn most cases, HIV is a sexually transmitted infection and occurs by contact with or transfer of blood, pre-ejaculate, semen, and vaginal fluids. Non-sexual transmission can occur from an infected mother to her infant during pregnancy, during childbirth by exposure to her blood or vaginal fluid, and through breast milk. Within these bodily fluids, HIV is present as both free virus particles and virus within infected immune cells.\nResearch has shown (for both same-sex and opposite-sex couples) that HIV is not contagious during sexual intercourse without a condom if the HIV-positive partner has a consistently undetectable viral load.\nHIV infects vital cells in the human immune system, such as helper T cells (specifically CD4+ T cells), macrophages, and dendritic cells. HIV infection leads to low levels of CD4+ T cells through a number of mechanisms, including pyroptosis of abortively infected T cells, apoptosis of uninfected bystander cells, direct viral killing of infected cells, and killing of infected CD4+ T cells by CD8+ cytotoxic lymphocytes that recognize infected cells. When CD4+ T cell numbers decline below a critical level, cell-mediated immunity is lost, and the body becomes progressively more susceptible to opportunistic infections, leading to the development of AIDS.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVirology.\nClassification.\nHIV is a member of the genus \"Lentivirus\", part of the family \"Retroviridae\". Lentiviruses have many morphologies and biological properties in common. Many species are infected by lentiviruses, which are characteristically responsible for long-duration illnesses with a long incubation period. Lentiviruses are transmitted as single-stranded, positive-sense, enveloped RNA viruses. Upon entry into the target cell, the viral RNA genome is converted (reverse transcribed) into double-stranded DNA by a virally encoded enzyme, reverse transcriptase, that is transported along with the viral genome in the virus particle. The resulting viral DNA is then imported into the cell nucleus and integrated into the cellular DNA by a virally encoded enzyme, integrase, and host co-factors. Once integrated, the virus may become latent, allowing the virus and its host cell to avoid detection by the immune system, for an indeterminate amount of time. The virus can remain dormant in the human body for up to ten years after primary infection; during this period the virus does not cause symptoms. Alternatively, the integrated viral DNA may be transcribed, producing new RNA genomes and viral proteins, using host cell resources, that are packaged and released from the cell as new virus particles that will begin the replication cycle anew.\nTwo types of HIV have been characterized: HIV-1 and HIV-2. HIV-1 is the virus that was initially discovered and termed both lymphadenopathy associated virus (LAV) and human T-lymphotropic virus 3 (HTLV-III). HIV-1 is more virulent and more infective than HIV-2, and is the cause of the majority of HIV infections globally. The lower infectivity of HIV-2, compared to HIV-1, implies that fewer of those exposed to HIV-2 will be infected per exposure. Due to its relatively poor capacity for transmission, HIV-2 is largely confined to West Africa.\nBoth HIV-1 and HIV-2 have gained an additional classification according to the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses, with the change being approved in 2020, to belong to the species called \"\"Lentivirus humimdef1\" and \"Lentivirus humimdef2\"\" for HIV-1 and HIV-2 respectively.\nStructure and genome.\nHIV is similar in structure to other retroviruses. It is roughly spherical with a diameter of about 120\u00a0nm, around 100,000\u00a0times smaller in volume than a red blood cell. It is composed of two copies of positive-sense single-stranded RNA that codes for the virus' nine genes enclosed by a ovoidal capsid composed of 2,000 copies of the viral protein p24. The single-stranded RNA is tightly bound to nucleocapsid proteins, p7, and enzymes needed for the development of the virion such as reverse transcriptase, proteases, ribonuclease and integrase. A matrix composed of the viral protein p17 surrounds the capsid ensuring the integrity of the virion particle.\nThis is, in turn, surrounded by the viral envelope, that is composed of the lipid bilayer taken from the membrane of a human host cell when the newly formed virus particle buds from the cell. The viral envelope contains proteins from the host cell and relatively few copies of the HIV envelope protein, which consists of a cap made of three molecules known as glycoprotein (gp) 120, and a stem consisting of three gp41 molecules that anchor the structure into the viral envelope. The envelope protein, encoded by the HIV \"env\" gene, allows the virus to attach to target cells and fuse the viral envelope with the target cell's membrane releasing the viral contents into the cell and initiating the infectious cycle.\nAs the sole viral protein on the surface of the virus, the envelope protein is a major target for HIV vaccine efforts. Over half of the mass of the trimeric envelope spike is N-linked glycans. The density is high as the glycans shield the underlying viral protein from neutralisation by antibodies. This is one of the most densely glycosylated molecules known and the density is sufficiently high to prevent the normal maturation process of glycans during biogenesis in the endoplasmic and Golgi apparatus. The majority of the glycans are therefore stalled as immature 'high-mannose' glycans not normally present on human glycoproteins that are secreted or present on a cell surface. The unusual processing and high density means that almost all broadly neutralising antibodies that have so far been identified (from a subset of patients that have been infected for many months to years) bind to, or are adapted to cope with, these envelope glycans.\nThe molecular structure of the viral spike has now been determined by X-ray crystallography and cryogenic electron microscopy. These advances in structural biology were made possible due to the development of stable recombinant forms of the viral spike by the introduction of an intersubunit disulphide bond and an isoleucine to proline mutation (radical replacement of an amino acid) in gp41. The so-called SOSIP trimers not only reproduce the antigenic properties of the native viral spike, but also display the same degree of immature glycans as presented on the native virus. Recombinant trimeric viral spikes are promising vaccine candidates as they display less non-neutralising epitopes than recombinant monomeric gp120, which act to suppress the immune response to target epitopes. \nThe RNA genome consists of at least seven structural landmarks (LTR, TAR, RRE, PE, SLIP, CRS, and INS), and nine genes (\"gag\", \"pol\", and \"env\", \"tat\", \"rev\", \"nef\", \"vif\", \"vpr\", \"vpu\", and sometimes a tenth \"tev\", which is a fusion of \"tat\", \"env\" and \"rev\"), encoding 19 proteins. Three of these genes, \"gag\", \"pol\", and \"env\", contain information needed to make the structural proteins for new virus particles. For example, \"env\" codes for a protein called gp160 that is cut in two by a cellular protease to form gp120 and gp41. The six remaining genes, \"tat\", \"rev\", \"nef\", \"vif\", \"vpr\", and \"vpu\" (or \"vpx\" in the case of HIV-2), are regulatory genes for proteins that control the ability of HIV to infect cells, produce new copies of virus (replicate), or cause disease.\nThe two \"tat\" proteins (p16 and p14) are transcriptional transactivators for the LTR promoter acting by binding the TAR RNA element. The TAR may also be processed into microRNAs that regulate the apoptosis genes \"ERCC1\" and \"IER3\". The \"rev\" protein (p19) is involved in shuttling RNAs from the nucleus and the cytoplasm by binding to the RRE RNA element. The \"vif\" protein (p23) prevents the action of APOBEC3G (a cellular protein that deaminates cytidine to uridine in the single-stranded viral DNA and/or interferes with reverse transcription). The \"vpr\" protein (p14) arrests cell division at G2/M. The \"nef\" protein (p27) down-regulates CD4 (the major viral receptor), as well as the MHC class I and class II molecules.\n\"Nef\" also interacts with SH3 domains. The \"vpu\" protein (p16) influences the release of new virus particles from infected cells. The ends of each strand of HIV RNA contain an RNA sequence called a long terminal repeat (LTR). Regions in the LTR act as switches to control production of new viruses and can be triggered by proteins from either HIV or the host cell. The Psi element is involved in viral genome packaging and recognized by \"gag\" and \"rev\" proteins. The SLIP element (&lt;samp class=\"dna-sequence\" style=\"word-break: break-all;\"&gt;TTTTTT&lt;/samp&gt;) is involved in the frameshift in the \"gag\"-\"pol\" reading frame required to make functional \"pol\".\nTropism.\nThe term viral tropism refers to the cell types a virus infects. HIV can infect a variety of immune cells such as CD4+ T cells, macrophages, and microglial cells. HIV-1 entry to macrophages and CD4+ T cells is mediated through interaction of the virion envelope glycoproteins (gp120) with the CD4 molecule on the target cells' membrane and also with chemokine co-receptors.\nMacrophage-tropic (M-tropic) strains of HIV-1, or non-syncytia-inducing strains (NSI; now called R5 viruses) use the \"\u03b2\"-chemokine receptor, CCR5, for entry and are thus able to replicate in both macrophages and CD4+ T cells. This CCR5 co-receptor is used by almost all primary HIV-1 isolates regardless of viral genetic subtype. Indeed, macrophages play a key role in several critical aspects of HIV infection. They appear to be the first cells infected by HIV and perhaps the source of HIV production when CD4+ cells become depleted in the patient. Macrophages and microglial cells are the cells infected by HIV in the central nervous system. In the tonsils and adenoids of HIV-infected patients, macrophages fuse into multinucleated giant cells that produce huge amounts of virus.\nT-tropic strains of HIV-1, or syncytia-inducing strains (SI; now called X4 viruses) replicate in primary CD4+ T cells as well as in macrophages and use the \"\u03b1\"-chemokine receptor, CXCR4, for entry.\nDual-tropic HIV-1 strains are thought to be transitional strains of HIV-1 and thus are able to use both CCR5 and CXCR4 as co-receptors for viral entry.\nThe \"\u03b1\"-chemokine SDF-1, a ligand for CXCR4, suppresses replication of T-tropic HIV-1 isolates. It does this by down-regulating the expression of CXCR4 on the surface of HIV target cells. M-tropic HIV-1 isolates that use only the CCR5 receptor are termed R5; those that use only CXCR4 are termed X4, and those that use both, X4R5. However, the use of co-receptors alone does not explain viral tropism, as not all R5 viruses are able to use CCR5 on macrophages for a productive infection and HIV can also infect a subtype of myeloid dendritic cells, which probably constitute a reservoir that maintains infection when CD4+ T cell numbers have declined to extremely low levels.\nSome people are resistant to certain strains of HIV. For example, people with the CCR5-\u039432 mutation are resistant to infection by the R5 virus, as the mutation leaves HIV unable to bind to this co-receptor, reducing its ability to infect target cells.\nSexual intercourse is the major mode of HIV transmission. Both X4 and R5 HIV are present in the seminal fluid, which enables the virus to be transmitted from a male to his sexual partner. The virions can then infect numerous cellular targets and disseminate into the whole organism. However, a selection process leads to a predominant transmission of the R5 virus through this pathway, hypothesized to be because some variants may more easily infect cells when entering the body, or because some variants replicate more efficiently after initial infection and become the dominant variant in blood. In patients infected with subtype B HIV-1, there is often a co-receptor switch in late-stage disease and T-tropic variants that can infect a variety of T cells through CXCR4. These variants then replicate more aggressively with heightened virulence that causes rapid T cell depletion, immune system collapse, and opportunistic infections that mark the advent of AIDS. HIV-positive patients acquire an enormously broad spectrum of opportunistic infections, which was particularly problematic prior to the onset of HAART therapies; however, the same infections are reported among HIV-infected patients examined post-mortem following the onset of antiretroviral therapies. Thus, during the course of infection, viral adaptation to the use of CXCR4 instead of CCR5 may be a key step in the progression to AIDS. A number of studies with subtype B-infected individuals have determined that between 40 and 50 percent of AIDS patients can harbour viruses of the SI and, it is presumed, the X4 phenotypes.\nHIV-2 is much less pathogenic than HIV-1 and is restricted in its worldwide distribution to West Africa. The adoption of \"accessory genes\" by HIV-2 and its more promiscuous pattern of co-receptor usage (including CD4-independence) may assist the virus in its adaptation to avoid innate restriction factors present in host cells. Adaptation to use normal cellular machinery to enable transmission and productive infection has also aided the establishment of HIV-2 replication in humans. A survival strategy for any infectious agent is not to kill its host, but ultimately become a commensal organism. Having achieved a low pathogenicity, over time, variants that are more successful at transmission will be selected.\nReplication cycle.\nEntry to the cell.\nThe HIV virion enters macrophages and CD4+ T cells by the adsorption of glycoproteins on its surface to receptors on the target cell followed by fusion of the viral envelope with the target cell membrane and the release of the HIV capsid into the cell.\nEntry to the cell begins through interaction of the trimeric envelope complex (gp160 spike) on the HIV viral envelope and both CD4 and a chemokine co-receptor (generally either CCR5 or CXCR4, but others are known to interact) on the target cell surface. Gp120 binds to integrin \u03b14\u03b27 activating LFA-1, the central integrin involved in the establishment of virological synapses, which facilitate efficient cell-to-cell spreading of HIV-1. The gp160 spike contains binding domains for both CD4 and chemokine receptors.\nThe first step in fusion involves the high-affinity attachment of the CD4 binding domains of gp120 to CD4. Once gp120 is bound with the CD4 protein, the envelope complex undergoes a structural change, exposing the chemokine receptor binding domains of gp120 and allowing them to interact with the target chemokine receptor. This allows for a more stable two-pronged attachment, which allows the N-terminal fusion peptide gp41 to penetrate the cell membrane. Repeat sequences in gp41, HR1, and HR2 then interact, causing the collapse of the extracellular portion of gp41 into a hairpin shape. This loop structure brings the virus and cell membranes close together, allowing fusion of the membranes and subsequent entry of the viral capsid.\nHIV can infect dendritic cells (DCs) by this CD4-CCR5 route, but another route using mannose-specific C-type lectin receptors such as DC-SIGN can also be used. DCs are one of the first cells encountered by the virus during sexual transmission. They are currently thought to play an important role by transmitting HIV to T cells when the virus is captured in the mucosa by DCs. The presence of FEZ-1, which occurs naturally in neurons, is believed to prevent the infection of cells by HIV.\nHIV-1 entry, as well as entry of many other retroviruses, has long been believed to occur exclusively at the plasma membrane. More recently, however, productive infection by pH-independent, clathrin-mediated endocytosis of HIV-1 has also been reported and was recently suggested to constitute the only route of productive entry.\nReplication and transcription.\nShortly after the viral capsid enters the cell, an enzyme called reverse transcriptase liberates the positive-sense single-stranded RNA genome from the attached viral proteins and copies it into a complementary DNA (cDNA) molecule. The process of reverse transcription is extremely error-prone, and the resulting mutations may cause drug resistance or allow the virus to evade the body's immune system. The reverse transcriptase also has ribonuclease activity that degrades the viral RNA during the synthesis of cDNA, as well as DNA-dependent DNA polymerase activity that creates a sense DNA from the \"antisense\" cDNA. Together, the cDNA and its complement form a double-stranded viral DNA that is then transported into the cell nucleus. The integration of the viral DNA into the host cell's genome is carried out by another viral enzyme called integrase.\nThe integrated viral DNA may then lie dormant, in the latent stage of HIV infection. To actively produce the virus, certain cellular transcription factors need to be present, the most important of which is NF-\"\u03ba\"B (nuclear factor kappa\u00a0B), which is upregulated when T cells become activated. This means that those cells most likely to be targeted, entered and subsequently killed by HIV are those actively fighting infection.\nDuring viral replication, the integrated DNA provirus is transcribed into RNA. The full-length genomic RNAs (gRNA) can be packaged into new viral particles in a pseudodiploid form. The selectivity in the packaging is explained by the structural properties of the dimeric conformer of the gRNA. The gRNA dimer is characterized by a tandem three-way junction within the gRNA monomer, in which the SD and AUG hairpins, responsible for splicing and translation respectively, are sequestered and the DIS (dimerization initiation signal) hairpin is exposed. The formation of the gRNA dimer is mediated by a 'kissing' interaction between the DIS hairpin loops of the gRNA monomers. At the same time, certain guanosine residues in the gRNA are made available for binding of the nucleocapsid (NC) protein leading to the subsequent virion assembly. The labile gRNA dimer has been also reported to achieve a more stable conformation following the NC binding, in which both the DIS and the U5:AUG regions of the gRNA participate in extensive base pairing.\nRNA can also be processed to produce mature messenger RNAs (mRNAs). In most cases, this processing involves RNA splicing to produce mRNAs that are shorter than the full-length genome. Which part of the RNA is removed during RNA splicing determines which of the HIV protein-coding sequences is translated.\nMature HIV mRNAs are exported from the nucleus into the cytoplasm, where they are translated to produce HIV proteins, including Rev. As the newly produced Rev protein is produced it moves to the nucleus, where it binds to full-length, unspliced copies of virus RNAs and allows them to leave the nucleus. Some of these full-length RNAs function as mRNAs that are translated to produce the structural proteins Gag and Env. Gag proteins bind to copies of the virus RNA genome to package them into new virus particles.\nHIV-1 and HIV-2 appear to package their RNA differently. HIV-1 will bind to any appropriate RNA. HIV-2 will preferentially bind to the mRNA that was used to create the Gag protein itself.\nRecombination.\nTwo RNA genomes are encapsidated in each HIV-1 particle (see Structure and genome of HIV). Upon infection and replication catalyzed by reverse transcriptase, recombination between the two genomes can occur. Recombination occurs as the single-strand, positive-sense RNA genomes are reverse transcribed to form DNA. During reverse transcription, the nascent DNA can switch multiple times between the two copies of the viral RNA. This form of recombination is known as copy-choice. Recombination events may occur throughout the genome. Anywhere from two to 20 recombination events per genome may occur at each replication cycle, and these events can rapidly shuffle the genetic information that is transmitted from parental to progeny genomes.\nViral recombination produces genetic variation that likely contributes to the evolution of resistance to anti-retroviral therapy. Recombination may also contribute, in principle, to overcoming the immune defenses of the host. Yet, for the adaptive advantages of genetic variation to be realized, the two viral genomes packaged in individual infecting virus particles need to have arisen from separate progenitor parental viruses of differing genetic constitution. It is unknown how often such mixed packaging occurs under natural conditions.\nBonhoeffer \"et al.\" suggested that template switching by reverse transcriptase acts as a repair process to deal with breaks in the single-stranded RNA genome. In addition, Hu and Temin suggested that recombination is an adaptation for repair of damage in the RNA genomes. Strand switching (copy-choice recombination) by reverse transcriptase could generate an undamaged copy of genomic DNA from two damaged single-stranded RNA genome copies. This view of the adaptive benefit of recombination in HIV could explain why each HIV particle contains two complete genomes, rather than one. Furthermore, the view that recombination is a repair process implies that the benefit of repair can occur at each replication cycle, and that this benefit can be realized whether or not the two genomes differ genetically. On the view that recombination in HIV is a repair process, the generation of recombinational variation would be a consequence, but not the cause of, the evolution of template switching.\nHIV-1 infection causes chronic inflammation and production of reactive oxygen species. Thus, the HIV genome may be vulnerable to oxidative damage, including breaks in the single-stranded RNA. For HIV, as well as for viruses in general, successful infection depends on overcoming host defense strategies that often include production of genome-damaging reactive oxygen species. Thus, Michod \"et al.\" suggested that recombination by viruses is an adaptation for repair of genome damage, and that recombinational variation is a byproduct that may provide a separate benefit.\nAssembly and release.\nThe final step of the viral cycle, assembly of new HIV-1 virions, begins at the plasma membrane of the host cell. The Env polyprotein (gp160) goes through the endoplasmic reticulum and is transported to the Golgi apparatus where it is cleaved by furin resulting in the two HIV envelope glycoproteins, gp41 and gp120. These are transported to the plasma membrane of the host cell where gp41 anchors gp120 to the membrane of the infected cell. The Gag (p55) and Gag-Pol (p160) polyproteins also associate with the inner surface of the plasma membrane along with the HIV genomic RNA as the forming virion begins to bud from the host cell. The budded virion is still immature as the gag polyproteins still need to be cleaved into the actual matrix, capsid and nucleocapsid proteins. This cleavage is mediated by the packaged viral protease and can be inhibited by antiretroviral drugs of the protease inhibitor class. The various structural components then assemble to produce a mature HIV virion. Only mature virions are then able to infect another cell.\nSpread within the body.\nThe classical process of infection of a cell by a virion can be called \"cell-free spread\" to distinguish it from a more recently recognized process called \"cell-to-cell spread\". In cell-free spread (see figure), virus particles bud from an infected T cell, enter the blood or extracellular fluid and then infect another T cell following a chance encounter. HIV can also disseminate by direct transmission from one cell to another by a process of cell-to-cell spread, for which two pathways have been described. Firstly, an infected T cell can transmit virus directly to a target T cell via a virological synapse. Secondly, an antigen-presenting cell (APC), such as a macrophage or dendritic cell, can transmit HIV to T cells by a process that either involves productive infection (in the case of macrophages) or capture and transfer of virions \"in trans\" (in the case of dendritic cells). Whichever pathway is used, infection by cell-to-cell transfer is reported to be much more efficient than cell-free virus spread. A number of factors contribute to this increased efficiency, including polarised virus budding towards the site of cell-to-cell contact, close apposition of cells, which minimizes fluid-phase diffusion of virions, and clustering of HIV entry receptors on the target cell towards the contact zone. Cell-to-cell spread is thought to be particularly important in lymphoid tissues, where CD4+ T cells are densely packed and likely to interact frequently. Intravital imaging studies have supported the concept of the HIV virological synapse \"in vivo\". The many dissemination mechanisms available to HIV contribute to the virus' ongoing replication in spite of anti-retroviral therapies.\nGenetic variability.\nHIV differs from many viruses in that it has very high genetic variability. This diversity is a result of its fast replication cycle, with the generation of about 1010 virions every day, coupled with a high mutation rate of approximately 3 x 10\u22125 per nucleotide base per cycle of replication and recombinogenic properties of reverse transcriptase.\nThis complex scenario leads to the generation of many variants of HIV in a single infected patient in the course of one day. This variability is compounded when a single cell is simultaneously infected by two or more different strains of HIV. When simultaneous infection occurs, the genome of progeny virions may be composed of RNA strands from two different strains. This hybrid virion then infects a new cell where it undergoes replication. As this happens, the reverse transcriptase, by jumping back and forth between the two different RNA templates, will generate a newly synthesized retroviral DNA sequence that is a recombinant between the two parental genomes. This recombination is most obvious when it occurs between subtypes.\nThe closely related simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) has evolved into many strains, classified by the natural host species. SIV strains of the African green monkey (SIVagm) and sooty mangabey (SIVsmm) are thought to have a long evolutionary history with their hosts. These hosts have adapted to the presence of the virus, which is present at high levels in the host's blood, but evokes only a mild immune response, does not cause the development of simian AIDS, and does not undergo the extensive mutation and recombination typical of HIV infection in humans.\nIn contrast, when these strains infect species that have not adapted to SIV (\"heterologous\" or similar hosts such as rhesus or cynomologus macaques), the animals develop AIDS and the virus generates genetic diversity similar to what is seen in human HIV infection. Chimpanzee SIV (SIVcpz), the closest genetic relative of HIV-1, is associated with increased mortality and AIDS-like symptoms in its natural host. SIVcpz appears to have been transmitted relatively recently to chimpanzee and human populations, so their hosts have not yet adapted to the virus. This virus has also lost a function of the \"nef\" gene that is present in most SIVs. For non-pathogenic SIV variants, \"nef\" suppresses T cell activation through the CD3 marker. \"Nef\"'s function in non-pathogenic forms of SIV is to downregulate expression of inflammatory cytokines, MHC-1, and signals that affect T cell trafficking. In HIV-1 and SIVcpz, \"nef\" does not inhibit T-cell activation and it has lost this function. Without this function, T cell depletion is more likely, leading to immunodeficiency.\nThree groups of HIV-1 have been identified on the basis of differences in the envelope (\"env\") region: M, N, and O. Group M is the most prevalent and is subdivided into eight subtypes (or clades), based on the whole genome, which are geographically distinct. The most prevalent are subtypes B (found mainly in North America and Europe), A and D (found mainly in Africa), and C (found mainly in Africa and Asia); these subtypes form branches in the phylogenetic tree representing the lineage of the M group of HIV-1. Co-infection with distinct subtypes gives rise to circulating recombinant forms (CRFs). In 2000, the last year in which an analysis of global subtype prevalence was made, 47.2% of infections worldwide were of subtype C, 26.7% were of subtype A/CRF02_AG, 12.3% were of subtype B, 5.3% were of subtype D, 3.2% were of CRF_AE, and the remaining 5.3% were composed of other subtypes and CRFs. Most HIV-1 research is focused on subtype B; few laboratories focus on the other subtypes. The existence of a fourth group, \"P\", has been hypothesised based on a virus isolated in 2009. The strain is apparently derived from gorilla SIV (SIVgor), first isolated from western lowland gorillas in 2006.\nHIV-2's closest relative is SIVsm, a strain of SIV found in sooty mangabees. Since HIV-1 is derived from SIVcpz, and HIV-2 from SIVsm, the genetic sequence of HIV-2 is only partially homologous to HIV-1 and more closely resembles that of SIVsm.\nDiagnosis.\nMany HIV-positive people are unaware that they are infected with the virus. For example, in 2001 less than 1% of the sexually active urban population in Africa had been tested, and this proportion is even lower in rural populations. Furthermore, in 2001 only 0.5% of pregnant women attending urban health facilities were counselled, tested or received their test results. Again, this proportion is even lower in rural health facilities. Since donors may therefore be unaware of their infection, donor blood and blood products used in medicine and medical research are routinely screened for HIV.\nHIV-1 testing is initially done using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to detect antibodies to HIV-1. Specimens with a non-reactive result from the initial ELISA are considered HIV-negative, unless new exposure to an infected partner or partner of unknown HIV status has occurred. Specimens with a reactive ELISA result are retested in duplicate. If the result of either duplicate test is reactive, the specimen is reported as repeatedly reactive and undergoes confirmatory testing with a more specific supplemental test (e.g., a polymerase chain reaction (PCR), western blot or, less commonly, an immunofluorescence assay (IFA)). Only specimens that are repeatedly reactive by ELISA and positive by IFA or PCR or reactive by western blot are considered HIV-positive and indicative of HIV infection. Specimens that are repeatedly ELISA-reactive occasionally provide an indeterminate western blot result, which may be either an incomplete antibody response to HIV in an infected person or nonspecific reactions in an uninfected person.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAlthough IFA can be used to confirm infection in these ambiguous cases, this assay is not widely used. In general, a second specimen should be collected more than a month later and retested for persons with indeterminate western blot results. Although much less commonly available, nucleic acid testing (e.g., viral RNA or proviral DNA amplification method) can also help diagnosis in certain situations. In addition, a few tested specimens might provide inconclusive results because of a low quantity specimen. In these situations, a second specimen is collected and tested for HIV infection.\nModern HIV testing is extremely accurate, when the window period is taken into consideration. A single screening test is correct more than 99% of the time. The chance of a false-positive result in a standard two-step testing protocol is estimated to be about 1 in 250,000 in a low risk population. Testing post-exposure is recommended immediately and then at six weeks, three months, and six months.\nThe latest recommendations of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) show that HIV testing must start with an immunoassay combination test for HIV-1 and HIV-2 antibodies and p24 antigen. A negative result rules out HIV exposure, while a positive one must be followed by an HIV-1/2 antibody differentiation immunoassay to detect which antibodies are present. This gives rise to four possible scenarios:\nResearch.\nHIV/AIDS research includes all medical research that attempts to prevent, treat, or cure HIV/AIDS, as well as fundamental research about the nature of HIV as an infectious agent and AIDS as the disease caused by HIV.\nMany governments and research institutions participate in HIV/AIDS research. This research includes behavioral health interventions, such as research into sex education, and drug development, such as research into microbicides for sexually transmitted diseases, HIV vaccines, and anti-retroviral drugs. Other medical research areas include the topics of pre-exposure prophylaxis, post-exposure prophylaxis, circumcision, and accelerated aging effects.\nTreatment and transmission.\nThe management of HIV/AIDS typically involves the use of multiple antiretroviral drugs. In many parts of the world, HIV has become a chronic condition, with progression to AIDS increasingly rare.\nHIV latency and the resulting viral reservoir in CD4+ T cells, dendritic cells, and macrophages is the main barrier to eradication of the virus.\nWhile HIV is highly virulent, transmission through sexual contact does not occur when an HIV-positive individual maintains a consistently undetectable viral load (&lt;50 copies/ml) due to antiretroviral treatment. This concept was first proposed by the Swiss Federal Commission for AIDS/HIV in 2008 in what is known as the Swiss Statement. Although initially controversial, subsequent studies have confirmed that the risk of transmitting HIV through sex is effectively zero when the HIV-positive person has a consistently undetectable viral load, a concept now widely known as U=U, or \"Undetectable = Untransmittable.\"\nStudies that established the U=U principle include Opposites Attract, PARTNER 1, PARTNER 2 (which focused on male-male couples), and HPTN052 (which focused on heterosexual couples). These studies involved couples where one partner was HIV-positive and one was HIV-negative, and included regular HIV testing. Across these four studies, a total of 4,097 couples participated from four continents, reporting 151,880 acts of condomless sex with zero phylogenetically-linked HIV transmissions when the positive partner had an undetectable viral load. Following these findings, the U=U consensus statement advocating the use of the term 'zero risk' was endorsed by numerous individuals and organizations, including the CDC, the British HIV Association, and \"The Lancet\" medical journal.\nAdditionally, reactivation of herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2) in individuals with genital herpes is associated with an increase in CCR-5 enriched CD4+ T cells and inflammatory dendritic cells in the dermis of ulcerated genital skin, persisting even after ulcer healing. HIV's tropism for CCR-5 positive cells contributes to the two- to threefold increased risk of HIV acquisition in persons with genital herpes. Notably, daily antiviral medication, such as acyclovir, does not reduce the subclinical post-reactivation inflammation and therefore does not decrease the risk of HIV acquisition.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nBoth HIV-1 and HIV-2 are believed to have originated in non-human primates in West-central Africa, and are believed to have transferred to humans (a process known as zoonosis) in the early 20th century.\nHIV-1 appears to have originated in southern Cameroon through the evolution of SIVcpz, a simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) that infects wild chimpanzees (HIV-1 descends from the SIVcpz endemic in the chimpanzee subspecies \"Pan troglodytes troglodytes\"). The closest relative of HIV-2 is SIVsmm, a virus of the sooty mangabey (\"Cercocebus atys atys\"), an Old World monkey living in littoral West Africa (from southern Senegal to western C\u00f4te d'Ivoire). New World monkeys such as the owl monkey are resistant to HIV-1 infection, possibly because of a genomic fusion of two viral resistance genes.\nHIV-1 is thought to have jumped the species barrier on at least three separate occasions, giving rise to the three groups of the virus, M, N, and O.\nThere is evidence that humans who participate in bushmeat activities, either as hunters or as bushmeat vendors, commonly acquire SIV. However, SIV is a weak virus, and it is typically suppressed by the human immune system within weeks of infection. It is thought that several transmissions of the virus from individual to individual in quick succession are necessary to allow it enough time to mutate into HIV. Furthermore, due to its relatively low person-to-person transmission rate, it can only spread throughout the population in the presence of one or more high-risk transmission channels, which are thought to have been absent in Africa prior to the 20th century.\nSpecific proposed high-risk transmission channels, allowing the virus to adapt to humans and spread throughout the society, depend on the proposed timing of the animal-to-human crossing. Genetic studies of the virus suggest that the most recent common ancestor of the HIV-1 M group dates back to c.\u20091910. Proponents of this dating link the HIV epidemic with the emergence of colonialism and growth of large colonial African cities, leading to social changes, including different patterns of sexual contact (especially multiple, concurrent partnerships), the spread of sex work, and the concomitant high frequency of genital ulcer diseases (such as syphilis) in nascent colonial cities. While transmission rates of HIV during vaginal intercourse are typically low, they are increased manyfold if one of the partners has a sexually transmitted infection resulting in genital ulcers. Early 1900s colonial cities were notable for their high prevalence of sex work and genital ulcers to the degree that as of 1928 as many as 45% of female residents of eastern Leopoldville (currently Kinshasa) were thought to have been involved with sex work and as of 1933 around 15% of all residents of the same city were infected by one of the forms of syphilis.\nThe earliest, well-documented case of HIV in a human dates back to 1959 in the Belgian Congo. The virus may have been present in the United States as early as the mid- to late 1960s, as a sixteen-year-old male named Robert Rayford presented with symptoms in 1966 and died in 1969.\nAn alternative and likely complementary hypothesis points to the widespread use of unsafe medical practices in Africa during years following World War II, such as unsterile reuse of single-use syringes during mass vaccination, antibiotic, and anti-malaria treatment campaigns. Research on the timing of most recent common ancestor for HIV-1 groups M and O, as well as on HIV-2 groups A and B, indicates that SIV has given rise to transmissible HIV lineages throughout the twentieth century. The dispersed timing of these transmissions to humans implies that no single external factor is needed to explain the cross-species transmission of HIV. This observation is consistent with both of the two prevailing views of the origin of the HIV epidemics, namely SIV transmission to humans during the slaughter or butchering of infected primates, and the colonial expansion of sub-Saharan African cities.\nDiscovery.\nThe first news story on \"an exotic new disease\" appeared May 18, 1981, in the gay newspaper \"New York Native\".\nAIDS was first clinically observed in 1981 in the United States. The initial cases were a cluster of injection drug users and gay men with no known cause of impaired immunity who showed symptoms of \"Pneumocystis\" pneumonia (PCP or PJP, the latter term recognizing that the causative agent is now called \"Pneumocystis jirovecii\"), a rare opportunistic infection that was known to occur in people with very compromised immune systems. Soon thereafter, researchers at the NYU School of Medicine studied gay men developing a previously rare skin cancer called Kaposi's sarcoma (KS). Many more cases of PJP and KS emerged, alerting U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and a CDC task force was formed to monitor the outbreak. The earliest retrospectively described case of AIDS is believed to have been in Norway beginning in 1966.\nIn the beginning, the CDC did not have an official name for the disease, often referring to it by way of the diseases that were associated with it, for example, lymphadenopathy, the disease after which the discoverers of HIV originally named the virus. They also used \"Kaposi's Sarcoma and Opportunistic Infections\", the name by which a task force had been set up in 1981. In the general press, the term \"GRID\", which stood for gay-related immune deficiency, had been coined. The CDC, in search of a name and looking at the infected communities, coined \"the 4H disease\", as it seemed to single out homosexuals, heroin users, hemophiliacs, and Haitians. However, after determining that AIDS was not isolated to the gay community, it was realized that the term GRID was misleading and \"AIDS\" was introduced at a meeting in July 1982. By September 1982 the CDC started using the name AIDS.\nIn 1983, two separate research groups led by American Robert Gallo and French investigators and Luc Montagnier independently declared that a novel retrovirus may have been infecting AIDS patients, and published their findings in the same issue of the journal \"Science\". Gallo claimed that a virus his group had isolated from a person with AIDS was strikingly similar in shape to other human T-lymphotropic viruses (HTLVs) his group had been the first to isolate. Gallo admitted in 1987 that the virus he claimed to have discovered in 1984 was in reality a virus sent to him from France the year before. Gallo's group called their newly isolated virus HTLV-III. Montagnier's group isolated a virus from a patient presenting with swelling of the lymph nodes of the neck and physical weakness, two classic symptoms of primary HIV infection. Contradicting the report from Gallo's group, Montagnier and his colleagues showed that core proteins of this virus were immunologically different from those of HTLV-I. Montagnier's group named their isolated virus lymphadenopathy-associated virus (LAV). As these two viruses turned out to be the same, in 1986 LAV and HTLV-III were renamed HIV.\nAnother group working contemporaneously with the Montagnier and Gallo groups was that of Jay A. Levy at the University of California, San Francisco. He independently discovered the AIDS virus in 1983 and named it the AIDS associated retrovirus (ARV). This virus was very different from the virus reported by the Montagnier and Gallo groups. The ARV strains indicated, for the first time, the heterogeneity of HIV isolates and several of these remain classic examples of the AIDS virus found in the United States.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14171", "revid": "37740198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14171", "title": "Heterodimer", "text": ""}
{"id": "14172", "revid": "37740198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14172", "title": "Homodimer", "text": ""}
{"id": "14173", "revid": "29750937", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14173", "title": "Hol", "text": "HOL or Hol may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "14174", "revid": "578047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14174", "title": "Hostile witness", "text": "Antagonistic or contrary witness\nA hostile witness, also known as an adverse witness or an unfavorable witness, is a witness at trial whose testimony on direct examination is either openly antagonistic or appears to be contrary to the legal position of the party who called the witness. This concept is used in the legal proceedings in the United States, and analogues of it exist in other legal systems in Western countries.\nProcess.\nDuring direct examination, if the examining attorney who called the witness finds that their testimony is antagonistic or contrary to the legal position of their client, the attorney may request that the judge declare the witness \"hostile\". If the request is granted, the attorney may proceed to ask the witness leading questions. Leading questions either suggest the answer (\"You saw my client sign the contract, correct?\") or challenge (impeach) the witness's testimony. As a rule, leading questions are generally allowed only during cross-examination, but a hostile witness is an exception to this rule.\nIn cross-examination conducted by the opposing party's attorney, a witness is presumed to be hostile and the examining attorney is not required to seek the judge's permission before asking leading questions. Attorneys can influence a hostile witness's responses by using Gestalt psychology to influence the way the witness perceives the situation, and utility theory to understand their likely responses. The attorney will integrate a hostile witness's expected responses into the larger case strategy through pretrial planning and through adapting as necessary during the course of the trial.\nJurisdiction.\nAustralia.\nIn the state of New South Wales, the term 'unfavourable witness' is defined by section 38 of the Evidence Act which permits the prosecution to cross-examine their own witness. For example, if the prosecution calls all material witnesses relevant to a case before the court, and any evidence given is not favourable to, or supports the prosecution case, or a witness has given a prior inconsistent statement, then the prosecution may seek leave of the court, via section 192, to test the witness in relation to their evidence.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, section 94 of the Evidence Act 2006 permits a party to cross-examine their own witness if the presiding judge determines the witness to be hostile and gives permission.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14179", "revid": "9134590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14179", "title": "Henry I of England", "text": "King of England from 1100 to 1135\n \nHenry I (c.\u20091068 \u2013 1 December 1135), also known as Henry Beauclerc, was King of England from 1100 to his death in 1135. He was the fourth son of William the Conqueror and was educated in Latin and the liberal arts. On William's death in 1087, Henry's elder brothers Robert Curthose and William Rufus inherited Normandy and England, respectively, thereby leaving Henry landless. He subsequently purchased the County of Cotentin in western Normandy from Robert, but his brothers deposed him in 1091. He gradually rebuilt his power base in the Cotentin and allied himself with William Rufus against Robert.\nWhen William died in a hunting accident, Henry seized the English throne ahead of Robert, promising at his coronation to correct many of William's less popular policies. He married Matilda of Scotland and they had two surviving children, Empress Matilda and William Adelin. Robert disputed Henry's control of England and invaded from Normandy in 1101. The ensuing military campaign ended in a negotiated settlement that confirmed Henry as king. The peace was short-lived, however, and Henry invaded the Duchy of Normandy in 1105 and 1106, finally defeating Robert at the Battle of Tinchebray. Henry kept Robert imprisoned for the rest of his life. Henry's control of Normandy was subsequently challenged by Louis VI of France, Baldwin VII of Flanders and Fulk V of Anjou, who promoted the rival claims of Robert's son, William Clito, and supported a major rebellion in the Duchy between 1116 and 1119. Following Henry's victory at the Battle of Br\u00e9mule, a favourable peace settlement was agreed with Louis in 1120. \nConsidered by contemporaries to be a harsh but effective ruler, Henry skilfully manipulated the barons in England and Normandy. In England, he drew on the existing Anglo-Saxon system of justice, local government and taxation, but also strengthened it with more institutions such as the royal exchequer and itinerant justices. Many of the officials who ran Henry's system were \"new men\" of obscure backgrounds, rather than from families of high status, who rose through the ranks as administrators. Henry encouraged ecclesiastical reform, but became embroiled in a serious dispute in 1101 with Archbishop Anselm of Canterbury, which was resolved through a compromise solution in 1105. He supported the Cluniac order and played a major role in the selection of the senior clergy in England and Normandy.\nHenry's son William drowned in the \"White Ship\" disaster of 1120, throwing the royal succession into doubt. Henry took a second wife, Adeliza of Louvain, in the hope of having another son, but their marriage was childless. In response to this, he declared his daughter Matilda his heir and married her to Geoffrey of Anjou. The relationship between Henry and the couple became strained, and fighting broke out along the border with Anjou. Henry died on 1 December 1135 after a week of illness. Despite his plans for Matilda, the King was succeeded by his nephew Stephen of Blois, resulting in a period of civil war known as the Anarchy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life, 1068\u20131099.\nChildhood and appearance, 1068\u20131086.\nHenry was probably born in England in 1068, in either the summer or the last weeks of the year, possibly in the town of Selby in Yorkshire. His father was William the Conqueror, the duke of Normandy who had invaded England in 1066 to become the king of England, establishing lands stretching into Wales. The invasion had created an Anglo-Norman ruling class, many with estates on both sides of the English Channel. These Anglo-Norman barons typically had close links to the Kingdom of France, which was then a loose collection of counties and smaller polities, only nominally under control of the king. Henry's mother, Matilda of Flanders, was the granddaughter of King Robert II of France, and she probably named Henry after her uncle Henry I of France.\nHenry was the youngest of William and Matilda's four sons. Physically he resembled his older brothers Robert Curthose, Richard and William Rufus, being, as historian David Carpenter describes, \"short, stocky and barrel-chested,\" with black hair. As a result of their age differences and Richard's early death, Henry would have probably seen relatively little of his older brothers. He probably knew his sister Adela well, as the two were close in age. There is little documentary evidence for his early years; historians Warren Hollister and Kathleen Thompson suggest he was brought up predominantly in England, while Judith Green argues he was initially brought up in the Duchy. He was probably educated by the Church, possibly by Bishop Osmund, the King's chancellor, at Salisbury Cathedral; it is uncertain if this indicated an intent by his parents for Henry to become a member of the clergy. It is also uncertain how far Henry's education extended, but he was probably able to read Latin and had some background in the liberal arts. He was given military training by an instructor called Robert Achard, and Henry was knighted by his father on 24 May 1086. \nInheritance, 1087\u20131088.\nIn 1087, William was fatally injured during a campaign in the Vexin. Henry joined his dying father near Rouen in September, where the King partitioned his possessions among his sons. The rules of succession in western Europe at the time were uncertain; in some parts of France, primogeniture, in which the eldest son would inherit a title, was growing in popularity. In other parts of Europe, including Normandy and England, the tradition was for lands to be divided, with the eldest son taking patrimonial lands \u2013 usually considered to be the most valuable \u2013 and younger sons given smaller, or more recently acquired, partitions or estates.\nIn dividing his lands, William appears to have followed the Norman tradition, distinguishing between Normandy, which he had inherited, and England, which he had acquired through war. William's second son, Richard, had died in a hunting accident, leaving Henry and his two brothers to inherit William's estate. Robert, the eldest, despite being in armed rebellion against his father at the time of his death, received Normandy. England was given to William Rufus, who was in favour with the dying king. Henry was given a large sum of money, usually reported as \u00a35,000, with the expectation that he would also be given his mother's modest set of lands in Buckinghamshire and Gloucestershire. William's funeral at Caen was marred by angry complaints from a local man, and Henry may have been responsible for resolving the dispute by buying off the protester with silver.\nRobert returned to Normandy, expecting to have been given both the Duchy and England, to find that William Rufus had crossed the Channel and been crowned king. The two brothers disagreed fundamentally over the inheritance, and Robert soon began to plan an invasion of England to seize the kingdom, helped by a rebellion by some of the leading nobles against William Rufus. Henry remained in Normandy and took up a role within Robert's court, possibly either because he was unwilling to side openly with William Rufus, or because Robert might have taken the opportunity to confiscate Henry's inherited money if he had tried to leave. William Rufus sequestered Henry's new estates in England, leaving Henry landless. \nIn 1088, Robert's plans for the invasion of England began to falter, and he turned to Henry, proposing that his brother lend him some of his inheritance, which Henry refused. Henry and Robert then came to an alternative arrangement, in which Robert would make Henry the count of western Normandy, in exchange for \u00a33,000. Henry's lands were a new countship created by a delegation of the ducal authority in the Cotentin, but it extended across the Avranchin, with control over the bishoprics of both. This also gave Henry influence over two major Norman leaders, Hugh d'Avranches and Richard de Redvers, and the abbey of Mont Saint-Michel, whose lands spread out further across the Duchy. Robert's invasion force failed to leave Normandy, leaving William Rufus secure in England.\nCount of the Cotentin, 1088\u201390.\nHenry quickly established himself as count, building up a network of followers from western Normandy and eastern Brittany, whom the historian John Le Patourel has characterised as \"Henry's gang\". His early supporters included Roger of Mandeville, Richard of Redvers, Richard d'Avranches and Robert Fitzhamon, along with the churchman Roger of Salisbury. Robert attempted to go back on his deal with Henry and re-appropriate the county, but Henry's grip was already sufficiently firm to prevent this. Robert's rule of the duchy was chaotic, and parts of Henry's lands became almost independent of central control from Rouen.\nDuring this period, neither King William nor Duke Robert seems to have trusted Henry. Waiting until the rebellion against William was safely over, Henry returned to England in July 1088. He met with the King but was unable to persuade him to grant him their mother's estates, and travelled back to Normandy in the autumn. While he had been away, however, Odo, Bishop of Bayeux, who regarded Henry as a potential competitor, had convinced Robert that Henry was conspiring against the duke with William. On landing, Odo seized Henry and imprisoned him in Neuilly-la-For\u00eat, and Robert took back the county of the Cotentin. Henry was held there over the winter, but in the spring of 1089 the senior elements of the Normandy nobility prevailed upon Robert to release him.\nAlthough no longer formally the Count of Cotentin, Henry continued to control the west of Normandy. The struggle between his brothers continued. William continued to put down resistance to his rule in England, but began to build a series of alliances against Robert with barons in Normandy and neighbouring Ponthieu. Robert allied himself with Philip I of France. In late 1090 William encouraged Conan Pilatus, a powerful burgher in Rouen, to rebel against Robert; Conan was supported by most of Rouen and made appeals to the neighbouring ducal garrisons to switch allegiance as well.\nRobert issued an appeal for help to his barons, and Henry was the first to arrive in Rouen in November. Violence broke out, leading to savage, confused street fighting as both sides attempted to take control of the city. Robert and Henry left the castle to join the battle, but Robert then retreated, leaving Henry to continue the fighting. The battle turned in favour of the ducal forces and Henry took Conan prisoner. Henry was angry that Conan had turned against his feudal lord. He had him taken to the top of Rouen Castle and then, despite Conan's offers to pay a huge ransom, threw him off the top of the castle to his death. Contemporaries considered Henry to have acted appropriately in making an example of Conan, and Henry became famous for his exploits in the battle.\nFall and rise, 1091\u20131099.\nIn the aftermath, Robert forced Henry to leave Rouen, probably because Henry's role in the fighting had been more prominent than his own, and possibly because Henry had asked to be formally reinstated as the count of the Cotentin. In early 1091, William invaded Normandy with a sufficiently large army to bring Robert to the negotiating table. The two brothers signed a treaty at Rouen, granting William a range of lands and castles in Normandy. In return, William promised to support Robert's attempts to regain control of the neighbouring county of Maine, once under Norman control, and help in regaining control over the duchy, including Henry's lands. They nominated each other as heirs to England and Normandy, excluding Henry from any succession while either one of them lived.\nWar now broke out between Henry and his brothers. Henry mobilised a mercenary army in the west of Normandy, but as William and Robert's forces advanced, his network of baronial support melted away. Henry focused his remaining forces at Mont Saint-Michel, where he was besieged, probably in March 1091. The site was easy to defend, but lacked fresh water. The chronicler William of Malmesbury suggested that when Henry's water ran short, Robert allowed his brother fresh supplies, leading to remonstrations between Robert and William Rufus. The events of the final days of the siege are unclear: the besiegers had begun to argue about the future strategy for the campaign, but Henry then abandoned Mont Saint-Michel, probably as part of a negotiated surrender. He left for Brittany and crossed over into France.\nHenry's next steps are not well documented; one chronicler, Orderic Vitalis, suggests that he travelled in the French Vexin, along the Normandy border, for over a year with a small band of followers. By the end of the year, Robert and William had fallen out once again, and the Treaty of Rouen had been abandoned. In 1092, Henry and his followers seized the Normandy town of Domfront. Domfront had previously been controlled by Robert of Bell\u00eame, but the inhabitants disliked his rule and invited Henry to take over the town, which he did in a bloodless coup. Over the next two years, Henry re-established his network of supporters across western Normandy, forming what Judith Green terms a \"court in waiting\". By 1094, he was allocating lands and castles to his followers as if he were the Duke of Normandy. William began to support Henry with money, encouraging his campaign against Robert, and Henry used some of this to construct a substantial castle at Domfront.\nWilliam crossed into Normandy to take the war to Robert in 1094, and when progress stalled, called upon Henry for assistance. Henry responded, but travelled to London instead of joining the main campaign further east in Normandy, possibly at the request of William, who in any event abandoned the campaign and returned to England. Over the next few years, Henry appears to have strengthened his power base in western Normandy, visiting England occasionally to attend William's court. In 1095 Pope Urban II called the First Crusade, encouraging knights from across Europe to join. Robert joined the Crusade, borrowing money from William to do so, and granting the King temporary custody of his part of the Duchy in exchange. The King appeared confident of regaining the remainder of Normandy from Robert, and Henry appeared ever closer to William. They campaigned together in the Norman Vexin between 1097 and 1098.\nEarly reign, 1100\u20131106.\nTaking the throne, 1100.\nOn the afternoon of 2 August 1100, King William went hunting in the New Forest, accompanied by a team of huntsmen and Norman nobility, including Henry. An arrow, possibly shot by the baron Walter Tirel, hit and killed William. Many conspiracy theories have been put forward suggesting that the King was killed deliberately; most modern historians reject these, as hunting was a risky activity and such accidents were common. Chaos broke out, and Tirel fled the scene for France, either because he had shot the fatal arrow, or because he had been incorrectly accused and feared that he would be made a scapegoat for the King's death.\nHenry rode to Winchester, where an argument ensued as to who now had the best claim to the throne. William of Breteuil championed the rights of Robert, who was still abroad, returning from the Crusade, and to whom Henry and the barons had given homage in previous years. Henry argued that, unlike Robert, he had been born to a reigning king and queen, thereby giving him a claim under the right of porphyrogeniture. Tempers flared, but Henry, supported by Henry de Beaumont and Robert of Meulan, held sway and persuaded the barons to follow him. He occupied Winchester Castle and seized the royal treasury.\nHenry was hastily crowned king in Westminster Abbey on 5 August by Maurice, the bishop of London, as Anselm, the archbishop of Canterbury, had been exiled by William Rufus, and Thomas, the archbishop of York, was in the north of England at Ripon. In accordance with English tradition and in a bid to legitimise his rule, Henry issued a coronation charter laying out various commitments. The new king presented himself as having restored order to a trouble-torn country. He announced that he would abandon William's policies towards the Church, which had been seen as oppressive by the clergy; he promised to prevent royal abuses of the barons' property rights, and assured a return to the gentler customs of Edward the Confessor; he asserted that he would \"establish a firm peace\" across England and ordered \"that this peace shall henceforth be kept\".\nAs well as his existing circle of supporters, many of whom were richly rewarded with new lands, Henry quickly co-opted many of the existing administration into his new royal household. His brother's chancellor, William Giffard, was made the bishop of Winchester, and the prominent sheriffs Urse d'Abetot, Haimo Dapifer and Robert Fitzhamon continued to play a senior role in government. By contrast, the unpopular Ranulf Flambard, the bishop of Durham and a key member of the previous regime, was imprisoned in the Tower of London and charged with corruption. The late king had left many Church positions unfilled, and Henry set about nominating candidates to these, in an effort to build further support for his new government. The appointments needed to be consecrated, and Henry wrote to Anselm, apologising for having been crowned while the archbishop was still in France and asking him to return at once.\nMarriage to Matilda, 1100.\nOn 11 November 1100 Henry married Matilda, the daughter of Malcolm III of Scotland, in Westminster Abbey. Henry was now around 31 years old, but late marriages for noblemen were not unusual in the 11th century. The pair had probably first met earlier the previous decade, possibly being introduced through Bishop Osmund of Salisbury. Historian Warren Hollister argues that Henry and Matilda were emotionally close, but their union was also certainly politically motivated. Matilda had originally been named Edith, an Anglo-Saxon name, and was a member of the West Saxon royal family, being the niece of Edgar the \u00c6theling, the great-granddaughter of Edmund Ironside and a descendant of Alfred the Great. For Henry, marrying Matilda gave his reign increased legitimacy, and for Matilda, an ambitious woman, it was an opportunity for high status and power in England.\nMatilda had been educated in a sequence of convents and may well have taken the vows to formally become a nun, which formed an obstacle to the marriage progressing. She did not wish to be a nun and appealed to Anselm for permission to marry Henry, and the Archbishop established a council at Lambeth Palace to judge the issue. Despite some dissenting voices, the council concluded that although Matilda had lived in a convent, she had not actually become a nun and was therefore free to marry, a judgement that Anselm then affirmed, allowing the marriage to proceed. Matilda proved an effective queen for Henry, acting as a regent in England on occasion, addressing and presiding over councils, and extensively supporting the arts. The couple soon had two children, Matilda, born in 1102, and William Adelin, born in 1103; it is possible that they also had a second son, Richard, who died young. Following the birth of these children, the Queen preferred to remain based in Westminster while the King travelled across England and Normandy, either for religious reasons or because she enjoyed being involved in the machinery of royal governance.\nHenry had a considerable sexual appetite and enjoyed a substantial number of sexual partners, resulting in many illegitimate children, at least nine sons and 13 daughters, many of whom he appears to have recognised and supported. It was normal for unmarried Anglo-Norman noblemen to have sexual relations with prostitutes and local women, and kings were also expected to have mistresses. Some of these relationships occurred before Henry was married, but many others took place after his marriage to Matilda. Henry had a wide range of mistresses from a range of backgrounds, and the relationships appear to have been conducted relatively openly. He may have chosen some of his noble mistresses for political purposes, but the evidence to support this theory is limited.\nTreaty of Alton, 1101\u20131102.\nBy early 1101, Henry's new regime was established and functioning, but many of the Anglo-Norman elite still supported his brother Robert, or would be prepared to switch sides if Robert appeared likely to gain power in England. In February, Flambard escaped from the Tower of London and crossed the Channel to Normandy, where he injected fresh direction and energy to Robert's attempts to mobilise an invasion force. By July, Robert had formed an army and a fleet, ready to move against Henry in England. Raising the stakes in the conflict, Henry seized Flambard's lands and, with the support of Anselm, Flambard was removed from his position as bishop. The King held court in April and June, where the nobility renewed their oaths of allegiance to him, but their support still appeared partial and shaky.\nWith the invasion imminent, Henry mobilised his forces and fleet outside Pevensey, close to Robert's anticipated landing site, training some of them personally in how to counter cavalry charges. Despite English levies and knights owing military service to the Church arriving in considerable numbers, many of his barons did not appear. Anselm intervened with some of the doubters, emphasising the religious importance of their loyalty to Henry. Robert unexpectedly landed further up the coast at Portsmouth on 20 July with a modest force of a few hundred men, but these were quickly joined by many of the barons in England. Instead of marching into nearby Winchester and seizing Henry's treasury, Robert paused, giving Henry time to march west and intercept the invasion force.\nThe two armies met at Alton, Hampshire, where peace negotiations began, possibly initiated by either Henry or Robert, and probably supported by Flambard. The brothers then agreed to the Treaty of Alton, under which Robert released Henry from his oath of homage and recognised him as king; Henry renounced his claims on western Normandy, except for Domfront, and agreed to pay Robert \u00a32,000 a year for life; if either brother died without a male heir, the other would inherit his lands; the barons whose lands had been seized by either the King or the Duke for supporting his rival would have them returned, and Flambard would be reinstated as bishop; the two brothers would campaign together to defend their territories in Normandy. Robert remained in England for a few months more with Henry before returning to Normandy.\nDespite the treaty, Henry set about inflicting severe penalties on the barons who had stood against him during the invasion. William de Warenne, the Earl of Surrey, was accused of fresh crimes, which were not covered by the Alton amnesty, and was banished from England. In 1102 Henry then turned against Robert of Bell\u00eame and his brothers, the most powerful of the barons, accusing him of 45 different offences. Robert escaped and took up arms against Henry. Henry besieged Robert's castles at Arundel, Tickhill and Shrewsbury, pushing down into the south-west to attack Bridgnorth. His power base in England broken, Robert accepted Henry's offer of banishment and left the country for Normandy.\nConquest of Normandy, 1103\u20131106.\nHenry's network of allies in Normandy became stronger during 1103. He arranged the marriages of his illegitimate daughters Juliane and Matilda to Eustace of Breteuil and Rotrou III, Count of Perche, respectively, the latter union securing the Norman border. Henry attempted to win over other members of the Norman nobility and gave other English estates and lucrative offers to key Norman lords. Duke Robert continued to fight Robert of Bell\u00eame, but the Duke's position worsened, until by 1104, he had to ally himself formally with Bell\u00eame to survive. Arguing that the Duke had broken the terms of their treaty, the King crossed over the Channel to Domfront, where he met with senior barons from across Normandy, eager to ally themselves with him. He confronted the Duke and accused him of siding with his enemies, before returning to England.\nNormandy continued to disintegrate into chaos. In 1105, Henry sent his friend Robert Fitzhamon and a force of knights into the Duchy, apparently to provoke a confrontation with Duke Robert. Fitzhamon was captured, and Henry used this as an excuse to invade, promising to restore peace and order. Henry had the support of most of the neighbouring counts around Normandy's borders, and King Philip of France was persuaded to remain neutral. Henry occupied western Normandy, and advanced east on Bayeux, where Fitzhamon was held. The city refused to surrender, and Henry besieged it, burning it to the ground. Terrified of meeting the same fate, the town of Caen switched sides and surrendered, allowing Henry to advance on Falaise, Calvados, which he took with some casualties. His campaign stalled, and the King instead began peace discussions with Robert. The negotiations were inconclusive and the fighting dragged on until Christmas, when Henry returned to England.\nHenry invaded again in July 1106, hoping to provoke a decisive battle. After some initial tactical successes, he turned south-west towards the castle of Tinchebray. He besieged the castle and Duke Robert, supported by Robert of Bell\u00eame, advanced from Falaise to relieve it. After attempts at negotiation failed, the Battle of Tinchebray took place, probably on 28 September. The battle lasted around an hour, and began with a charge by Duke Robert's cavalry; the infantry and dismounted knights of both sides then joined the battle. Henry's reserves, led by Elias I, Count of Maine, and Alan IV, Duke of Brittany, attacked the enemy's flanks, routing first Bell\u00eame's troops and then the bulk of the ducal forces. Duke Robert was taken prisoner, but Bell\u00eame escaped.\nHenry mopped up the remaining resistance in Normandy, and Duke Robert ordered his last garrisons to surrender. Reaching Rouen, Henry reaffirmed the laws and customs of Normandy and took homage from the leading barons and citizens. The lesser prisoners taken at Tinchebray were released, but the Duke and several other leading nobles were imprisoned indefinitely. The Duke's son, William Clito, was only three years old and was released to the care of Helias of Saint-Saens, a Norman baron. Henry reconciled himself with Robert of Bell\u00eame, who gave up the ducal lands he had seized and rejoined the royal court. Henry had no way of legally removing the Duchy from his brother, and initially Henry avoided using the title \"duke\" at all, emphasising that, as the king of England, he was only acting as the guardian of the troubled Duchy.\nGovernment, family and household.\nGovernment, law and court.\nHenry inherited the kingdom of England from William Rufus, giving him a claim of suzerainty over Wales and Scotland, and acquired the Duchy of Normandy, a complex entity with troubled borders. The borders between England and Scotland were still uncertain during Henry's reign, with Anglo-Norman influence pushing northwards through Cumbria, but his relationship with King David I of Scotland was generally good, partially due to Henry's marriage to his sister. In Wales, Henry used his power to coerce and charm the indigenous Welsh princes, while Norman Marcher Lords pushed across the valleys of South Wales. Normandy was controlled via interlocking networks of ducal, ecclesiastical and family contacts, backed by a growing string of important ducal castles along the borders. Alliances and relationships with neighbouring counties along the Norman border were particularly important to maintaining the stability of the Duchy.\nHenry ruled through the barons and lords in England and Normandy, whom he manipulated skilfully for political effect. Political friendships, termed \"amicitia\" in Latin, were important during the 12th century, and Henry maintained a wide range of these, mediating between his friends in factions across his realm when necessary, and rewarding those who were loyal to him. He also had a reputation for punishing those barons who stood against him, and he maintained an effective network of informers and spies who reported to him on events. Henry was a harsh, firm ruler, but not excessively so by the standards of the day. Over time, he increased the degree of his control over the barons, removing his enemies and bolstering his friends until the \"reconstructed baronage\", as historian Warren Hollister describes it, was predominantly loyal and dependent on the King.\nHenry's itinerant royal court comprised several parts. At the heart was his domestic household, called the \"domus\"; a wider grouping was termed the \"familia regis\", and formal gatherings of the court were termed \"curia\". The \"domus\" was divided into several parts. The chapel, headed by the chancellor, looked after the royal documents, the chamber dealt with financial affairs and the master-marshal was responsible for travel and accommodation. The \"familia regis\" included Henry's mounted household troops, up to several hundred strong, who came from a wider range of social backgrounds, and could be deployed across England and Normandy as required. Initially Henry continued his father's practice of regular crown-wearing ceremonies at his \"curia\", but they became less frequent as the years passed. Henry's court was grand and ostentatious, financing the construction of large new buildings and castles with a range of precious gifts on display, including his private menagerie of exotic animals, which he kept at Woodstock Palace. Despite being a lively community, Henry's court was more tightly controlled than those of previous kings. Strict rules controlled personal behaviour and prohibited members of the court from pillaging neighbouring villages, as had been the norm under William Rufus.\nHenry was responsible for a substantial expansion of the royal justice system. In England, Henry drew on the existing Anglo-Saxon system of justice, local government and taxes, but strengthened it with more central governmental institutions. Roger of Salisbury began to develop the royal exchequer after 1110, using it to collect and audit revenues from the King's sheriffs in the shires. Itinerant justices began to emerge under Henry, travelling around the country managing eyre courts, and many more laws were formally recorded. Henry gathered increasing revenue from the expansion of royal justice, both from fines and from fees. The first Pipe Roll that is known to have survived dates from 1130, recording royal expenditures. Henry reformed the coinage in 1107, 1108 and in 1125, inflicting harsh corporal punishments to English coiners who had been found guilty of debasing the currency. In Normandy, he restored law and order after 1106, operating through a body of Norman justices and an exchequer system similar to that in England. Norman institutions grew in scale and scope under Henry, although less quickly than in England. Many of the officials that ran Henry's system were termed \"new men\", relatively low-born individuals who rose through the ranks as administrators, managing justice or the royal revenues.\nRelations with the Church.\nChurch and the King.\nHenry's ability to govern was intimately bound up with the Church, which formed the key to the administration of both England and Normandy, and this relationship changed considerably over the course of his reign. William the Conqueror had reformed the English Church with the support of his Archbishop of Canterbury, Lanfranc, who became a close colleague and advisor to the King. Under William Rufus this arrangement had collapsed, the King and Archbishop Anselm had become estranged and Anselm had gone into exile. Henry also believed in Church reform, but on taking power in England he became embroiled in the investiture controversy.\nThe argument concerned who should invest a new bishop with his staff and ring: traditionally, this had been carried out by the King in a symbolic demonstration of royal power, but Pope Urban II had condemned this practice in 1099, arguing that only the papacy could carry out this task, and declaring that the clergy should not give homage to their local temporal rulers. Anselm returned to England from exile in 1100 having heard Urban's pronouncement, and informed Henry that he would be complying with the Pope's wishes. Henry was in a difficult position. On one hand, the symbolism and homage was important to him; on the other hand, he needed Anselm's support in his struggle with his brother Robert.\nAnselm stuck firmly to the letter of the papal decree, despite Henry's attempts to persuade him to give way in return for a vague assurance of a future royal compromise. Matters escalated, with Anselm going back into exile and Henry confiscating the revenues of his estates. Anselm threatened excommunication, and in July 1105 the two men finally negotiated a solution. A distinction was drawn between the secular and ecclesiastical powers of the prelates, under which Henry gave up his right to invest his clergy, but retained the custom of requiring them to come and do homage for the temporalities, the landed properties they held in England. Despite this argument, the pair worked closely together, combining to deal with Duke Robert's invasion of 1101, for example, and holding major reforming councils in 1102 and 1108.\nA long-running dispute between the Archbishops of Canterbury and York flared up under Anselm's successor, Ralph d'Escures. Canterbury, traditionally the senior of the two establishments, had long argued that the Archbishop of York should formally promise to obey their Archbishop, but York argued that the two episcopates were independent within the English Church and that no such promise was necessary. Henry supported the primacy of Canterbury, to ensure that England remained under a single ecclesiastical administration, but the Pope preferred the case of York. The matter was complicated by Henry's personal friendship with Thurstan, the Archbishop of York, and the King's desire that the case should not end up in a papal court, beyond royal control. Henry needed the support of the Papacy in his struggle with Louis VI of France, however, and therefore allowed Thurstan to attend the Council of Rheims in 1119, where Thurstan was then consecrated by the Pope with no mention of any duty towards Canterbury. Henry believed that this went against assurances Thurstan had previously made and exiled him from England until the King and Archbishop came to a negotiated solution the following year.\nEven after the investiture dispute, Henry continued to play a major role in the selection of new English and Norman bishops and archbishops. He appointed many of his officials to bishoprics and, as historian Martin Brett suggests, \"some of his officers could look forward to a mitre with all but absolute confidence\". Henry's chancellors, and those of his queens, became bishops of Durham, Hereford, London, Lincoln, Winchester and Salisbury. Henry increasingly drew on a wider range of these bishops as advisors \u2013 particularly Roger of Salisbury \u2013 breaking with the earlier tradition of relying primarily on the Archbishop of Canterbury. The result was a cohesive body of administrators through which Henry could exercise careful influence, holding general councils to discuss key matters of policy. This stability shifted slightly after 1125, when he began to inject a wider range of candidates into the senior positions of the Church, often with more reformist views, and the impact of this generation would be felt in the years after Henry's death.\nPersonal beliefs and piety.\nLike other rulers of the period, Henry donated to the Church and patronised several religious communities, but contemporary chroniclers did not consider him an unusually pious king. His personal beliefs and piety may have developed during the course of his life; Henry had always taken an interest in religion, but in his later years he may have become much more concerned about spiritual affairs. If so, the major shifts in his thinking would appear to have occurred after 1120, when his son William Adelin died, and 1129, when his daughter Matilda's marriage to Geoffrey of Anjou teetered on the verge of collapse.\nAs a proponent of religious reform, Henry gave extensively to reformist groups within the Church. He was a keen supporter of the Cluniac order, probably for intellectual reasons. He donated money to the abbey at Cluny itself, and after 1120 gave generously to Reading Abbey, a Cluniac establishment. Construction on Reading began in 1121, and Henry endowed it with rich lands and extensive privileges, making it a symbol of his dynastic lines. He also focused effort on promoting the conversion of communities of clerks into Augustinian canons, the foundation of leper hospitals, expanding the provision of nunneries, and the charismatic orders of the Savigniacs and Tironensians. He was an avid collector of relics, sending an embassy to Constantinople in 1118 to collect Byzantine items, some of which were donated to Reading Abbey.\nLater reign, 1107\u20131135.\nContinental and Welsh politics, 1108\u20131114.\nNormandy faced an increased threat from France, Anjou and Flanders after 1108. Louis VI succeeded to the French throne in 1108 and began to reassert central royal power. Louis demanded Henry give homage to him and that two disputed castles along the Normandy border be placed into the control of neutral castellans. Henry refused, and Louis responded by mobilising an army. After some arguments, the two kings negotiated a truce and retreated without fighting, leaving the underlying issues unresolved. Fulk V assumed power in Anjou in 1109 and began to rebuild Angevin authority. He inherited the county of Maine, but refused to recognise Henry as his feudal lord and instead allied himself with Louis. Robert II of Flanders also briefly joined the alliance, before his death in 1111.\nIn 1108, Henry betrothed his six-year-old daughter Matilda to Henry V of Germany. For the English king, this was a prestigious match; for Henry V, it was an opportunity to restore his financial situation and fund an expedition to Italy, as he received a dowry of \u00a36,666 from England and Normandy. Raising this money proved challenging, and required the implementation of a special \"aid\", or tax, in England. Matilda was crowned German queen in 1110.\nHenry responded to the French and Angevin threat by expanding his own network of supporters beyond the Norman borders. Some Norman barons deemed unreliable were arrested or dispossessed, and Henry used their forfeited estates to bribe his potential allies in the neighbouring territories, in particular Maine. Around 1110, Henry attempted to arrest the young William Clito, but William's mentors moved him to the safety of Flanders before he could be taken. At about this time, Henry probably began to style himself as the duke of Normandy. Robert of Bell\u00eame turned against Henry once again, and when he appeared at Henry's court in 1112 in a new role as a French ambassador, he was arrested and imprisoned.\nRebellions broke out in France and Anjou between 1111 and 1113, and Henry crossed into Normandy to support his nephew Theobald IV, Count of Blois, who had sided against Louis in the uprising. In a bid to isolate Louis diplomatically, Henry created alliances with Anjou and Brittany by betrothing his young son, William Adelin, to Fulk of Anjou's daughter Matilda and marrying his illegitimate daughter Matilda to Conan III, Duke of Brittany. Louis backed down and in March 1113 met with Henry near Gisors to agree a peace settlement, giving Henry the disputed fortresses and confirming Henry's overlordship of Maine, Bell\u00eame and Brittany.\nMeanwhile, the situation in Wales was deteriorating. Henry had conducted a campaign in South Wales in 1108, pushing out royal power in the region and colonising the area around Pembroke with Flemings. By 1114, some of the resident Norman lords were under attack, while in Mid-Wales, Owain ap Cadwgan blinded one of the political hostages he was holding, and in North Wales Gruffudd ap Cynan threatened the power of the Earl of Chester. Henry sent three armies into Wales that year, with Gilbert Fitz Richard leading a force from the south, Alexander I of Scotland pressing from the north and Henry himself advancing into Mid-Wales. Owain and Gruffudd sued for peace, and Henry accepted a political compromise. He reinforced the Welsh Marches with his own appointees, strengthening the border territories.\nRebellion, 1115\u20131120.\nConcerned about the succession, Henry sought to persuade Louis VI to accept his son, William Adelin, as the legitimate future Duke of Normandy, in exchange for his son's homage. Henry crossed into Normandy in 1115 and assembled the Norman barons to swear loyalty; he also almost successfully negotiated a settlement with Louis, affirming William's right to the Duchy in exchange for a large sum of money. Louis, backed by his ally Baldwin VII of Flanders, instead declared that he considered William Clito the legitimate heir to the Duchy.\nWar broke out after Henry returned to Normandy with an army to support Theobald of Blois, who was under attack from Louis. Henry and Louis raided each other's towns along the border, and a wider conflict then broke out, probably in 1116. Henry was pushed onto the defensive as French, Flemish and Angevin forces began to pillage the Normandy countryside. Amaury III of Montfort and many other barons rose up against Henry, and there was an assassination plot from within his own household. Queen Matilda died in early 1118, but the situation in Normandy was sufficiently pressing that Henry was unable to return to England for her funeral.\nHenry responded by mounting campaigns against the rebel barons and deepening his alliance with Theobald. Baldwin of Flanders was wounded in battle and died in September 1118, easing the pressure on Normandy from the north-east. Henry attempted to crush a revolt in the city of Alen\u00e7on, but was defeated by Fulk and the Angevin army. Forced to retreat from Alen\u00e7on, Henry's position deteriorated alarmingly, as his resources became overstretched and more barons abandoned his cause. Early in 1119, Henry's daughter Juliane and son-in-law Eustace of Breteuil threatened to join the baronial revolt. Hostages were exchanged in a bid to avoid conflict, but relations broke down and both sides mutilated their captives. Henry attacked and took the town of Breteuil, Eure, despite Juliane's attempt to kill her father with a crossbow. In the aftermath, Henry dispossessed the couple of almost all of their lands in Normandy.\nHenry's situation improved in May 1119 when he enticed Fulk to switch sides by finally agreeing to marry William Adelin to Fulk's daughter Matilda and paying Fulk a large sum of money. Fulk left for the Levant, leaving the County of Maine in Henry's care, and the King was free to focus on crushing his remaining enemies. During the summer Henry advanced into the Norman Vexin, where he encountered Louis's army, resulting in the Battle of Br\u00e9mule. Henry appears to have deployed scouts and then organised his troops into several carefully formed lines of dismounted knights. Unlike Henry's forces, the French knights remained mounted; they hastily charged the Anglo-Norman positions, breaking through the first rank of the defences but then becoming entangled in Henry's second line of knights. Surrounded, the French army began to collapse. In the melee, Henry was hit by a sword blow, but his armour protected him. Louis and William Clito escaped from the battle, leaving Henry to return to Rouen in triumph.\nThe war slowly petered out after this battle, and Louis took the dispute over Normandy to Pope Callixtus II's council in Reims that October. Henry faced French complaints concerning his acquisition and subsequent management of Normandy, and despite being defended by Geoffrey, the Archbishop of Rouen, Henry's case was shouted down by the pro-French elements of the council. Callixtus declined to support Louis, and merely advised the two rulers to seek peace. Amaury de Montfort came to terms with Henry, but Henry and William Clito failed to find a mutually satisfactory compromise. In June 1120, Henry and Louis formally made peace on terms advantageous to the English king: William Adelin gave homage to Louis, and in return Louis confirmed William's rights to the Duchy.\nSuccession crisis, 1120\u20131124.\nHenry's succession plans were thrown into chaos by the sinking of the \"White Ship\" off the French coast on 25 November 1120. Henry had left the port of Barfleur for England in the early evening, leaving William Adelin and many of the younger members of the court to follow on that night in a separate vessel, the \"White Ship\". Both the crew and passengers were drunk and, just outside the harbour, the ship hit a submerged rock. The ship sank, killing as many as 300 people, with only one survivor, a butcher from Rouen. Henry's court was initially too scared to report William's death to the King. When he was finally told, he collapsed with grief.\nThe disaster left Henry with no legitimate son, his nephews now the closest possible male heirs. Henry announced he would take a new wife, Adeliza of Louvain, opening up the prospect of a new royal son, and the two were married at Windsor Castle in January 1121. Henry appears to have chosen her because she was attractive and came from a prestigious noble line. Adeliza seems to have been fond of Henry and joined him in his travels, probably to maximise the chances of her conceiving a child. The \"White Ship\" disaster initiated fresh conflict in Wales, where the drowning of Richard, Earl of Chester, encouraged a rebellion led by Maredudd ap Bleddyn. Henry intervened in North Wales that summer with an army and, although he was hit by a Welsh arrow, the campaign reaffirmed royal power across the region.\nHenry's alliance with Anjou \u2013 which had been based on his son William marrying Fulk's daughter Matilda \u2013 began to disintegrate. Fulk returned from the Levant and demanded that Henry return Matilda and her dowry, a range of estates and fortifications in Maine. Matilda left for Anjou, but Henry argued that the dowry had in fact originally belonged to him before it came into the possession of Fulk, and so declined to hand the estates back to Anjou. Fulk married his daughter Sibylla to William Clito, and granted them Maine. Once again, conflict broke out, as Amaury de Montfort allied himself with Fulk and led a revolt along the Norman-Anjou border in 1123. Amaury was joined by several other Norman barons, headed by Waleran de Beaumont, one of the sons of Henry's old ally, Robert of Meulan.\nHenry dispatched his illegitimate son Robert of Gloucester and Ranulf le Meschin to Normandy and then intervened himself in late 1123. He began the process of besieging the rebel castles, before wintering in the Duchy. In the spring of 1124, campaigning began again. In the Battle of Bourgth\u00e9roulde, fought near Rouen, Borleng, castellan of Bernay, Eure, led the King's army and received intelligence that the rebels were departing from the rebel base in Beaumont-le-Roger allowing him to ambush them as they traversed through the Brotonne forest. Waleran charged the royal forces, but his knights were cut down by Odo's archers and the rebels were quickly overwhelmed. Waleran was captured, but Amaury escaped. Henry mopped up the remainder of the rebellion, blinding some of the rebel leaders\u00a0\u2013 considered, at the time, a more merciful punishment than execution\u00a0\u2013 and recovering the last rebel castles. He paid Pope Callixtus a large amount of money, in exchange for the Papacy annulling the marriage of William Clito and Sibylla on the grounds of consanguinity.\nPlanning the succession, 1125\u20131134.\nHenry and Adeliza did not conceive any children, generating prurient speculation as to the possible explanation, and the future of the dynasty appeared at risk. Henry may have begun to look among his nephews for a possible heir. He may have considered Stephen of Blois as a possible option and, perhaps in preparation for this, he arranged a beneficial marriage for Stephen to the wealthy heiress Matilda of Boulogne. Theobald of Blois, his close ally, may have also felt that he was in favour with Henry. William Clito, who was Louis VI's preferred choice, remained opposed to Henry and was therefore unsuitable. Henry may have also considered his own illegitimate son, Robert of Gloucester, as a possible candidate, but English tradition and custom would have looked unfavourably on this.\nHenry's plans shifted when his son-in-law, Holy Roman Emperor Henry V, died in 1125. The King recalled his widowed daughter, Empress Matilda, to England the next year and declared that, should he die without a male heir, she was to be his rightful successor. The Anglo-Norman barons were gathered together at Westminster at Christmas 1126, where they swore to recognise Matilda and any future legitimate heir she might have. Putting forward a woman as a potential heir in this way was unusual: opposition to Matilda continued to exist within the English court, and Louis was vehemently opposed to her candidacy.\nFresh conflict broke out in 1127, when the childless Charles I, Count of Flanders, was murdered, creating a local succession crisis. With Louis's support, the Flemings chose William Clito to become their new ruler. This development potentially threatened Normandy, and Henry began to finance a proxy war in Flanders, promoting the claims of William's Flemish rivals. In an effort to disrupt the French alliance with William, Henry mounted an attack into France in 1128, forcing Louis to cut his aid to William. William died unexpectedly in July, removing the last major challenger to Henry's rule and bringing the war in Flanders to a halt. Without William, the baronial opposition in Normandy lacked a leader. A fresh peace was made with France, and Henry was finally able to release the remaining prisoners from the revolt of 1123, including Waleran of Meulan, who was rehabilitated into the royal court.\nMeanwhile, Henry rebuilt his alliance with Fulk of Anjou, this time by marrying Matilda to Fulk's eldest son, Geoffrey. The pair were betrothed in 1127 and married the following year. It is unknown whether Henry intended Geoffrey to have any future claim on England or Normandy, and he was probably keeping his son-in-law's status deliberately uncertain. Similarly, although Matilda was granted several castles in Normandy as part of her dowry, it was not specified when the couple would actually take possession of them. Fulk left Anjou for Jerusalem in 1129, declaring Geoffrey the Count of Anjou and Maine. The marriage proved difficult, as the couple did not particularly like each other and the disputed castles proved a point of contention, resulting in Matilda returning to Normandy later that year. Henry appears to have blamed Geoffrey for the separation, but in 1131 the couple were reconciled. Much to the pleasure and relief of Henry, Matilda then gave birth to two sons, Henry and Geoffrey, in 1133 and 1134.\nDeath and legacy.\nDeath.\nRelations among Henry, Matilda, and Geoffrey became increasingly strained during the King's final years. Matilda and Geoffrey suspected that they lacked genuine support in England. In 1135 they urged Henry to hand over the royal castles in Normandy to Matilda while he was still alive, and insisted that the Norman nobility swear immediate allegiance to her, thereby giving the couple a more powerful position after Henry's death. Henry angrily declined to do so, probably out of concern that Geoffrey would try to seize power in Normandy. A fresh rebellion broke out among the barons in southern Normandy, led by William III, Count of Ponthieu, whereupon Geoffrey and Matilda intervened in support of the rebels.\nHenry campaigned throughout the autumn, strengthening the southern frontier, and then travelled to Lyons-la-For\u00eat in November to enjoy some hunting, still apparently healthy. There he fell ill \u2013 according to the chronicler Henry of Huntingdon, he ate too many (\"a surfeit of\") lampreys against his physician's advice \u2013 and his condition worsened over the course of a week. Once the condition appeared terminal, Henry gave confession and summoned Archbishop Hugh of Amiens, who was joined by Robert of Gloucester and other members of the court. In accordance with custom, preparations were made to settle Henry's outstanding debts and to revoke outstanding sentences of forfeiture. The King died on 1 December 1135, and his corpse was taken to Rouen accompanied by the barons, where it was embalmed; his entrails were buried locally at the priory of Notre-Dame du Pr\u00e9, and the preserved body was taken on to England, where it was interred at Reading Abbey.\nDespite Henry's efforts, the succession was disputed. When news began to spread of the King's death, Geoffrey and Matilda were in Anjou supporting the rebels in their campaign against the royal army, which included a number of Matilda's supporters such as Robert of Gloucester. Many of these barons had taken an oath to stay in Normandy until the late king was properly buried, which prevented them from returning to England. The Norman nobility discussed declaring Theobald of Blois king. Theobald's younger brother Stephen quickly crossed from Boulogne to England, accompanied by his military household. Hugh Bigod dubiously testified that Henry, on his deathbed, had released the barons from their oath to Matilda, and with the help of his brother Henry of Blois, Stephen seized power in England and was crowned king on 22 December. Matilda did not give up her claim to England and Normandy, appealing at first to the Pope against the decision to allow the coronation of Stephen, and then invading England to start a prolonged civil war, known as the Anarchy, between 1135 and 1153.\nHistoriography.\nHistorians have drawn on a range of sources on Henry, including the accounts of chroniclers; other documentary evidence, including early pipe rolls; and surviving buildings and architecture. The three main chroniclers to describe the events of Henry's life were William of Malmesbury, Orderic Vitalis, and Henry of Huntingdon, but each incorporated extensive social and moral commentary into their accounts and borrowed a range of literary devices and stereotypical events from other popular works. Other chroniclers include Eadmer, Hugh the Chanter, Abbot Suger, and the authors of the Welsh \"Brut\". Not all royal documents from the period have survived, but there are several royal acts, charters, writs, and letters, along with some early financial records. Some of these have since been discovered to be forgeries, and others had been subsequently amended or tampered with.\nLate medieval historians seized on the accounts of selected chroniclers regarding Henry's education and gave him the title of Henry \"Beauclerc\", a theme echoed in the analysis of Victorian and Edwardian historians such as Francis Palgrave and Henry Davis. The historian Charles David dismissed this argument in 1929, showing the more extreme claims for Henry's education to be without foundation. Modern histories of Henry commenced with Richard Southern's work in the early 1960s, followed by extensive research during the rest of the 20th century into a wide variety of themes from his reign in England, and a much more limited number of studies of his rule in Normandy. Only two major, modern biographies of Henry have been produced, C. Warren Hollister's posthumous volume in 2001, and Judith Green's 2006 work.\nInterpretation of Henry's personality by historians has altered over time. Earlier historians such as Austin Poole and Richard Southern considered Henry a cruel, draconian ruler. More recent historians, such as Hollister and Green, view his implementation of justice much more sympathetically, particularly when set against the standards of the day, but even Green has noted that Henry was \"in many respects highly unpleasant\", and Alan Cooper has observed that many contemporary chroniclers were probably too scared of the King to voice much criticism. Historians have also debated the extent to which Henry's administrative reforms genuinely constituted an introduction of what Hollister and John Baldwin have termed systematic, \"administrative kingship\", or whether his outlook remained fundamentally traditional.\nHenry's burial at Reading Abbey is marked by a local cross and a plaque, but Reading Abbey was slowly demolished during the Dissolution of the Monasteries in the 16th century. The exact location is uncertain, but the most likely location of the tomb itself is now in a built-up area of central Reading, on the site of the former abbey choir. A plan to locate his remains was announced in March 2015, with support from English Heritage and Philippa Langley, who aided with the successful discovery and exhumation of Richard III.\nFamily and children.\nLegitimate.\nIn addition to Matilda and William, Henry possibly had a short-lived son, Richard, with his first wife, Matilda of Scotland. Henry and his second wife, Adeliza of Louvain, had no children.\nIllegitimate.\nHenry had a number of illegitimate children by various mistresses.\nFamily tree.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Norman English and early Plantagenet monarchs and their relationship with rulers of Western Europe\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14183", "revid": "31151657", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14183", "title": "Hentai", "text": "Anime and manga pornography\nHentai () is a style of Japanese pornographic anime and manga. In addition to anime and manga, hentai works exist in a variety of media, including artwork and video games (commonly known as \"eroge\").\nThe development of hentai has been influenced by Japanese cultural and historical attitudes toward sexuality. Hentai works, which are often self-published, form a significant portion of the market for \"doujin\" works, including \"doujinshi\". Numerous subgenres exist depicting a variety of sexual acts and relationships, as well as novel fetishes.\nTerminology.\nIn sexual contexts, \"hentai\" carries additional meanings of \"perversion\" or \"abnormality\", especially when used as an adjective; in these uses, it is the shortened form of the phrase which means \"sexual perversion\". The character is a catch-all for queerness as a peculiarity\u2014it does not carry an explicit sexual reference. While the term has expanded in use to cover a range of publications including homosexual publications, it remains primarily a heterosexual term, as terms indicating homosexuality entered Japan as foreign words. Japanese pornographic works are often simply tagged as , meaning \"prohibited to those not yet 18 years old\", and . Less official terms also in use include , , and the English initialism AV (for \"adult video\"). Usage of the term \"hentai\" does not define a genre in Japan.\n\"Hentai\" is defined differently in English. The \"Oxford Dictionary Online\" defines it as \"a subgenre of the Japanese genres of manga and anime, characterized by overtly sexualized characters and sexually explicit images and plots.\" The origin of the word in English is unknown, but AnimeNation's John Oppliger points to the early 1990s, when a \"Dirty Pair\" erotic \"doujinshi\" (self-published work) titled \"H-Bomb\" was released, and when many websites sold access to images culled from Japanese erotic visual novels and games. The earliest English use of the term traces back to the rec.arts.anime boards, with a 1990 post concerning Happosai of \"Ranma \u00bd\" and the first discussion of the meaning in 1991. A 1995 glossary on the rec.arts.anime boards contained reference to the Japanese usage and the evolving definition of hentai as \"pervert\" or \"perverted sex\". \"The Anime Movie Guide\", published in 1997, defines as the initial sound of hentai (i.e., the name of the letter \"H\", as pronounced in Japanese); it included that ecchi was \"milder than hentai\". A year later it was defined as a genre in \"Good Vibrations Guide to Sex\". At the beginning of 2000, \"hentai\" was listed as the 41st most-popular search term of the internet, while \"anime\" ranked 99th. The attribution has been applied retroactively to works such as \"Urotsukid\u014dji\", \"La Blue Girl\", and \"Cool Devices\". \"Urotsukid\u014dji\" had previously been described with terms such as \"Japornimation\", and \"erotic grotesque\", prior to being identified as hentai.\nEtymology.\n (\"hentai\"; shinjitai; ()) derives from (classical Chinese, also ky\u016bjitai), which is attested in classical Chinese texts. It functioned as a verbal phrase, from its two component morphemes, meaning \"to change\" and meaning \"state\" or \"condition,\" hence \"to change from one state to another.\" Literal one-to-one English translations for this would be \"transform\" and \"metamorph\", wherein \"trans-\" and \"meta-\" correspond to \u8b8a, while \"form\" and \"morph\" to \u614b. This meaning is attested in early Middle Japanese and later texts.\nIn Chinese, is primarily a verb meaning to \"change,\" and secondarily a noun meaning \"troublesome event,\" but in Japanese, it was extended to an adjectival noun meaning \"different,\" \"unusual\" or \"strange\" (compare other compounds such as as in , and as in ). This led to become a noun phrase meaning \"strange state,\" thus \"abnormality,\" instead of the original \"to change to another state,\" in modern Japanese and Chinese publications, particularly in psychology and physiology. A psychological application of this meaning is found in the phrase (\"hentai seiyoku\" lit.\u2009'abnormal sexual desire'), which has been cited as being shortened (by ellipsis) back to just .\nYet another meaning, metamorphosis, which resembles the original one, was first adopted by the Entomological Society of Japan and reintroduced into Chinese, Korean and Vietnamese. This meaning is used in the English translation of the light novel \"Perfect Blue: Complete Metamorphosis\", although it is not directly entomological, and it may also reference the semi-sexual portions of the work.\nIt is worth noting that is further shortened to \"H\" (\"etchi\"), the first letter of its romanization. Both \"hentai\" and \"etchi\" (or \"ecchi\" in English parlance) are used to refer to sexual perversion/deviance, or people therewith, as well as smut. A person accused of sexual perversion may be derogatorily called \"hentai\", while a sex scene in a film, TV show or erotic game is called (\"etchi sh\u012bn\" lit.\u2009'H-scene'). The distinction outside of Japanese contexts between \"hardcore\" \"hentai\" and \"softcore\" \"etchi\" is entirely artificial.\nThe history of the word \"hentai\" has its origins in science and psychology. By the middle of the Meiji era, the term appeared in publications to describe unusual or abnormal traits, including paranormal abilities and psychological disorders. A translation of German sexologist Richard von Krafft-Ebing's text originated the concept of \"hentai seiyoku\", as a \"perverse or abnormal sexual desire\", though it was popularized outside psychology, as in the case of Mori \u014cgai's 1909 novel \"Vita Sexualis\". Continued interest in \"hentai seiyoku\" resulted in numerous journals and publications on sexual advice which circulated in the public, served to establish the sexual connotation of \"hentai\" as perverse. Any perverse or abnormal act could be hentai, such as committing (love suicide). It was Nakamura Kokyo's journal \"Abnormal Psychology\" which started the popular sexology boom in Japan which would see the rise of other popular journals like \"Sexuality and Human Nature\", \"Sex Research\" and \"Sex\". Originally, Tanaka Kogai wrote articles for \"Abnormal Psychology\", but it would be Tanaka's own journal \"Modern Sexuality\" which would become one of the most popular sources of information about erotic and neurotic expression. \"Modern Sexuality\" was created to promote fetishism, S&amp;M, and necrophilia as a facet of modern life. The ero guro movement and depiction of perverse, abnormal and often erotic undertones were a response to interest in \"hentai seiyoku\".\nFollowing World War II, Japan took a new interest in sexualization and public sexuality. Mark McLelland puts forth the observation that the term \"hentai\" found itself shortened to \"H\" and that the English pronunciation was \"etchi\", referring to lewdness and which did not carry the stronger connotation of abnormality or perversion. By the 1950s, the \"hentai seiyoku\" publications became their own genre and included fetish and homosexual topics. By the 1960s, the homosexual content was dropped in favor of subjects like sadomasochism and stories of lesbianism targeted to male readers. The late 1960s brought a sexual revolution which expanded and solidified the normalizing of the term's identity in Japan that continues to exist today through publications such as \"Bessatsu Takarajima\"'s \"Hentai-san ga iku\" series.\nHistory.\nWith the usage of \"hentai\" as any erotic depiction, the history of these depictions is split into their media. Japanese artwork and comics serve as the first example of hentai material, coming to represent the iconic style after the publication of Azuma Hideo's \"Cybele\" in 1979. Hentai first appeared in animation in the 1932 film Suzumi-bune by Hakusan Kimura, which was seized by police when it was half complete. The remnants of the film were donated to the National Film Center in the early 21st century. The film has never been viewed by the public. However, the 1984 release of Wonderkid's \"Lolita Anime\" was the first hentai to get a general release, overlooking the erotic and sexual depictions in 1969's \"A Thousand and One Nights\" and the bare-breasted Cleopatra in 1970's \"Cleopatra\" film. Erotic games, another area of contention, has its first case of the art style depicting sexual acts in 1985's \"Tenshitachi no Gogo\". In each of these mediums, the broad definition and usage of the term complicates its historic examination.\nOrigin of erotic manga.\nDepictions of sex and abnormal sex can be traced back through the ages, predating the term \"hentai\". \"Shunga\", a Japanese term for erotic art, is thought to have existed in some form since the Heian period. From the 16th to the 19th centuries, \"shunga\" works were suppressed by the shogunate. A well-known example is \"The Dream of the Fisherman's Wife\" by Hokusai, which depicts a woman being stimulated by two octopuses. \"Shunga\" production fell with the introduction of pornographic photographs in the late 19th century.\nTo define erotic manga, a definition for manga is needed. While the \"Hokusai Manga\" uses the term \"manga\" in its title, it does not depict the storytelling aspect common to modern manga, as the images are unrelated. Due to the influence of pornographic photographs in the 19th and 20th centuries, the manga artwork was depicted by realistic characters. Osamu Tezuka helped define the modern look and form of manga, and was later proclaimed as the \"God of Manga\". His debut work \"New Treasure Island\" was released in 1947 as a comic book through Ikuei Publishing and sold over 400,000 copies, though it was the popularity of Tezuka's \"Astro Boy\", \"Metropolis\", and \"Jungle Emperor\" manga that came to define the media. This story-driven manga style is distinctly unique from comic strips like \"Sazae-san\", and story-driven works came to dominate and \"sh\u014dnen\" magazines.\nAdult themes in manga have existed since the 1940s, but some of these depictions were more realistic than the cartoon-cute characters popularized by Tezuka. In 1973, \"Manga Bestseller\" (later known as \"Manga Erotopia\"), which is considered to be the first hentai manga magazine published in Japan, was responsible for creating a new genre known as , where was taken, and the sexual and violent content was intensified. Other well-known \"\" magazines were \"Erogenica\" (1975), and \"Alice\" (1977). The circulation of magazines peaked in 1978, and it is believed that somewhere between eighty and one hundred different magazines were being published annually.\nThe 1980s saw the decline of in favor of the rising popularity of \"lolicon\" and magazines, which grew from \"otaku\" fan culture. It has been theorized that the decline of was due to the baby boomer readership beginning to start their own families, as well as migrating to \"seinen\" magazines such as \"Weekly Young Magazine\", and when it came to sexual material, the readership was stolen by gravure and pornographic magazines. The distinct shift in the style of Japanese pornographic comics from realistic to cartoon-cute characters is accredited to Hideo Azuma, \"The Father of \"Lolicon\"\". In 1979, he penned \"Cybele\", which offered the first depictions of sexual acts between cute, unrealistic Tezuka-style characters. This started a pornographic manga movement. The \"lolicon\" boom of the 1980s saw the rise of magazines such as the anthologies \"Lemon People\" and \"Petit Apple Pie\". As the \"lolicon\" boom waned in the mid-1980s, the dominant form of representation for female characters became \"baby faced and big chested\" women. The shift in popularity from \"lolicon\" to has been credited to Naoki Yamamoto (who wrote under the pen name of T\u014d Moriyama). Moriyama's manga had a style that had not been seen before at the time, and was different from the and \"lolicon\" styles, and used designs as a base to build upon. Moriyama's books sold well upon publication, creating even more fans for the genre. These new artists then wrote for magazines such as \"Monthly Penguin Club Magazine\" (1986) and \"Manga Hot Milk\" (1986) which became popular with their readership, drawing in new fans.\nThe publication of erotic materials in the United States can be traced back to at least 1990, when IANVS Publications printed its first \"Anime Shower Special\". In March 1994, Antarctic Press released \"Bondage Fairies\", an English translation of \"Insect Hunter\", an \"insect rape\" manga which became popular in the American market, while it apparently had a poor showing in Japan. During this time, the one American publisher translating and publishing hentai was Fantagraphics on their adult comic imprint, Eros Comix, which was established around 1990.\nOrigin of erotic anime.\n\"Hentai\" is typically defined as consisting of excessive nudity, and graphic sexual intercourse whether or not it is perverse. The term \"ecchi\" is typically related to fanservice, with no sexual intercourse being depicted.\nThe earliest pornographic anime was \"Suzumi-bune\", created in 1932 by Hakusan Kimura. It was the first part of a two-reeler film, which was half complete before it was seized by the police. The remnants of the film were donated to the National Film Center in the early 21st century by the Tokyo police, who were removing all silver nitrate film in their possession, as it is extremely flammable. The film has never been viewed by the public.\nTwo early works escape being defined as hentai, but contain erotic themes. This is likely due to the obscurity and unfamiliarity of the works, arriving in the United States and fading from public focus a full 20 years before importation and surging interests coined the Americanized term \"hentai\". The first is the 1969 film \"A Thousand and One Nights\", which faithfully includes erotic elements of the original story. In 1970, \"\", was the first animated film to carry an X rating, but it was mislabeled as erotica in the United States.\nThe \"Lolita Anime\" series is typically identified as the first erotic anime and original video animation (OVA); it was released in 1984 by Wonder Kids. Containing six episodes, the series focused on underage sex and rape, and included one episode containing BDSM bondage. Several sub-series were released in response, including a second \"Lolita Anime\" series released by Nikkatsu. It has not been officially licensed or distributed outside of its original release.\nThe \"Cream Lemon\" franchise of works ran from 1984 to 2005, with a number of them entering the American market in various forms. \"The Brothers Grime\" series released by Excalibur Films contained \"Cream Lemon\" works as early as 1986. However, they were not billed as anime and were introduced during the same time that the first underground distribution of erotic works began.\nThe American release of licensed erotic anime was first attempted in 1991 by Central Park Media, with \"I Give My All\", but it never occurred. In December 1992, \"Devil Hunter Yohko\" was the first risque (\"ecchi\") title that was released by A.D. Vision. While it contains no sexual intercourse, it pushes the limits of the \"ecchi\" category with sexual dialogue, nudity and one scene in which the heroine is about to be raped.\nIt was Central Park Media's 1993 release of \"Urotsukid\u014dji\" which brought the first hentai film to American viewers. Often cited for inventing the tentacle rape subgenre, it contains extreme depictions of violence and monster sex. As such, it is acknowledged for being the first to depict tentacle sex on screen. When the film premiered in the United States, it was described as being \"drenched in graphic scenes of perverse sex and ultra-violence\".\nFollowing this release, a wealth of pornographic content began to arrive in the United States, with companies such as A.D. Vision, Central Park Media and Media Blasters releasing licensed titles under various labels. A.D. Vision's label SoftCel Pictures released 19 titles in 1995 alone. Another label, Critical Mass, was created in 1996 to release an unedited edition of \"Violence Jack\". When A.D. Vision's hentai label SoftCel Pictures shut down in 2005, most of its titles were acquired by Critical Mass. Following the bankruptcy of Central Park Media in 2009, the licenses for all Anime 18-related products and movies were transferred to Critical Mass.\nOrigin of erotic games.\nThe term \"eroge\" (erotic game) literally defines any erotic game, but has become synonymous with video games depicting the artistic styles of anime and manga. The origins of \"eroge\" began in the early 1980s, while the computer industry in Japan was struggling to define a computer standard with makers like NEC, Sharp, and Fujitsu competing against one another. The PC98 series, despite lacking in processing power, CD drives and limited graphics, came to dominate the market, with the popularity of \"eroge\" games contributing to its success.\nBecause of vague definitions of what constitutes an \"erotic game\", there are several possible candidates for the first \"eroge\". If the definition applies to adult themes, the first game was \"Softporn Adventure\". Released in America in 1981 for the Apple II, this was a text-based comedic game from On-Line Systems. If \"eroge\" is defined as the first graphical depictions of Japanese adult themes, it would be Koei's 1982 release of \"Night Life\". Sexual intercourse is depicted through simple graphic outlines. Notably, \"Night Life\" was not intended to be erotic so much as an instructional guide \"to support married life\". A series of \"undressing\" games appeared as early as 1983, such as \"Strip Mahjong\". The first anime-styled erotic game was , released in 1985 by JAST. In 1988, ASCII released the first erotic role-playing game, \"Chaos Angel\". In 1989, AliceSoft released the turn-based role-playing game \"Rance\" and ELF released \"Dragon Knight\".\nIn the late 1980s, \"eroge\" began to stagnate under high prices and the majority of games containing uninteresting plots and mindless sex. ELF's 1992 release of came as customer frustration with \"eroge\" was mounting and spawned a new genre of games called dating sims. was unique because it had no defined plot and required the player to build a relationship with different girls in order to advance the story. Each girl had her own story, but the prospect of consummating a relationship required the girl growing to love the player; there was no easy sex.\nThe term \"visual novel\" is vague, with Japanese and English definitions classifying the genre as a type of interactive fiction game driven by narration and limited player interaction. While the term is often retroactively applied to many games, it was Leaf that coined the term with their \"Leaf Visual Novel Series\" (LVNS) and the 1996 release of and . The success of these two dark \"eroge\" games would be followed by the third and final installment of the LVNS, the 1997 romantic \"eroge\" \"To Heart\". \"Eroge\" visual novels took a new emotional turn with Tactics' 1998 release . Key's 1999 release of \"Kanon\" proved to be a major success and would go on to have numerous console ports, two manga series and two anime series.\nCensorship.\nJapanese laws have impacted depictions of works since the Meiji Restoration, but these predate the common definition of hentai material. Since becoming law in 1907, Article 175 of the Criminal Code of Japan forbids the publication of obscene materials. Specifically, depictions of male\u2013female sexual intercourse and pubic hair are considered obscene, but bare genitalia is not. As censorship is required for published works, the most common representations are the blurring dots on pornographic videos and \"bars\" or \"lights\" on still images. In 1986, Toshio Maeda sought to get past censorship on depictions of sexual intercourse, by creating tentacle sex. This led to the large number of works containing sexual intercourse with monsters, demons, robots, and aliens, whose genitals look different from men's. While Western views attribute hentai to any explicit work, it was the products of this censorship which became not only the first titles legally imported to America and Europe, but the first successful ones. While uncut for American release, the United Kingdom's release of \"Urotsukid\u014dji\" removed many scenes of the violence and tentacle rape scenes. Another technique used to evade regulation was the \"sexual intercourse cross-section view\", an imaginary view of intercourse resembling an anatomic drawing or an MRI, which would eventually evolve as a prevalent expression in hentai for its erotic appeal. This expression is known in the Western world as the \"x-ray view\".\nIt was also because of this law that the artists began to depict the characters with a minimum of anatomical details and without pubic hair, by law, prior to 1991. Part of the ban was lifted when Nagisa Oshima prevailed over the obscenity charges at his trial for his film \"In the Realm of the Senses\". Though not enforced, the lifting of this ban did not apply to anime and manga as they were not deemed artistic exceptions.\nAlterations of material or censorship and banning of works are common. The US release of \"La Blue Girl\" altered the age of the heroine from 16 to 18, removed sex scenes with a dwarf ninja named Nin-nin, and removed the Japanese blurring dots. \"La Blue Girl\" was outright rejected by UK censors who refused to classify it and prohibited its distribution. In 2011, members of the Liberal Democratic Party of Japan sought a ban on the subgenre \"lolicon\" but were unsuccessful. The last law proposed against it was introduced on 27 May 2013 by the Liberal Democratic Party, the New Komei Party and the Japan Restoration Party that would have made possession of sexual images of individuals under 18 illegal with a fine of 1\u00a0million yen (about US$10,437) and less than a year in jail. The Japanese Democratic Party, along with several industry associations involved in anime and manga protested against the bill saying \"while they appreciate that the bill protects children, it will also restrict freedom of expression\". The law was ultimately passed in June 2014 after the regulation of \"lolicon\" anime and manga was removed from the bill. This new law went into full effect in 2015 banning real life child pornography.\nSocietal effects of hentai.\nThere is existing research on the social implications of pornography, in general, as it pertains to the sexualized and objectified image of women. In regards to how hentai particularly contributes to the conversation of the image of women, recent research identifies evidence in which hentai promotes rape myth acceptance, sexual violence, and racialization of women.\nRape myths.\nRecent studies have illustrated a correlation between the consumption of hentai and the promotion of rape myths. In particular, studies have shown how viewing hentai can lead to an increase in prejudiced and stereotypical perspectives on rape and sexual assault. Increased consumption can also lead to an increase in the normalization of sexual violence, rape, victim blaming, and further stereotypes associated with sexual violence and sexually aggressive behaviors. The origin and culture of hentai as \"abnormal\" pornography, as highlighted through research studies, is also described to perpetuate a desensitized view of sexual violence and rape play. The distinction between rape myth acceptance and sexually violent or aggressive behaviors has also been outlined in various research studies. Recent studies highlight how a rise in the acceptance of rape myths is causally linked to rape proclivity and sexually violent behaviors.\nRacial fetishization of Asian women in hentai.\nHistory.\nThe racial fetishization of Asian women can be traced back to Western colonialism and imperialism where Asian women were portrayed as \"exotic\" or submissive and such traits were in turn romanticized.\nClassic media such as \"Madame Butterfly\" and \"Miss Saigon\" also portray Asian women having intimate relations with white men, ultimately to their demise. Critics say this perpetuates the notion that value of Asian women is tied to their white lovers.\nA popular trope in hentai places the woman in a more submissive role, playing into the \"lotus blossom\" stereotype where Asian women are thought to be more docile. The increasing Western audience of hentai exacerbates this portrayal of Asian women.\nPortrayals of Japanese women.\nSince hentai is a broad genre of erotic media the portrayal of women varies greatly, however, almost always is the girl slim and with large breasts. A paper by Hinako Ishikawa on the racialization of Japanese women in hentai concluded that this portrayal directly plays into the sexual objectification and stereotyping of Japanese women.\nRacial fetishization of Japanese women.\nAlthough the race of the female protagonists in hentai is not always clear, the film will often highlight the character's \"Japanese-ness\". This is done either through her clothes (wearing traditional dress like kimonos), the setting of the film, or her mannerisms (eating with chopsticks) that imply the character's race.\nAccording to Ishikawa, this portrayal of Japanese women plays into the increasingly popularized Asian fetish in the Western world, specifically citing 2022's Pornhub statistics world wide trendy terms put \"hentai\" and \"Japanese\" as top two most searched words.\nDemographics.\nAccording to data from Pornhub in 2017, the most prolific consumers of hentai are men. However, Patrick W. Galbraith and Jessica Bauwens-Sugimoto note that hentai manga attracts \"a diverse readership, which of course includes women.\" Kathryn Hemmann also writes that \"self-identified female otaku [...] readily admit to enjoying [hentai] \"d\u014djinshi\" catering to a male erotic gaze\". When it comes to mediums of hentai, \"eroge\" games in particular combine three favored media\u2014cartoons, pornography and gaming\u2014into an experience. The hentai genre engages a wide audience that expands yearly, and desires better quality and storylines, or works which push the creative envelope. Nobuhiro Komiya, a manga censor, states that the unusual and extreme depictions in hentai are not about perversion so much as they are an example of the profit-oriented industry. Anime depicting normal sexual situations enjoy less market success than those that break social norms, such as sex at schools or bondage.\nAccording to clinical psychologist Megha Hazuria Gorem, \"Because toons are a kind of final fantasy, you can make the person look the way you want him or her to look. Every fetish can be fulfilled.\" Sexologist Narayan Reddy noted of \"eroge\", \"Animators make new games because there is a demand for them, and because they depict things that the gamers do not have the courage to do in real life, or that might just be illegal, these games are an outlet for suppressed desire.\"\nClassification.\nThe hentai genre can be divided into numerous subgenres, the broadest of which encompasses heterosexual and homosexual acts. Hentai that features mainly heterosexual interactions occur in both male-targeted (\"ero\" or \"dansei-muke\") and female-targeted (\"ladies' comics\") form. Those that feature mainly homosexual interactions are known as \"yaoi\" or \"Boys' Love\" (male\u2013male) and \"yuri\" or \"Girls' Love\" (female\u2013female). Both \"yaoi\" and, to a lesser extent, \"yuri\", are generally aimed at members of the opposite sex from the persons depicted. While \"yaoi\" and \"yuri\" are not always explicit, their pornographic history and association remain. \"Yaoi\"'s pornographic usage has remained strong in textual form through fanfiction. The definition of \"yuri\" has begun to be replaced by the broader definitions of \"lesbian-themed animation or comics\".\nHentai is perceived as \"dwelling\" on sexual fetishes. These include dozens of fetish and paraphilia related subgenres, which can be further classified with additional terms, such as heterosexual or homosexual types.\nMany works are focused on depicting the mundane and the impossible across every conceivable act and situation, no matter how fantastical. One subgenre of hentai is \"futanari\" (hermaphroditism), which features a woman with a penis or penis-like appendage in addition to a vulva. Futanari characters are often depicted as having sex with other women, but many other works feature sex with men or, as in \"Anal Justice\", with both genders. Futanari can be dominant, submissive, or switch between the two roles in a single work.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14186", "revid": "48961050", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14186", "title": "Henry VII of England", "text": "King of England from 1485 to 1509\nHenry VII (28 January 1457 \u2013 21 April 1509), also known as Henry Tudor, was King of England and Lord of Ireland from his seizure of the crown on 22 August 1485 until his death in 1509. He was the first monarch of the House of Tudor.\nHenry was the son of Edmund Tudor, 1st Earl of Richmond, and Lady Margaret Beaufort. His mother was a great-granddaughter of John of Gaunt, an English prince who founded the Lancastrian cadet branch of the House of Plantagenet. Henry's father was the half-brother of the Lancastrian king Henry VI. Edmund Tudor died three months before his son was born, and Henry was raised by his uncle Jasper Tudor, a Lancastrian, and William Herbert, a supporter of the Yorkist branch of the House of Plantagenet. During Henry's early years, his uncles and the Lancastrians fought a series of civil wars against the Yorkist claimant, Edward IV. After Edward retook the throne in 1471, Henry spent 14 years in exile in Brittany. He attained the throne when his forces, supported by France and Scotland, defeated Richard III at the Battle of Bosworth Field. He was the last king of England to win his throne on the field of battle, defending it two years later at the Battle of Stoke Field to decisively end the Wars of the Roses (1455\u20131487). He strengthened his claim by marrying Elizabeth of York, Edward IV's daughter.\nHenry restored power and stability to the English monarchy following the civil war. He is credited with many administrative, economic and diplomatic initiatives. His supportive policy toward England's wool industry and his standoff with the Low Countries had long-lasting benefits to the English economy. He paid very close attention to detail, and instead of spending lavishly, he concentrated on raising new revenues. He stabilised the government's finances by introducing several new taxes. After his death, a commission found widespread abuses in the tax collection process. Henry reigned for nearly 24 years and was peacefully succeeded by his son, Henry VIII.\nAncestry and early life.\nHenry VII was born on 28 January 1457 at Pembroke Castle, in the English-speaking portion of Pembrokeshire known as Little England beyond Wales. He was the only child of Lady Margaret Beaufort, who was 13 years old at the time, and Edmund Tudor, 1st Earl of Richmond, who, at 26, died three months before his birth. He was probably baptised at St Mary's Church, Pembroke, though no documentation of the event exists. Henry's paternal grandfather, Owen Tudor, originally from the Tudors of Penmynydd, Isle of Anglesey in Wales, had been a page in the court of King Henry V. He rose to become one of the \"Squires to the Body to the King\" after military service at the Battle of Agincourt. Owen is said to have secretly married the widow of Henry V, Catherine of Valois. One of their sons was Edmund, Henry's father. Edmund was created Earl of Richmond in 1452 and \"formally declared legitimate by Parliament\".\nThe descent of Henry's mother, Margaret, through the legitimised House of Beaufort bolstered Henry's claim to the English throne. She was a great-granddaughter of John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster (fourth son of Edward III), and his third wife Katherine Swynford. Swynford was Gaunt's mistress for about 25 years. When they married in 1396, they already had four children, including Henry's great-grandfather John Beaufort. Gaunt's nephew Richard II legitimised Gaunt's children by Swynford by letters patent in 1397. In 1407, Henry IV, Gaunt's son by his first wife, issued new letters patent confirming the legitimacy of his half-siblings but also declaring them ineligible for the throne. Henry IV's action was of doubtful legality, as the Beauforts were previously legitimised by an act of Parliament, but it weakened Henry's claim. Nonetheless, by 1483 Henry was the senior male claimant heir to the House of Lancaster remaining after the deaths in battle, by murder or execution of Henry VI (son of Henry V and Catherine of Valois), his son Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales, and the other Beaufort line of descent through Lady Margaret's uncle, Edmund Beaufort, 2nd Duke of Somerset.\nHenry also made some political capital out of his Welsh ancestry in attracting military support and safeguarding his army's passage through Wales on its way to the Battle of Bosworth. He came from an old, established Anglesey family that claimed descent from Cadwaladr, in legend, the last ancient British king.\nOn occasion, Henry displayed the red dragon. He took it, as well as the standard of St. George, on his procession through London after the victory at Bosworth. A contemporary writer and Henry's biographer, Bernard Andr\u00e9, also made much of Henry's Welsh descent.\nIn 1456, Henry's father, Edmund Tudor, was captured while fighting for Henry VI in South Wales against the Yorkists. He died shortly afterwards in Carmarthen Castle. His younger brother, Jasper Tudor, the Earl of Pembroke, undertook to protect Edmund's widow Margaret. When Edward IV became King in 1461, Jasper Tudor went into exile abroad. Pembroke Castle, and later the Earldom of Pembroke, were granted to the Yorkist William Herbert, who also assumed the guardianship of Margaret Beaufort and the young Henry.\nHenry lived in the Herbert household until 1469, when Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick (the \"Kingmaker\"), went over to the Lancastrians. Herbert was captured fighting for the Yorkists and executed by Warwick. When Warwick restored Henry VI in 1470, Jasper Tudor returned from exile and brought Henry to court. When the Yorkist Edward IV regained the throne in 1471, Henry fled with other Lancastrians to Brittany. He spent most of the next 14 years under the protection of Francis II, Duke of Brittany. In November 1476, Francis fell ill and his principal advisers were more amenable to negotiating with King Edward. Henry was thus handed over to English envoys and escorted to the Breton port of Saint-Malo. While there, he feigned stomach cramps and delayed his departure long enough to miss the tides. An ally of Henry's, Viscount Jean du Qu\u00e9lennec, soon arrived, bringing news that Francis had recovered, and in the confusion, Henry was able to flee to a monastery. There, he claimed sanctuary until the envoys were forced to depart.\nRise to the throne.\nBy 1483, Henry's mother was actively promoting him as an alternative to Richard III, despite her being married to Lord Stanley, a Yorkist. At Rennes Cathedral on Christmas Day 1483, Henry pledged to marry Elizabeth of York, the eldest daughter of Edward IV. She was Edward's heir since the presumed death of her brothers, the Princes in the Tower, King Edward V and Richard of Shrewsbury, Duke of York. With money and supplies borrowed from his host, Francis II of Brittany, Henry tried to land in England, but his conspiracy unravelled resulting in the execution of his primary co-conspirator, Henry Stafford, 2nd Duke of Buckingham. Now supported by Francis II's prime minister, Pierre Landais, Richard III attempted to extradite Henry from Brittany, but Henry escaped to France. He was welcomed by the French, who readily supplied him with troops and equipment for a second invasion.\nHenry gained the support of the Woodvilles, in-laws of the late Edward IV, and sailed with a small French and Scottish force, landing at Mill Bay near Dale, Pembrokeshire. He marched toward England accompanied by his uncle Jasper and John de Vere, 13th Earl of Oxford. Wales was historically a Lancastrian stronghold, and Henry owed the support he gathered to his Welsh birth and ancestry, being agnatically descended from Rhys ap Gruffydd. He amassed an army of about 5,000\u20136,000 soldiers.\nHenry devised a plan to seize the throne by engaging Richard quickly because Richard had reinforcements in Nottingham and Leicester. Though outnumbered, Henry's Lancastrian forces decisively defeated Richard's Yorkist army at the Battle of Bosworth Field on 22 August 1485. Several of Richard's key allies, such as Henry Percy, 4th Earl of Northumberland, and also Lord Stanley and his brother William, crucially switched sides or left the battlefield. Richard III's death at Bosworth Field effectively ended the Wars of the Roses.\nReign.\nTo secure his hold on the throne, Henry declared himself king by right of conquest retroactively from 21 August 1485, the day before Bosworth Field. Thus, anyone who had fought for Richard against him would be guilty of treason and Henry could legally confiscate the lands and property of Richard III, while restoring his own. Henry spared Richard's nephew and designated heir, John de la Pole, Earl of Lincoln, and made the Yorkist heiress Margaret Plantagenet Countess of Salisbury \"suo jure\". He took care not to address the baronage or summon Parliament until after his coronation, which took place in Westminster Abbey on 30 October 1485. After his coronation Henry issued an edict that any gentleman who swore fealty to him would, notwithstanding any previous attainder, be secure in his property and person.\nHenry honoured his pledge of December 1483 to marry Elizabeth of York and the wedding took place in 1486 at Westminster Abbey. He was 29 years old, she was 20. They were third cousins, as both were great-great-grandchildren of John of Gaunt. Henry married Elizabeth of York with the hope of uniting the Yorkist and Lancastrian sides of the Plantagenet dynastic disputes, and he was largely successful. However, such a level of paranoia persisted that anyone (John de la Pole, Earl of Lincoln, for example) with blood ties to the Plantagenets was suspected of coveting the throne.\nHenry had Parliament repeal \"Titulus Regius\", the statute that declared Edward IV's marriage invalid and his children illegitimate, thus legitimising his wife. Amateur historians Bertram Fields and Sir Clements Markham have claimed that he may have been involved in the murder of the Princes in the Tower, as the repeal of \"Titulus Regius\" gave the Princes a stronger claim to the throne than his own. Alison Weir points out that the Rennes ceremony, two years earlier, was plausible only if Henry and his supporters were certain that the Princes were already dead. Henry secured his crown principally by dividing and undermining the power of the nobility, especially through the aggressive use of bonds and recognisances to secure loyalty. He also enacted laws against livery and maintenance, the great lords' practice of having large numbers of \"retainers\" who wore their lord's badge or uniform and formed a potential private army.\nHenry began taking precautions against rebellion while still in Leicester after Bosworth Field. Edward, Earl of Warwick, the ten-year-old son of Edward IV's brother George, Duke of Clarence, was the senior surviving male of the House of York. Before departing for London, Henry sent Robert Willoughby to Sheriff Hutton in Yorkshire, to arrest Warwick and take him to the Tower of London. Despite such precautions, Henry faced several rebellions over the next twelve years. The first was the 1486 rebellion of the Stafford brothers, abetted by Viscount Lovell, which collapsed without fighting.\nNext, in 1487, Yorkists led by Lincoln rebelled in support of Lambert Simnel, a boy they claimed to be Edward of Warwick (who was actually a prisoner in the Tower). The rebellion began in Ireland, where the historically Yorkist nobility, headed by the powerful Gerald FitzGerald, 8th Earl of Kildare, proclaimed Simnel king and provided troops for his invasion of England. The rebellion was defeated and Lincoln killed at the Battle of Stoke. Henry showed remarkable clemency to the surviving rebels: he pardoned Kildare and the other Irish nobles, and he made the boy, Simnel, a servant in the royal kitchen where he was in charge of roasting meats on a spit.\nIn 1490, a young Fleming, Perkin Warbeck, appeared and claimed to be Richard of Shrewsbury, the younger of the \"Princes in the Tower\". Warbeck won the support of Edward IV's sister Margaret, Duchess of Burgundy. He led attempted invasions of Ireland in 1491 and England in 1495, and persuaded James IV of Scotland to invade England in 1496. In 1497, Warbeck landed in Cornwall with a few thousand troops, but was soon captured and executed.\nWhen the King's agents searched the property of William Stanley (Chamberlain of the Household, with direct access to Henry VII), they found a bag of coins amounting to around \u00a310,000 and a collar of livery with Yorkist garnishings. Stanley was accused of supporting Warbeck's cause, arrested and later executed. In response to this threat within his own household, the King instituted more rigid security for access to his person. In 1499, Henry had the Earl of Warwick executed. However, he spared Warwick's elder sister Margaret, who survived until 1541 when she was executed by Henry VIII.\nEconomics.\nFor most of Henry VII's reign Edward Story was Bishop of Chichester. Story's register still exists and, according to the 19th-century historian W.R.W. Stephens, \"affords some illustrations of the avaricious and parsimonious character of the king\". It seems that Henry was skilled at extracting money from his subjects on many pretexts, including that of war with France or war with Scotland. The money so extracted added to the King's personal fortune rather than being used for the stated purpose.\nUnlike his predecessors, Henry VII came to the throne without personal experience in estate management or financial administration. Despite this, during his reign, he became a fiscally prudent monarch who restored the fortunes of an effectively bankrupt exchequer. Henry VII introduced stability to the financial administration of England by keeping the same financial advisors throughout his reign. For instance, except for the first few months of the reign, the Baron Dynham and the Earl of Surrey were the only Lord High Treasurers throughout his reign.\nHenry VII improved tax collection in the realm by introducing ruthlessly efficient mechanisms of taxation. He was supported in this effort by his chancellor, Archbishop John Morton, whose \"Morton's Fork\" was a catch-22 method of ensuring that nobles paid increased taxes: those nobles who spent little must have saved much, and thus could afford the increased taxes; in contrast, those nobles who spent much obviously had the means to pay the increased taxes. Henry also increased wealth by acquiring land through the act of resumption of 1486, which had been delayed as he focused on the defence of the Church, his person and his realm.\nThe capriciousness and lack of due process that had indebted many would tarnish his legacy and were soon ended upon Henry VII's death, after a commission revealed widespread abuses. According to the contemporary historian Polydore Vergil, simple \"greed\" underscored the means by which royal control was over-asserted in Henry's final years. Following Henry VII's death, Henry VIII executed Richard Empson and Edmund Dudley, his two most hated tax collectors, on trumped-up charges of treason.\nHenry VII established the pound avoirdupois as a standard of weight; it later became part of the Imperial and customary systems of units. In 1506, he resumed the construction of King's College Chapel, Cambridge, started under Henry VI, guaranteeing finances which would continue even after his death.\nForeign policy.\nHenry VII's policy was to maintain peace and to create economic prosperity. To a degree, he succeeded. The Treaty of Redon was signed in February 1489 between Henry and representatives of Brittany. Based on the terms of the accord, Henry sent 6,000 troops to fight (at the expense of Brittany) under the command of Lord Daubeney. The purpose of the agreement was to prevent France from annexing Brittany. According to John M. Currin, the treaty redefined Anglo-Breton relations. Henry started a new policy to recover Guyenne and other lost Plantagenet claims in France. The treaty marks a shift from neutrality over the French invasion of Brittany to active intervention against it.\nHenry later concluded a treaty with France at Etaples, which brought money into the coffers of England and ensured the French would not support pretenders to the English throne, such as Perkin Warbeck. However, this treaty came at a price, as Henry mounted a minor invasion of Brittany in November 1492. Henry decided to keep Brittany out of French hands, signed an alliance with Spain to that end, and sent 6,000 troops to France. The confused, fractious nature of Breton politics undermined his efforts, which finally failed after three sizeable expeditions, costing \u00a324,000. However, as France was becoming more concerned with the Italian Wars, the French were happy to agree to the Peace of \u00c9taples. Henry had pressured the French by laying siege to Boulogne in October 1492. Henry had been under the financial and physical protection of the French throne or its vassals for most of his life before becoming king. To strengthen his position, however, he subsidised shipbuilding, so strengthening the navy (he commissioned Europe's first ever \u2013 and the world's oldest surviving \u2013 dry dock at Portsmouth in 1495) and improving trading opportunities. John Cabot, originally from Genoa and Venice, had heard that ships from Bristol had discovered uncharted, newfound territory far west of Ireland. Having secured financial backing from Florentine bankers in London, Cabot was granted carefully phrased letters patent from Henry in March 1496, permitting him to embark on an exploratory voyage westward. It is unknown precisely where Cabot landed, but he was eventually rewarded with a pension from the king; it is presumed that Cabot perished at sea after a later unsuccessful expedition.\nHenry VII was one of the first European monarchs to recognise the importance of the newly united Spanish kingdom; he concluded the Treaty of Medina del Campo, by which his son Arthur, Prince of Wales, was married to Catherine of Aragon. He also concluded the Treaty of Perpetual Peace with Scotland (the first treaty between England and Scotland for almost two centuries), which betrothed his daughter Margaret Tudor to King James IV of Scotland. By this marriage, Henry VII hoped to break the Auld Alliance between Scotland and France. Though this was not achieved during his reign, the marriage eventually led to the union of the English and Scottish crowns under Margaret's great-grandson, James VI and I, following the death of Henry's granddaughter Elizabeth I. Henry also formed an alliance with Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I (1493\u20131519) and persuaded Pope Innocent VIII to issue a papal bull of excommunication against all pretenders to Henry's throne.\nIn 1506, Grand Master of the Knights Hospitaller Emery d'Amboise asked Henry VII to become the protector and patron of the Order, as he had an interest in the crusade. Later on, Henry had exchanged letters with Pope Julius II in 1507, in which he encouraged him to establish peace among Christian realms, and to organise an expedition against the Turks of the Ottoman Empire.\nTrade agreements.\nHenry VII was much enriched by trading alum, which was used in the wool and cloth trades as a chemical fixative for dyeing fabrics. Since alum was mined in only one area in Europe (Tolfa, Italy), it was a scarce commodity and therefore especially valuable to its landholder, the Pope. With the English economy heavily invested in wool production, Henry VII became involved in the alum trade in 1486. With the assistance of the Italian merchant banker Lodovico della Fava and the Italian banker Girolamo Frescobaldi, Henry VII became deeply involved in the trade by licensing ships, obtaining alum from the Ottoman Empire, and selling it to the Low Countries and in England. This trade made an expensive commodity cheaper, which raised opposition from Pope Julius II, since the Tolfa mine was a part of papal territory and had given the Pope monopoly control over alum.\nHenry's most successful diplomatic achievement as regards the economy was the \"Magnus Intercursus\" (\"great agreement\") of 1496. In 1494, Henry embargoed trade (mainly in wool) with the Burgundian Netherlands in retaliation for Margaret of Burgundy's support for Perkin Warbeck. The Merchant Adventurers, the company which enjoyed the monopoly of the Flemish wool trade, relocated from Antwerp to Calais. At the same time, Flemish merchants were ejected from England. The dispute eventually paid off for Henry. Both parties realised they were mutually disadvantaged by the reduction in commerce. Its restoration by the \"Magnus Intercursus\" was very much to England's benefit in removing taxation for English merchants and significantly increasing England's wealth. In turn, Antwerp became an extremely important trade entrep\u00f4t (transhipment port), through which, for example, goods from the Baltic, spices from the east and Italian silks were exchanged for English cloth.\nIn 1506, Henry extorted the Treaty of Windsor from Philip the Handsome, Duke of Burgundy. Philip had been shipwrecked on the English coast, and while Henry's guest, was bullied into an agreement so favourable to England at the expense of the Netherlands that it was dubbed the \"Malus Intercursus\" (\"evil agreement\"). France, Burgundy, the Holy Roman Empire, Spain and the Hanseatic League all rejected the treaty, which was never in force. Philip died shortly after the negotiations.\nLaw enforcement and justices of the peace.\nHenry's principal problem was to restore royal authority in a realm recovering from the Wars of the Roses. There were too many powerful noblemen and, as a consequence of the system of so-called bastard feudalism, each had what amounted to private armies of indentured retainers (mercenaries masquerading as servants). Following the example of Edward IV, Henry VII created a Council of Wales and the Marches for his son Arthur, which was intended to govern Wales and the Marches, Cheshire and Cornwall.\nHe was content to allow the nobles their regional influence if they were loyal to him. For instance, the Stanley family had control of Lancashire and Cheshire, upholding the peace on the condition that they stayed within the law. In other cases, he brought his over-powerful subjects to heel by decree. He passed laws against \"livery\" (the upper classes' flaunting of their adherents by giving them badges and emblems) and \"maintenance\" (the keeping of too many male \"servants\"). These laws were used shrewdly in levying fines upon those that he perceived as threats.\nHowever, his principal weapon was the Court of Star Chamber. This revived an earlier practice of using a small (and trusted) group of the Privy Council as a personal or Prerogative Court, able to cut through the cumbersome legal system and act swiftly. Serious disputes involving the use of personal power, or threats to royal authority, were thus dealt with.\nHenry VII used justices of the peace on a large, nationwide scale. They were appointed for every shire and served for a year at a time. Their chief task was to see that the laws of the country were obeyed in their area. Their powers and numbers steadily increased during the time of the Tudors, never more so than under Henry's reign. Despite this, Henry was keen to constrain their power and influence, applying the same principles to the justices of the peace as he did to the nobility: a similar system of bonds and recognisances to that which applied to both the gentry and the nobles who tried to exert their elevated influence over these local officials.\nAll Acts of Parliament were overseen by justices of the peace. For example, they could replace suspect jurors in accordance with the 1495 act, preventing the corruption of juries. They were also in charge of various administrative duties, such as the checking of weights and measures.\nBy 1509, justices of the peace were key enforcers of law and order for Henry VII. They were unpaid, which, in comparison with modern standards, meant a smaller tax bill for law enforcement. Local gentry saw the office as one of local influence and prestige and were therefore willing to serve. Overall, this was a successful area of policy for Henry, both in terms of efficiency and as a method of reducing the corruption endemic within the nobility of the Middle Ages.\nLater years and death.\nIn 1502, Henry VII's life took a difficult and personal turn in which many people he was close to died in quick succession. His first son and heir apparent, Arthur, Prince of Wales, died suddenly at Ludlow Castle, very likely from a viral respiratory illness known at the time as the \"English sweating sickness\". This made Henry VII's second son, Henry, Duke of York, heir apparent to the throne. The King, normally a reserved man who rarely showed much emotion in public unless angry, surprised his courtiers with his intense grief and sobbing at his son's death. His concern for the Queen is evidence that the marriage was a happy one, as is his reaction to Queen Elizabeth's death the following year, when he shut himself away for several days, refusing to speak to anyone. Henry VII was shattered by the loss of Elizabeth, and her death affected him severely.\nHenry wanted to maintain the Spanish alliance. Accordingly, he arranged a papal dispensation from Pope Julius II for Prince Henry to marry his brother's widow Catherine, a relationship that would have otherwise precluded marriage in the Church. After obtaining the dispensation, Henry had second thoughts about the marriage of his son and Catherine. Catherine's mother Isabella I of Castile had died and Catherine's sister Joanna had succeeded her; Catherine was, therefore, daughter of only one reigning monarch and so less desirable as a spouse for Henry VII's heir-apparent. The marriage did not take place during his lifetime. Otherwise, at the time of his father's arranging of the marriage to Catherine of Aragon, the future Henry VIII was too young to contract the marriage according to Canon Law and would be ineligible until age fourteen.\nHenry made half-hearted plans to remarry and beget more heirs, but these never came to anything. He entertained thoughts of remarriage to renew the alliance with Spain; Joanna, Dowager Queen of Naples (a niece of Queen Isabella of Castile), Queen Joanna of Castile, and Margaret, Dowager Duchess of Savoy (sister-in-law of Joanna of Castile) were all considered. In 1505 he was sufficiently interested in a potential marriage to Joanna of Naples that he sent ambassadors to Naples to report on the 27 year-old Joanna's physical suitability. The wedding never took place.\nHenry VII falls among the minority of British monarchs who never had any known mistresses, and, for the times, it is unusual that he did not remarry. His son Henry was the only male heir left after the death of his wife; the death of Arthur therefore created a precarious political position for the House of Tudor.\nDuring Henry VII's lifetime, the nobility often criticised him for re-centralising power in London and, later, the 16th-century historian Francis Bacon was ruthlessly critical of the methods by which he enforced tax law. It is equally true that Henry VII was diligent about keeping detailed records of his personal finances, down to the last halfpenny; these and one account book detailing the expenses of his queen survive in the British National Archives, as do courtiers' accounts and many of the king's own letters. From these accounting books, the evidence is clear that, until the death of his wife, Henry was a more doting father and husband than was widely known, and there is evidence that his outwardly austere personality belied a devotion to his family. Letters to relatives have an affectionate tone not captured in official state business, as evidenced by many written to his mother, Margaret. Many of the entries show a man who loosened his purse strings generously for his wife and children \u2013 and not just for necessities. After Elizabeth's death, the possibilities for such family indulgences greatly diminished. Henry became very sick and nearly died, allowing only his mother Margaret Beaufort near him: \"privily departed to a solitary place, and would that no man should resort unto him.\" Further compounding Henry's distress, within months of her mother's death, his older daughter Margaret, who had previously been betrothed to King James IV of Scotland, had to be escorted to the border by her father: he would never see her again. Margaret wrote letters to her father declaring her homesickness, but Henry could do nothing but mourn the loss of his family and honour the terms of the peace treaty he had agreed to with the King of Scotland. \nHenry VII died of tuberculosis at Richmond Palace on 21 April 1509 and was buried in the chapel he commissioned in Westminster Abbey next to his wife, Elizabeth. He was succeeded by his second son, Henry VIII (reigned 1509\u201347), who would initiate the Protestant Reformation in England. His mother died two months later on 29 June 1509.\nAppearance and character.\nAmiable and high-spirited, Henry was friendly if dignified in manner, and it was clear that he was extremely intelligent. His biographer, Professor Stanley Chrimes, credits him \u2013 even before he had become king \u2013 with \"a high degree of personal magnetism, ability to inspire confidence, and a growing reputation for shrewd decisiveness\". On the debit side, he may have looked a little delicate as he suffered from poor health.\nComparison with contemporaries.\nHistorians have compared Henry VII with his continental contemporaries, especially Louis XI of France and Ferdinand II of Aragon. By 1600, historians emphasised Henry's wisdom in drawing lessons in statecraft from other monarchs. In 1622 Francis Bacon published his \"History of the Reign of King Henry VII\". By 1900 the \"New Monarchy\" interpretation stressed the common factors that in each country led to the revival of monarchical power. This approach raised puzzling questions about similarities and differences in the development of national states. In the late 20th century a model of European state formation was prominent in which Henry less resembles Louis and Ferdinand.\nFamily.\nIssue.\nHenry VII and Elizabeth had seven children:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14187", "revid": "40692073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14187", "title": "Henry VIII", "text": "King of England from 1509 to 1547\nHenry VIII (28 June 1491\u00a0\u2013 28 January 1547) was King of England from 22 April 1509 until his death in 1547. Henry was a dominant and forceful monarch. He is also known for his six marriages and his efforts to have his first marriage, to Catherine of Aragon, annulled. His disagreement with Pope Clement VII about such an annulment led Henry to initiate the English Reformation, separating the Church of England from papal authority. He appointed himself Supreme Head of the Church of England and dissolved convents and monasteries, for which he was excommunicated by the pope.\nBorn in Greenwich, Henry brought radical changes to the Constitution of England, expanding royal power and ushering in the theory of the divine right of kings in opposition to papal supremacy. He frequently used charges of treason and heresy to quell dissent, and those accused were often executed without a formal trial using bills of attainder. He achieved many of his political aims through his chief ministers, some of whom were banished or executed when they fell out of his favour. Thomas Wolsey, Thomas More, Thomas Cromwell, and Thomas Cranmer all figured prominently in his administration.\nHenry was an extravagant spender, using proceeds from the dissolution of the monasteries and acts of the Reformation Parliament. He converted money that was formerly paid to Rome into royal revenue. Despite the money from these sources, he was often on the verge of financial ruin due to personal extravagance and costly and largely unproductive wars, particularly with King Francis I of France, Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, King James V of Scotland, and the Scottish regency under the Earl of Arran and Mary of Guise. He founded the Royal Navy, oversaw the annexation of Wales to England with the Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542, and was the first English monarch to rule as King of Ireland following the Crown of Ireland Act 1542.\nHenry's contemporaries considered him an attractive, educated, and accomplished king. He has been described as \"one of the most charismatic rulers to sit on the English throne\" and his reign described as the \"most important\" in English history. He was an author and composer. As he aged, he became severely overweight and his health suffered, and was frequently characterised in his later life as a lustful, egotistical, paranoid, and tyrannical monarch. He was succeeded by his son Edward VI.\nEarly years.\nBorn on 28 June 1491 at the Palace of Placentia in Greenwich, Kent, Henry Tudor was the third child and second son of King Henry VII and Elizabeth of York. Of the young Henry's six (or seven) siblings, only three\u00a0\u2013 his brother Arthur, Prince of Wales, and sisters Margaret and Mary\u00a0\u2013 survived infancy. He was baptised by Richard Foxe, the Bishop of Exeter, at a church of the Observant Franciscans close to the palace. In 1493, at the age of two, Henry was appointed Constable of Dover Castle and Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. He was subsequently appointed Earl Marshal of England and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland at age three and was made a Knight of the Bath soon after. The day after the ceremony, he was created Duke of York and a month or so later made Warden of the Scottish Marches. In May 1495, he was appointed to the Order of the Garter. The reason for giving such appointments to a small child was to enable his father to retain personal control of lucrative positions and not share them with established families. Not much is known about Henry's early life \u2013 save for his appointments \u2013 because he was not expected to become king, but it is known that he received a first-rate education from leading tutors. He became fluent in Latin and French and learned at least some Italian.\nIn November 1501, Henry played a considerable part in the ceremonies surrounding his brother Arthur's marriage to Catherine, the youngest child of King Ferdinand II of Aragon and Queen Isabella I of Castile. As duke of York, Henry used the arms of his father as king, differenced by a \"label of three points ermine\". He was further honoured on 9 February 1506 by Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I, who made him a Knight of the Golden Fleece.\nIn 1502, Arthur died at the age of 15, just 20 weeks after his marriage to Catherine of Aragon. Arthur's death thrust all his duties upon his younger brother. The 10-year-old Henry became the new Duke of Cornwall, and the new Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester in February 1504. Henry VII gave his second son few responsibilities even after the death of Arthur. Young Henry was strictly supervised and did not appear in public. As a result, he ascended the throne \"untrained in the exacting art of kingship\".\nHenry VII renewed his efforts to seal a marital alliance between England and Spain, by offering his son Henry in marriage to the widowed Catherine. Henry VII and Queen Isabella were both keen on the idea, which had arisen very shortly after Arthur's death. On 23 June 1503, a treaty was signed for their marriage, and they were betrothed two days later. A papal dispensation was only needed for the \"impediment of public honesty\" if the marriage had not been consummated as Catherine and her duenna claimed, but Henry VII and the Spanish ambassador set out instead to obtain a dispensation for \"affinity\", which took account of the possibility of consummation. Cohabitation was not possible because Henry was too young. Isabella's death in 1504, and the ensuing problems of succession in Castile, complicated matters. Ferdinand II preferred Catherine to stay in England, but Henry VII's relations with Ferdinand had deteriorated. Catherine was therefore left in limbo for some time, culminating in Prince Henry's rejection of the marriage as soon he was able, at the age of 14. Ferdinand's solution was to make his daughter ambassador, allowing her to stay in England indefinitely. Devout, she began to believe that it was God's will that she marry the Prince despite his opposition.\nEarly reign.\nHenry VII died in April 1509, and the 17-year-old Henry succeeded him as king. Soon after his father's burial on 10 May, Henry suddenly declared that he would indeed marry Catherine, leaving unresolved several issues concerning the papal dispensation and a missing part of the marriage portion. The new king maintained that it had been his father's dying wish that he marry Catherine. Whether or not this was true, it was convenient. Emperor Maximilian I had been attempting to marry his granddaughter Eleanor, Catherine's niece, to Henry; she had now been jilted. Henry's wedding to Catherine was modest and was held at the friars' church in Greenwich on 11 June 1509. Henry claimed descent from Constantine the Great and King Arthur and saw himself as their successor.\nOn 23 June 1509, Henry led the now 23-year-old Catherine from the Tower of London to Westminster Abbey for their coronation, which took place the following day. It was a grand affair: the King's passage was lined with tapestries and laid with fine cloth. Following the ceremony, there was a grand banquet in Westminster Hall. As Catherine wrote to her father, \"our time is spent in continuous festival\".\nTwo days after his coronation, Henry arrested his father's two most unpopular ministers, Richard Empson and Edmund Dudley. They were charged with high treason and were executed in 1510. Politically motivated executions would remain one of Henry's primary tactics for dealing with those who stood in his way. Henry returned some of the money supposedly extorted by the two ministers. By contrast, Henry's view of the House of York \u2013 potential rival claimants for the throne \u2013 was more moderate than his father's had been. Several who had been imprisoned by his father, including Thomas Grey, 2nd Marquess of Dorset, were pardoned. Others went unreconciled; Edmund de la Pole, 3rd Duke of Suffolk, was eventually beheaded in 1513, an execution prompted by his brother Richard siding against the King.\nSoon after marrying Henry, Catherine conceived. She gave birth to a stillborn girl on 31 January 1510. About four months later, Catherine again became pregnant. On 1 January 1511, New Year's Day, a son Henry was born. After the grief of losing their first child, the couple were pleased to have a boy and festivities were held, including a two-day joust known as the Westminster Tournament. However, the child died seven weeks later. Catherine had two stillborn sons in 1513 and 1515, but gave birth in February 1516 to a girl, Mary. Relations between Henry and Catherine had been strained, but they eased slightly after Mary's birth.\nAlthough Henry's marriage to Catherine has since been described as \"unusually good\", it is known that Henry took mistresses. It was revealed in 1510 that Henry had been conducting an affair with one of the sisters of Edward Stafford, 3rd Duke of Buckingham, either Elizabeth or Anne Hastings, Countess of Huntingdon. The most significant mistress for about three years, starting in 1516, was Elizabeth Blount. Blount is one of only two completely undisputed mistresses, considered by some to be few for a virile young king. Exactly how many Henry had is disputed: David Loades believes Henry had mistresses \"only to a very limited extent\", whilst Alison Weir believes there were numerous other affairs. Catherine is not known to have protested. In 1518, she fell pregnant again with another girl, who was also stillborn.\nBlount gave birth in June 1519 to Henry's illegitimate son, Henry FitzRoy. The young boy was made Duke of Richmond in June 1525 in what some thought was one step on the path to his eventual legitimisation. FitzRoy married Mary Howard in 1533, but died childless three years later. At the time of his death in July 1536, Parliament was considering the Second Succession Act, which could have allowed him to become king.\nFrance and the Habsburgs.\nIn 1510, France, with a fragile alliance with the Holy Roman Empire in the League of Cambrai, was winning a war against Venice. Henry renewed his father's friendship with Louis XII of France, an issue that divided his council. Certainly, war with the combined might of the two powers would have been exceedingly difficult. Shortly thereafter, however, Henry also signed a pact with Ferdinand II of Aragon. After Pope Julius II created the anti-French Holy League in October 1511, Henry followed Ferdinand's lead and brought England into the new League. An initial joint Anglo-Spanish attack was planned for the spring to recover Aquitaine for England, the start of making Henry's dreams of ruling France a reality. The attack, however, following a formal declaration of war in April 1512, was not led by Henry personally and was a considerable failure; Ferdinand used it simply to further his own ends, and it strained the Anglo-Spanish alliance. Nevertheless, the French were pushed out of Italy soon after, and the alliance survived, with both parties keen to win further victories over the French. Henry then pulled off a diplomatic coup by convincing Emperor Maximilian to join the Holy League. Remarkably, Henry had secured the promised title of \"Most Christian King of France\" from Julius and possibly coronation by the Pope himself in Paris, if only Louis could be defeated.\nOn 30 June 1513, Henry invaded France, and his troops defeated a French army at the Battle of the Spurs \u2013 a relatively minor result, but one which was seized on by the English for propaganda purposes. Soon after, the English took Th\u00e9rouanne (handing it over to Maximilian) and Tournai, a more significant settlement, which it kept for five years before handing it back to the French. Henry had led the army personally, complete with a large entourage. His absence from the country, however, had prompted his brother-in-law James IV of Scotland to invade England at the behest of Louis. Nevertheless, the English army, overseen by Queen Catherine, decisively defeated the Scots at the Battle of Flodden on 9 September 1513. Among the dead was the Scottish king, thus ending Scotland's brief involvement in the war. These campaigns had given Henry a taste of the military success he so desired. However, despite initial indications, he decided not to pursue a 1514 campaign. He had been supporting Ferdinand and Maximilian financially during the campaign but had received little in return; England's coffers were now empty. With the replacement of Julius by Pope Leo X, who was inclined to negotiate for peace with France, Henry signed his own treaty with Louis: his sister Mary would become Louis's wife, having previously been pledged to the younger Charles, and peace was secured for eight years, a remarkably long time.\nCharles V, the nephew of Henry's wife Catherine, inherited a large empire in Europe, becoming king of Spain in 1516 and Holy Roman Emperor in 1519. When Louis XII of France died in 1515, he was succeeded by his cousin Francis I. These accessions left three relatively young rulers and an opportunity for a clean slate. The careful diplomacy of Cardinal Thomas Wolsey had resulted in the Treaty of London (1518), aimed at uniting the kingdoms of western Europe in the wake of a new Ottoman threat, and it seemed that peace might be secured. Henry met King Francis on 7 June 1520 at the Field of the Cloth of Gold near Calais for a fortnight of lavish entertainment. Both hoped for friendly relations in place of the wars of the previous decade. The strong air of competition laid to rest any hopes of a renewal of the Treaty of London, however, and conflict was inevitable. Henry had more in common with Charles, whom he met once before and once after Francis. Charles brought his realms into war with France in 1521; Henry offered to mediate, but little was achieved and by the end of the year Henry had aligned England with Charles. He still clung to his previous aim of restoring English lands in France but sought to secure an alliance with the Netherlands, then a territorial possession of Charles, and the continued support of the Emperor. A small English attack in the north of France made up little ground. Charles defeated and captured Francis at Pavia and could dictate peace, but he believed he owed Henry nothing. Sensing this, Henry decided to take England out of the war before his ally, signing the Treaty of the More on 30 August 1525.\nMarriages.\nAnnulment from Catherine.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDuring his marriage to Catherine of Aragon, Henry conducted an affair with Mary Boleyn, Catherine's lady-in-waiting. There has been speculation that Mary's two children, Henry Carey and Catherine Carey, were fathered by Henry but this has never been proven. King Henry never acknowledged them as he did in the case of Henry FitzRoy. In 1525, as Henry grew more impatient with Catherine's inability to produce the male heir he desired, he became enamoured with Mary Boleyn's sister, Anne Boleyn, then a charismatic young woman of 25 in the Queen's entourage. Anne, however, resisted his attempts to seduce her, and refused to become his mistress as her sister had. It was in this context that Henry considered his three options for finding a dynastic successor and hence resolving what came to be described at court as the King's \"great matter\". These options were legitimising Henry FitzRoy, which would need the involvement of the Pope and would be open to challenge; marrying off Mary, his daughter with Catherine, as soon as possible and hoping for a grandson to inherit directly, but Mary was considered unlikely to conceive before Henry's death, or somehow rejecting Catherine and marrying someone else of child-bearing age. Probably seeing the possibility of marrying Anne, the third was ultimately the most attractive possibility to the 34-year-old Henry, and it soon became the King's absorbing desire to annul his marriage to the now 40-year-old Catherine.\nHenry's precise motivations and intentions over the coming years are not widely agreed on. Henry himself, at least in the early part of his reign, was a devout and well-informed Catholic to the extent that his 1521 publication \"Assertio Septem Sacramentorum\" (\"Defence of the Seven Sacraments\") earned him the title of \"Fidei Defensor\" (Defender of the Faith) from Pope Leo X. The work represented a staunch defence of papal supremacy, albeit one couched in somewhat contingent terms. It is not clear exactly when Henry changed his mind on the issue as he grew more intent on a second marriage. Certainly, by 1527, he had convinced himself that Catherine had produced no male heir because their union was \"blighted in the eyes of God\". Indeed, in marrying Catherine, his brother's wife, he had acted contrary to Leviticus 20:21, a justification Thomas Cranmer used to declare the marriage null. Martin Luther, on the other hand, had initially argued against the annulment, stating that Henry VIII could take a second wife in accordance with his teaching that the Bible allowed for polygamy but not divorce. Henry now believed the Pope had lacked the authority to grant a dispensation from this impediment. It was this argument Henry took to Pope Clement VII in 1527 in the hope of having his marriage to Catherine annulled, forgoing at least one less openly defiant line of attack. In going public, all hope of tempting Catherine to retire to a nunnery or otherwise stay quiet was lost. Henry sent his secretary, William Knight, to appeal directly to the Holy See by way of a deceptively worded draft papal bull. Knight was unsuccessful; the Pope could not be misled so easily.\nOther missions concentrated on arranging an ecclesiastical court to meet in England, with a representative from Clement VII. Although Clement agreed to the creation of such a court, he never had any intention of empowering his legate, Lorenzo Campeggio, to decide in Henry's favour. This bias was perhaps the result of pressure from Emperor Charles V, but it is not clear how far this influenced either Campeggio or the Pope. After less than two months of hearing evidence, Clement called the case back to Rome in July 1529, from which it was clear that it would never re-emerge. With the chance for an annulment lost, Cardinal Wolsey bore the blame. He was charged with \"praemunire\" in October 1529, and his fall from grace was \"sudden and total\". Briefly reconciled with Henry (and officially pardoned) in the first half of 1530, he was charged once more in November 1530, this time for treason, but died while awaiting trial. After a short period in which Henry took government upon his own shoulders, Thomas More took on the role of Lord Chancellor and chief minister. Intelligent and able, but a devout Catholic and opponent of the annulment, More initially cooperated with the King's new policy, denouncing Wolsey in Parliament.\nA year later, Catherine was banished from court, and her rooms were given to Anne Boleyn. Anne was an unusually educated and intellectual woman for her time and was keenly absorbed and engaged with the ideas of the Protestant Reformers, but the extent to which she herself was a committed Protestant is much debated. When Archbishop of Canterbury William Warham died, Anne's influence and the need to find a trustworthy supporter of the annulment had Thomas Cranmer appointed to the vacant position. This was approved by the Pope, unaware of the King's nascent plans for the Church.\nMarriage to Anne Boleyn.\nIn the winter of 1532, Henry met with Francis I at Calais and enlisted Francis's support for his new marriage. Immediately upon returning to Dover in England, Henry, now 41, and Anne went through a secret wedding service. She soon became pregnant, and there was a second wedding service in London on 25 January 1533. On 23 May 1533, Cranmer, sitting in judgment at a special court convened at Dunstable Priory to rule on the validity of the King's marriage to Catherine of Aragon, declared the marriage of Henry and Catherine null and void. Five days later, on 28 May 1533, Cranmer declared the marriage of Henry and Anne to be valid. Catherine was formally stripped of her title as queen, becoming instead \"princess dowager\" as the widow of Arthur. In her place, Anne was crowned queen on 1 June 1533. The Queen gave birth to a daughter slightly prematurely on 7 September 1533. The child was christened Elizabeth, in honour of Henry's mother, Elizabeth of York.\nFollowing the marriage, there was a period of consolidation, taking the form of a series of statutes of the Reformation Parliament aimed at finding solutions to any remaining issues, whilst protecting the new reforms from challenge, convincing the public of their legitimacy, and exposing and dealing with opponents. Although the canon law was dealt with at length by Cranmer and others, these acts were advanced by Thomas Cromwell, Thomas Audley and Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk and indeed by Henry himself. With this process complete, in May 1532 More resigned as Lord Chancellor, leaving Cromwell as Henry's chief minister. With the Act of Succession 1533, Catherine's daughter, Mary, was declared illegitimate; Henry's marriage to Anne was declared legitimate; and Anne's issue declared to be next in the line of succession. With the Acts of Supremacy in 1534, Parliament recognised the King's status as head of the church in England and, together with the Act in Restraint of Appeals in 1532, abolished the right of appeal to Rome. It was only then that Pope Clement VII took the step of excommunicating the King and Cranmer, although the excommunication was not made official until some time later.\nThe King and Queen were not pleased with married life. They enjoyed periods of calm and affection, but Anne refused to play the submissive role expected of her. The vivacity and opinionated intellect that had made her so attractive as an illicit lover made her too independent for the largely ceremonial role of a royal wife and it made her many enemies. For his part, Henry disliked Anne's constant irritability and violent temper. After a false pregnancy or miscarriage in 1534, he saw her failure to give him a son as a betrayal. As early as Christmas 1534, Henry was discussing with Cranmer and Cromwell the chances of leaving Anne without having to return to Catherine. Henry is traditionally believed to have had an affair with Madge Shelton in 1535, although historian Antonia Fraser argues that Henry in fact had an affair with her sister Mary Shelton.\nOpposition to Henry's religious policies was at first quickly suppressed in England. Some dissenting monks, including the first Carthusian Martyrs, were executed and many more pilloried. The most prominent resisters included John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, and Thomas More, both of whom refused to take the Oath of Supremacy to the King. Neither Henry nor Cromwell sought at that stage to have the men executed; rather, they hoped that the two might change their minds and save themselves. Fisher openly rejected Henry as the Supreme Head of the Church, but More was careful to avoid openly breaking the Treasons Act 1534, which (unlike later acts) did not forbid mere silence. Both men were subsequently convicted of high treason, however \u2013 More on the evidence of a single conversation with Richard Rich, the Solicitor General \u2013 and both were executed in the summer of 1535.\nThese suppressions, as well as the Suppression of Religious Houses Act 1535, in turn, contributed to a more general resistance to Henry's reforms, most notably in the Pilgrimage of Grace, a large uprising in northern England in October 1536. Some 20,000 to 40,000 rebels were led by Robert Aske, together with parts of the northern nobility. Henry VIII promised the rebels he would pardon them and thanked them for raising the issues. Aske told the rebels they had been successful and they could disperse and go home. Henry saw the rebels as traitors and did not feel obliged to keep his promises to them, so when further violence occurred after Henry's offer of a pardon he was quick to break his promise of clemency. The leaders, including Aske, were arrested and executed for treason. In total, about 200 rebels were executed, and the disturbances ended.\nExecution of Anne Boleyn.\nOn 8 January 1536, news reached the King and Queen that Catherine of Aragon had died. The following day, Henry dressed all in yellow, with a white feather in his bonnet. Queen Anne was pregnant again, and she was aware that there might be consequences if she failed to give birth to a son. Later that month, the King was thrown from his horse in a tournament and was badly injured; it seemed for a time that his life was in danger. When news of this accident reached the Queen, she was sent into shock and miscarried a male child at about 15 weeks' gestation, on the day of Catherine's funeral, 29 January 1536. For most observers, this personal loss was the beginning of the end of this royal marriage.\nAlthough the Boleyn family still held important positions on the Privy Council, Anne had many enemies, including Charles Brandon, 1st Duke of Suffolk. Even her own uncle, the Duke of Norfolk, had come to resent her attitude to her power. The Boleyns preferred France over the Emperor as a potential ally, but the King's favour had swung towards the latter (partly because of Cromwell), damaging the family's influence. Also opposed to Anne were supporters of reconciliation with Princess Mary (among them the former supporters of Catherine), who had reached maturity. A second annulment was now a real possibility, although it is commonly believed that it was Cromwell's anti-Boleyn influence that led opponents to look for a way of having her executed.\nAnne's downfall came shortly after she had recovered from her final miscarriage. Whether it was primarily the result of allegations of conspiracy, adultery, or witchcraft remains a matter of debate among historians. Early signs of a fall from grace included the King's new mistress, the 28-year-old Jane Seymour, being moved into new quarters, and Anne's brother, George Boleyn, being refused the Order of the Garter, which was instead given to Nicholas Carew. Between 30 April and 2 May, five men, including George Boleyn, were arrested on charges of treasonable adultery and accused of having sexual relationships with the Queen. Anne was arrested, accused of treasonous adultery and incest. Although the evidence against them was unconvincing, the accused were found guilty and condemned to death. On 17 May 1536, Henry and Anne's marriage was annulled by Archbishop Cranmer at Lambeth Palace and the accused men were executed. Cranmer appears to have had difficulty finding grounds for an annulment and probably based it on the prior liaison between Henry and Anne's sister Mary, which in canon law meant that Henry's marriage to Anne was, like his first marriage, within a forbidden degree of affinity and therefore void. At 8\u00a0am on 19 May 1536, Anne was executed on Tower Green.\nMarriage to Jane Seymour; domestic and foreign affairs.\nThe day after Anne's execution, the 45-year-old Henry became engaged to Seymour, who had been one of the Queen's ladies-in-waiting. They were married ten days later at the Palace of Whitehall, Whitehall, London, in Anne's closet, by Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester.\nWith Charles V distracted by the internal politics of his many kingdoms and external threats, and Henry and Francis on relatively good terms, domestic and not foreign policy issues had been Henry's priority in the first half of the 1530s. In 1536, for example, Henry granted his assent to the Laws in Wales Act 1535, which legally annexed Wales, uniting England and Wales into a single nation. This was followed by the Second Succession Act (the Succession to the Crown Act 1536), which declared Henry's children by Jane to be next in the line of succession and declared both Mary and Elizabeth illegitimate, thus excluding them from the throne. The King was granted the power to further determine the line of succession in his will, should he have no further issue.\nOn 12 October 1537, Jane gave birth to a son, Prince Edward, the future Edward VI. The birth was difficult, and Queen Jane died on 24 October 1537 from an infection and was buried in Windsor. The euphoria that had accompanied Edward's birth became sorrow, but it was only over time that Henry came to long for his wife. At the time, Henry recovered quickly from the shock. Measures were immediately put in place to find another wife for Henry, which, at the insistence of Cromwell and the Privy Council, were focused on the European continent.\nIn 1538, as part of the negotiation of a secret treaty by Cromwell with Charles V, a series of dynastic marriages were proposed: Mary would marry a son of King John III of Portugal, Elizabeth would marry one of the sons of King Ferdinand I of Hungary and the infant Edward would marry one of Charles's daughters. It was suggested the widowed Henry might marry Christina, Dowager Duchess of Milan. However, when Charles and Francis made peace in January 1539, Henry became increasingly paranoid, perhaps as a result of receiving a constant list of threats to the kingdom (real or imaginary, minor or serious) supplied by Cromwell in his role as spymaster. Enriched by the dissolution of the monasteries, Henry used some of his financial reserves to build a series of coastal defences and set some aside for use in the event of a Franco-German invasion.\nMarriage to Anne of Cleves.\nHaving considered the matter, Cromwell suggested Anne, the 25-year-old sister of William, Duke of J\u00fclich-Cleves-Berg, who was seen as an important ally in case of a Roman Catholic attack on England, for the Duke fell between Lutheranism and Catholicism. Other potential brides included Christina of Denmark, Anna of Lorraine, Louise of Guise and Amalia of Cleves. Hans Holbein the Younger was dispatched to Cleves to paint a portrait of Anne for the King. Despite speculation that Holbein painted her in an overly flattering light, it is more likely that the portrait was accurate; Holbein remained in favour at court. After seeing Holbein's portrait, and urged on by the complimentary description of Anne given by his courtiers, the 49-year-old King agreed to wed Anne.\nWhen Henry met Anne, however, he was much displeased with her appearance. The King was reportedly taken aback and told his courtiers \"I promise you, I see no such thing as hath been shown me of her, by pictures and report. I am ashamed that men have praised her as they have done, and I love her not!\" Despite his protests, Henry knew that the situation was too far gone and he would have to wed his bride.\nThe marriage took place in January 1540, but it was never consummated. The morning after their wedding night, Henry complained about his new wife to Cromwell, stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Surely, my lord, I liked her before not well, but now I like her much worse! She is nothing fair, and have very evil smells about her. I took her to be no maid by reason of the closeness of her breasts and other tokens, which, when I felt them, strake me so to the heart, that I had neither will nor courage to prove the rest. I can have none appetite for displeasant airs. I have left her as good a maid as I found her.\nHenry wished to annul the marriage as soon as possible so he could marry another. Anne did not argue, and confirmed that the marriage had never been consummated. Anne's previous betrothal to Francis of Lorraine provided further grounds for the annulment. The marriage was subsequently dissolved in July 1540, and Anne received the title of \"The King's Sister\", two houses, and a generous allowance.\nMarriage to Catherine Howard (and fall of Thomas Cromwell).\nIt was soon clear that Henry had fallen for the 17-year-old Catherine Howard, the Duke of Norfolk's niece. This worried Cromwell, for Norfolk was his political opponent.\nShortly after, the religious reformers (and prot\u00e9g\u00e9s of Cromwell) Robert Barnes, William Jerome and Thomas Garret were burned as heretics. Cromwell, meanwhile, fell out of favour although it is unclear exactly why, for there is little evidence of differences in domestic or foreign policy. Despite his role, he was never formally accused of being responsible for Henry's failed marriage. Cromwell was now surrounded by enemies at court, with Norfolk also able to draw on his niece Catherine's position. Cromwell was charged with treason, selling export licences, granting passports, and drawing up commissions without permission, and may also have been blamed for the failure of the foreign policy that accompanied the attempted marriage to Anne. He was subsequently attainted and beheaded.\nOn 28 July 1540 (the same day Cromwell was executed), Henry married the young Catherine Howard, a first cousin and lady-in-waiting of Anne Boleyn. He was delighted with his new queen and awarded her the lands of Cromwell and a vast array of jewellery. Soon after the marriage, however, Queen Catherine had an affair with the courtier Thomas Culpeper. She also employed Francis Dereham, who had previously been informally engaged to her and had an affair with her prior to her marriage, as her secretary. The Privy Council was informed of her affair with Dereham whilst Henry was away; Thomas Cranmer was dispatched to investigate, and he brought evidence of Queen Catherine's previous affair with Dereham to the King's notice. Though Henry originally refused to believe the allegations, Dereham confessed. It took another meeting of the council, however, before Henry believed the accusations against Dereham and went into a rage, blaming the council before consoling himself in hunting. When questioned, the Queen could have admitted a prior contract to marry Dereham, which would have made her subsequent marriage to Henry invalid, but she instead claimed that Dereham had forced her to enter into an adulterous relationship. Dereham, meanwhile, exposed Catherine's relationship with Culpeper. Culpeper and Dereham were both executed, and Catherine too was beheaded on 13 February 1542.\nMarriage to Catherine Parr.\nHenry married his last wife, the wealthy widow Catherine Parr, in July 1543. A reformer at heart, she argued with Henry over religion. Henry remained committed to an idiosyncratic mixture of Catholicism and Protestantism; the reactionary mood that had gained ground after Cromwell's fall had neither eliminated his Protestant streak nor been overcome by it. Parr helped reconcile Henry with his daughters, Mary and Elizabeth. In 1543, the Third Succession Act put them back in the line of succession after Edward. The same act allowed Henry to determine further succession to the throne in his will.\nShrines destroyed and monasteries dissolved.\nIn 1538, the chief minister Thomas Cromwell pursued an extensive campaign against what the government termed \"idolatry\" practised under the old religion, culminating in September with the dismantling of the shrine of St. Thomas Becket at Canterbury Cathedral. As a consequence, the King was excommunicated by Pope Paul III on 17 December of the same year. In 1540, Henry sanctioned the complete destruction of shrines to saints. In 1542, England's remaining monasteries were all dissolved, and their property transferred to the Crown. Abbots and priors lost their seats in the House of Lords. Consequently, the Lords Spiritual\u00a0\u2013 as members of the clergy with seats in the House of Lords were known\u00a0\u2013 were for the first time outnumbered by the Lords Temporal.\nSecond invasion of France and the \"Rough Wooing\" of Scotland.\nThe 1539 alliance between Francis and Charles had soured, eventually degenerating into renewed war. With Catherine of Aragon and Anne Boleyn dead, relations between Charles and Henry improved considerably, and Henry concluded a secret alliance with the Emperor and decided to enter the Italian War in favour of his new ally. An invasion of France was planned for 1543. In preparation for it, Henry moved to eliminate the potential threat of Scotland under his young nephew, James V. The Scots were defeated at the Battle of Solway Moss on 24 November 1542, and James died on 15 December. Henry now hoped to unite the crowns of England and Scotland by marrying his son Edward to James's successor, Mary. The Scottish regent Lord Arran agreed to the marriage in the Treaty of Greenwich on 1 July 1543, but it was rejected by the Parliament of Scotland on 11 December. The result was eight years of war between England and Scotland, a campaign later dubbed \"the Rough Wooing\". Despite several peace treaties, unrest continued in Scotland until Henry's death.\nDespite the early success with Scotland, Henry hesitated to invade France, annoying Charles. Henry finally went to France in June 1544 with a two-pronged attack. One force under Norfolk ineffectively besieged Montreuil. The other, under Suffolk, laid siege to Boulogne. Henry later took personal command, and Boulogne fell on 18 September 1544. However, Henry had refused Charles's request to march against Paris. Charles's own campaign fizzled, and he made peace with France that same day. Henry was left alone against France, unable to make peace. Francis attempted to invade England in the summer of 1545 but his forces reached only the Isle of Wight before being repulsed in the Battle of the Solent. Financially exhausted, France and England signed the Treaty of Camp on 7 June 1546. Henry secured Boulogne for eight years. The city was then to be returned to France for 2\u00a0million crowns (\u00a3750,000). Henry needed the money; the 1544 campaign had cost \u00a3650,000, and England was once again facing bankruptcy.\nPhysical decline and death.\nLate in life, Henry became obese, with a waist measurement of , and had to be moved about with the help of mechanical devices. He was covered with painful, pus-filled boils and possibly had gout. His obesity and other medical problems can be traced to the jousting accident on 24 January 1536 in which he suffered a leg wound. The accident reopened and aggravated an injury he had sustained years earlier, to the extent that his doctors found it difficult to treat. The chronic wound festered for the remainder of his life and became ulcerated, preventing him from maintaining the level of physical activity he had previously enjoyed. The jousting accident is also believed to have caused Henry's mood swings, which may have had a dramatic effect on his personality and temperament.\nThe theory that Henry had syphilis has been dismissed by most historians. Historian Susan Maclean Kybett ascribes his death to scurvy, which is caused by insufficient vitamin C most often due to a lack of fresh fruit and vegetables in one's diet.\nA 2010 study suggests Henry may have been of Kell-positive blood type to explain both his physical and mental deterioration, being consistent with some symptoms of the McLeod syndrome, and the high mortality in the pregnancies attributed to him.\nHenry's obesity hastened his death at the age of 55, on 28 January 1547 in the Palace of Whitehall, on what would have been his father's 90th birthday. The tomb he had planned (with components taken from the tomb intended for Cardinal Wolsey) was only partly constructed and was never completed (the sarcophagus and its base were later removed and used for Lord Nelson's tomb in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral). Henry was interred in a vault at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, next to Jane Seymour. Over 100 years later, King Charles I (ruled 1625\u20131649) was buried in the same vault.\nSuccession.\nUpon Henry's death, he was succeeded by his only surviving son, Edward VI. Since Edward was then only nine years old, he could not rule directly. Instead, Henry's will designated 16 executors to serve on a regency council until Edward reached 18. The executors chose Edward Seymour, 1st Earl of Hertford, elder brother to Jane Seymour (Edward's mother), to be Lord Protector of the Realm. Under provisions of the will, if Edward died childless, the throne was to pass to Mary, Henry VIII's daughter by Catherine of Aragon, and her heirs.\nIf Mary's issue failed, the crown was to go to Elizabeth, Henry's daughter by Anne Boleyn, and her heirs. Finally, if Elizabeth's line became extinct, the crown was to be inherited by the descendants of Henry VIII's deceased younger sister, Mary, the Greys.\nThe descendants of Henry's sister Margaret Tudor\u00a0\u2013 the Stuarts, rulers of Scotland\u00a0\u2013 were thereby excluded from the succession. This provision ultimately failed when James VI of Scotland, Margaret's great-grandson, became king of England and Ireland in 1603.\nEdward VI himself would disregard the will and name Jane Grey his successor.\nPublic image.\nHenry cultivated the image of a Renaissance man, and his court was a centre of scholarly and artistic innovation and glamorous excess, epitomised by the Field of the Cloth of Gold. He scouted the country for choirboys, taking some directly from Wolsey's choir, and introduced Renaissance music into court. Musicians included Benedict de Opitiis, Richard Sampson, Ambrose Lupo, and Venetian organist Dionisio Memo, and Henry himself played and kept a considerable collection of flute instruments including recorders. He was skilled on the lute and played the organ, and was a talented player of the virginals. He could also sightread music and sing well. He was an accomplished musician, author, and poet; his best-known work is \"Pastime with Good Company\" (\"The Kynges Ballade\"). It is also frequently said that Henry wrote the sixteenth-century English folk song \"Greensleeves\". However, it is certain he did not, as \"Greensleeves\" is based on an Italian style of composition that did not reach England until after Henry's death.\nHenry was an avid gambler and dice player, and excelled at sports, especially jousting, hunting and real tennis. He was also known for his strong defence of conventional Christian piety. He was involved in the construction and improvement of several significant buildings, including Nonsuch Palace, King's College Chapel, Cambridge, and Westminster Abbey in London. Many of the existing buildings which he improved were properties confiscated from Wolsey, such as Christ Church, Oxford, Hampton Court Palace, the Palace of Whitehall and Trinity College, Cambridge.\nHenry was an intellectual, the first English king with a modern humanist education. He read and wrote English, French and Latin, and owned a large library. He annotated many books and published one of his own, and he had numerous pamphlets and lectures prepared to support the reformation of the church. Richard Sampson's \"Oratio\" (1534), for example, was an argument for absolute obedience to the monarchy and claimed that the English church had always been independent of Rome. At the popular level, theatre and minstrel troupes funded by the crown travelled around the land to promote the new religious practices; the Pope and Catholic priests and monks were mocked as foreign devils, while Henry was hailed as the glorious king of England and as a brave and heroic defender of the true faith. Henry worked hard to present an image of unchallengeable authority and irresistible power.\nHenry was a large, well-built athlete, over tall, strong, and broad in proportion. His athletic activities were more than pastimes; they were political devices that served multiple goals, enhancing his image, impressing foreign emissaries and rulers, and conveying his ability to suppress any rebellion. He arranged a jousting tournament at Greenwich in 1517 where he wore gilded armour and gilded horse trappings, and outfits of velvet, satin, and cloth of gold with pearls and jewels. It suitably impressed foreign ambassadors, one of whom wrote home that \"the wealth and civilisation of the world are here, and those who call the English barbarians appear to me to render themselves such\". Henry finally retired from jousting in 1536 after a heavy fall from his horse left him unconscious for two hours, but he continued to sponsor two lavish tournaments a year. He then started gaining weight and lost the trim, athletic figure that had made him so handsome, and his courtiers began dressing in heavily padded clothes to emulate and flatter him. His health declined rapidly near the end of his reign.\nGovernment.\nThe power of Tudor monarchs, including Henry, was 'whole' and 'entire', ruling, as they claimed, by the grace of God alone. The Crown could also rely on the exclusive use of those functions that constituted the royal prerogative. These included acts of diplomacy (including royal marriages), declarations of war, management of the coinage, the issue of royal pardons and the power to summon and dissolve Parliament as and when required. Nevertheless, as evident during Henry's break with Rome, the monarch stayed within established limits, whether legal or financial, that forced him to work closely with both the nobility and Parliament (representing the gentry).\nIn practice, Tudor monarchs used patronage to maintain a royal court that included formal institutions such as the Privy Council as well as more informal advisers and confidants. Both the rise and fall of court nobles could be swift: Henry did undoubtedly execute at will, burning or beheading two of his wives, 20 peers, four leading public servants, six close attendants and friends, one cardinal (John Fisher) and numerous abbots. Among those who were in favour at any given point in Henry's reign, one could usually be identified as a chief minister, though one of the enduring debates in the historiography of the period has been the extent to which those chief ministers controlled Henry rather than vice versa. In particular, historian G. R. Elton has argued that one such minister, Thomas Cromwell, led a \"Tudor revolution in government\" independently of the King, whom Elton presented as an opportunistic, essentially lazy participant in the nitty-gritty of politics. Where Henry did intervene personally in the running of the country, Elton argued, he mostly did so to its detriment. The prominence and influence of faction in Henry's court is similarly discussed in the context of at least five episodes of Henry's reign, including the downfall of Anne Boleyn.\nFrom 1514 to 1529, Thomas Wolsey, a cardinal of the established Church, oversaw domestic and foreign policy for the King from his position as Lord Chancellor. Wolsey centralised the national government and extended the jurisdiction of the conciliar courts, particularly the Star Chamber. The Star Chamber's overall structure remained unchanged, but Wolsey used it to provide much-needed reform of the criminal law. The power of the court itself did not outlive Wolsey, however, since no serious administrative reform was undertaken and its role eventually devolved to the localities. Wolsey helped fill the gap left by Henry's declining participation in government (particularly in comparison to his father) but did so mostly by imposing himself in the King's place. His use of these courts to pursue personal grievances, and particularly to treat delinquents as mere examples of a whole class worthy of punishment, angered the rich, who were annoyed as well by his enormous wealth and ostentatious living. Following Wolsey's downfall, Henry took full control of his government, although at court numerous complex factions continued to try to ruin and destroy each other.\nThomas Cromwell also came to define Henry's government. Returning to England from the continent in 1514 or 1515, Cromwell soon entered Wolsey's service. He turned to law, also picking up a good knowledge of the Bible, and was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1524. He became Wolsey's \"man of all work\". Driven in part by his religious beliefs, Cromwell attempted to reform the body politic of the English government through discussion and consent, and through the vehicle of continuity, not outward change. Many saw him as the man they wanted to bring about their shared aims, including Thomas Audley. By 1531, Cromwell and his associates were already responsible for the drafting of much legislation. Cromwell's first office was that of the master of the King's jewels in 1532, from which he began to invigorate the government finances. By that point, Cromwell's power as an efficient administrator, in a Council full of politicians, exceeded what Wolsey had achieved.\nCromwell did much work through his many offices to remove the tasks of government from the Royal Household (and ideologically from the personal body of the King) and into a public state. But he did so in a haphazard fashion that left several remnants, not least because he needed to retain Henry's support, his own power, and the possibility of actually achieving the plan he set out. Cromwell made the various income streams Henry VII put in place more formal and assigned largely autonomous bodies for their administration. The role of the King's Council was transferred to a reformed Privy Council, much smaller and more efficient than its predecessor. A difference emerged between the King's financial health and the country's, although Cromwell's fall undermined much of his bureaucracy, which required him to keep order among the many new bodies and prevent profligate spending that strained relations as well as finances. Cromwell's reforms ground to a halt in 1539, the initiative lost, and he failed to secure the passage of an enabling act, the Proclamation by the Crown Act 1539. He was executed on 28 July 1540.\nFinances.\nHenry inherited a vast fortune and a prosperous economy from his father, who had been frugal. This fortune is estimated at \u00a31,250,000 (the equivalent of \u00a3375\u00a0million today). By comparison, Henry VIII's reign was a near disaster financially. He augmented the royal treasury by seizing church lands, but his heavy spending and long periods of mismanagement damaged the economy.\nHenry spent much of his wealth on maintaining his court and household, including many of the building works he undertook on royal palaces. He hung 2,000 tapestries in his palaces; by comparison, James V of Scotland hung just 200. Henry took pride in showing off his collection of weapons, which included exotic archery equipment, 2,250 pieces of land ordnance and 6,500 handguns. Tudor monarchs had to fund all government expenses out of their own income. This income came from the crown lands that Henry owned as well as from customs duties like tonnage and poundage, granted by Parliament to the King for life. During Henry's reign the revenues of the Crown remained constant (around \u00a3100,000), but were eroded by inflation and rising prices brought about by war. Indeed, war and Henry's dynastic ambitions in Europe exhausted the surplus he had inherited from his father by the mid-1520s.\nHenry VII had not involved Parliament in his affairs very much, but Henry VIII had to turn to Parliament during his reign for money, in particular for grants of subsidies to fund his wars. The dissolution of the monasteries provided a means to replenish the treasury, and as a result, the Crown took possession of monastic lands worth \u00a3120,000 (\u00a336\u00a0million) a year. The Crown had profited by a small amount in 1526 when Wolsey put England onto a gold, rather than silver, standard, and had debased the currency slightly. Cromwell debased the currency more significantly, starting in Ireland in 1540. The English pound halved in value against the Flemish pound between 1540 and 1551 as a result. The nominal profit made was significant, helping to bring income and expenditure together, but it had a catastrophic effect on the country's economy. In part, it helped to bring about a period of very high inflation from 1544 onwards.\nReformation.\nHenry is generally credited with initiating the English Reformation\u00a0\u2013 the process of transforming England from a Catholic country to a Protestant one\u00a0\u2013 though his progress at the elite and mass levels is disputed, and the precise narrative not widely agreed upon. Certainly, in 1527, Henry, until then an observant and well-informed Catholic, appealed to the Pope for an annulment of his marriage to Catherine. No annulment was immediately forthcoming, since the papacy was now under the control of Charles V, Catherine's nephew. The traditional narrative gives this refusal as the trigger for Henry's rejection of papal supremacy, which he had previously defended. Yet as E. L. Woodward put it, Henry's determination to annul his marriage with Catherine was the occasion rather than the cause of the English Reformation so that \"neither too much nor too little\" should be made of the annulment. Historian A. F. Pollard has argued that even if Henry had not needed an annulment, he might have come to reject papal control over the governance of England purely for political reasons. Indeed, Henry needed a son to secure the Tudor Dynasty and avert the risk of civil war over disputed succession.\nIn any case, between 1532 and 1537, Henry instituted a number of statutes that dealt with the relationship between king and pope and hence the structure of the nascent Church of England. These included the Statute in Restraint of Appeals (passed 1533), which extended the charge of \"praemunire\" against all who introduced papal bulls into England, potentially exposing them to the death penalty if found guilty. Other acts included the Supplication against the Ordinaries and the Submission of the Clergy, which recognised Royal Supremacy over the church. The Ecclesiastical Appointments Act 1534 required the clergy to elect bishops nominated by the Sovereign. The Act of Supremacy in 1534 declared that the King was \"the only Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of England\" and the Treasons Act 1534 made it high treason, punishable by death, to refuse the Oath of Supremacy acknowledging the King as such. Similarly, following the passage of the Act of Succession 1533, all adults in the kingdom were required to acknowledge the Act's provisions (declaring Henry's marriage to Anne legitimate and his marriage to Catherine illegitimate) by oath; those who refused were subject to imprisonment for life, and any publisher or printer of any literature alleging that the marriage to Anne was invalid subject to the death penalty. Finally, the Peter's Pence Act was passed, and it reiterated that England had \"no superior under God, but only your Grace\" and that Henry's \"imperial crown\" had been diminished by \"the unreasonable and uncharitable usurpations and exactions\" of the Pope. The King had much support from the Church under Cranmer.\nTo Cromwell's annoyance, Henry insisted on parliamentary time to discuss questions of faith, which he achieved through the Duke of Norfolk. This led to the passing of the Act of Six Articles, whereby six major questions were all answered by asserting the religious orthodoxy, thus restraining the reform movement in England. It was followed by the beginnings of a reformed liturgy and of the \"Book of Common Prayer\", which would take until 1549 to complete. But this victory for religious conservatives did not convert into much change in personnel, and Cranmer remained in his position. Overall, the rest of Henry's reign saw a subtle movement away from religious orthodoxy, helped in part by the deaths of prominent figures from before the break with Rome, especially the executions of Thomas More and John Fisher in 1535 for refusing to renounce papal authority. Henry established a new political theology of obedience to the crown that continued for the next decade. It reflected Martin Luther's new interpretation of the fourth commandment (\"Honour thy father and mother\"), brought to England by William Tyndale. The founding of royal authority on the Ten Commandments was another important shift: reformers within the Church used the Commandments' emphasis on faith and the word of God, while conservatives emphasised the need for dedication to God and doing good. The reformers' efforts lay behind the publication of the Great Bible in 1539 in English. Protestant Reformers still faced persecution, particularly over objections to Henry's annulment. Many fled abroad, including the influential Tyndale, who was eventually executed and his body burned at Henry's behest.\nWhen taxes once payable to Rome were transferred to the Crown, Cromwell saw the need to assess the taxable value of the Church's extensive holdings as they stood in 1535. The result was an extensive compendium, the \"Valor Ecclesiasticus\". In September 1535, Cromwell commissioned a more general visitation of religious institutions, to be undertaken by four appointee visitors. The visitation focused almost exclusively on the country's religious houses, with largely negative conclusions. In addition to reporting back to Cromwell, the visitors made the lives of the monks more difficult by enforcing strict behavioural standards. The result was to encourage self-dissolution. In any case, the evidence Cromwell gathered led swiftly to the beginning of the state-enforced dissolution of the monasteries, with all religious houses worth less than \u00a3200 vested by statute in the crown in January 1536. After a short pause, surviving religious houses were transferred one by one to the Crown and new owners, and the dissolution confirmed by a further statute in 1539. By January 1540 no such houses remained; 800 had been dissolved. The process had been efficient, with minimal resistance, and brought the crown some \u00a390,000 a year. The extent to which the dissolution of all houses was planned from the start is debated by historians; there is some evidence that major houses were originally intended only to be reformed. Cromwell's actions transferred a fifth of England's landed wealth to new hands. The programme was designed primarily to create a landed gentry beholden to the crown, which would use the lands much more efficiently. Although little opposition to the supremacy could be found in England's religious houses, they had links to the international church and were an obstacle to further religious reform.\nResponse to the reforms was mixed. The religious houses had been the only support of the impoverished, and the reforms alienated much of the populace outside London, helping to provoke the great northern rising of 1536\u201337, known as the Pilgrimage of Grace. Elsewhere the changes were accepted and welcomed, and those who clung to Catholic rites kept quiet or moved in secrecy. They reemerged during the reign of Henry's daughter Mary (1553\u201358).\nMilitary.\nApart from permanent garrisons at Berwick, Calais, and Carlisle, England's standing army numbered only a few hundred men. This was increased only slightly by Henry. Henry's invasion force of 1513, some 30,000 men, was composed of billmen and longbowmen, at a time when the other European nations were moving to hand guns and pikemen but the difference in capability was at this stage not significant, and Henry's forces had new armour and weaponry. They were also supported by battlefield artillery and the war wagon, relatively new innovations, and several large and expensive siege guns. The invasion force of 1544 was similarly well-equipped and organised, although command on the battlefield was laid with the dukes of Suffolk and Norfolk, which in the latter case produced disastrous results at Montreuil.\nHenry's break with Rome incurred the threat of a large-scale French or Spanish invasion. To guard against this, in 1538 he began to build a chain of expensive, state-of-the-art defences along Britain's southern and eastern coasts, from Kent to Cornwall, largely built of material gained from the demolition of the monasteries. These were known as Henry VIII's Device Forts. He also strengthened existing coastal defence fortresses such as Dover Castle and, at Dover, Moat Bulwark and Archcliffe Fort, which he visited for a few months to supervise. Wolsey had many years before conducted the censuses required for an overhaul of the system of militia, but no reform resulted. In 1538\u201339, Cromwell overhauled the shire musters, but his work mainly served to demonstrate how inadequate they were in organisation. The building works, including that at Berwick, along with the reform of the militias and musters, were eventually finished under Queen Mary.\nHenry is traditionally cited as one of the founders of the Royal Navy. Technologically, Henry invested in large cannon for his warships, an idea that had taken hold in other countries, to replace the smaller serpentines in use. He also flirted with designing ships personally. His contribution to larger vessels, if any, is unknown, but it is believed that he influenced the design of rowbarges and similar galleys. Henry was also responsible for the creation of a permanent navy, with the supporting anchorages and dockyards. Tactically, Henry's reign saw the first steps of the Navy moving from prioritising boarding tactics to emphasising gunnery instead. The Tudor navy was enlarged from seven ships to up to 50 (the \"Mary Rose\" among them), and Henry was responsible for the establishment of the \"council for marine causes\" to oversee the maintenance and operation of the Navy, becoming the basis for the later Admiralty.\nIreland.\nAt the beginning of Henry's reign, Ireland was effectively divided into three zones: the Pale, where English rule was unchallenged; Leinster and Munster, the so-called \"obedient land\" of Anglo-Irish peers; and the Gaelic Connaught and Ulster, with merely nominal English rule. Until 1513, Henry continued the policy of his father, to allow Irish lords to rule in the King's name and accept steep divisions between the communities. However, upon the death of the Gerald FitzGerald, 8th Earl of Kildare, Lord Deputy of Ireland, fractious Irish politics combined with a more ambitious Henry to cause trouble. When Thomas Butler, 7th Earl of Ormond, died, Henry recognised one successor for Ormond's English, Welsh and Scottish lands, whilst in Ireland another took control. Kildare's successor, the 9th Earl, was replaced as Lord Deputy of Ireland by the Earl of Surrey in 1520. Surrey's ambitious aims were costly but ineffective; English rule became trapped between winning the Irish lords over with diplomacy, as favoured by Henry and Wolsey, and a sweeping military occupation as proposed by Surrey. Surrey was recalled in 1521, with Piers Butler \u2013 one of the claimants to the Earldom of Ormond \u2013 appointed in his place. Butler proved unable to control opposition, including that of Kildare. Kildare was appointed lord deputy in 1524, resuming his dispute with Butler, which had before been in a lull. Meanwhile, James FitzGerald, 10th Earl of Desmond, an Anglo-Irish peer, had turned his support to Richard de la Pole as pretender to the English throne; when in 1528 Kildare failed to take suitable actions against him, Kildare was once again removed from his post.\nThe Desmond situation was resolved on his death in 1529, which was followed by a period of uncertainty. This was effectively ended with the appointment of Henry FitzRoy, Duke of Richmond and Somerset and the King's son, as lord deputy. Richmond had never before visited Ireland, his appointment a break with past policy. For a time it looked as if peace might be restored with the return of Kildare to Ireland to manage the tribes, but the effect was limited and the Irish Parliament soon rendered ineffective. Ireland began to receive the attention of Cromwell, who had supporters of Ormond and Desmond promoted. Kildare, on the other hand, was summoned to London; after some hesitation, he departed for London in 1534, where he would face charges of treason. His son, Thomas, Lord Offaly, was more forthright, denouncing the King and leading a \"Catholic crusade\" against Henry, who was by this time mired in marital problems. Offaly had the Archbishop of Dublin, John Alen, murdered and besieged Dublin. Offaly led a mixture of Pale gentry and Irish tribes, although he failed to secure the support of Lord Darcy, a sympathiser, or Charles V. What was effectively a civil war was ended with the intervention of 2,000 English troops \u2013 a large army by Irish standards \u2013 and the execution of Offaly (his father was already dead) and his uncles.\nAlthough the Offaly revolt was followed by a determination to rule Ireland more closely, Henry was wary of drawn-out conflict with the tribes, and a royal commission recommended that the only relationship with the tribes was to be promises of peace, their land protected from English expansion. The man to lead this effort was Antony St Leger, as Lord Deputy of Ireland, who would remain in post past Henry's death. Until the break with Rome, it was widely believed that Ireland was a Papal possession granted as a mere fiefdom to the English king, so in 1542 Henry asserted England's claim to the Kingdom of Ireland free from the Papal overlordship. This change did, however, also allow a policy of peaceful reconciliation and expansion: the Lords of Ireland would grant their lands to the King, before being returned as fiefdoms. The incentive to comply with Henry's request was an accompanying barony, and thus a right to sit in the Irish House of Lords, which was to run in parallel with England's. The Irish law of the tribes did not suit such an arrangement, because the chieftain did not have the required rights; this made progress tortuous, and the plan was abandoned in 1543, not to be replaced.\nHistoriography.\nThe complexities and sheer scale of Henry's legacy ensured that, in the words of Betteridge and Freeman, \"throughout the centuries, Henry has been praised and reviled, but he has never been ignored\". In the 1950s, historian John D. Mackie summed up Henry's personality and its impact on his achievements and popularity:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The respect, nay even the popularity, which he had from his people was not unmerited... He kept the development of England in line with some of the most vigorous, though not the noblest forces of the day. His high courage \u2013 highest when things went ill \u2013 his commanding intellect, his appreciation of fact, and his instinct for rule carried his country through a perilous time of change, and his very arrogance saved his people from the wars which afflicted other lands. Dimly remembering the wars of the Roses, vaguely informed as to the slaughters and sufferings in Europe, the people of England knew that in Henry they had a great king.\nA particular focus of modern historiography has been the extent to which the events of Henry's life (including his marriages, foreign policy and religious changes) were the result of his own initiative and, if they were, whether they were the result of opportunism or of a principled undertaking by Henry. The traditional interpretation of those events was provided by historian A. F. Pollard, who in 1902 presented his own, largely positive, view of the King, lauding him, \"as the King and statesman who, whatever his personal failings, led England down the road to parliamentary democracy and empire\". Pollard's interpretation remained the dominant interpretation of Henry's life until the publication of the doctoral thesis of Geoffrey Elton in 1953.\nElton's 1977 book on \"The Tudor Revolution in Government\" maintained Pollard's positive interpretation of the Henrician period as a whole, but reinterpreted Henry himself as a follower rather than a leader. For Elton, it was Cromwell and not Henry who undertook the changes in government \u2013 Henry was shrewd but lacked the vision to follow a complex plan through. Henry was little more, in other words, than an \"ego-centric monstrosity\" whose reign \"owed its successes and virtues to better and greater men about him; most of its horrors and failures sprang more directly from [the King]\".\nAlthough the central tenets of Elton's thesis have since been questioned, it has consistently provided the starting point for much later work, including that of J. J. Scarisbrick, his student. Scarisbrick largely kept Elton's regard for Cromwell's abilities but returned agency to Henry, who Scarisbrick considered to have ultimately directed and shaped policy. For Scarisbrick, Henry was a formidable, captivating man who \"wore regality with a splendid conviction\". The effect of endowing Henry with this ability, however, was largely negative in Scarisbrick's eyes: to Scarisbrick, the Henrician period was one of upheaval and destruction and those in charge worthy of blame more than praise. Even among more recent biographers, including David Loades, David Starkey, and John Guy, there has ultimately been little consensus on the extent to which Henry was responsible for the changes he oversaw or the assessment of those he did bring about.\nThis lack of clarity about Henry's control over events has contributed to the variation in the qualities ascribed to him: religious conservative or dangerous radical; lover of beauty or brutal destroyer of priceless artefacts; friend and patron or betrayer of those around him; chivalry incarnate or ruthless chauvinist. One traditional approach, favoured by Starkey and others, is to divide Henry's reign into two halves, the first Henry being dominated by positive qualities (politically inclusive, pious, athletic but also intellectual) who presided over a period of stability and calm, and the latter a \"hulking tyrant\" who presided over a period of dramatic, sometimes whimsical, change. Other writers have tried to merge Henry's disparate personality into a single whole; Lacey Baldwin Smith, for example, considered him an egotistical borderline neurotic given to great fits of temper and deep and dangerous suspicions, with a mechanical and conventional, but deeply held piety, and having at best a mediocre intellect.\nStyle and arms.\nMany changes were made to the royal style during his reign. Henry originally used the style \"Henry the Eighth, by the Grace of God, King of England, France and Lord of Ireland\". In 1521, pursuant to a grant from Pope Leo X rewarding Henry for his \"Defence of the Seven Sacraments\", the royal style became \"Henry the Eighth, by the Grace of God, King of England and France, Defender of the Faith and Lord of Ireland\". Following Henry's excommunication, Pope Paul III rescinded the grant of the title \"Defender of the Faith\", but an Act of Parliament (35 Hen. 8. c. 3) declared that it remained valid; and it continues in royal usage to the present day, as evidenced by the letters FID DEF or F.D. on all British coinage. Henry's motto was \"Coeur Loyal\" (\"true heart\"), and he had this embroidered on his clothes in the form of a heart symbol and with the word \"loyal\". His emblem was the Tudor rose and the Beaufort portcullis. As king, Henry's arms were the same as those used by his predecessors since Henry IV: \"Quarterly, Azure three fleurs-de-lys Or (for France) and Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or (for England)\".\nIn 1535, Henry added the \"supremacy phrase\" to the royal style, which became \"Henry the Eighth, by the Grace of God, King of England and France, Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland and of the Church of England in Earth Supreme Head\". In 1536, the phrase \"of the Church of England\" changed to \"of the Church of England and also of Ireland\". In 1541, Henry had the Irish Parliament change the title \"Lord of Ireland\" to \"King of Ireland\" with the Crown of Ireland Act 1542, after being advised that many Irish people regarded the Pope as the true head of their country, with the Lord acting as a mere representative. The reason the Irish regarded the Pope as their overlord was that Ireland had originally been given to King Henry II of England by Pope Adrian IV in the 12th century as a feudal territory under papal overlordship. The meeting of the Irish Parliament that proclaimed Henry VIII as king of Ireland was the first meeting attended by the Gaelic Irish chieftains as well as the Anglo-Irish aristocrats. The style \"Henry the Eighth, by the Grace of God, King of England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith and of the Church of England and also of Ireland in Earth Supreme Head\" remained in use until the end of Henry's reign.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14189", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14189", "title": "Haryana", "text": "State in northwestern India\nHaryana (, ) is a state located in the northwestern part of India. It was carved out after the linguistic reorganisation of Punjab on 1 November 1966. It is ranked 21st in terms of area, with less than 1.4% () of India's land area. The state capital is Chandigarh, which it shares with the neighbouring state of Punjab; the most populous city is Faridabad, a part of the National Capital Region. The city of Gurgaon is among India's largest financial and technology hubs. Haryana has administrative divisions, districts, 72 sub-divisions, 93 revenue tehsils, 50 sub-tehsils, 140 community development blocks, 154 cities and towns, 7,356 villages, and 6,222 villages panchayats.\nHaryana contains 32 special economic zones (SEZs), mainly located within the industrial corridor projects connecting the National Capital Region. Gurgaon is considered one of the major information technology and automobile hubs of India. Haryana ranks 11th among Indian states in human development index. The economy of Haryana is the 13th largest in India, with a gross state domestic product (GSDP) of \u20b9 () and has the country's 5th-highest GSDP per capita of ().\nThe state is rich in history, monuments, heritage, flora and fauna and tourism, with a well-developed economy, national and state highways. It is bordered by Punjab and Himachal Pradesh to the north, by Rajasthan to the west and south, while river Yamuna forms its eastern border with Uttar Pradesh. Haryana surrounds the country's capital territory of Delhi on three sides (north, west and south), consequently, a large area of Haryana state is included in the economically important National Capital Region of India for the purposes of planning and development.\nEtymology.\nSome anthropologists believe that the name \"Haryana\" originated in the period following the Mahabharata, when the \u0100bhiras are thought to have settled in the region. This community was known for developing advanced agricultural techniques.\nHistorian Pran Nath Chopra suggests that the name evolved linguistically over time\u2014from \u0100bhir\u0101yana (derived from \u0101bhira meaning \"Abhira\" and ayana meaning \"path\" or \"way\") to Ahir\u0101yana, and eventually became Hariy\u0101n\u0101 or Haryana.\nHistory.\nAncient period.\nThe villages of Rakhigarhi in Hisar district and Bhirrana in Fatehabad district are home to ancient sites of the Indus Valley Civilization, which contain evidence of paved roads, a drainage system, a large-scale rainwater collection storage system, terracotta brick and statue production, and skilled metalworking (in both bronze and precious metals).\nDuring the Vedic era, Haryana was the site of the Kuru kingdom, one of India's great Mahajanapadas. The south of Haryana is the claimed location of Manu's state of Brahmavarta. The area surrounding Dhosi Hill, and districts of Rewari and Mahendragarh had Ashrams of several Rishis who made valuable contributions to important Hindu scriptures like Vedas, Upanishads, Manusmriti, Brahmanas and Puranas. As per Manusmriti, Manu was the king of Brahmavarta, the flood time state 10,000 years ago surrounded by oldest route of Sarasvati and Drishadwati rivers on the banks of which Sanatan-Vedic or present-day Hindu ethos evolved and scriptures were composed.\nMedieval period.\nAncient bronze and stone idols of Jain Tirthankara were found in archaeological expeditions in Badli, Bhiwani (Ranila, Charkhi Dadri and Badhra), Dadri, Gurgaon (Gurugram), Hansi, Hisar, Kasan, Nahad, Narnaul, Pehowa, Rewari, Rohad, Rohtak (Asthal Bohar) and Sonepat in Haryana.\nPushyabhuti dynasty ruled parts of northern India in the 7th century with its capital at Thanesar. Harsha was a prominent king of the dynasty. Tomara dynasty ruled the south Haryana region in the 10th century. Anangpal Tomar was a prominent king among the Tomaras.\nAfter the sack of Bhatner fort during the Timurid conquests of India in 1398, Timur attacked and sacked the cities of Sirsa, Fatehabad, Sunam, Kaithal and Panipat.\nHem Chandra Vikramaditya, also called Hemu, claimed royal status and the throne of Delhi after defeating Akbar's Mughal forces on 7 October 1556 in the Battle of Delhi, and assumed the ancient title of Vikramaditya. The area that is now Haryana has been ruled by some of the major empires of India. Panipat is known for three seminal battles in the history of India. In the First Battle of Panipat (1526), Babur defeated the Lodis. In the Second Battle of Panipat (1556), Akbar defeated the local Haryanvi Hindu Emperor of Delhi, who belonged to Rewari. Hem Chandra Vikramaditya had earlier won 22 battles across India from 1553 to 1556 from Punjab to Bengal, defeating the Mughals and Afghans. Hemu had defeated Akbar's forces twice at Agra and the Battle of Delhi in 1556 to become the last Hindu Emperor of India with a formal coronation at Purana Quila in Delhi on 7 October 1556. In the Third Battle of Panipat (1761), the Afghan king Ahmad Shah Abdali defeated the Marathas.\nThe growth of trade centers like Bhiwani was supported by influential merchants such as Seth Nand Ram Ji Katla Wale, who promoted social development and commerce during the late 18th and early 19th centuries. He was one of the prominent leaders who devoted his life to establishing Bhiwani as a trade centre in the 18th century.\nBritish Period.\nThe state was part of the British Punjab province. The Delhi division of Punjab province formed the bulk of Haryana. Among the princely states that were located in the state were Jind, Kalsia, Loharu, Dujana and Pataudi, as well as parts of the Patiala State.\nPartition and aftermath.\nDuring the Partition of India, the Punjab province was one of two British Indian provinces, alongside Bengal, to be partitioned between India and Pakistan. Haryana, along with other Hindu and Sikh-dominated areas of Punjab province, became part of India as East Punjab state. As a result, a significant number of Muslims left for the newly formed country of Pakistan. Similarly, a huge number of Hindu and Sikh refugees poured into the state from West Punjab. Gopi Chand Bhargava, who hailed from Sirsa in present-day Haryana, became the first Chief Minister of East Punjab.\nFormation of Haryana.\nHaryana as a state came into existence on 1 November 1966 the Punjab Reorganisation Act (1966). The Indian government set up the Shah Commission under the chairmanship of Justice JC Shah on 23 April 1966 to divide the existing state of Punjab and determine the boundaries of the new state of Haryana after consideration of the languages spoken by the people. It encompassed the predominantly Hindi-speaking southern part of former Punjab, while the state of Punjab was reduced to the area where Punjabi speakers formed the majority population. The commission delivered its report on 31 May 1966 whereby the then-districts of Hisar, Mahendragarh, Gurgaon, Rohtak and Karnal were to be a part of the new state of Haryana. Further, the tehsils of Jind and Narwana in the Sangrur district \u2013 along with Naraingarh, Ambala and Jagadhri \u2013 were to be included.\nThe commission recommended that the tehsil of Kharar, which includes Chandigarh, the state capital of Punjab, should be a part of Haryana. However, Kharar was given to Punjab. The city of Chandigarh was made a union territory, serving as the capital of both Punjab and Haryana.\nBhagwat Dayal Sharma became the first Chief Minister of Haryana. Chaudhary Devi Lal is credited to be the individual who pushed for the creation of this commission. He was an instrumental figure in the separation of the Haryana state from Punjab in 1966.\nPunjabi Migration to Haryana in 1947 and 1980s.\nThe Punjabi migration to Haryana occurred in two major waves\u2014first during the Partition of India in 1947, and later during the 1980s, influenced by the Khalistani movement in Punjab.\nThe Partition of India led to one of the largest mass migrations in history, as millions of people were displaced due to the creation of Pakistan. Many Punjabi Hindus and Sikhs fled West Punjab (now in Pakistan) and settled in Haryana, bringing with them their agricultural skills, business expertise, and cultural traditions. Their arrival helped in the economic development of Haryana, particularly in agriculture and trade, as they introduced advanced farming techniques and expanded local businesses.\nThe Khalistani movement, which emerged in Punjab during the 1980s, led to political instability and violent insurgency. The demand for a separate Sikh state (Khalistan) resulted in clashes between separatist groups and security forces, making the region unsafe for many civilians. This turmoil prompted Punjabi families, including both Hindus and Sikhs, to migrate to neighbouring Haryana, seeking security, stability, and economic opportunities.\nThe urban centers of Haryana witnessed an influx of Punjabi migrants, who contributed to the state's business and industrial sectors.\nBy the mid-1990s, the insurgency declined due to government interventions, weakening separatist factions, and changing political dynamics.\nThese migrations have shaped Haryana's demographic, cultural, and economic landscape, making Punjabis an integral part of the state's growth and identity.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCastes, tribes and Ethnic groups.\nAs per 2019 estimates, the caste wise composition of Haryana is 25\u201330% Jats, 21% Scheduled Caste, 8% Khatris, 7.5% Brahmins, 5.1% Ahir/Yadav, 5% Vaish, 4% Jat Sikhs, 3.8% Meos and other Muslims, 3.4% Rajputs, 3.35% Gujjar, 2.9% Saini, 2.7% Kumhars, 1.1% Ror and 0.7% Bishnois.\nAccording to a 2023 report, the Jats constitute 25% of the state's population, while Sainis are at 8%.\nThe Punjabis ethnic group constitutes more than one-third of Haryana's population, making them a significant and influential community in the state.\nLanguages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe official language of Haryana is Modern Standard Hindi and second official language is Punjabi.\nSeveral regional languages or dialects, often subsumed under the name \"Hindi\", are spoken in the state. Predominant among them is Haryanvi (also known as Bangru), whose territory encompasses the central and eastern portions of Haryana. Hindi and Punjabi is spoken in the northeast, Bagri in the west, Deshwali in the East and Ahirwati, Mewati and Braj Bhasha in the south.\nThere are also significant numbers of speakers of Urdu and Punjabi, the latter of which was recognised as the second official language of Haryana for government and administrative purposes in 2010. After the state's formation, Telugu was made the state's \"second language\" \u2013 to be taught in schools \u2013 but it was not the \"second official language\" for official communication. Due to a lack of students, the language ultimately stopped being taught. Tamil was made the second language in 1969 by Bansi Lal to show the state's differences with Punjab although there were no Tamil speakers in Haryana at the time. In 2010, due to the lack of Tamil speakers, the language was removed from its status.\nThere are also some speakers of several major regional languages of neighbouring states or other parts of the subcontinent, like Bengali, Bhojpuri, Marwari, Mewari, and Nepali, as well as smaller communities of speakers of languages that are dispersed across larger regions, like Bauria, Bazigar, Gujari, Gade Lohar, Oadki, and Sansi.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2011 census, of the total population of 25,351,462 in Haryana, Hindus (87.46%) constitute the majority of the state's population with Muslims (7.03%) (mainly Meos) and Sikhs (4.91%) being the largest minorities.\nMuslims are mainly found in the districts of Nuh, Palwal, and Faridabad, along with the Sohna tehsil of Gurgaon district. Haryana has the second largest Sikh population in India after Punjab, and they mostly live in the districts adjoining Punjab, such as Sirsa, Jind, Fatehabad, Kaithal, Kurukshetra, Ambala and Panchkula.\nCulture.\nMusic.\nHaryana has its own unique traditional folk music, folk dances, saang (folk theatre), cinema, belief system such as Jathera (ancestral worship), and arts such as Phulkari and Shisha embroidery.\nFolk dances.\nFolk music and dances of Haryana are based on satisfying the cultural needs of primarily agrarian and martial natures of Haryanavi tribes.\nHaryanvi musical folk theatre's main types are Saang, Raslila and Ragini. The Saang and Ragini form of theatre was popularised by Lakhmi Chand.\nHaryanvi folk dances and music have fast energetic movements. Three popular categories of dance are festive-seasonal, devotional, and ceremonial-recreational. The festive-seasonal dances and songs are Gogaji/Gugga, Holi, Phaag, Sawan, Teej. The devotional dances and songs are Chaupaiya, Holi, Manjira, Ras Leela, Raginis). The ceremonial-recreational dances and songs are of following types: legendary bravery (Kissa and Ragini of male warriors and female Satis), love and romance (Been and its variant N\u0101gin\u012b dance, and Ragini), ceremonial (Dhamal Dance, Ghoomar, Jhoomar (male), Khoria, Loor, and Ragini).\nFolk music and songs.\nHaryanvi folk music is based on day-to-day themes and injecting earthly humour enlivens the feel of the songs. Haryanvi music takes two main forms: \"Classical folk music\" and \"Desi Folk music\" (Country Music of Haryana), and sung in the form of ballads and love, valor and bravery, harvest, happiness and pangs of the parting of lovers.\nClassical Haryanvi folk music.\nClassical Haryanvi folk music is based on Indian classical music. Hindustani classical ragas, learnt in gharana parampara of guru\u2013shishya tradition, are used to sing songs of heroic bravery (such as Alha-Khand (1163\u20131202 CE) about the bravery of Alha and Udal, Jaimal and Patta of Maharana Udai Singh II), Brahmas worship and festive seasonal songs (such as Teej, Holi and Phaag songs of Phalgun month near Holi). Bravery songs are sung in high pitch.\nDesi Haryanvi folk music.\nDesi Haryanvi folk music, is a form of Haryanvi music, based on Raag Bhairvi, Raag Bhairav, Raag Kafi, Raag Jaijaivanti, Raag Jhinjhoti and Raag Pahadi and used for celebrating community bonhomie to sing seasonal songs, ballads, ceremonial songs (wedding, etc.) and related religious legendary tales such as Puran Bhagat. Relationship and songs celebrating love and life are sung in medium pitch. Ceremonial and religious songs are sung in low pitch. Young girls and women usually sing entertaining and fast seasonal, love, relationship and friendship-related songs such as Phagan (song for eponymous season/month), Katak (songs for the eponymous season/month), Samman (songs for the eponymous season/month), (male-female duet songs), (songs of sharing heartfelt feelings among female friends). Older women usually sing devotional Mangal Geet (auspicious songs) and ceremonial songs such as Bhajan, Bhat (wedding gift to the mother of bride or groom by her brother), Sagai, Ban (Hindu wedding ritual where pre-wedding festivities starts), Kuan-Poojan (a custom that is performed to welcome the birth of a child by worshiping the well or source of drinking water), Sanjhi and Holi festival.\nSocially normative-cohesive impact.\nMusic and dance for Haryanvi people is a way of lessening societal differences as folk singers are highly esteemed and they are sought after and invited for events, ceremonies and special occasions regardless of their caste or status. These inter-caste songs are fluid in nature, and never personalised for any specific caste, and they are sung collectively by women from different strata, castes, and dialects. These songs transform fluidly in dialect, style, words, etc. This adoptive style can be seen in the adoption of tunes of Bollywood movie songs into Haryanvi songs. Despite this continuous fluid transforming nature, Haryanvi songs have a distinct style of their own as explained above.\nWith the coming up of a strongly socio-economic metropolitan culture in the emergence of urban Gurgaon Haryana is also witnessing community participation in public arts and city beautification. Several landmarks across Gurgaon are decorated with public murals and graffiti with cultural cohesive ideologies and stand the testimony of a lived sentiment in Haryana folk.\nCuisine.\nAs per a survey, 13% of males and 7.8% of females of Haryana are non-vegetarian. The cuisine of Haryana, rooted in its predominantly agricultural society, has maintained a simple and uncomplicated essence. The regional cuisine features the staples of roti, saag, vegetarian sabzi and milk products such as ghee, milk, lassi and kheer. Haryana is often referred to as the 'Land of Rotis' due to its residents' fondness for various types of rotis. Wheat rotis are ubiquitous, along with the popular baajre ki roti. In the past, rotis were commonly made from a blend of wheat, gram, and barley flour, offering a nutritious and wholesome combination. Another notable variety is the gochini atta, crafted from wheat and gram flour. Haryana is renowned for its abundant livestock, including the famed Murrah buffalo and the Haryana cow. This cattle wealth ensures a plentiful supply of milk and dairy products in Haryanvi cuisine. Many households produce their own butter and ghee, which are generously incorporated into daily meals. Fresh homemade butter, known as \"nooni\" or \"tindi ghee,\" is commonly churned on a daily basis. When a girl becomes a mother, it's customary for her family to present her with gifts of ghee, edible gum (gondh), laddus (sweetmeats made from gram flour), and dry fruits. Buttermilk, known as \"chaaj,\" is a popular beverage and serves as an instant refresher during the summer months. Lassi, made from yogurt, is another beloved drink that can almost constitute a meal in itself. The Haryanvi fondness for lassi is evident in the fact that \"thandai,\" a sweet milk-based drink, is referred to as \"kachi lassi\" in Haryana.\nPunjabi Culture.\nPunjabi culture has a significant presence in Haryana, particularly in regions bordering Punjab and the GT road belt. The influence is evident in language, cuisine, festivals, and traditions. Many people in Haryana speak Punjabi alongside Hindi and Haryanvi, and Punjabi music and dance forms like Bhangra and Giddha are popular. Additionally, Punjabi cuisine, including dishes like Makki di Roti and Sarson da Saag, is widely enjoyed. Efforts to preserve and promote Punjabi identity in Haryana have been ongoing, with linguistic and cultural initiatives aimed at strengthening the connection between the Punjabi-speaking population and their heritage.\nSociety.\nHaryanvi people have a concept of inclusive society involving the \"36 J\u0101tis\" or communities. Castes such as Jat, Rajput, Gurjar, Saini, Pasi, Ahirs, Ror, Meo, Charan, Bishnoi, Harijan, Aggarwal, Brahmin, Khatri and Tyagi are some of the notable of these 36 J\u0101tis.\nGeography.\nHaryana is a landlocked state in northern India. It is between 27\u00b039' to 30\u00b035' N latitude and between 74\u00b028' and 77\u00b036' E longitude. The total geographical area of the state is 4.42 m ha, which is 1.4% of the geographical area of the country. The altitude of Haryana varies between 700 and 3600\u00a0ft (200 metres to 1200 metres) above sea level. Haryana has only 4% (compared with national 21.85%) area under forests. Karoh Peak, a tall mountain peak in the Sivalik Hills range of the greater Himalayas range located near Morni Hills area of Panchkula district, is the highest point in Haryana. Most of the state sits atop the fertile Ghaggar Plain, a subsection of the Indo-Gangetic Plain. Haryana has 4 states and 2 union territories on its border \u2013 Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Delhi, and Chandigarh.\nPlains and mountains.\nHaryana has four main geographical features.\nHydrography.\nThe Yamuna, a tributary of the Ganges, flows along the state's eastern boundary.\nNorthern Haryana has several northeast to west flowing rivers originating from the Sivalik Hills of Himalayas, such as Ghaggar (palaeochannel of vedic Sarasvati river), Chautang (paleochannel of vedic Drishadvati river, tributary of the Ghagghar), Tangri river (tributary of the Ghagghar), Kaushalya river (tributary of the Ghagghar), Markanda River (tributary of Ghagghar), Sarsuti, Dangri, Somb river. Haryana's main seasonal river, the Ghaggar-Hakra, known as Ghaggar before the Ottu barrage and as the Hakra downstream of the barrage, rises in the outer Himalayas, between the Yamuna and the Satluj and enters the state near Pinjore in the Panchkula district, passes through Ambala and Sirsa, it reaches Bikaner in Rajasthan and runs for before disappearing into the deserts of Rajasthan. The seasonal Markanda River, known as the \"Aruna\" in ancient times, originates from the lower Shivalik Hills and enters Haryana west of Ambala, and swells into a raging torrent during monsoon is notorious for its devastating power, carries its surplus water on to the Sanisa Lake where the Markanda joins the Sarasuti and later the Ghaggar.\nSouthern Haryana has several south-west to east flowing seasonal rivulets originating from the Aravalli Range in and around the hills in Mewat region, including Sahibi River (called Najafgarh drain in Delhi), Dohan river (tributary of Sahibi, originates at Mandoli village near Neem Ka Thana in Jhunjhunu district of Rajasthan and then disappears in Mahendragarh district), Krishnavati river (former tributary of Sahibi river, originates near Dariba and disappears in Mahendragarh district much before reaching Sahibi river) and Indori river (longest tributary of Sahibi River, originates in Sikar district of Rajasthan and flows to Rewari district of Haryana), these once were tributaries of the Drishadwati/Saraswati river.\nMajor canals are Western Yamuna Canal, Sutlej Yamuna link canal (from Sutlej river tributary of Indus), and Indira Gandhi Canal.\nMajor dams are Kaushalya Dam in Panchkula district, Hathnikund Barrage and Tajewala Barrage on Yamuna in Yamunanagar district, Pathrala barrage on Somb river in Yamunanagar district, ancient Anagpur Dam near Surajkund in Faridabad district, and Ottu barrage on Ghaggar-Hakra River in Sirsa district.\nMajor lakes are Dighal Wetland, Badkhal Lake in Faridabad, Basai Wetland, Sultanpur National Park, and Damdama Lake in Gurgaon, Bhindawas Lake in Jhajjar, holy Brahma Sarovar and Sannihit Sarovar in Kurukshetra, Blue Bird Lake in Hisar, Hathni Kund in Yamunanagar district, Karna Lake at Karnal, ancient Surajkund in Faridabad, and Tilyar Lake in Rohtak.\nThe \"Haryana State Waterbody Management Board\" is responsible for the rejuvenation of 14,000 johads of Haryana and up to 60 lakes in National Capital Region falling within the Haryana state.\nThe only hot spring in Haryana is the Sohna Sulphur Hot Spring at Sohna in Gurgaon district. Tosham Hill range has several sacred sulphur ponds of religious significance that are revered for the healing impact of sulphur, such as \"Pandu Teerth Kund\", \"Surya Kund\", \"Kukkar Kund\", \"Gyarasia Kund\" or \"Vyas Kund\".\nSeasonal waterfalls include Tikkar Taal twin lakes at Morni hiills, Dhosi Hill in Mahendragarh district, Pali village on the outskirts of Faridabad, and Ghamroj Waterfall near Gurgaon.\nClimate.\nHaryana is hot in summer with maximum temperatures hovering around and cool in winter with minimum temperatures around . The hottest months are May and June and the coldest are December and January. The climate is semi-arid to subhumid with an average rainfall of 592.93\u00a0mm. Around 29% of rainfall is received during the months from July to September as a result of the monsoon, and the remaining rainfall is received during the period from December to February as a result of the western disturbance.\nFlora and fauna.\nForests.\nForest cover in the state in 2013 was 3.59% (1586\u00a0km2) and the tree cover in the state was 2.90% (1282\u00a0km2), giving a total forest and tree cover of 6.49%. In 2016 and 2017, 18,412 hectares were brought under tree cover by planting 14.1\u00a0million seedlings. Thorny, dry, deciduous forest and thorny shrubs can be found all over the state. During the monsoon, a carpet of grass covers the hills. Shisham, khair, babul, dhok, and neem are the dominant trees of the subtropical dry deciduous forest typical of northern India. The species of fauna found in the state of Haryana include black buck, nilgai, panther, fox, mongoose, jackal and wild dog. More than 450 species of birds are found here.\nWildlife.\nHaryana has two national parks, eight wildlife sanctuaries, two wildlife conservation areas, four animal and bird breeding centers, one deer park and three zoos, all of which are managed by the Haryana Forest Department of the Government of Haryana. Sultanpur National Park is a notable park in Gurgaon District.\nEnvironmental and ecological issues.\nHaryana Environment Protection Council is the advisory committee and the Department of Environment, Haryana is the department responsible for the administration of the environment. Areas of Haryana surrounding Delhi NCR are the most polluted. During the smog of November 2017, the air quality index of Gurgaon and Faridabad showed that the density of fine particulates (2.5 \u03bcm diameter) was an average a score of 400 and the monthly average of Haryana was 60. Other sources of pollution are exhaust gases from old vehicles, stone crushers and brick kilns. Haryana has 7.5\u00a0million vehicles, of which 40% are old, more polluting vehicles, and 500,000 new vehicles are added every year. Other majorly polluted cities are Bhiwani, Bahadurgarh, Dharuhera, Hisar and Yamunanagar.\nAdministration.\nDivisions.\nThe state is divided into 6 revenue divisions, 5 Police Ranges and 4 Police Commissionerates (c. January 2017). Six revenue divisions are: Ambala, Rohtak, Gurgaon, Hisar, Karnal and Faridabad. Haryana has 11 municipal corporations (Gurgaon, Faridabad, Ambala, Panchkula, Yamunanagar, Rohtak, Hisar, Panipat, Karnal, Sonipat, and Manesar), 18 municipal councils and 52 municipalities.\nWithin these, there are 22 districts, 72 sub-divisions, 93 tehsils, 50 sub-tehsils, 140 blocks, 154 cities and towns, 6,848 villages, 6,226 villages panchayats and numerous smaller dhanis.\nDistricts.\nHaryana consists of six divisions comprising 22 districts. Each district is headed by a Deputy Commissioner (DC), an IAS officer who also functions as the District Magistrate (DM) for maintaining law and order and the District Collector for land revenue administration.\nThe districts are further divided into sub-divisions and tehsils for land revenue administration, and into blocks for development administration.\u00a0 The subdivisions and tehsils are headed by Sub-Divisional Magistrates (SDMs) and Tehsildars, respectively.\nLaw and order.\nThe Haryana Police force is the law enforcement agency of Haryana. Five Police Ranges are Ambala, Hissar, Karnal, Rewari and Rohtak. Four Police Commissionerates are Faridabad, Gurgaon, Panchkula and Sonipat. Cybercrime investigation cell is based in Gurgaon's Sector 51.\nThe highest judicial authority in the state is the Punjab and Haryana High Court, with the next higher right of appeal being to the Supreme Court of India. Haryana uses an e-filing facility.\nGovernance and e-governance.\nThe Common Service Centres (CSCs) have been upgraded in all districts to offer hundreds of e-services to citizens, including applications for new water and sanitation connections, electricity bill collection, ration card member registration, the result of HBSE, admit cards for board examinations, online admission forms for government colleges, long route booking of buses, admission forms for Kurukshetra University and HUDA plots status inquiry. Haryana has become the first state to implement Aadhaar-enabled birth registration in all the districts. Thousands of all traditional offline state and central government services are also available 24/7 online through single unified UMANG app and portal as part of Digital India initiative.\nEconomy.\nHaryana's 14th placed 12.96% 2012\u201317 CAGR estimated a 2017\u201318 GSDP of US$95\u00a0billion split into 52% services, 30% industries and 18% agriculture.\nThe services sector is split across 45% in real estate and financial and professional services, 26% trade and hospitality, 15% state and central government employees, and 14% transport and logistics &amp; warehousing. In IT services, Gurgaon ranks first in India in growth rate and existing technology infrastructure, and second in startup ecosystem, innovation and livability (Nov 2016).\nThe industrial sector is split across 69% manufacturing, 28% construction, 2% utilities and 1% mining. In industrial manufacturing, Haryana produces 67% of passenger cars, 60% of motorcycles, 50% of tractors and 50% of the refrigerators in India.\nThe service and industrial sectors are boosted by 7 operational SEZs and an additional 23 formally approved SEZs (20 already notified and 3 approved in-principle) that are mostly spread along the Delhi\u2013Mumbai Industrial Corridor, Amritsar Delhi Kolkata Industrial Corridor and Western Peripheral Expressway.\nThe agricultural sector is split across 93% crops and livestock, 4% commercial forestry and logging, and 2% fisheries. Although Haryana has less than 1.4% of the total area of India, it contributes 15% of food grains to the central food security public distribution system, and makes up 7% of total national agricultural exports, including 60% of total national basmati rice exports.\nAgriculture.\nCrops.\nHaryana is traditionally an agrarian society of zamindars (owner-cultivator farmers). About 70% of Haryana's residents are engaged in agriculture. The Green Revolution in Haryana of the 1960s combined with the completion of Bhakra Dam in 1963 and Western Yamuna Command Network canal system in 1970s resulted in the significantly increased food grain production. This movement lead to large-scale investments towards improving irrigation systems, enhancing the quality of fertilizers, and investing in superior seeds. As a result, Haryana is self sufficient in food production and the second largest contributor to India's central pool of food grains \nIn 2015\u20132016, Haryana produced the following principal crops: 13,352,000 tonnes of wheat, 4,145,000 tonnes of rice, 7,169,000 tonnes of sugarcane, 993,000 tonnes of cotton and 855,000 tonnes of oilseeds (mustard seed, sunflower, etc.). In the northeastern area, dairy cattle, buffaloes, and bullocks play a prominent role, being utilised both for agricultural ploughing and as draft animals.\nFruits, vegetables and spices.\nVegetable production was: potato 853,806 tonnes, onion 705,795 tonnes, tomato 675,384 tonnes, cauliflower 578,953 tonnes, leafy vegetables 370,646 tonnes, brinjal 331,169 tonnes, guard 307,793 tonnes, peas 111,081 tonnes and others 269,993 tonnes.\nFruits production was: citrus 301,764 tonnes, guava 152,184 tonnes, mango 89,965 tonnes, chikoo 16,022 tonnes, aonla 12,056 tonnes and other fruits 25,848 tonnes.\nSpices production was: garlic 40,497 tonnes, fenugreek 9,348 tonnes, ginger 4,304 tonnes and others 840 tonnes.\nFlowers and medicinal plants.\nCut flowers production was: marigold 61,830 tonnes, gladiolus 2,448,620\u00a0million, rose 1,861,160\u00a0million and other 691,300 million.\nMedicinal plants production was: aloe vera 1403 tonnes and stevia 13 tonnes.\nLivestock.\nHaryana is well known for its high-yield Murrah buffalo. Other breeds of cattle native to Haryana are Haryanvi, Mewati, Sahiwal and Nili-Ravi.\nResearch.\nTo support its agrarian economy, both the central government (Central Institute for Research on Buffaloes, Central Sheep Breeding Farm, National Research Centre on Equines, Central Institute of Fisheries, National Dairy Research Institute, Regional Centre for Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Wheat and Barley Research and National Bureau of Animal Genetic Resources) and the state government (CCS HAU, LUVAS, Government Livestock Farm, Regional Fodder Station and Northern Region Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institute) have opened several institutes for research and education.\nIndustrial sector.\nUtilities.\nHaryana State has always given high priority to the expansion of electricity infrastructure, as it is one of the most important drivers of development for the state. Haryana was the first state in the country to achieve 100% rural electrification in 1970 as well as the first in the country to link all villages with all-weather roads and provide safe drinking water facilities throughout the state.\nSources of power in the state include:\nServices sector.\nTransport.\nRoads and highways.\nHaryana has a total road length of , including comprising 29 national highways, of state highways, of Major District Roads (MDR) and of Other District Roads (ODR) (c. December 2017). A fleet of 3,864 Haryana Roadways buses covers a distance of 1.15\u00a0million km per day, and it was the first state in the country to introduce luxury video coaches.\nAncient Delhi Multan Road and Grand Trunk Road, South Asia's oldest and longest major roads, pass through Haryana. GT Road passes through the districts of Sonipat, Panipat, Karnal, Kurukshetra and Ambala in north Haryana where it enters Delhi and subsequently the industrial town of Faridabad on its way. The Kundli-Manesar-Palwal Expressway (KMP) will provide a high-speed link to northern Haryana with its southern districts such as Sonipat, Gurgaon, and Faridabad.\nThe Delhi-Agra Expressway (NH-2) that passes through Faridabad is being widened to six lanes from the current four lanes. It will further boost Faridabad's connectivity with Delhi.\nRailway.\nThe rail network in Haryana is covered by five rail divisions under three rail zones. Diamond Quadrilateral High-speed rail network, Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (72\u00a0km) and Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (177\u00a0km) pass through Haryana.\nBikaner railway division of the North Western Railway zone manages the rail network in western and southern Haryana covering Bhatinda-Dabwali-Hanumangarh line, Rewari-Bhiwani-Hisar-Bathinda line, Hisar-Sadulpur line and Rewari-Loharu-Sadulpur line. Jaipur railway division of North Western Railway zone manages the rail network in south-west Haryana covering Rewari-Reengas-Jaipur line, Delhi-Alwar-Jaipur line and Loharu-Sikar line.\nThe Delhi railway division of the Northern Railway zone manages the rail network in north and east-central Haryana, covering Delhi-Panipat-Ambala line, Delhi-Rohtak-Tohana line, Rewari\u2013Rohtak line, Jind-Sonepat line and Delhi-Rewari line. Agra railway division of North Central Railway zone manages another very small part of the network in southeast Haryana covering only the Palwal-Mathura line.\nAmbala railway division of Northern Railway zone manages a small part of the rail network in north-east Haryana covering Ambala-Yamunanagar line, Ambala-Kurukshetra line and UNESCO World Heritage Kalka\u2013Shimla Railway.\nMetro.\nDelhi Metro connects the national capital Delhi with the NCR cities of Faridabad, Gurgaon and Bahadurgarh. Faridabad has the longest metro network in the NCR Region consisting of 11 stations and a track length of 17\u00a0km.\nSky Way.\nThe Haryana and Delhi governments have constructed the international standard Delhi Faridabad Skyway, the first of its kind in North India, to connect Delhi and Faridabad.\nCommunication and media.\nHaryana has a statewide network of telecommunication facilities. Haryana Government has its own statewide area network by which all government offices of 22 districts and 126 blocks across the state are connected with each other, thus making it the first SWAN of the country. Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited and most of the leading private sector players (such as Reliance Infocom, Tata Teleservices, Bharti Telecom, Idea Vodafone Essar, Aircel, Uninor and Videocon) have operations in the state. The two biggest cities of Haryana, Faridabad and Gurgaon, which are part of the National Capital Region, come under the local Delhi Mobile Telecommunication System. The rest of the cities of Haryana come under Haryana Telecommunication System.\nElectronic media channels include MTV, 9XM, Star Group, SET Max, News Time, NDTV 24x7 and Zee Group. The radio stations include All India Radio and other FM stations.\nPanipat, Hisar, Ambala and Rohtak are the cities in which the leading newspapers of Haryana are printed and circulated throughout Haryana, in which Dainik Bhaskar, Dainik Jagran, Punjab Kesari, The Tribune, , Hari Bhoomi and Amar Ujala are prominent.\nHealthcare.\nThe total fertility rate of Haryana is 2.3. The infant mortality rate is 41 (SRS 2012) and the maternal mortality ratio is 146 (SRS 2010\u20132012). The state of Haryana has various Medical Colleges including Pandit Bhagwat Dayal Sharma Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences Rohtak, Bhagat Phool Singh Medical College in District Sonipat, ESIC Medical College, Faridabad along with notable private medical institutes like Medanta, Max Hospital, Fortis Healthcare\nEducation.\nLiteracy.\nThe literacy rate in Haryana has seen an upward trend and is 76.64 per cent as per the 2011 population census. Male literacy stands at 85.38%, while female literacy is at 66.67%. In 2001, the literacy rate in Haryana stood at 67.91%, of which males and females were 78.49% and 55.73% literate respectively. As of 2013[ [update]], Gurgaon city had the highest literacy rate in Haryana at 86.30% followed by Panchkula at 81.9% and Ambala at 81.7%. In terms of districts, as of 2012[ [update]], Rewari had the highest literacy rate in Haryana at 74%, higher than the national average of 59.5%; male literacy was 79% and female literacy was 67%. In 2011, Haryana's urban literacy rate stood at 84.98%, marking a notable rise from 79.92% in 2001. Similarly, the rural literacy rate in the state experienced an improvement, reaching 68.91% in 2011 compared to 58.74% in 2001.\nSchools.\nHaryana Board of School Education, established in September 1969 and shifted to Bhiwani in 1981, conducts public examinations at middle, matriculation, and senior secondary levels twice a year. Over 700,000 candidates attend annual examinations in February and March; 150,000 attend supplementary examinations each November. The Board also conducts examinations for Haryana Open School at senior and senior secondary levels twice a year. The Haryana government provides free education to women up to the bachelor's degree level.\nIn 2015\u20132016, there were nearly 20,000 schools, including 10,100 state government schools (36 Aarohi Schools, 11 Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas, 21 Model Sanskriti Schools, 8,744 government primary school, 3386 government middle school, 1,284 government high school and 1,967 government senior secondary schools), 7,635 private schools (200 aided, 6,612 recognised unaided, and 821 unrecognised unaided private schools) and several hundred other central government and private schools such as Kendriya Vidyalaya, Indian Army Public Schools, Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya and DAV schools affiliated to central government's CBSE and ICSE school boards.\nUniversities and higher education.\nHaryana has 48 universities and 1,038 colleges, including 115 government colleges, 88 government-aided colleges and 96 self-finance colleges. Hisar has three universities: Chaudhary Charan Singh Haryana Agricultural University \u2013 Asia's largest agricultural university, Guru Jambheshwar University of Science and Technology, Lala Lajpat Rai University of Veterinary &amp; Animal Sciences); several national agricultural and veterinary research centres (National Research Centre on Equines), Central Sheep Breeding Farm, National Institute on Pig Breeding and Research, Northern Region Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institute and Central Institute for Research on Buffaloes (CIRB); and more than 20 colleges including Maharaja Agrasen Medical College, Agroha.\nDemographically, Haryana has 471,000 women and 457,000 men pursuing post-secondary school higher education. There are more than 18,616 female teachers and 17,061 male teachers in higher education.\nUnion Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad announced on 27 February 2016 that the National Institute of Electronics and Information Technology (NIELIT) would be set up in Kurukshetra to provide computer training to youth and a Software Technology Park of India (STPI) would be set up in Panchkula's existing HSIIDC IT Park in Sector 23. Hindi and English are compulsory languages in schools whereas Punjabi, Sanskrit and Urdu are chosen as optional languages.\nSports.\nIn the 2010 Commonwealth Games at Delhi, 22 out of 38 gold medals that India won came from Haryana. During the 33rd National Games held in Assam in 2007, Haryana stood first in the nation with a medal tally of 80, including 30 gold, 22 silver and 28 bronze medals.\nThe 1983 World Cup winning captain Kapil Dev made his domestic-cricket debut playing for Haryana. Nahar Singh Stadium was built in Faridabad in the year 1981 for international cricket. This ground has the capacity to hold around 25,000 people as spectators. Tejli Sports Complex is an ultra-modern sports complex in Yamuna Nagar. Tau Devi Lal Stadium in Gurgaon is a multi-sport complex.\nChief Minister of Haryana, Manohar Lal Khattar announced the \"Haryana Sports and Physical Fitness Policy\", a policy to support 26 Olympic sports, on 12 January 2015 with the words \"We will develop Haryana as the sports hub of the country.\"\nHaryana is home to Haryana Gold, one of India's eight professional basketball teams that compete in the country's UBA Pro Basketball League.\nAt the 2016 Summer Olympics, Sakshi Malik won the bronze medal in the 58\u00a0kg category, becoming the first Indian female wrestler to win a medal at the Olympics and the fourth female Olympic medalist from the country.\nNotable badminton player Saina Nehwal is from Hisar in Haryana.\nNotable athlete Neeraj Chopra, who competes in Javelin Throw and won the first track and field gold medal in 2020 Tokyo Olympics for India, was born and raised in Panipat, Haryana.\nWrestling is also very prominent in Haryana, as 2 medals won in wrestling at 2020 Tokyo Olympics were from Haryana.\nNotable athlete Ravi Dahiya, who was born in Nahri village of Sonipat District, won silver medal in the 2020 Tokyo Olympics for India.\nRavi Kumar is an Indian freestyle wrestler who won a silver medal at the 2020 Tokyo Olympics in the 57\u00a0kg category. Dahiya is also a bronze medalist from 2019 World Wrestling Championships and a two-time Asian champion.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14190", "revid": "51069098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14190", "title": "Himachal Pradesh", "text": "State in northwestern India\nHimachal Pradesh (, ; Sanskrit: \"him\u0101c\u0101l pr\u0101des;\" lit. \"Snow-laden Mountain Province\") is a state in the northern part of India. Situated in the Western Himalayas, it is one of the 13 mountain states and is characterised by an extreme landscape featuring several peaks and extensive river systems. Himachal Pradesh is the northernmost state of India and shares borders with the union territories of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh to the north, and the states of Punjab to the west, Haryana to the southwest, Uttarakhand to the southeast and a very narrow border with Uttar Pradesh to the south. The state also shares an international border to the east with the Tibet Autonomous Region in China. Himachal Pradesh is also known as \"Dev Bhoomi\", meaning 'Land of Gods' and \"Veer Bhoomi\" which means 'Land of the Brave'.\nThe predominantly mountainous region comprising the present-day Himachal Pradesh has been inhabited since pre-historic times, having witnessed multiple waves of human migrations from other areas. Through its history, the region was mostly ruled by local kingdoms, some of which accepted the suzerainty of larger empires. Prior to India's independence from the British, Himachal comprised the hilly regions of the Punjab Province of British India. After independence, many of the hilly territories were organised as the Chief Commissioner's province of Himachal Pradesh, which later became a Union Territory. In 1966, hilly areas of the neighbouring Punjab state were merged into Himachal and it was ultimately granted full statehood in 1971.\nHimachal Pradesh is spread across valleys with many perennial rivers flowing through them. Agriculture, horticulture, hydropower, and tourism are important constituents of the state's economy. The hilly state is almost universally electrified, with 99.5% of households having electricity as of 2016. The state was declared India's second open-defecation-free state in 2016. According to a survey of CMS-India Corruption Study in 2017, Himachal Pradesh is India's least corrupt state.\nHimachal Pradesh is divided into 12 districts.\nEtymology.\nThe name of the state is a reference to its setting: Himachal means \"snowy slopes\" (Sanskrit: \"hima\", meaning \"snow\"; \"acala/achala, meaning\" \"slopes\", or \"land\", or \"abode\"). Himachal Pradesh (\u0266\u026a\u02c8ma\u02d0t\u0283\u0259l p\u027e\u0259\u02c8de\u02d0\u0283; literally \"snow-laden province\"). Himachal refers to being in the \"aanchal\" of the Himalayas hence; sheltered by the Himalayas or by the snow. It means \"the land in the lap of the snowy Himalayas\". Pradesh means \"state\". Himachal was referenced by Diwakar Datt Sharma, a Sanskrit scholar, after independence, when \"Jan Gan Man\" was revealed publicly by Pt. Nehru from Gurudev Tagore's diary. The word was added in the national anthem of India, \"Jan Gan Man\", by Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore when he was writing and composing it. Later, after the independence of India, Punjab province was divided and the name was given, officially to the mountain state as Himachal Pradesh.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nTribes such as the Koli, Hali, Dagi, Dhaugri, Dasa, Khasa, Kanaura, and Kirata inhabited the region from the prehistoric era. The foothills of the modern state of Himachal Pradesh were inhabited by people from the Indus valley civilisation, which flourished between 2250 and 1750 BCE. The Kols and Mundas are believed to be the original inhabitants to the hills of present-day Himachal Pradesh, followed by the Bhotas and Kiratas.\nDuring the Vedic period, several small republics known as \"Janapada\" existed which were later conquered by the Gupta Empire. After a brief period of supremacy by King Harshavardhana, the region was divided into several local powers headed by chieftains, including some Rajput principalities. These kingdoms enjoyed a large degree of independence and were invaded by Delhi Sultanate several times. Mahmud Ghaznavi conquered Kangra at the beginning of the 11th century. Timur and Sikander Lodi also marched through the lower hills of the state, captured several forts, and fought many battles. Several hill states acknowledged Mughal suzerainty and paid regular tribute to the Mughals.\nThe Kingdom of Gorkha conquered many kingdoms and came to power in Nepal in 1768. They consolidated their military power and began to expand their territory. Gradually, the Kingdom of Nepal annexed Sirmour and Shimla. Under the leadership of Amar Singh Thapa, the Nepali army laid siege to Kangra. They managed to defeat Sansar Chand Katoch, the ruler of Kangra, in 1806 with the help of many provincial chiefs. However, the Nepali army could not capture Kangra fort which came under Maharaja Ranjit Singh in 1809. After the defeat, they expanded towards the south of the state. However, Raja Ram Singh, Raja of Siba State, captured the fort of Siba from the remnants of Lahore Darbar in Samvat 1846, during the First Anglo-Sikh War.\nThey came into direct conflict with the British along the \"tarai\" belt, after which the British expelled them from the provinces of the Satluj. The British gradually emerged as the paramount power in the region. In the revolt of 1857, or first Indian war of independence, arising from several grievances against the British, the people of the hill states were not as politically active as were those in other parts of the country. They and their rulers, except Bushahr, remained more or less inactive. Some, including the rulers of Chamba, Bilaspur, Bhagal and Dhami, rendered help to the British government during the revolt.\nThe British territories came under the British Crown after Queen Victoria's proclamation of 1858. The states of Chamba, Mandi and Bilaspur made good progress in many fields during the British rule. During World War I, virtually all rulers of the hill states remained loyal and contributed to the British war effort, both in the form of men and materials. Among these were the states of Kangra, Jaswan, Datarpur, Guler, Rajgarh, Nurpur, Chamba, Suket, Mandi, and Bilaspur.\nPartition and post-independence.\nAfter independence, the Chief Commissioner's Province of Himachal Pradesh was organised on 15 April 1948 as a result of the integration of 30 petty princely states (including feudal princes and \"zaildars\") in the promontories of the western Himalayas. These were known as the Simla Hills States and four Punjab southern hill states under the Himachal Pradesh (Administration) Order, 1948 under Sections 3 and 4 of the Extra-Provincial Jurisdiction Act, 1947 (later renamed as the Foreign Jurisdiction Act, 1947 vide A.O. of 1950). The State of Bilaspur was merged into Himachal Pradesh on 1 July 1954 by the Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954.\nHimachal became a Part 'C' state on 26 January 1950 when the Constitution of India came into effect and the Lieutenant Governor was appointed. The Legislative Assembly was elected in 1952. In July 1954, following the passage of The Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954 by an act of Parliament, Bilaspur State was dissolved and incorporated into the State of Himachal Pradesh as Bilaspur district. Himachal Pradesh became a union territory on 1 November 1956. Some areas of the Punjab State, namely, Simla, Kangra, Kullu and Lahul and Spiti Districts, Lohara, Amb and Una Kanungo circles, some areas of Santokhgarh Kanungo circle and some other specified area of Una Tehsil of Hoshiarpur District, as well as Kandaghat and Nalagarh Tehsils of erstwhile PEPSU State, besides some parts of Dhar Kalan Kanungo circle of Pathankot District\u2014were merged with Himachal Pradesh on 1 November 1966 on the enactment by Parliament of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966. On 18 December 1970, the State of Himachal Pradesh Act was passed by Parliament, and the new state came into being on 25 January 1971. Himachal became the 18th state of the Indian Union with Dr. Yashwant Singh Parmar as its first chief minister.\nGeography.\nHimachal is in the western Himalayas situated between 30\u00b022\u2032N and 33\u00b012\u2032N latitude and 75\u00b047\u2032E and 79\u00b004\u2032E longitude. Covering an area of , it is a mountainous state. The Zanskar range runs in the northeastern part of the state and the great Himalayan range run through the eastern and northern parts, while the Dhauladhar and the Pir Panjal ranges of the lesser Himalayas, and their valleys, form much of the core regions. The outer Himalayas, or the Shiwalik range, form southern and western Himachal Pradesh. At 6,816\u00a0m, Reo Purgyil is the highest mountain peak in the state of Himachal Pradesh.\nThe drainage system of Himachal is composed of both rivers and glaciers. Himalayan rivers criss-cross the entire mountain chain. Himachal Pradesh provides water to both the Indus and Ganges basins. The drainage systems of the region are the Chandra Bhaga or the Chenab, the Ravi, the Beas, the Sutlej, and the Yamuna. These rivers are perennial and are fed by snow and rainfall. They are protected by an extensive cover of natural vegetation. Four of the five Punjab rivers flow through Himachal Pradesh, three of them originating in the state. These rivers run through a maze of valleys separated by the mountain ranges of the state. The Satluj Valley is formed by the Satluj river entering the state near Shipki La, while the Spiti and Baspa Valleys are formed by the river's two major tributaries in the state. The Beas river flows though the Kullu and the Kangra Valleys, with tributary Parvati forming the Parvati Valley. The Chenab river, formed by the confluence of the Chandra and Bhaga, forms much of the northern regions of Lahaul and Pangi, and the Ravi river flows principally through Chamba. The Pabbar and Giri rivers in the southeast are part of the Yamuna basin.\nDue to extreme variation in elevation, great variation occurs in the climatic conditions of Himachal Pradesh. The climate varies from hot and humid subtropical in the southern tracts to, with more elevation, cold, alpine, and glacial in the northern and eastern mountain ranges. The state's winter capital, Dharamsala receives very heavy rainfall, while areas like Lahaul and Spiti are cold and almost rainless. Broadly, Himachal experiences three seasons: summer, winter, and rainy season. Summer lasts from mid-April until the end of June and most parts become very hot (except in the alpine zone which experiences a mild summer) with the average temperature ranging from . Winter lasts from late November until mid-March. Snowfall is common in alpine tracts. Pollution is affecting the climate of almost all the states of India. Due to steps taken by governments to prevent pollution, Himachal Pradesh has become the first smoke-free state in India which means cooking in the entire state is free of traditional chulhas.\nIn a statement on 29 March 2025, Town and Country Planning Minister, Rajesh Dharmani, highlighted the state government's policy of sustainable development, citing the \"Green Himachal vision\" and ongoing efforts to meet sustainable development goals.\nFlora and fauna.\nHimachal Pradesh is one of the states that lies in the Indian Himalayan Region (IHR), one of the richest reservoirs of biological diversity in the world. As of 2002, the IHR is undergoing large scale irrational extraction of wild, medicinal herbs, thus endangering many of its high-value gene stock. To address this, a workshop on 'Endangered Medicinal Plant Species in Himachal Pradesh' was held in 2002 and the conference was attended by forty experts from diverse disciplines.\nAccording to 2003 Forest Survey of India report, legally defined forest areas constitute 66.52% of the area of Himachal Pradesh. Vegetation in the state is dictated by elevation and precipitation. The state is endowed with a high diversity of medicinal and aromatic plants. Lahaul-Spiti region of the state, being a cold desert, supports unique plants of medicinal value including \"Ferula jaeschkeana\", \"Hyoscyamus niger\", \"Lancea tibetica\", and \"Saussurea bracteata\".\nHimachal is also said to be the fruit bowl of the country, with widespread orchards. Meadows and pastures are also seen clinging to steep slopes. After the winter season, the hillsides and orchards bloom with wild flowers, white gladiolas, carnations, marigolds, roses, chrysanthemums, tulips and lilies are carefully cultivated. Himachal Pradesh Horticultural Produce Marketing and Processing Corporation Ltd. (HPMC) is a state body that markets fresh and processed fruits.\nHimachal Pradesh has around 463 birds, and Tragopan melanocephalus is the state bird of Himanchal Pradesh 77 mammalian, 44 reptile and 80 fish species. Himachal Pradesh has currently five National Parks. Great Himalayan National Park, which is the oldest and largest National park in the state, is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Pin Valley National Park, Inderkilla, Khirganga and Simbalbara are the other national Parks located in the state. The state also has 30 wildlife sanctuaries and 3 conservation reserves. The state bird of Himachal Pradesh is the Western tragopan, locally known as the \"jujurana\". It is one of the rarest living pheasants in the world. The state animal is the snow leopard, which is even rarer to find than the \"jujurana\".\nGovernment.\nThe Legislative Assembly of Himachal Pradesh has no pre-constitution history. The State itself is a post-independence creation. It came into being as a centrally administered territory on 15 April 1948 from the integration of thirty erstwhile princely states.\nHimachal Pradesh is governed through a parliamentary system of representative democracy, a feature the state shares with other Indian states. Universal suffrage is granted to residents. The legislature consists of elected members and special office bearers such as the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker who are elected by the members. Assembly meetings are presided over by the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker in the Speaker's absence. The judiciary is composed of the Himachal Pradesh High Court and a system of lower courts.\nExecutive authority is vested in the Council of Ministers headed by the Chief Minister, although the titular head of government is the Governor. The governor is the head of state appointed by the President of India. The leader of the party or coalition with a majority in the Legislative Assembly is appointed as the Chief Minister by the governor, and the Council of Ministers are appointed by the governor on the advice of the Chief Minister. The Council of Ministers reports to the Legislative Assembly. The Assembly is unicameral with 68 Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLA). Terms of office run for five years, unless the Assembly is dissolved prior to the completion of the term. Auxiliary authorities known as \"panchayats\", for which local body elections are regularly held, govern local affairs.\nIn the assembly elections held in November 2022, the Indian National Congress secured an absolute majority, winning 40 of the 68 seats while the BJP won only 25 of the 68 seats. Sukhvinder Singh Sukhu was sworn in as Himachal Pradesh's 15th Chief Minister in Shimla on 11 December 2022. Mukesh Agnihotri was sworn in as his deputy the same day.\nAdministrative divisions.\nBilaspur\nChamba\nHamirpur\nKangra\nKinnaur\nKullu\nLahaul and Spiti\nMandi\nShimla\nSirmaur\nSolan\nUna\nDistricts of Himachal Pradesh\nThe state of Himachal Pradesh is divided into 12 districts which are grouped into three divisions, Shimla, Kangra and Mandi. The districts are further divided into 73 subdivisions, 78 blocks and 172 Tehsils.\nEconomy.\nPlanning in Himachal Pradesh started in 1951 along with the rest of India with the implementation of the first five-year plan. The First Plan allocated \u20b952.7\u00a0million to Himachal Pradesh. More than 50% of this expenditure was incurred on transport and communication; while the power sector got a share of just 4.6%, though it had steadily increased to 7% by the Third Plan. Expenditure on agriculture and allied activities increased from 14.4% in the First Plan to 32% in the Third Plan, showing a progressive decline afterwards from 24% in the Fourth Plan to less than 10% in the Tenth Plan. Expenditure on energy sector was 24.2% of the total in the Tenth Plan.\nThe total GDP for 2005\u201306 was estimated at \u20b9254\u00a0billion as against \u20b9230\u00a0billion in the year 2004\u201305, showing an increase of 10.5%. The GDP for fiscal 2015\u201316 was estimated at \u20b91.110\u00a0trillion, which increased to \u20b91.247\u00a0trillion in 2016\u201317, recording growth of 6.8%. The per capita income increased from \u20b9130,067 in 2015\u201316 to \u20b9147,277 in 2016\u201317. The state government's advance estimates for fiscal 2017\u201318 stated the total GDP and per capita income as \u20b91.359\u00a0trillion and \u20b9158,462, respectively. As of 2018, Himachal is the 22nd-largest state economy in India with () in gross domestic product and has the 13th-highest per capita income ( ()) among the states and union territories of India.\nHimachal Pradesh also ranks as the second-best performing state in the country on human development indicators after Kerala. One of the Indian government's key initiatives to tackle unemployment is the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA). The participation of women in the NREGA has been observed to vary across different regions of the nation. As of the year 2009\u20132010, Himachal Pradesh joined the category of high female participation, recording a 46% share of NREGS (National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme) workdays for women. This was a drastic increase from the 13% that was recorded in 2006\u20132007.\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture accounts for 9.4% of the net state domestic product. It is the main source of income and employment in Himachal. About 90% of the population in Himachal depends directly upon agriculture, which provides direct employment to 62% of total workers of state. The main cereals grown include wheat, maize, rice and barley with major cropping systems being maize-wheat, rice-wheat and maize-potato-wheat. Pulses, fruits, vegetables and oilseeds are among the other crops grown in the state. Centuries-old traditional Kuhl irrigation system is prevalent in the Kangra valley, though in recent years these Kuhls have come under threat from hydroprojects on small streams in the valley. Land husbandry initiatives such as the Mid-Himalayan Watershed Development Project, which includes the Himachal Pradesh Reforestation Project (HPRP), the world's largest clean development mechanism (CDM) undertaking, have improved agricultural yields and productivity, and raised rural household incomes.\nApple is the principal cash crop of the state grown principally in the districts of Shimla, Kinnaur, Kullu, Mandi, Chamba and some parts of Sirmaur and Lahaul-Spiti with an average annual production of five lakh tonnes and per hectare production of 8 to 10 tonnes. The apple cultivation constitute 49 per cent of the total area under fruit crops and 85% of total fruit production in the state with an estimated economy of \u20b93500 crore. Apples from Himachal are exported to other Indian states and even other countries. In 2011\u201312, the total area under apple cultivation was 104,000 hectares, increased from 90,347 hectares in 2000\u201301. According to the provisional estimates of Ministry of Agriculture &amp; Farmers Welfare, the annual apple production in Himachal for fiscal 2015\u201316 stood at 753,000 tonnes, making it India's second-largest apple-producing state after Jammu and Kashmir. The state is also among the leading producers of other fruits such as apricots, cherries, peaches, pears, plums and strawberries in India.\nKangra tea is grown in the Kangra valley. Tea plantation began in 1849, and production peaked in the late 19th century with the tea becoming popular across the globe. Production dipped sharply after the 1905 Kangra earthquake and continues to decline. The tea received geographical indication status in 2005.\nIndustry.\nPharma hub.\nHimachal Pradesh is renowned as Asia's pharmaceutical hub, housing a total of 652 pharmaceutical units. The state hosts a thriving \u20b940,000 crore drug manufacturing industry.\nEnergy.\nHydropower is one of the major sources of income generation for the state. The state has an abundance of hydropower resources because of the presence of various perennial rivers. Many high-capacity hydropower plants have been constructed which produce surplus electricity that is sold to other states, such as Delhi, Punjab and West Bengal. The income generated from exporting the electricity to other states is being provided as subsidy to the consumers in the state. The rich hydropower resources of Himachal have resulted in the state becoming almost universally electrified with around 94.8% houses receiving electricity as of 2001, as compared to the national average of 55.9%. Himachal's hydro-electric power production is, however, yet to be fully utilised. The identified hydroelectric potential for the state is 27,436 MW in five river basins while the hydroelectric capacity in 2016 was 10,351 MW.\nTourism.\nTourism in Himachal Pradesh is a major contributor to the state's economy and growth. The Himalayas attracts tourists from all over the world. Hill stations like Shimla, Manali, Dharamshala, Dalhousie, Chamba, Khajjiar, Kullu and Kasauli are popular destinations for both domestic and foreign tourists. The state has 5 Shakti Peeths - Chintpurni, Jwalamukhi Temple, Bajreshwari Mata Temple, Shri Chamunda Devi Mandir and Naina Devi Temple. The state also has many important Hindu pilgrimage sites with prominent temples like Baijnath Temple, Bhimakali Temple, Bijli Mahadev and Jakhoo Temple. Manimahesh Lake situated in the Bharmour region of Chamba district is the venue of an annual Hindu pilgrimage trek held in the month of August which attracts lakhs of devotees. The state is also referred to as \"Dev Bhoomi\" (literally meaning \"Abode of Gods\") due to its mention as such in ancient Hindu texts and occurrence of a large number of historical temples in the state.\nHimachal is also known for its adventure tourism activities like ice skating in Shimla, paragliding in Bir, Himachal Pradesh and Solang Valley, rafting in Kullu, skiing in Manali, boating in Bilaspur, fishing in Tirthan Valley, trekking and horse riding in different parts of the state. Shimla, the state's capital, is home to Asia's only natural ice-skating rink. The state has some of the highest mountain passes in the world - Rohtang Pass, Baralacha La, Kunzum La, Borasu Pass and Hamta Pass. Spiti Valley in Lahaul and Spiti District situated at an altitude of over 3000 metres with its picturesque landscapes is popular destination for adventure seekers. The region also has some of the oldest Buddhist monasteries in the world.\nHimachal hosted the first Paragliding World Cup in India from 24 to 31 October in 2015. Bir Billing, the venue for the paragliding world cup, is known as the launching site of paragliding. It is 70\u00a0km from the tourist town of Mcleod Ganj and is located in the heart of Himachal in Kangra district. Bir Billing is the centre for aero sports in Himachal and considered as best for paragliding. While Bir, the paragliding capital of India, is the landing site for paragliding. It is also known for its tourist attractions including Buddhist monasteries, trekking to tribal villages and mountain biking. The village also hosts prominent cultural musical events like Bir Music Festival, aiming to primarily promote the tourism of Bir.\nThere are a variety of festivals celebrated by the locals of Himachal Pradesh who worship gods and goddesses. There are over 2000 villages in Himachal Pradesh which celebrate festivals such as Kullu Dussehra, Chamba's Minjar, Renuka ji Fair, Lohri, Halda, Phagli, Losar and Mandi Shivratri. There approximately 6000 temples in Himachal Pradesh with a known one being Bijli Mahadev. The temple is seen as a 20-meter structure built in stone which, according to locals, is known to attract lighting. They say that this is a way the Gods show their blessings.\nThe Great Himalayan National Park is found in the Kullu districts of Himachal Pradesh. It has an area of 620\u00a0km2 and ranging from an altitude of 1500 meters to 4500 meters and was created in 1984. There are various forest types found here such as Deodar, Himalayan Fir, Spruce, Oak and Alpine pastures. In the Great Himalayan National Park, there are a variety of animals found such as Snow leopard, Yak, Himalayan black bear, Western tragopan, Monal and Musk deer. This National Park is a trail to many hikers and trekkers too. Moreover, there are sanctuaries which are tourist spots such as Naina Devi and Gobind Sagar Sanctuary in the Una and Bilaspur districts with an area of 220\u00a0km2. There are animals such as Indian porcupine and giant flying squirrel found here. The Gobind Sagar Lake has fish species such as Mrigal, Silver carp, Katla, Mahaseer and Rohu are found here. Narkanda located in at an altitude of around 8850 feet is known for its apple orchards. It is located between the river valleys of Giri and Sutlej.\nTransport.\nAir.\nHimachal has three domestic airports in Kangra, Kullu and Shimla districts, respectively. The air routes connect the state with New Delhi and Chandigarh.\nRailways.\nBroad-gauge lines.\nThe only broad-gauge railway line in the whole state connects Amb Andaura\u2013Una Himachal railway station to Nangal Dam in Punjab and runs all the way to Daulatpur, Himachal Pradesh. It is an electrified track since 1999. While a tiny portion of line adjacent to Kandrori(KNDI) station on either side on Pathankot-Jalandhar Section, under Ferozepur Division of Northern Railway also crosses into Himachal Pradesh, before venturing out to Punjab again.\nFuture constructions:\nNarrow-gauge lines.\nHimachal is known for its narrow-gauge railways. One is the Kalka-Shimla Railway, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and another is the Kangra Valley Railway. The total length of these two tracks is . The Kalka-Shimla Railway passes through many tunnels and bridges, while the Pathankot\u2013Jogindernagar one meanders through a maze of hills and valleys. The total route length of the operational railway network in the state is .\nRoads.\nRoads are the major mode of transport in Himachal Pradesh due to its hilly terrain. The state has road network of , including eight National Highways (NH) that constitute and 19 State Highways with a total length of . Hamirpur district has the highest road density in the country. Some roads are closed during winter and monsoon seasons due to snow and landslides. The state-owned Himachal Road Transport Corporation with a fleet of over 3,100, operates bus services connecting important cities and towns with villages within the state and also on various interstate routes. In addition, around 5,000 private buses ply in the state.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHimachal Pradesh has a total population of 6,864,602 including 3,481,873 males and 3,382,729 females according to the Census of India 2011. It has only 0.57 per cent of India's total population, recording a growth of 12.81 per cent. The child sex ratio increased from 896 in 2001 to 909 in 2011. The total fertility rate (TFR) per woman in 2015 stood at 1.7, one of the lowest in India.\nThe scheduled castes and scheduled tribes account for 25.19 per cent and 5.71 per cent of the population, respectively. The sex ratio stood at 972 females per 1,000 males, recording a marginal increase from 968 in 2001. The main caste groups in Himachal Pradesh are Brahmins, Rajputs, Kanets, Kulindas, Girths, Gurjars, Raos, Kolis, Hollis, Chamars, Drains, Rehars, Chanals, Lohars, Baris, Julahas, Dhakhis, Turis, and Batwals.\nCaste-based discrimination in Himachal Pradesh has persisted alongside the state\u2019s relatively high human-development indicators, particularly affecting Dalit communities in rural areas. Recent high-profile incidents have reignited public debate and led to calls for stronger enforcement of the SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act. A 12-year-old boy from a Scheduled Caste was found to have died by suicide (on 17 September 2025) in Limbra village, Rohru subdivision of Shimla district, after being locked overnight in a cowshed and harassed for allegedly entering an upper-caste woman\u2019s house. The woman has been arrested under the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act.Field work in Himachal shows that \u201cupper castes occupy land holdings which are mostly fertile, whereas the depressed castes have very less land and that too is usually unfertile.\u201d Research further notes that both major parties in Himachal allocate tickets and mobilise voters with regard to caste, and specifically acknowledge dependence on Thakur or upper\u2010caste votes.\nIn the census, the state is placed 21st on the population chart, followed by Tripura at 22nd place. Kangra District was top-ranked with a population strength of 1,507,223 (21.98%), Mandi District 999,518 (14.58%), Shimla District 813,384 (11.86%), Solan District 576,670 (8.41%), Sirmaur District 530,164 (7.73%), Una District 521,057 (7.60%), Chamba District 518,844 (7.57%), Hamirpur district 454,293 (6.63%), Kullu District 437,474 (6.38%), Bilaspur district 382,056 (5.57%), Kinnaur District 84,298 (1.23%) and Lahaul Spiti 31,528 (0.46%).\nThe life expectancy at birth in Himachal Pradesh increased significantly from 52.6 years in the period from 1970 to 1975 (above the national average of 49.7 years) to 72.0 years for the period 2011\u201315 (above the national average of 68.3 years). The infant mortality rate stood at 40 in 2010, and the crude birth rate has declined from 37.3 in 1971 to 16.9 in 2010, below the national average of 26.5 in 1998. The crude death rate was 6.9 in 2010. Himachal Pradesh's literacy rate has almost doubled between 1981 and 2011 (see table to right). The state is one of the most literate states of India with a literacy rate of 83.78% as of 2011.\nLanguages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHindi is the de jure official language of Himachal Pradesh and is spoken by the majority of the population as a lingua franca. Sanskrit is the additional official language of the state. Although mostly encountered in academic and symbolic contexts, the government of Himachal Pradesh is encouraging its wider study and use.\nMost of the population, however, speaks natively one or another of the Western Pahari languages (locally also known as \"Himachali\" or just \"Pahari\"), a subgroup of the Indo-Aryan languages that includes Bhattiyali, Bilaspuri, Chambeali, Churahi, Gaddi, Hinduri, Kangri, Kullu, Mahasu Pahari, Mandeali, Pahari Kinnauri, Pangwali, and Sirmauri. Additional Indo-Aryan languages spoken include Punjabi (native to 4.4% of the population), Nepali (1.3%), Chinali, Lahul Lohar, and others. In parts of the state there are speakers of Tibeto-Burman languages like Kinnauri (1.2%), Tibetan (0.3%), Lahuli\u2013Spiti languages (0.16%), Pattani (0.12%), Bhoti Kinnauri, Chitkuli Kinnauri, Bunan (or Gahri), Jangshung, Kanashi, Shumcho, Spiti Bhoti, Sunam, Tinani, and Tukpa.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHinduism is the major religion in Himachal Pradesh. More than 95% of the total population adheres to the Hindu faith and majorly follows Shaivism and Shaktism traditions, the distribution of which is evenly spread throughout the state. Himachal Pradesh has the highest proportion of Hindu population among all the states and union territories in India.\nOther religions that form a smaller percentage are Islam, Sikhism and Buddhism. Muslims are mainly concentrated in Sirmaur, Chamba, Una and Solan districts where they form 2.5-6.3% of the population. Sikhs mostly live in towns and cities and constitute 1.16% of the state population. The Buddhists, who constitute 1.15%, are mainly natives and tribals from Lahaul and Spiti, where they form a majority of 62%, and Kinnaur, where they form 21.5%.\nCulture.\nHimachal Pradesh was one of the few states that had remained largely untouched by external customs, largely due to its difficult terrain. With remarkable economic and social advancements, the state has changed rapidly. Himachal Pradesh is a multilingual state like other Indian states. Western Pahari languages also known as Himachali languages are widely spoken in the state. Some of the most commonly spoken Pahadi lects are Kangri, Mandyali, Kullvi, Chambeali, Bharmauri and Kinnauri.\nHimachal is well known for its handicrafts. The carpets, leather works, Kullu shawls, Kangra paintings, Chamba Rumals, stoles, embroidered grass footwear (\"Pullan chappal\"), silver jewellery, metal ware, knitted woolen socks, \"Pattoo\", basketry of cane and bamboo (\"Wicker\" and \"Rattan\") and woodwork are among the notable ones. Of late, the demand for these handicrafts has increased within and outside the country.\nHimachali caps of various colour bands are also well-known local art work, and are often treated as a symbol of the Himachali identity. The colour of the Himachali caps has been an indicator of political loyalties in the hill state for a long period of time with Congress party leaders like Virbhadra Singh donning caps with green band and the rival BJP leader Prem Kumar Dhumal wearing a cap with maroon band. The former has served six terms as the Chief Minister of the state while the latter is a two-time Chief Minister. Local music and dance also reflect the cultural identity of the state. Through their dance and music, the Himachali people entreat their gods during local festivals and other special occasions.\nThere are national and regional fairs and festivals, including temple fairs in nearly every region. The Kullu Dussehra, Minjar mela and Mahashivratri Mandi festival is nationally known. The day-to-day cuisine of \"Himachalis\" is similar to the rest of northern India with Punjabi and Tibetan influences. Lentils (\"D\u0101l\"), rice ( or ), vegetables () and chapati (wheat flatbread) form the staple food of the local population. Non-vegetarian food is more widely accepted in Himachal Pradesh than elsewhere in India, partly due to the scarcity of fresh vegetables on the hilly terrain of the state.\nHimachali specialities include Siddu, Babru, Khatta, Mhanee, Channa Madra, Patrode, Mah ki dal, Chamba-style fried fish, Kullu trout, Chha Gosht, Pahadi Chicken, Sepu Badi, Auriya Kaddu, Aloo palda, Pateer, Makki di roti, Sarson ka saag, Chamba Chukh (Chouck), Bhagjery, Chutney of Til, etc.\nEducation.\nAt the time of Independence, Himachal Pradesh had a literacy rate of 8% \u2013 one of the lowest in the country. By 2011, the literacy rate surged to 82.8%, making Himachal one of the most-literate states in the country. There are over 10,000 primary schools, 1,000 secondary schools and more than 1,300 high schools in the state. In meeting the constitutional obligation to make primary education compulsory, Himachal became the first state in India to make elementary education accessible to every child. Himachal Pradesh is an exception to the nationwide gender bias in education levels. The state has a female literacy rate of around 76%. In addition, school enrolment and participation rates for girls are almost universal at the primary level. While higher levels of education do reflect a gender-based disparity, Himachal is still significantly ahead of other states at bridging the gap. The Hamirpur District in particular stands out for high literacy rates across all metrics of measurement.\nThe state government has played an instrumental role in the rise of literacy in the state by spending a significant proportion of the state's GDP on education. During the first six five-year plans, most of the development expenditure in the education sector was utilised in quantitative expansion, but after the seventh five-year-plan the state government switched emphasis on qualitative improvement and modernisation of education. To raise the number of the teaching staff at primary schools they appointed over 1000 teacher aids through the Vidya Upasak Yojna in 2001. The Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan is another HP government initiative that not only aims for universal elementary education but also encourages communities to engage in the management of schools. The Rashtriya Madhayamic Shiksha Abhiyan launched in 2009, is a similar scheme but focuses on improving access to quality secondary education.\nThe standard of education in the state has reached a considerably high level as compared to other states in India with several reputed educational institutes for higher studies. The Baddi University of Emerging Sciences and Technologies, Indian Institute of Technology Mandi, Indian Institute of Management Sirmaur, Himachal Pradesh University in Shimla, Central University of Himachal Pradesh, Dharamsala, National Institute of Technology, Hamirpur, Indian Institute of Information Technology Una, Alakh Prakash Goyal University, Maharaja Agrasen University, Himachal Pradesh National Law University are some of the notable universities in the state. Indira Gandhi Medical College and Hospital in Shimla, Dr. Rajendra Prasad Government Medical College in Kangra, Rajiv Gandhi Government Post Graduate Ayurvedic College in Paprola and Homoeopathic Medical College &amp; Hospital in Kumarhatti are the prominent medical institutes in the state. Besides these, there is a Government Dental College in Shimla which is the state's first recognised dental institute.\nThe state government has also decided to start three major nursing colleges to develop the healthcare system of the state. CSK Himachal Pradesh Krishi Vishwavidyalya Palampur is one of the most renowned hill agriculture institutes in the world. Dr. Yashwant Singh Parmar University of Horticulture and Forestry has earned a unique distinction in India for imparting teaching, research and extension education in horticulture, forestry and allied disciplines. Further, state-run Jawaharlal Nehru Government Engineering College was inaugurated in 2006 at Sundernagar.\nHimachal Pradesh also hosts a campus of the fashion college, National Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT) in Kangra.\nState profile.\nSource: \"Department of Information and Public Relations.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14191", "revid": "6150386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14191", "title": "Hakra River", "text": ""}
{"id": "14192", "revid": "17216044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14192", "title": "Helene", "text": "Helene or H\u00e9l\u00e8ne may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "14193", "revid": "50630180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14193", "title": "Hyperion", "text": "Hyperion may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "14194", "revid": "49862235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14194", "title": "History of medicine", "text": "The history of medicine is both a study of medicine throughout history as well as a multidisciplinary field of study that seeks to explore and understand medical practices, both past and present, throughout human societies.\nThe history of medicine is the study and documentation of the evolution of medical treatments, practices, and knowledge over time. Medical historians often draw from other humanities fields of study including economics, health sciences, sociology, and politics to better understand the institutions, practices, people, professions, and social systems that have shaped medicine. When a period which predates or lacks written sources regarding medicine, information is instead drawn from archaeological sources. This field tracks the evolution of human societies' approach to health, illness, and injury ranging from prehistory to the modern day, the events that shape these approaches, and their impact on populations.\nEarly medical traditions include those of Babylon, Egypt, China and India. Invention of the microscope was a consequence of improved understanding, during the Renaissance. Prior to the 19th century, humorism (also known as humoralism) was thought to explain the cause of disease but it was gradually replaced by the germ theory of disease, leading to effective treatments and even cures for many infectious diseases. Military doctors advanced the methods of trauma treatment and surgery. Public health measures were developed especially in the 19th century as the rapid growth of cities required systematic sanitary measures. Advanced research centers opened in the early 20th century, often connected with major hospitals. The mid-20th century was characterized by new biological treatments, such as antibiotics. These advancements, along with developments in chemistry, genetics, and radiography led to modern medicine. Medicine was heavily professionalized in the 20th century, and new careers opened to women as nurses (from the 1870s) and as physicians (especially after 1970).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrehistoric medicine.\nPrehistoric medicine is a field of study focused on understanding the use of medicinal plants, healing practices, illnesses, and wellness of humans before written records existed. Although styled prehistoric \"medicine\", prehistoric healthcare practices were vastly different from what we understand medicine to be in the present era and more accurately refers to studies and exploration of early healing practices.\nThis period extends across the first use of stone tools by early humans c. 3.3\u00a0million years ago to the beginning of writing systems and subsequent recorded history c. 5000 years ago.\nAs human populations were once scattered across the world, forming isolated communities and cultures that sporadically interacted, a range of archaeological periods have been developed to account for the differing contexts of technology, sociocultural developments, and uptake of writing systems throughout early human societies. Prehistoric medicine is then highly contextual to the location and people in question, creating an ununiform period of study to reflect various degrees of societal development.\nWithout written records, insights into prehistoric medicine comes indirectly from interpreting evidence left behind by prehistoric humans. One branch of this includes the archaeology of medicine; a discipline that uses a range of archaeological techniques from observing illness in human remains, plant fossils, to excavations to uncover medical practices. There is evidence of healing practices within Neanderthals and other early human species. Prehistoric evidence of human engagement with medicine include the discovery of psychoactive plant sources such as psilocybin mushrooms in c. 6000 BCE Sahara to primitive dental care in c. 11,900 BCE (13,000 BP) Riparo Fredian (present-day Italy) and c. 7000 BCE Mehrgarh (present-day Pakistan).\nAnthropology is another academic branch that contributes to understanding prehistoric medicine in uncovering the sociocultural relationships, meaning, and interpretation of prehistoric evidence. The overlap of medicine as both a root to healing the body as well as the spiritual throughout prehistoric periods highlights the multiple purposes that healing practices and plants could potentially have. From proto-religions to developed spiritual systems, relationships of humans and supernatural entities, from Gods to shamans, have played an interwoven part in prehistoric medicine.\nA significant example of sophisticated prehistoric self-medication is the case of \u00d6tzi the Iceman (c. 3230 BC). According to archaeologist Patrick Hunt, \u00d6tzi carried a deliberate \"prehistoric medical kit\" to treat his numerous documented ailments. This kit included Piptoporus betulinus (birch polypore fungus), which Hunt suggests was used as both a vermifuge for intestinal parasites and an antibiotic for his Lyme disease; poppy seeds as an analgesic ; sloe berries to treat vertigo and eczema associated with Lyme disease; and sphagnum moss as an antiseptic wound dressing.\nAncient medicine.\nAncient history covers time between c. 3000 BCE to c. 500 CE, starting from evidenced development of writing systems to the end of the classical era and beginning of the post-classical period. Socioculture and technological developments could differ locally from settlement to settlement as well as globally from one society to the next.\nAncient medicine covers a similar period of time and presented a range of similar healing theories from across the world connecting nature, religion, and humans within ideas of circulating fluids and energy. Although prominent scholars and texts detailed well-defined medical insights, their real-world applications were marred by knowledge destruction and loss, poor communication, localized reinterpretations, and subsequent inconsistent applications.\nAncient Mesopotamian medicine.\nThe Mesopotamian region, covering much of present-day Iraq, Kuwait, Syria, Iran, and Turkey, was dominated by a series of civilisations including Sumer, the earliest known civilisation in the Fertile Crescent region, alongside the Akkadians (including Assyrians and Babylonians). Overlapping ideas of what we now understand as medicine, science, magic, and religion characterised early Mesopotamian healing practices as a hybrid naturalistic and supernatural belief system.\nThe Sumerians developed one of the earliest known writing systems in the 3rd millennium BCE, and created numerous cuneiform clay tablets regarding their civilisation. These included detailed accounts of drug prescriptions and operations, as well as exorcisms. These were administered and carried out by highly defined professionals including \"b\u00e2r\u00fb\" (seers), \"\u00e2s[h]ipu\" (exorcists), and \"as\u00fb\" (physician-priests). An example of an early, prescription-like medication appeared in Sumerian during the Third Dynasty of Ur (c. 2112 BCE \u2013 c. 2004 BCE).\nFollowing the conquest of the Sumerian civilisation by the Akkadian Empire and the empire's eventual collapse from a number of social and environmental factors, the Babylonian civilisation began to dominate the region. Examples of Babylonian Medicine include the extensive Babylonian medical text, the \"Diagnostic Handbook,\" written by the \"umm\u00e2n\u016b\", or chief scholar, Esagil-kin-apli of Borsippa, in the middle of the 11th century BCE during the reign of the Babylonian king Adad-apla-iddina (1069\u20131046\u00a0BCE).\nThis medical treatise devoted great attention to the practice of diagnosis, prognosis, physical examination, and remedies. The text contains a list of medical symptoms and often detailed empirical observations along with logical rules used in combining observed symptoms on the body of a patient with their diagnosis and prognosis. Here, clearly developed rationales were developed to understand the causes of disease and injury, supported by theories, agreed upon at the time, of elements we might now understand as natural causes, supernatural magic and religious explanations.\nMost known and recovered artefacts from the ancient Mesopotamian civilisations centre on the neo-Assyrian (c. 900 \u2013 600 BCE) and neo-Babylonian (c. 600 \u2013 500 BCE) periods, as the last empires ruled by native Mesopotamian rulers. These discoveries include a huge array of medical clay tablets from this period, although damage to the clay documents creates large gaps in our understanding of medical practices.\nThroughout the civilisations of Mesopotamia there are a wide range of medical innovations, including evidenced practices of prophylaxis, measures to prevent the spread of disease, accounts of stroke, and an awareness of mental illnesses.\nAncient Egyptian medicine.\nAncient Egypt, a civilisation spanning the valley of the river Nile (throughout parts of present-day Egypt, Sudan, and South Sudan), existed from its unification in c. 3150 BCE to its collapse via Persian conquest in 525 BCE and ultimate downfall from the conquest of Alexander the Great in 332 BCE.\nAncient Egyptians developed a complex, experimental, and communicative medical tradition that has been uncovered through surviving documents, most made of papyrus, such as the Kahun Gynaecological Papyrus, the Edwin Smith Papyrus, the Ebers Papyrus, the London Medical Papyrus, to the Greek Magical Papyri.\nHerodotus described the Egyptians as \"the healthiest of all men, next to the Libyans\", because of the dry climate and the notable public health system that they possessed. According to him, \"the practice of medicine is so specialized among them that each physician is a healer of one disease and no more.\" Although Egyptian medicine, to a considerable extent, dealt with the supernatural, it eventually developed a practical use in the fields of anatomy, public health, and clinical diagnostics.\nMedical information in the Edwin Smith Papyrus may date to a time as early as 3000\u00a0BCE. Imhotep in the 3rd dynasty is sometimes credited with being the founder of ancient Egyptian medicine and with being the original author of the \"Edwin Smith Papyrus\", detailing cures, ailments and anatomical observations. This papyrus is regarded as a copy of several earlier works and was written c. 1600\u00a0BCE. It is an ancient textbook on surgery almost completely devoid of magical thinking and describes in exquisite detail the \"examination, diagnosis, treatment,\" and \"prognosis\" of numerous ailments.\nThe Kahun Gynaecological Papyrus treats women's complaints, including problems with conception. Thirty-four cases detailing diagnosis and treatment survive, although some of them are mere fragments. Dating to 1800\u00a0BCE, it is the oldest surviving medical text of any kind.\nMedical institutions, referred to as Houses of Life, are known to have been established in ancient Egypt as early as 2200 BCE.\nThe Ebers Papyrus is the oldest written text mentioning enemas. Many medications were administered by enemas and one of the many types of medical specialists was an Iri, the Shepherd of the Anus.\nThe earliest known physician is also credited to ancient Egypt: Hesy-Ra, \"Chief of Dentists and Physicians\" for King Djoser in the 27th century\u00a0BCE. Also, the earliest known woman physician, Peseshet, practiced in Ancient Egypt at the time of the 4th dynasty. Her title was \"Lady Overseer of the Lady Physicians.\"\nAncient Chinese medicine.\nMedical and healing practices in early Chinese dynasties were heavily shaped by the practice of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). Starting around the Zhou dynasty, parts of this system were being developed and are demonstrated in early writings on herbs in \"Classic of Changes\" (\"Yi Jing\") and \"Classic of Poetry\" (\"Shi Jing\").\nChina also developed a large body of traditional medicine. Much of the philosophy of traditional Chinese medicine derived from empirical observations of disease and illness by Taoist physicians and reflects the classical Chinese belief that individual human experiences express causative principles effective in the environment at all scales. These causative principles, whether material, essential, or mystical, correlate as the expression of the natural order of the universe.\nThe foundational text of Chinese medicine is the \"Huangdi Neijing\", (or \"Yellow Emperor's Inner Canon\"), written 5th century to 3rd century BCE. Near the end of the 2nd century CE, during the Han dynasty, Zhang Zhongjing, wrote a \"Treatise on Cold Damage\", which contains the earliest known reference to the \"Neijing Suwen\". The Jin dynasty practitioner and advocate of acupuncture and moxibustion, Huangfu Mi (215\u2013282), also quotes the Yellow Emperor in his \"Jiayi jing\", c. 265. During the Tang dynasty, the \"Suwen\" was expanded and revised and is now the best extant representation of the foundational roots of traditional Chinese medicine. Traditional Chinese medicine that is based on the use of herbal medicine, acupuncture, massage and other forms of therapy has been practiced in China for thousands of years.\nCritics say that TCM theory and practice have no basis in modern science, and TCM practitioners do not agree on what diagnosis and treatments should be used for any given person. A 2007 editorial in the journal \"Nature\" wrote that TCM \"remains poorly researched and supported, and most of its treatments have no logical mechanism of action.\" It also described TCM as \"fraught with pseudoscience\". A review of the literature in 2008 found that scientists are \"still unable to find a shred of evidence\" according to standards of science-based medicine for traditional Chinese concepts such as \"qi\", meridians, and acupuncture points, and that the traditional principles of acupuncture are deeply flawed. There are concerns over a number of potentially toxic plants, animal parts, and mineral Chinese compounds, as well as the facilitation of disease. Trafficked and farm-raised animals used in TCM are a source of several fatal zoonotic diseases. There are additional concerns over the illegal trade and transport of endangered species including rhinoceroses and tigers, and the welfare of specially farmed animals, including bears.\nAncient Indian medicine.\nThe Atharvaveda, a sacred text of Hinduism dating from the middle Vedic age (c. 1200\u2013900 BCE), is one of the first Indian texts dealing with medicine. It is a text filled with magical charms, spells, and incantations used for various purposes, such as protection against demons, rekindling love, ensuring childbirth, and achieving success in battle, trade, and even gambling. It also includes numerous charms aimed at curing diseases and several remedies from medicinal herbs, overall making it a key source of medical knowledge during the Vedic period. The use of herbs to treat ailments would later form a large part of Ayurveda. \nAyurveda, meaning the \"complete knowledge for long life\" is another medical system of India. Its two most famous texts (samhitas) belong to the schools of Charaka and Sushruta. The Samhitas represent later revised versions (recensions) of their original works. The earliest foundations of Ayurveda were built on a synthesis of traditional herbal practices together with a massive addition of theoretical conceptualizations, new nosologies and new therapies dating from about 600 BCE onwards, and coming out of the communities of thinkers which included the Buddha and others.\nAccording to the compendium of Charaka, the Charakasamhit\u0101, health and disease are not predetermined and life may be prolonged by human effort. The compendium of Sushruta, the Sushruta Samhita, defines the purpose of medicine to cure the diseases of the sick, protect the healthy, and to prolong life. Both these ancient compendia include details of the examination, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of numerous ailments. The Sushruta Samhita is notable for describing procedures on forms of surgery, including rhinoplasty, the repair of torn ear lobes, perineal lithotomy, cataract surgery, and other excisions and surgical procedures. Susruta also described more than 125 surgical instruments in detail. Sushruta had a penchant for scientific classification: his medical treatise consists of 184 chapters, 1,120 conditions are listed, including injuries and illnesses relating to aging and mental illness.\nThe Ayurvedic classics mention eight branches of medicine: k\u0101y\u0101cikits\u0101 (internal medicine), \u015balyacikits\u0101 (surgery including anatomy), \u015b\u0101l\u0101kyacikits\u0101 (eye, ear, nose, and throat diseases), kaum\u0101rabh\u1e5btya (pediatrics with obstetrics and gynaecology), bh\u016btavidy\u0101 (spirit and psychiatric medicine), agada tantra (toxicology with treatments of stings and bites), ras\u0101yana (science of rejuvenation), and v\u0101j\u012bkara\u1e47a (aphrodisiac and fertility). Apart from learning these, the student of \u0100yurveda was expected to know ten arts that were indispensable in the preparation and application of his medicines: distillation, operative skills, cooking, horticulture, metallurgy, sugar manufacture, pharmacy, analysis and separation of minerals, compounding of metals, and preparation of alkalis. The teaching of various subjects was done during the instruction of relevant clinical subjects. For example, the teaching of anatomy was a part of the teaching of surgery, embryology was a part of training in pediatrics and obstetrics, and the knowledge of physiology and pathology was interwoven in the teaching of all the clinical disciplines.\nEven today Ayurvedic treatment is practiced, but it is considered pseudoscientific, some ayurvedic medicines have been found to contain toxic substances. Both the lack of scientific soundness in the theoretical foundations of ayurveda and the quality of research have been criticized.\nAncient Greek medicine.\nHumors.\nThe theory of humors was derived from ancient medical works, dominated Western medicine until the 19th century, and is credited to Greek philosopher and surgeon Galen of Pergamon (129 \u2013 c.\u2009216 CE). In Greek medicine, there are thought to be four humors, or bodily fluids that are linked to illness: blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile. Early scientists believed that food is digested into blood, muscle, and bones, while the humors that were not blood were then formed by indigestible materials that are left over. An excess or shortage of any one of the four humors is theorized to cause an imbalance that results in sickness; the aforementioned statement was hypothesized by sources before Hippocrates. Hippocrates (c.\u2009400 BCE) deduced that the four seasons of the year and four ages of man that affect the body in relation to the humors. The four ages of man are childhood, youth, prime age, and old age. Black bile is associated with autumn, phlegm with winter, blood with spring, and yellow bile with summer.\nIn \"De temperamentis,\" Galen linked what he called temperaments, or personality characteristics, to a person's natural mixture of humors. He also said that the best place to check the balance of temperaments was in the palm of the hand. A person that is considered to be phlegmatic is said to be an introvert, even-tempered, calm, and peaceful. This person would have an excess of phlegm, which is described as a viscous substance or mucous. Similarly, a melancholic temperament related to being moody, anxious, depressed, introverted, and pessimistic. A melancholic temperament is caused by an excess of black bile, which is sedimentary and dark in colour. Being extroverted, talkative, easygoing, carefree, and sociable coincides with a sanguine temperament, which is linked to too much blood. Finally, a choleric temperament is related to too much yellow bile, which is actually red in colour and has the texture of foam; it is associated with being aggressive, excitable, impulsive, and also extroverted.\nThere are numerous ways to treat a disproportion of the humors. For example, if someone was suspected to have too much blood, then the physician would perform bloodletting as a treatment. Likewise, if a person believed to have too much phlegm should feel better after expectorating, and someone with too much yellow bile would purge. Another factor to be considered in the balance of humors is the quality of air where one resides, such as the climate and elevation. Also, the standard of food and drink, balance of sleeping and waking, exercise and rest, retention and evacuation are important. Moods such as anger, sadness, joy, and love can affect the balance. During that time, the importance of balance was demonstrated by the fact that women lose blood monthly during menstruation, and have a lesser occurrence of gout, arthritis, and epilepsy than men do. Galen also hypothesized that there are three faculties. The natural faculty affects growth and reproduction and is produced in the liver. Animal or vital faculty controls respiration and emotion, coming from the heart. In the brain, the psychic faculty commands the senses and thoughts. The structure of bodily functions is related to the humors as well. Greek physicians understood that food was cooked in the stomach; this is where the nutrients are extracted. The best, most potent and pure nutrients from food are reserved for blood, which is produced in the liver and carried through veins to organs. Blood enhanced with pneuma, which means wind or breath, is carried by the arteries. The path that blood take is as follows: venous blood passes through the vena cava and is moved into the right ventricle of the heart; then, the pulmonary artery takes it to the lungs. Later, the pulmonary vein then mixes air from the lungs with blood to form arterial blood, which has different observable characteristics. After leaving the liver, half of the yellow bile that is produced travels to the blood, while the other half travels to the gallbladder. Similarly, half of the black bile produced gets mixed in with blood, and the other half is used by the spleen.\nPeople.\nAround 800 BCE Homer in the \"Iliad\" gives descriptions of wound treatment by the two sons of Asklepios, the admirable physicians Podaleirius and Machaon and one acting doctor, Patroclus. Because Machaon is wounded and Podaleirius is in combat Eurypylus asks Patroclus to \"cut out the arrow-head, and wash the dark blood from my thigh with warm water, and sprinkle soothing herbs with power to heal on my wound\". Asklepios, like Imhotep, came to be associated as a god of healing over time.\nTemples dedicated to the healer-god Asclepius, known as \"Asclepieia\" (, sing. , \"Asclepieion\"), functioned as centers of medical advice, prognosis, and healing. At these shrines, patients would enter a dream-like state of induced sleep known as \"enkoimesis\" () not unlike anesthesia, in which they either received guidance from the deity in a dream or were cured by surgery. Asclepeia provided carefully controlled spaces conducive to healing and fulfilled several of the requirements of institutions created for healing. In the Asclepeion of Epidaurus, three large marble boards dated to 350 BCE preserve the names, case histories, complaints, and cures of about 70 patients who came to the temple with a problem and shed it there. Some of the surgical cures listed, such as the opening of an abdominal abscess or the removal of traumatic foreign material, are realistic enough to have taken place, but with the patient in a state of enkoimesis induced with the help of soporific substances such as opium. Alcmaeon of Croton wrote on medicine between 500 and 450 BCE. He argued that channels linked the sensory organs to the brain, and it is possible that he discovered one type of channel, the optic nerves, by dissection.\nHippocrates of Kos (c.\u2009460\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009370 BCE), considered the \"father of modern medicine.\" The Hippocratic Corpus is a collection of around seventy early medical works from ancient Greece strongly associated with Hippocrates and his students. Most famously, the Hippocratics invented the Hippocratic Oath for physicians. Contemporary physicians swear an oath of office which includes aspects found in early editions of the Hippocratic Oath.\nHippocrates and his followers were first to describe many diseases and medical conditions. Though humorism (humoralism) as a medical system predates 5th-century Greek medicine, Hippocrates and his students systematized the thinking that illness can be explained by an imbalance of blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile. Hippocrates is given credit for the first description of clubbing of the fingers, an important diagnostic sign in chronic suppurative lung disease, lung cancer and cyanotic heart disease. For this reason, clubbed fingers are sometimes referred to as \"Hippocratic fingers\". Hippocrates was also the first physician to describe the Hippocratic face in \"Prognosis\". Shakespeare famously alludes to this description when writing of Falstaff's death in Act II, Scene iii. of \"Henry V\". Hippocrates began to categorize illnesses as acute, chronic, endemic and epidemic, and use terms such as, \"exacerbation, relapse, resolution, crisis, paroxysm, peak, and convalescence.\"\nThe Greek Galen (c. \u00a0CE) was one of the greatest physicians of the ancient world, as his theories dominated all medical studies for nearly 1500 years. His theories and experimentation laid the foundation for modern medicine surrounding the heart and blood. Galen's influence and innovations in medicine can be attributed to the experiments he conducted, which were unlike any other medical experiments of his time. Galen strongly believed that medical dissection was one of the essential procedures in truly understanding medicine. He began to dissect different animals that were anatomically similar to humans, which allowed him to learn more about the internal organs and extrapolate the surgical studies to the human body. In addition, he performed many audacious operations\u2014including brain and eye surgeries\u2014that were not tried again for almost two millennia. Through the dissections and surgical procedures, Galen concluded that blood is able to circulate throughout the human body, and the heart is most similar to the human soul. In \"Ars medica\" (\"Arts of Medicine\"), he further explains the mental properties in terms of specific mixtures of the bodily organs. While much of his work surrounded the physical anatomy, he also worked heavily in humoral physiology.\nGalen's medical work was regarded as authoritative until well into the Middle Ages. He left a physiological model of the human body that became the mainstay of the medieval physician's university anatomy curriculum. Although he attempted to extrapolate the animal dissections towards the model of the human body, some of Galen's theories were incorrect. This caused his model to suffer greatly from stasis and intellectual stagnation. Greek and Roman taboos caused dissection of the human body to usually be banned in ancient times, but in the Middle Ages it changed.\nIn 1523 Galen's \"On the Natural Faculties\" was published in London. In the 1530s Belgian anatomist and physician Andreas Vesalius launched a project to translate many of Galen's Greek texts into Latin. Vesalius's most famous work, \"De humani corporis fabrica\" was greatly influenced by Galenic writing and form.\nHerophilus and Erasistratus.\nTwo great Alexandrians laid the foundations for the scientific study of anatomy and physiology, Herophilus of Chalcedon and Erasistratus of Ceos. Other Alexandrian surgeons gave us ligature (hemostasis), lithotomy, hernia operations, ophthalmic surgery, plastic surgery, methods of reduction of dislocations and fractures, tracheotomy, and mandrake as an anaesthetic. Some of what we know of them comes from Celsus and Galen of Pergamum.\nHerophilus of Chalcedon, the renowned Alexandrian physician, was one of the pioneers of human anatomy. Though his knowledge of the anatomical structure of the human body was vast, he specialized in the aspects of neural anatomy. Thus, his experimentation was centered around the anatomical composition of the blood-vascular system and the pulsations that can be analyzed from the system. Furthermore, the surgical experimentation he administered caused him to become very prominent throughout the field of medicine, as he was one of the first physicians to initiate the exploration and dissection of the human body.\nThe banned practice of human dissection was lifted during his time within the scholastic community. This brief moment in the history of Greek medicine allowed him to further study the brain, which he believed was the core of the nervous system. He also distinguished between veins and arteries, noting that the latter pulse and the former do not. Thus, while working at the medical school of Alexandria, Herophilus placed intelligence in the brain based on his surgical exploration of the body, and he connected the nervous system to motion and sensation. In addition, he and his contemporary, Erasistratus of Chios, continued to research the role of veins and nerves. After conducting extensive research, the two Alexandrians mapped out the course of the veins and nerves across the human body. Erasistratus connected the increased complexity of the surface of the human brain compared to other animals to its superior intelligence. He sometimes employed experiments to further his research, at one time repeatedly weighing a caged bird, and noting its weight loss between feeding times. In Erasistratus' physiology, air enters the body, is then drawn by the lungs into the heart, where it is transformed into vital spirit, and is then pumped by the arteries throughout the body. Some of this vital spirit reaches the brain, where it is transformed into animal spirit, which is then distributed by the nerves.\nAncient Roman medicine.\nThe Romans invented numerous surgical instruments, including the first instruments unique to women, as well as the surgical uses of forceps, scalpels, cautery, cross-bladed scissors, the surgical needle, the sound, and speculas. Romans also performed cataract surgery.\nThe Roman army physician Dioscorides (c.\u200940\u201390 CE), was a Greek botanist and pharmacologist. He wrote the encyclopedia \"De materia medica\" describing over 600 herbal cures, forming an influential pharmacopoeia which was used extensively for the following 1,500 years.\nEarly Christians in the Roman Empire incorporated medicine into their theology, ritual practices, and metaphors.\nPost-classical medicine.\nMiddle East.\nPlaces.\nByzantine medicine.\nByzantine medicine encompasses the common medical practices of the Byzantine Empire from about 400 CE to 1453 CE. Byzantine medicine was notable for building upon the knowledge base developed by its Greco-Roman predecessors. In preserving medical practices from antiquity, Byzantine medicine influenced Islamic medicine as well as fostering the Western rebirth of medicine during the Renaissance.\nByzantine physicians often compiled and standardized medical knowledge into textbooks. Their records tended to include both diagnostic explanations and technical drawings. The Medical Compendium in Seven Books, written by the leading physician Paul of Aegina, survived as a particularly thorough source of medical knowledge. This compendium, written in the late seventh century, remained in use as a standard textbook for the following 800 years.\nLate antiquity ushered in a revolution in medical science, and historical records often mention civilian hospitals (although battlefield medicine and wartime triage were recorded well before Imperial Rome). Constantinople stood out as a center of medicine during the Middle Ages, which was aided by its crossroads location, wealth, and accumulated knowledge.\nThe first ever known example of separating conjoined twins occurred in the Byzantine Empire in the 10th century. The next example of separating conjoined twins would be recorded many centuries later in Germany in 1689.\nThe Byzantine Empire's neighbors, the Persian Sassanid Empire, also made their noteworthy contributions mainly with the establishment of the Academy of Gondeshapur, which was \"the most important medical center of the ancient world during the 6th and 7th centuries.\" In addition, Cyril Elgood, British physician and a historian of medicine in Persia, commented that thanks to medical centers like the Academy of Gondeshapur, \"to a very large extent, the credit for the whole hospital system must be given to Persia.\"\nIslamic medicine.\nThe Muslim world rose to primacy in medical science as its physicians contributed significantly to the field of medicine, including anatomy, ophthalmology, pharmacology, pharmacy, physiology, and surgery. Islamic civilization's contribution was a process that took hundreds of years. During the Umayyad Caliphate (661\u2013750 CE), these fields were in their very early stages of development, and little progress was made. One reason for limited advancement in medicine was the Caliphate's focus on expansion after the death of Muhammad (632 CE). The focus on expansionism redirected resources from other fields, such as medicine.\nIslamic medicine grew significantly when the Abbasid Caliphate (750\u20131258 CE) overthrew the Umayyad Caliphate in 750 CE. This change in dynasty served as a turning point towards scientific and medical developments. A large contributor to this was that, under Abbasid rule, much of the Greek legacy was transmitted into Arabic which by then, was the main language of Islamic peoples. Many Islamic physicians were heavily influenced by the works of Greek scholars of Alexandria and Egypt and were able to expand on those texts to produce new medical knowledge. This period of time is known as the Islamic Golden Age where there was development and flourishment of technology, commerce and sciences, including medicine. The creation of the first Islamic Hospital in 805 CE by the Abbasid caliph Harun al-Rashid in Baghdad was a significant development. This hospital provided educational opportunities for Islamic physicians.\nMuslims were influenced by ancient Indian, Persian, Greek, Roman and Byzantine medical practices, and helped them to develop it further. Galen &amp; Hippocrates were pre-eminent authorities. The translation of 129 of Galen's works into Arabic by the Nestorian Christian Hunayn ibn Ishaq and his assistants, and in particular Galen's insistence on a rational systematic approach to medicine, set the template for Islamic medicine, which spread throughout the Arab Empire. Its most famous physicians included the Persian polymaths Abu Bakr al-Razi and Avicenna, who wrote more than 40 works on health, medicine, and well-being. Taking leads from Greece and Rome, Islamic scholars kept medicine moving forward. Persian polymath Avicenna has been called the \"father of medicine\" and wrote \"The Canon of Medicine\" which became a standard medical text in medieval European universities, considered one of the most famous books in the history of medicine. \"The Canon of Medicine\" presents an overview of medicine in the medieval Islamic world, which had been influenced by earlier traditions including Greco-Roman medicine, Al-R\u0101zi was one of the first to question the Greek theory of humorism, which nevertheless remained influential in medieval Western and Islamic medicine. Some volumes of al-R\u0101zi's work \"Al-Mansuri\", namely \"On Surgery\" and \"A General Book on Therapy\", became part of the medical curriculum in European universities. He has been described as a doctor's doctor, the father of pediatrics, and a pioneer of ophthalmology.\nIn addition to contributions to understanding human anatomy, Islamic physicians played a role in the development of the modern hospital system. During the Safavid empire (16th\u201318th centuries) in Iran and the Mughal empire (16th\u201319th centuries) in India, Muslim scholars transformed the institution of the hospital, creating an environment in which developing medical knowledge could be passed among students and teachers from a range of cultures. There were two main schools of thought with patient care. These included humoral physiology from the Persians and Ayurvedic practice. After these theories were translated from Sanskrit to Persian and vice-versa, hospitals could have a mix of culture and techniques. Hospitals became increasingly common as wealthy patrons commonly founded them. Many features still in use today, such as emphasis on hygiene, a staff dedicated to the care of patients, and separation of individual patients were developed in Islamic hospitals before they came into practice in Europe. The patient care aspect of hospitals in Europe had then not taken effect. European hospitals were places of religion rather than science. As was the case with much of the scientific work done by Islamic scholars, many of these novel developments in medical practice were transmitted to European cultures, after they had long been used throughout the Islamic world. Although Islamic scientists were responsible for discovering much of the knowledge that allows the hospital system to function safely today, European scholars who built on this work still receive the majority of the credit.\nBefore the development of scientific medical practices in the Islamic empires, medical care was mainly performed by religious figures such as priests. Without an understanding of how infectious diseases worked and why sickness spread from person to person, these early attempts at caring for the ill and injured often did harm. With the development of new and safer practices by scholars and physicians in hospitals of the Islamic world, ideas vital for the effective care of patients were developed, learned, and transmitted. Hospitals developed concepts and structures, still used today: separate wards for male and female patients, pharmacies, medical record-keeping, and personal and institutional sanitation and hygiene. Much of this knowledge was recorded and passed on through Islamic medical texts, many of which were carried to Europe and translated for the use of European medical workers. The Tasrif, written by surgeon Abu Al-Qasim Al-Zahrawi, was translated into Latin; it became one of the most important medical texts in European universities during the Middle Ages and contained useful information on surgical techniques and spread of bacterial infection.\nThe hospital was a typical institution included in most Muslim cities, and although they were often physically attached to religious institutions, they were not themselves places of religious practice. Islamic hospitals, along with observatories used for astronomical science, were some of the most important points of exchange for the spread of scientific knowledge.\nEurope.\nAfter 400 CE, the study and practice of medicine in the Western Roman Empire went into deep decline. Medical services were provided, especially for the poor, in the thousands of monastic hospitals that sprang up across Europe, but the care was rudimentary and mainly palliative. Most of the writings of Galen and Hippocrates were lost to the West, with the summaries and compendia of St. Isidore of Seville being the primary channel for transmitting Greek medical ideas. The Carolingian Renaissance brought increased contact with Byzantium and a greater awareness of ancient medicine, but only with the Renaissance of the 12th century and the new translations coming from Muslim and Jewish sources in Spain, and the fifteenth-century flood of resources after the fall of Constantinople did the West fully recover its acquaintance with classical antiquity.\nGreek and Roman taboos had meant that dissection was usually banned in ancient times, but in the Middle Ages it changed: medical teachers and students at Bologna began to open human bodies, and Mondino de Luzzi (c.\u20091275\u20131326) produced the first known anatomy textbook based on human dissection.\nWallis identifies a prestige hierarchy with university educated physicians on top, followed by learned surgeons; craft-trained surgeons; barber surgeons; itinerant specialists such as dentist and oculists; empirics; and midwives.\nInstitutions.\nThe first medical schools were opened in the 9th century, most notably the Schola Medica Salernitana at Salerno in southern Italy. The cosmopolitan influences from Greek, Latin, Arabic, and Hebrew sources gave it an international reputation as the Hippocratic City. Students from wealthy families came for three years of preliminary studies and five of medical studies. The medicine, following the laws of Federico II, that he founded in 1224 the university and improved the Schola Salernitana, in the period between 1200 and 1400, it had in Sicily (so-called Sicilian Middle Ages) a particular development so much to create a true school of Jewish medicine.\nAs a result of which, after a legal examination, was conferred to a Jewish Sicilian woman, Virdimura, wife of another physician Pasquale of Catania, the historical record of before woman officially trained to exercise of the medical profession.\nAt the University of Bologna the training of physicians began in 1219. The Italian city attracted students from across Europe. Taddeo Alderotti built a tradition of medical education that established the characteristic features of Italian learned medicine and was copied by medical schools elsewhere.Turisanus (d. 1320) was his student.\nThe University of Padua was founded about 1220 by walkouts from the University of Bologna, and began teaching medicine in 1222. It played a leading role in the identification and treatment of diseases and ailments, specializing in autopsies and the inner workings of the body. Starting in 1595, Padua's famous anatomical theatre drew artists and scientists studying the human body during public dissections. The intensive study of Galen led to critiques of Galen modeled on his own writing, as in the first book of Vesalius's \"De humani corporis fabrica.\" Andreas Vesalius held the chair of Surgery and Anatomy (\"explicator chirurgiae\") and in 1543 published his anatomical discoveries in \"De Humani Corporis Fabrica\". He portrayed the human body as an interdependent system of organ groupings. The book triggered great public interest in dissections and caused many other European cities to establish anatomical theatres.\nBy the thirteenth century, the medical school at Montpellier began to eclipse the Salernitan school. In the 12th century, universities were founded in Italy, France, and England, which soon developed schools of medicine. The University of Montpellier in France and Italy's University of Padua and University of Bologna were leading schools. Nearly all the learning was from lectures and readings in Hippocrates, Galen, Avicenna, and Aristotle. In later centuries, the importance of universities founded in the late Middle Ages gradually increased, e.g. Charles University in Prague (established in 1348), Jagiellonian University in Krak\u00f3w (1364), University of Vienna (1365), Heidelberg University (1386) and University of Greifswald (1456).\nEarly modern medicine.\nPlaces.\nEngland.\nIn England, there were but three small hospitals after 1550. Pelling and Webster estimate that in London in the 1580 to 1600 period, out of a population of nearly 200,000 people, there were about 500 medical practitioners. Nurses and midwives are not included. There were about 50 physicians, 100 licensed surgeons, 100 apothecaries, and 250 additional unlicensed practitioners. In the last category about 25% were women. All across England\u2014and indeed all of the world\u2014the vast majority of the people in city, town or countryside depended for medical care on local amateurs with no professional training but with a reputation as wise healers who could diagnose problems and advise sick people what to do\u2014and perhaps set broken bones, pull a tooth, give some traditional herbs or brews or perform a little magic to cure what ailed them.\nEurope.\nThe Renaissance brought an intense focus on scholarship to Christian Europe. A major effort to translate the Arabic and Greek scientific works into Latin emerged. Europeans gradually became experts not only in the ancient writings of the Romans and Greeks, but in the contemporary writings of Islamic scientists. During the later centuries of the Renaissance came an increase in experimental investigation, particularly in the field of dissection and body examination, thus advancing our knowledge of human anatomy.\nInstitutions.\nAt the University of Bologna the curriculum was revised and strengthened in 1560\u20131590. The representative professor was Julius Caesar Aranzi (Arantius) (1530\u20131589). He became Professor of Anatomy and Surgery at the University of Bologna in 1556, where he established anatomy as a major branch of medicine for the first time. Aranzi combined anatomy with a description of pathological processes, based largely on his own research, Galen, and the work of his contemporary Italians. Aranzi discovered the 'Nodules of Aranzio' in the semilunar valves of the heart and wrote the first description of the superior levator palpebral and the coracobrachialis muscles. His books (in Latin) covered surgical techniques for many conditions, including hydrocephalus, nasal polyp, goitre and tumours to phimosis, ascites, haemorrhoids, anal abscess and fistulae.\nPeople.\nWoman.\nCatholic women played large roles in health and healing in medieval and early modern Europe. A life as a nun was a prestigious role; wealthy families provided dowries for their daughters, and these funded the convents, while the nuns provided free nursing care for the poor.\nThe Catholic elites provided hospital services because of their theology of salvation that good works were the route to heaven. The Protestant reformers rejected the notion that rich men could gain God's grace through good works\u2014and thereby escape purgatory\u2014by providing cash endowments to charitable institutions. They also rejected the Catholic idea that the poor patients earned grace and salvation through their suffering. Protestants generally closed all the convents and most of the hospitals, sending women home to become housewives, often against their will. On the other hand, local officials recognized the public value of hospitals, and some were continued in Protestant lands, but without monks or nuns and in the control of local governments.\nIn London, the crown allowed two hospitals to continue their charitable work, under nonreligious control of city officials. The convents were all shut down but Harkness finds that women\u2014some of them former nuns\u2014were part of a new system that delivered essential medical services to people outside their family. They were employed by parishes and hospitals, as well as by private families, and provided nursing care as well as some medical, pharmaceutical, and surgical services.\nMeanwhile, in Catholic lands such as France, rich families continued to fund convents and monasteries, and enrolled their daughters as nuns who provided free health services to the poor. Nursing was a religious role for the nurse, and there was little call for science.\nAsia.\nChina.\nIn the 18th century, during the Qing dynasty, there was a proliferation of popular books as well as more advanced encyclopedias on traditional medicine. Jesuit missionaries introduced Western science and medicine to the royal court, although the Chinese physicians ignored them.\nIndia.\nUnani medicine, based on Avicenna's \"Canon of Medicine\" (ca. 1025), was developed in India throughout the medieval and Early Modern periods. Its use continued, especially in Muslim communities, during the Indian Sultanate and Mughal periods. Unani medicine is in some respects close to Ayurveda and to Early Modern European medicine. All share a theory of the presence of the elements (in Unani, as in Europe, they are considered to be fire, water, earth, and air) and humors in the human body. According to Unani physicians, these elements are present in different humoral fluids and their balance leads to health and their imbalance leads to illness.\nSanskrit medical literature of the Early Modern period included innovative works such as the \"Compendium of \u015a\u0101r\u1e45gadhara\" (Skt. \"\u015a\u0101r\u1e45gadharasa\u1e43hit\u0101\", ca. 1350) and especially \"The Illumination of Bh\u0101va\" (\"Bh\u0101vaprak\u0101\u015ba,\" by \"Bh\u0101vami\u015bra,\" ca. 1550). The latter work also contained an extensive dictionary of materia medica, and became a standard textbook used widely by ayurvedic practitioners in north India up to the present day (2024). Medical innovations of this period included pulse diagnosis, urine diagnosis, the use of mercury and china root to treat syphilis, and the increasing use of metallic ingredients in drugs.\nBy the 18th century CE, Ayurvedic medical therapy was still widely used among most of the population. Muslim rulers built large hospitals in 1595 in Hyderabad, and in Delhi in 1719, and numerous commentaries on ancient texts were written.\nEurope.\nEvents.\nEuropean Age of Enlightenment.\nDuring the Age of Enlightenment, the 18th century, science was held in high esteem and physicians upgraded their social status by becoming more scientific. The health field was crowded with self-trained barber-surgeons, apothecaries, midwives, drug peddlers, and charlatans.\nAcross Europe medical schools relied primarily on lectures and readings. The final year student would have limited clinical experience by trailing the professor through the wards. Laboratory work was uncommon, and dissections were rarely done because of legal restrictions on cadavers. Most schools were small, and only Edinburgh Medical School, Scotland, with 11,000 alumni, produced large numbers of graduates.\nPlaces.\nSpain and the Spanish Empire.\nIn the Spanish Empire, the viceregal capital of Mexico City was a site of medical training for physicians and the creation of hospitals. Epidemic disease had decimated indigenous populations starting with the early sixteenth-century Spanish conquest of the Aztec empire, when a black auxiliary in the armed forces of conqueror Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s, with an active case of smallpox, set off a virgin land epidemic among indigenous peoples, Spanish allies and enemies alike. Aztec emperor Cuitlahuac died of smallpox. Disease was a significant factor in the Spanish conquest elsewhere as well.\nMedical education instituted at the Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico chiefly served the needs of urban elites. Male and female \"curanderos\" or lay practitioners, attended to the ills of the popular classes. The Spanish crown began regulating the medical profession just a few years after the conquest, setting up the Royal Tribunal of the Protomedicata, a board for licensing medical personnel in 1527. Licensing became more systematic after 1646 with physicians, druggists, surgeons, and bleeders requiring a license before they could publicly practice. Crown regulation of medical practice became more general in the Spanish empire.\nElites and the popular classes alike called on divine intervention in personal and society-wide health crises, such as the epidemic of 1737. The intervention of the Virgin of Guadalupe was depicted in a scene of dead and dying Indians, with elites on their knees praying for her aid. In the late eighteenth century, the crown began implementing secularizing policies on the Iberian peninsula and its overseas empire to control disease more systematically and scientifically.\nSpanish Quest for Medicinal Spices.\nBotanical medicines also became popular during the 16th, 17th, and 18th Centuries. Spanish pharmaceutical books during this time contain medicinal recipes consisting of spices, herbs, and other botanical products. For example, nutmeg oil was documented for curing stomach ailments and cardamom oil was believed to relieve intestinal ailments. During the rise of the global trade market, spices and herbs, along with many other goods, that were indigenous to different territories began to appear in different locations across the globe. Herbs and spices were especially popular for their utility in cooking and medicines. As a result of this popularity and increased demand for spices, some areas in Asia, like China and Indonesia, became hubs for spice cultivation and trade. The Spanish Empire also wanted to benefit from the international spice trade, so they looked towards their American colonies.\nThe Spanish American colonies became an area where the Spanish searched to discover new spices and indigenous American medicinal recipes. The Florentine Codex, a 16th-century ethnographic research study in Mesoamerica by the Spanish Franciscan friar Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan, is a major contribution to the history of Nahua medicine. The Spanish did discover many spices and herbs new to them, some of which were reportedly similar to Asian spices. A Spanish physician by the name of Nicol\u00e1s Monardes studied many of the American spices coming into Spain. He documented many of the new American spices and their medicinal properties in his survey \"Historia medicinal de las cosas que se traen de nuestras Indias Occidentales\". For example, Monardes describes the \"Long Pepper\" (Pimienta luenga), found along the coasts of the countries that are now known Panama and Colombia, as a pepper that was more flavorful, healthy, and spicy in comparison to the Eastern black pepper. The Spanish interest in American spices can first be seen in the commissioning of the \"Libellus de Medicinalibus Indorum Herbis\", which was a Spanish-American codex describing indigenous American spices and herbs and describing the ways that these were used in natural Aztec medicines. The codex was commissioned in the year 1552 by Francisco de Mendoza, the son of Antonio de Mendoza, who was the first Viceroy of New Spain. Francisco de Mendoza was interested in studying the properties of these herbs and spices, so that he would be able to profit from the trade of these herbs and the medicines that could be produced by them.\nFrancisco de Mendoza recruited the help of Monardez in studying the traditional medicines of the indigenous people living in what was then the Spanish colonies. Monardez researched these medicines and performed experiments to discover the possibilities of spice cultivation and medicine creation in the Spanish colonies. The Spanish transplanted some herbs from Asia, but only a few foreign crops were successfully grown in the Spanish Colonies. One notable crop brought from Asia and successfully grown in the Spanish colonies was ginger, as it was considered Hispaniola's number 1 crop at the end of the 16th Century. The Spanish Empire did profit from cultivating herbs and spices, but they also introduced pre-Columbian American medicinal knowledge to Europe. Other Europeans were inspired by the actions of Spain and decided to try to establish a botanical transplant system in colonies that they controlled, however, these subsequent attempts were not successful.\nUnited Kingdom and the British Empire.\nThe London Dispensary opened in 1696, the first clinic in the British Empire to dispense medicines to poor sick people. The innovation was slow to catch on, but new dispensaries were open in the 1770s. In the colonies, small hospitals opened in Philadelphia in 1752, New York in 1771, and Boston (Massachusetts General Hospital) in 1811.\nGuy's Hospital, the first great British hospital with a modern foundation, opened in 1721 in London, with funding from businessman Thomas Guy. It had been preceded by St Bartholomew's Hospital and St Thomas's Hospital, both medieval foundations. In 1821 a bequest of \u00a3200,000 by William Hunt in 1829 funded expansion for an additional hundred beds at Guy's. Samuel Sharp (1709\u201378), a surgeon at Guy's Hospital from 1733 to 1757, was internationally famous; his \"A Treatise on the Operations of Surgery\" (1st ed., 1739), was the first British study focused exclusively on operative technique.\nEnglish physician Thomas Percival (1740\u20131804) wrote a comprehensive system of medical conduct, \"Medical Ethics; or, a Code of Institutes and Precepts, Adapted to the Professional Conduct of Physicians and Surgeons\" (1803) that set the standard for many textbooks.\nLate modern medicine.\nGerm theory and bacteriology.\nIn the 1830s in Italy, Agostino Bassi traced the silkworm disease muscardine to microorganisms. Meanwhile, in Germany, Theodor Schwann led research on alcoholic fermentation by yeast, proposing that living microorganisms were responsible.\nLeading chemists, such as Justus von Liebig, seeking solely physicochemical explanations, derided this claim and alleged that Schwann was regressing to vitalism.\nIn 1847 in Vienna, Ignaz Semmelweis (1818\u20131865), dramatically reduced the death rate of new mothers (due to childbed fever) by requiring physicians to clean their hands before attending childbirth, yet his principles were marginalized and attacked by professional peers. At that time most people still believed that infections were caused by foul odors called miasmas.\nFrench scientist Louis Pasteur confirmed Schwann's fermentation experiments in 1857 and afterwards supported the hypothesis that yeast were microorganisms. Moreover, he suggested that such a process might also explain contagious disease. In 1860, Pasteur's report on bacterial fermentation of butyric acid motivated fellow Frenchman Casimir Davaine to identify a similar species (which he called ) as the pathogen of the deadly disease anthrax. Others dismissed \"\" as a mere byproduct of the disease. British surgeon Joseph Lister, however, took these findings seriously and subsequently introduced antisepsis to wound treatment in 1865.\nGerman physician Robert Koch, noting fellow German Ferdinand Cohn's report of a spore stage of a certain bacterial species, traced the life cycle of Davaine's , identified spores, inoculated laboratory animals with them, and reproduced anthrax\u2014a breakthrough for experimental pathology and germ theory of disease. Pasteur's group added ecological investigations confirming spores' role in the natural setting, while Koch published a landmark treatise in 1878 on the bacterial pathology of wounds. In 1881, Koch reported discovery of the \"tubercle bacillus\", cementing germ theory and Koch's acclaim.\nUpon the outbreak of a cholera epidemic in Alexandria, Egypt, two medical missions went to investigate and attend the sick, one was sent out by Pasteur and the other led by Koch. Koch's group returned in 1883, having successfully discovered the cholera pathogen. In Germany, however, Koch's bacteriologists had to vie against Max von Pettenkofer, Germany's leading proponent of miasmatic theory. Pettenkofer conceded bacteria's casual involvement, but maintained that other, environmental factors were required to turn it pathogenic, and opposed water treatment as a misdirected effort amid more important ways to improve public health. The massive cholera epidemic in Hamburg in 1892 devastated Pettenkoffer's position, and yielded German public health to \"Koch's bacteriology\".\nOn losing the 1883 rivalry in Alexandria, Pasteur switched research direction, and introduced his third vaccine\u2014rabies vaccine\u2014the first vaccine for humans since Jenner's for smallpox. From across the globe, donations poured in, funding the founding of Pasteur Institute, the globe's first biomedical institute, which opened in 1888. Along with Koch's bacteriologists, Pasteur's group\u2014which preferred the term \"microbiology\"\u2014led medicine into the new era of \"scientific medicine\" upon bacteriology and germ theory. Accepted from Jakob Henle, Koch's steps to confirm a species' pathogenicity became famed as \"Koch's postulates\". Although his proposed tuberculosis treatment, tuberculin, seemingly failed, it soon was used to test for infection with the involved species. In 1905, Koch was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, and remains renowned as the founder of medical microbiology.\nNursing.\nThe breakthrough to professionalization based on knowledge of advanced medicine was led by Florence Nightingale in England. She resolved to provide more advanced training than she saw on the Continent. At Kaiserswerth, where the first German nursing schools were founded in 1836 by Theodor Fliedner, she said, \"The nursing was nil and the hygiene horrible.\" Britain's male doctors preferred the old system, but Nightingale won out and her Nightingale Training School opened in 1860 and became a model. The Nightingale solution depended on the patronage of upper-class women, and they proved eager to serve. Royalty became involved. In 1902 the wife of the British king took control of the nursing unit of the British army, became its president, and renamed it after herself as the Queen Alexandra's Royal Army Nursing Corps; when she died the next queen became president. Today its Colonel in Chief is Sophie, Countess of Wessex, the daughter-in-law of Queen Elizabeth II. In the United States, upper-middle-class women who already supported hospitals promoted nursing. The new profession proved highly attractive to women of all backgrounds, and schools of nursing opened in the late 19th century. Nurses were soon a part of large hospitals, where they provided a steady stream of low-paid idealistic workers. The International Red Cross began operations in numerous countries in the late 19th century, promoting nursing as an ideal profession for middle-class women.\nStatistical methods.\nA major breakthrough in epidemiology came with the introduction of statistical maps and graphs. They allowed careful analysis of seasonality issues in disease incidents, and the maps allowed public health officials to identify critical loci for the dissemination of disease. John Snow in London developed the methods. In 1849, he observed that the symptoms of cholera, which had already claimed around 500 lives within a month, were vomiting and diarrhoea. He concluded that the source of contamination must be through ingestion, rather than inhalation as was previously thought. It was this insight that resulted in the removal of The Pump On Broad Street, after which deaths from cholera plummeted. English nurse Florence Nightingale pioneered analysis of large amounts of statistical data, using graphs and tables, regarding the condition of thousands of patients in the Crimean War to evaluate the efficacy of hospital services. Her methods proved convincing and led to reforms in military and civilian hospitals, usually with the full support of the government.\nBy the late 19th and early 20th century English statisticians led by Francis Galton, Karl Pearson and Ronald Fisher developed the mathematical tools such as correlations and hypothesis tests that made possible much more sophisticated analysis of statistical data.\nDuring the U.S. Civil War the Sanitary Commission collected enormous amounts of statistical data, and opened up the problems of storing information for fast access and mechanically searching for data patterns. The pioneer was John Shaw Billings (1838\u20131913). A senior surgeon in the war, Billings built the Library of the Surgeon General's Office (now the National Library of Medicine), the centerpiece of modern medical information systems. Billings figured out how to mechanically analyze medical and demographic data by turning facts into numbers and punching the numbers onto cardboard cards that could be sorted and counted by machine. The applications were developed by his assistant Herman Hollerith; Hollerith invented the punch card and counter-sorter system that dominated statistical data manipulation until the 1970s. Hollerith's company became International Business Machines (IBM) in 1911.\nPsychiatry.\nUntil the nineteenth century, the care of the insane was largely a communal and family responsibility rather than a medical one. The vast majority of the mentally ill were treated in domestic contexts with only the most unmanageable or burdensome likely to be institutionally confined. This situation was transformed radically from the late eighteenth century as, amid changing cultural conceptions of madness, a new-found optimism in the curability of insanity within the asylum setting emerged. Increasingly, lunacy was perceived less as a physiological condition than as a mental and moral one to which the correct response was persuasion, aimed at inculcating internal restraint, rather than external coercion. This new therapeutic sensibility, referred to as moral treatment, was epitomised in French physician Philippe Pinel's quasi-mythological unchaining of the lunatics of the Bic\u00eatre Hospital in Paris and realised in an institutional setting with the foundation in 1796 of the Quaker-run York Retreat in England.\nFrom the early nineteenth century, as lay-led lunacy reform movements gained influence, ever more state governments in the West extended their authority and responsibility over the mentally ill. Small-scale asylums, conceived as instruments to reshape both the mind and behaviour of the disturbed, proliferated across these regions. By the 1830s, moral treatment, together with the asylum itself, became increasingly medicalised and asylum doctors began to establish a distinct medical identity with the establishment in the 1840s of associations for their members in France, Germany, the United Kingdom and America, together with the founding of medico-psychological journals. Medical optimism in the capacity of the asylum to cure insanity soured by the close of the nineteenth century as the growth of the asylum population far outstripped that of the general population. Processes of long-term institutional segregation, allowing for the psychiatric conceptualisation of the natural course of mental illness, supported the perspective that the insane were a distinct population, subject to mental pathologies stemming from specific medical causes. As degeneration theory grew in influence from the mid-nineteenth century, heredity was seen as the central causal element in chronic mental illness, and with national asylum systems overcrowded and insanity apparently undergoing an inexorable rise, the focus of psychiatric therapeutics shifted from a concern with treating the individual to maintaining the racial and biological health of national populations.\nEmil Kraepelin (1856\u20131926) introduced new medical categories of mental illness, which eventually came into psychiatric usage despite their basis in behavior rather than pathology or underlying cause. Shell shock among frontline soldiers exposed to heavy artillery bombardment was first diagnosed by British Army doctors in 1915. By 1916, similar symptoms were also noted in soldiers not exposed to explosive shocks, leading to questions as to whether the disorder was physical or psychiatric. In the 1920s surrealist opposition to psychiatry was expressed in a number of surrealist publications. In the 1930s several controversial medical practices were introduced including inducing seizures (by electroshock, insulin or other drugs) or cutting parts of the brain apart (leucotomy or lobotomy). Both came into widespread use by psychiatry, but there were grave concerns and much opposition on grounds of basic morality, harmful effects, or misuse.\nIn the 1950s new psychiatric drugs, notably the antipsychotic chlorpromazine, were designed in laboratories and slowly came into preferred use. Although often accepted as an advance in some ways, there was some opposition, due to serious adverse effects such as tardive dyskinesia. Patients often opposed psychiatry and refused or stopped taking the drugs when not subject to psychiatric control. There was also increasing opposition to the use of psychiatric hospitals, and attempts to move people back into the community on a collaborative user-led group approach (\"therapeutic communities\") not controlled by psychiatry. Campaigns against masturbation were done in the Victorian era and elsewhere. Lobotomy was used until the 1970s to treat schizophrenia. This was denounced by the anti-psychiatric movement in the 1960s and later.\nWomen.\nIt was very difficult for women to become doctors in any field before the 1970s. Elizabeth Blackwell became the first woman to formally study and practice medicine in the United States. She was a leader in women's medical education. While Blackwell viewed medicine as a means for social and moral reform, her student Mary Putnam Jacobi (1842\u20131906) focused on curing disease. At a deeper level of disagreement, Blackwell felt that women would succeed in medicine because of their humane female values, but Jacobi believed that women should participate as the equals of men in all medical specialties using identical methods, values and insights. Although the majority of medical doctors in the Soviet Union were women, they were paid less than the male dominated factory workers.\nAsia.\nPlaces.\nChina.\nFinally in the 19th century, Western medicine was introduced at the local level by Christian medical missionaries from the London Missionary Society (Britain), the Methodist Church (Britain) and the Presbyterian Church (US). Benjamin Hobson (1816\u20131873) in 1839, set up a highly successful Wai Ai Clinic in Guangzhou, China. The Hong Kong College of Medicine for Chinese was founded in 1887 by the London Missionary Society, with its first graduate (in 1892) being Sun Yat-sen, who later led the 1911 Revolution. The Hong Kong College of Medicine for Chinese was the forerunner of the School of Medicine of the University of Hong Kong, which started in 1911.\nBecause of the social custom that men and women should not be near to one another, the women of China were reluctant to be treated by male doctors. The missionaries sent women doctors such as Dr. Mary Hannah Fulton (1854\u20131927). Supported by the Foreign Missions Board of the Presbyterian Church (US) she in 1902 founded the first medical college for women in China, the Hackett Medical College for Women, in Guangzhou.\nJapan.\nEuropean ideas of modern medicine were spread widely through the world by medical missionaries, and the dissemination of textbooks. Japanese elites enthusiastically embraced Western medicine after the Meiji Restoration of the 1860s. However they had been prepared by their knowledge of the Dutch and German medicine, for they had some contact with Europe through the Dutch. Highly influential was the 1765 edition of Hendrik van Deventer's pioneer work \"Nieuw Ligt\" (\"A New Light\") on Japanese obstetrics, especially on Katakura Kakuryo's publication in 1799 of \"Sanka Hatsumo\" (\"Enlightenment of Obstetrics\"). A cadre of Japanese physicians began to interact with Dutch doctors, who introduced smallpox vaccinations. By 1820 Japanese ranp\u00f4 medical practitioners not only translated Dutch medical texts, they integrated their readings with clinical diagnoses. These men became leaders of the modernization of medicine in their country. They broke from Japanese traditions of closed medical fraternities and adopted the European approach of an open community of collaboration based on expertise in the latest scientific methods.\nKitasato Shibasabur\u014d (1853\u20131931) studied bacteriology in Germany under Robert Koch. In 1891 he founded the Institute of Infectious Diseases in Tokyo, which introduced the study of bacteriology to Japan. He and French researcher Alexandre Yersin went to Hong Kong in 1894, where; Kitasato confirmed Yersin's discovery that the bacterium \"Yersinia pestis\" is the agent of the plague. In 1897 he isolated and described the organism that caused dysentery. He became the first dean of medicine at Keio University, and the first president of the Japan Medical Association.\nJapanese physicians immediately recognized the values of X-Rays. They were able to purchase the equipment locally from the Shimadzu Company, which developed, manufactured, marketed, and distributed X-Ray machines after 1900. Japan not only adopted German methods of public health in the home islands, but implemented them in its colonies, especially Korea and Taiwan, and after 1931 in Manchuria. A heavy investment in sanitation resulted in a dramatic increase of life expectancy.\nEurope.\nThe practice of medicine changed in the face of rapid advances in science, as well as new approaches by physicians. Hospital doctors began much more systematic analysis of patients' symptoms in diagnosis. Among the more powerful new techniques were anaesthesia, and the development of both antiseptic and aseptic operating theatres. Effective cures were developed for certain endemic infectious diseases. However, the decline in many of the most lethal diseases was due more to improvements in public health and nutrition than to advances in medicine.\nMedicine was revolutionized in the 19th century and beyond by advances in chemistry, laboratory techniques, and equipment. Old ideas of infectious disease epidemiology were gradually replaced by advances in bacteriology and virology.\nThe Russian Orthodox Church sponsored seven orders of nursing sisters in the late 19th century. They ran hospitals, clinics, almshouses, pharmacies, and shelters as well as training schools for nurses. In the Soviet era (1917\u20131991), with the aristocratic sponsors gone, nursing became a low-prestige occupation based in poorly maintained hospitals.\nPlaces.\nFrance.\nParis (France) and Vienna were the two leading medical centers on the Continent in the era 1750\u20131914.\nIn the 1770s\u20131850s Paris became a world center of medical research and teaching. The \"Paris School\" emphasized that teaching and research should be based in large hospitals and promoted the professionalization of the medical profession and the emphasis on sanitation and public health. A major reformer was Jean-Antoine Chaptal (1756\u20131832), a physician who was Minister of Internal Affairs. He created the Paris Hospital, health councils, and other bodies.\nLouis Pasteur (1822\u20131895) was one of the most important founders of medical microbiology. He is remembered for his remarkable breakthroughs in the causes and preventions of diseases. His discoveries reduced mortality from puerperal fever, and he created the first vaccines for rabies and anthrax. His experiments supported the germ theory of disease. He was best known to the general public for inventing a method to treat milk and wine to prevent it from causing sickness, a process that came to be called pasteurization. He is regarded as one of the three main founders of microbiology, together with Ferdinand Cohn and Robert Koch. He worked chiefly in Paris and in 1887 founded the Pasteur Institute there to perpetuate his commitment to basic research and its practical applications. As soon as his institute was created, Pasteur brought together scientists with various specialties. The first five departments were directed by Emile Duclaux (general microbiology research) and Charles Chamberland (microbe research applied to hygiene), as well as a biologist, Ilya Ilyich Mechnikov (morphological microbe research) and two physicians, Jacques-Joseph Grancher (rabies) and Emile Roux (technical microbe research). One year after the inauguration of the Institut Pasteur, Roux set up the first course of microbiology ever taught in the world, then entitled \"Cours de Microbie Technique\" (Course of microbe research techniques). It became the model for numerous research centers around the world named \"Pasteur Institutes.\"\nVienna.\nThe First Viennese School of Medicine, 1750\u20131800, was led by the Dutchman Gerard van Swieten (1700\u20131772), who aimed to put medicine on new scientific foundations\u2014promoting unprejudiced clinical observation, botanical and chemical research, and introducing simple but powerful remedies. When the Vienna General Hospital opened in 1784, it at once became the world's largest hospital and physicians acquired a facility that gradually developed into the most important research centre. Progress ended with the Napoleonic wars and the government shutdown in 1819 of all liberal journals and schools; this caused a general return to traditionalism and eclecticism in medicine.\nVienna was the capital of a diverse empire and attracted not just Germans but Czechs, Hungarians, Jews, Poles and others to its world-class medical facilities. After 1820 the Second Viennese School of Medicine emerged with the contributions of physicians such as Carl Freiherr von Rokitansky, Josef \u0160koda, Ferdinand Ritter von Hebra, and Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis. Basic medical science expanded and specialization advanced. Furthermore, the first dermatology, eye, as well as ear, nose, and throat clinics in the world were founded in Vienna. The textbook \"Lehre von den Augenkrankheiten\" of ophthalmologist Georg Joseph Beer (1763\u20131821) combined practical research and philosophical speculations, and became the standard reference work for decades.\nBerlin.\nAfter 1871 Berlin, the capital of the new German Empire, became a leading center for medical research. The Charit\u00e9 is tracing back its origins to the year 1710. More than half of all German Nobel Prize winners in Physiology or Medicine, including Emil von Behring, Robert Koch and Paul Ehrlich, worked there. Koch, (1843\u20131910), was a representative leader. He became famous for isolating \"Bacillus anthracis\" (1877), the \"Tuberculosis bacillus\" (1882) and \"Vibrio cholerae\" (1883) and for his development of Koch's postulates. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1905 for his tuberculosis findings. Koch is one of the founders of microbiology and modern medicine. He inspired such major figures as Ehrlich, who discovered the first antibiotic, arsphenamine and Gerhard Domagk, who created the first commercially available antibiotic, Prontosil.\nNorth America.\nEvents.\nAmerican Civil War.\nIn the American Civil War (1861\u201365), as was typical of the 19th century, more soldiers died of disease than in battle, and even larger numbers were temporarily incapacitated by wounds, disease and accidents. Conditions were poor in the Confederacy, where doctors and medical supplies were in short supply. The war had a dramatic long-term impact on medicine in the U.S., from surgical technique to hospitals to nursing and to research facilities. Weapon development\u2014particularly the appearance of Springfield Model 1861, mass-produced and much more accurate than muskets\u2014led to generals underestimating the risks of long range rifle fire; risks exemplified in the death of John Sedgwick and the disastrous Pickett's Charge. The rifles could shatter bone forcing amputation and longer ranges meant casualties were sometimes not quickly found. Evacuation of the wounded from Second Battle of Bull Run took a week. As in earlier wars, untreated casualties sometimes survived unexpectedly due to maggots debriding the wound\u2014an observation which led to the surgical use of maggots\u2014still a useful method in the absence of effective antibiotics.\nThe hygiene of the training and field camps was poor, especially at the beginning of the war when men who had seldom been far from home were brought together for training with thousands of strangers. First came epidemics of the childhood diseases of chicken pox, mumps, whooping cough, and, especially, measles. Operations in the South meant a dangerous and new disease environment, bringing diarrhea, dysentery, typhoid fever, and malaria. There were no antibiotics, so the surgeons prescribed coffee, whiskey, and quinine. Harsh weather, bad water, inadequate shelter in winter quarters, poor policing of camps, and dirty camp hospitals took their toll.\nThis was a common scenario in wars from time immemorial, and conditions faced by the Confederate army were even worse. The Union responded by building army hospitals in every state. What was different in the Union was the emergence of skilled, well-funded medical organizers who took proactive action, especially in the much enlarged United States Army Medical Department, and the United States Sanitary Commission, a new private agency. Numerous other new agencies also targeted the medical and morale needs of soldiers, including the United States Christian Commission as well as smaller private agencies.\nThe U.S. Army learned many lessons and in August 1886, it established the Hospital Corps.\nInstitutions.\nJohns Hopkins Hospital, founded in 1889, originated several modern medical practices, including residency and rounds.\nCardiovascular.\nBlood groups.\nThe ABO blood group system was discovered in 1901 by Karl Landsteiner at the University of Vienna. Landsteiner experimented on his staff, mixing their various blood components together, and found that some people's blood agglutinated (clumped together) with other blood, while some did not. This then lead him identifying three blood groups, ABC, which would later be renamed to ABO. The less frequently found blood group AB was discovered later in 1902 by Alfred Von Decastello and Adriano Sturli. In 1937 Landsteiner and Alexander S. Wiener further discovered the Rh factor (misnamed from early thinking that this blood group was similar to that found in rhesus monkeys) whose antigens further determine blood reaction between people. This was demonstrated in a 1939 case study by Phillip Levine and Rufus Stetson where a mother who had recently given birth had reacted to their partner's blood, highlighting the Rh factor.\nBlood transfusion.\nCanadian physician Norman Bethune, M.D. developed a mobile blood-transfusion service for frontline operations in the Spanish Civil War (1936\u20131939), but ironically, he himself died of sepsis.\nPacemaker.\nIn 1958, Arne Larsson in Sweden became the first patient to depend on an artificial cardiac pacemaker. He died in 2001 at age 86, having outlived its inventor, the surgeon, and 26 pacemakers.\nCancer.\nCancer treatment has been developed with radiotherapy, chemotherapy and surgical oncology.\nDiagnosis.\nX-ray imaging was the first kind of medical imaging, and later ultrasonic imaging, CT scanning, MR scanning and other imaging methods became available.\nDisabilities.\n Prosthetics have improved with lightweight materials as well as neural prosthetics emerging in the end of the 20th century.\nDiseases.\nOral rehydration therapy has been extensively used since the 1970s to treat cholera and other diarrhea-inducing infections.\nAs infectious diseases have become less lethal, and the most common causes of death in developed countries are now tumors and cardiovascular diseases, these conditions have received increased attention in medical research.\nDisease eradication.\nMalaria eradication.\nStarting in World War II, DDT was used as insecticide to combat insect vectors carrying malaria, which was endemic in most tropical regions of the world. The first goal was to protect soldiers, but it was widely adopted as a public health device. In Liberia, for example, the United States had large military operations during the war and the U.S. Public Health Service began the use of DDT for indoor residual spraying (IRS) and as a larvicide, with the goal of controlling malaria in Monrovia, the Liberian capital. In the early 1950s, the project was expanded to nearby villages. In 1953, the World Health Organization (WHO) launched an antimalaria program in parts of Liberia as a pilot project to determine the feasibility of malaria eradication in tropical Africa. However these projects encountered a spate of difficulties that foreshadowed the general retreat from malaria eradication efforts across tropical Africa by the mid-1960s.\nPandemics.\n1918 influenza pandemic (1918-1920).\nThe 1918 influenza pandemic was a global pandemic in the early 20th century that occurred between 1918 and 1920. Sometimes known as Spanish Flu due to popular opinion at the time thinking the flu originated from Spain, this pandemic caused close to 50 million deaths around the world. Spreading at the end of World War I.\nPublic health.\nPublic health measures became particularly important during the 1918 flu pandemic, which killed at least 50 million people around the world. It became an important case study in epidemiology. Bristow shows there was a gendered response of health caregivers to the pandemic in the United States. Male doctors were unable to cure the patients, and they felt like failures. Women nurses also saw their patients die, but they took pride in their success in fulfilling their professional role of caring for, ministering, comforting, and easing the last hours of their patients, and helping the families of the patients cope as well.\nResearch.\nEvidence-based medicine is a modern concept, not introduced to literature until the 1990s.\nSexual and reproductive health.\nThe sexual revolution included taboo-breaking research in human sexuality such as the 1948 and 1953 Kinsey reports, invention of hormonal contraception, and the normalization of abortion and homosexuality in many countries. Family planning has promoted a demographic transition in most of the world. With threatening sexually transmitted infections, not least HIV, use of barrier contraception has become imperative. The struggle against HIV has improved antiretroviral treatments.\nSmoking.\nTobacco smoking as a cause of lung cancer was first researched in the 1920s, but was not widely supported by publications until the 1950s.\nSurgery.\nCardiac surgery was revolutionized in 1948 as open-heart surgery was introduced for the first time since 1925. In 1954 Joseph Murray, J. Hartwell Harrison and others accomplished the first kidney transplantation. Transplantations of other organs, such as heart, liver and pancreas, were also introduced during the later 20th century. The first partial face transplant was performed in 2005, and the first full one in 2010. By the end of the 20th century, microtechnology had been used to create tiny robotic devices to assist microsurgery using micro-video and fiber-optic cameras to view internal tissues during surgery with minimally invasive practices. Laparoscopic surgery was broadly introduced in the 1990s. Natural orifice surgery has followed.\nWar.\nMexican Revolution (1910-1920).\nDuring the 19th century, large-scale wars were attended with medics and mobile hospital units which developed advanced techniques for healing massive injuries and controlling infections rampant in battlefield conditions. During the Mexican Revolution (1910\u20131920), General Pancho Villa organized hospital trains for wounded soldiers. Boxcars marked \"Servicio Sanitario\" (\"sanitary service\") were re-purposed as surgical operating theaters and areas for recuperation, and staffed by up to 40 Mexican and U.S. physicians. Severely wounded soldiers were shuttled back to base hospitals.\nWorld War I (1914-1918).\nThousands of scarred troops provided the need for improved prosthetic limbs and expanded techniques in plastic surgery or reconstructive surgery. Those practices were combined to broaden cosmetic surgery and other forms of elective surgery.\nInterwar period (1918\u20131939).\nFrom 1917 to 1932, the American Red Cross moved into Europe with a battery of long-term child health projects. It built and operated hospitals and clinics, and organized antituberculosis and antityphus campaigns. A high priority involved child health programs such as clinics, better baby shows, playgrounds, fresh air camps, and courses for women on infant hygiene. Hundreds of U.S. doctors, nurses, and welfare professionals administered these programs, which aimed to reform the health of European youth and to reshape European public health and welfare along American lines.\nWorld War II (1939-1945).\nThe advances in medicine made a dramatic difference for Allied troops, while the Germans and especially the Japanese and Chinese suffered from a severe lack of newer medicines, techniques and facilities. Harrison finds that the chances of recovery for a badly wounded British infantryman were as much as 25 times better than in the First World War. The reason was that:\n\"By 1944 most casualties were receiving treatment within hours of wounding, due to the increased mobility of field hospitals and the extensive use of aeroplanes as ambulances. The care of the sick and wounded had also been revolutionized by new medical technologies, such as active immunization against tetanus, sulphonamide drugs, and penicillin.\"\nDuring the second World War, Alexis Carrel and Henry Dakin developed the Carrel-Dakin method of treating wounds with an irrigation, Dakin's solution, a germicide which helped prevent gangrene.\nThe War spurred the usage of Roentgen's X-ray, and the electrocardiograph, for the monitoring of internal bodily functions. This was followed in the inter-war period by the development of the first anti-bacterial agents such as the sulpha antibiotics.\nNazi and Japanese medical research.\nUnethical human subject research, and killing of patients with disabilities, peaked during the Nazi era, with Nazi human experimentation and Aktion T4 during the Holocaust as the most significant examples. Many of the details of these and related events were the focus of the Doctors' Trial. Subsequently, principles of medical ethics, such as the Nuremberg Code, were introduced to prevent a recurrence of such atrocities. After 1937, the Japanese Army established programs of biological warfare in China. In Unit 731, Japanese doctors and research scientists conducted large numbers of vivisections and experiments on human beings, mostly Chinese victims.\nInstitutions.\nWorld Health Organization.\nThe World Health Organization was founded in 1948 as a United Nations agency to improve global health. In most of the world, life expectancy has improved since then, and was about 67 years as of 2010[ [update]], and well above 80 years in some countries. Eradication of infectious diseases is an international effort, and several new vaccines have been developed during the post-war years, against infections such as measles, mumps, several strains of influenza and human papilloma virus. The long-known vaccine against Smallpox finally eradicated the disease in the 1970s, and Rinderpest was wiped out in 2011. Eradication of polio is underway. Tissue culture is important for development of vaccines. Despite the early success of antiviral vaccines and antibacterial drugs, antiviral drugs were not introduced until the 1970s. Through the WHO, the international community has developed a response protocol against epidemics, displayed during the SARS epidemic in 2003, the Influenza A virus subtype H5N1 from 2004, the Ebola virus epidemic in West Africa and onwards.\nContemporary medicine.\nAntibiotics and antibiotic resistance.\nThe discovery of penicillin in the 20th century by Alexander Fleming provided a vital line of defence against bacterical infections that, without them, often cause patients to suffer prelonged recovery periods and highly increased chances of death. Its discovery and application within medicine allowed previously impossible treatments to take place, including cancer treatments, organ transplants, to open heart surgery. Throughout the 20th century, though, their overprescribed use to humans, as well as to animals that need them due to the conditions of intensive animal farming, has led to the development of antibiotic resistant bacteria.\nHIV First death.\nThe early 21st century, facilitated by extensive global connections, international travel, and unprecedented human disruption of ecological systems, has been defined by a number of noval as well as continuing global pandemics from the 20th century.\nPast.\nThe SARS 2002 to 2004 outbreak affected a number of countries around the world and killed hundreds. This outbreak gave rise to a number of lessons learnt from viral infection control, including more effective isolation room protocols to better hand washing techniques for medical staff. A mutated strain of SARS would go on to develop into COVID-19, causing the future COVID-19 pandemic. A significant influenza strain, H1N1, caused a further pandemic between 2009 and 2010. Known as swine flu, due to its indirect source from pigs, it went on to infect over 700 million people.\nOngoing.\nThe continuing HIV pandemic, starting in 1981, has infected and led to the deaths of millions of people around the world. Emerging and improved pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) and post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) treatments that aim to reduce the spread of the disease have proven effective in limiting the spread of HIV alongside combined use of safe sex methods, sexual health education, needle exchange programmes, and sexual health screenings. Efforts to find a HIV vaccine are ongoing while health inequities have left certain population groups, like trans women, as well as resource limited regions, like sub-Saharan Africa, at greater risk of contracting HIV compared with, for example, developed countries.\nThe outbreak of COVID-19, starting in 2019, and subsequent declaration of the COVID-19 pandemic by the WHO is a major pandemic event within the early 21st century. Causing global disruptions, millions of infections and deaths, the pandemic has caused suffering throughout communities. The pandemic has also seen some of the largest logistical organisations of goods, medical equipment, medical professionals, and military personnel since World War II that highlights its far-reaching impact.\nPersonalised medicine.\nThe rise of personalised medicine in the 21st century has generated the possibility to develop diagnosis and treatments based on the individual characteristics of a person, rather than through generic practices that defined 20th century medicine. Areas like DNA sequencing, genetic mapping, gene therapy, imaging protocols, proteomics, stem cell therapy, and wireless health monitoring devices are all rising innovations that can help medical professionals fine tune treatment to the individual.\nTelemedicine.\nRemote surgery is another recent development, with the transatlantic Lindbergh operation in 2001 as a groundbreaking example.\nThemes in medical history.\nRacism in medicine.\nRacism has a long history in how medicine has evolved and established itself, both in terms of racism experience upon patients, professionals, and wider systematic violence within medical institutions and systems. See: medical racism in the United States, race and health, and scientific racism.\nWomen in medicine.\nWomen have always served as healers and midwives since ancient times. However, the professionalization of medicine forced them increasingly to the sidelines. As hospitals multiplied they relied in Europe on orders of Roman Catholic nun-nurses, and German Protestant and Anglican deaconesses in the early 19th century. They were trained in traditional methods of physical care that involved little knowledge of medicine.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14196", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14196", "title": "Hamoaze", "text": "Section of the River Tamar in southwest England\nThe Hamoaze (; ) is an estuarine stretch of the English tidal River Tamar, between its confluence with the River Lynher and Plymouth Sound.\nEtymology.\nThe name first appears as \"ryver of Hamose\" in 1588. The first element is thought to refer to specifically to Ham in the parish of Weston Peverel, now a suburb of Plymouth (whose name in turn came from the Old English word , meaning \"water-meadow, land in the bend of a river\"). The second element is thought to derive from Old English meaning \"mud\" (as in \"ooze\"). Thus the name once meant \"mud-banks at Ham\". The name originally probably applied only to a creek running past Ham, which perhaps consisted of mud-banks at low tide, north of the present-day Devonport Dockyard. The name later came to be used for the main channel of the estuary into which the creek drained.\nGeography.\nThe Hamoaze flows past Devonport Dockyard, which is one of three major bases of the Royal Navy today. The presence of large numbers of small watercraft is a challenge and hazard to the warships using the naval base and dockyard. Navigation on the waterway is controlled by the King's Harbour Master for Plymouth.\nSettlements on the banks of the Hamoaze are Saltash, Wilcove, Torpoint and Cremyll in Cornwall, as well as Devonport and Plymouth in Devon.\nTwo regular ferry services crossing the Hamoaze exist: the Torpoint Ferry (a chain ferry that takes vehicles) and the Cremyll Ferry (passengers and cyclists only).\nA street in Torpoint bears the name Hamoaze Road, named after the stretch of river.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14197", "revid": "5320876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14197", "title": "Hanover", "text": "Capital of Lower Saxony, Germany\nHanover ( ; ; ) is the capital and largest city of the German state of Lower Saxony. Its population of 535,932 (2021) makes it the 13th-largest city in Germany as well as the fourth-largest in northern Germany after Berlin, Hamburg and Bremen. Hanover's urban area comprises the towns of Garbsen, Langenhagen and Laatzen and has a population of about 791,000 (2018). The Hanover Region has approximately 1.16 million inhabitants (2019) and is the largest in the Hanover\u2013Braunschweig\u2013G\u00f6ttingen\u2013Wolfsburg Metropolitan Region, the 17th biggest metropolitan area by GDP in the European Union.\nBefore it became the capital of Lower Saxony in 1946, Hanover was the capital of the Principality of Calenberg (1636\u20131692), the Electorate of Hanover (1692\u20131814), the Kingdom of Hanover (1814\u20131866), the Province of Hanover of the Kingdom of Prussia (1868\u20131918), the Province of Hanover of the Free State of Prussia (1918\u20131947) and of the State of Hanover (1946). From 1714 to 1837 Hanover was by personal union the family seat of the Hanoverian Kings of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, under their title of the dukes of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg (later described as the Elector of Hanover).\nThe city lies at the confluence of the River Leine and its tributary the Ihme, in the south of the North German Plain. The city is a major crossing point of railway lines and motorways (Autobahnen), connecting European main lines in both the east\u2013west (Berlin\u2013Ruhr area/D\u00fcsseldorf/Cologne) and north\u2013south (Hamburg\u2013Frankfurt/Stuttgart/Munich) directions. Hanover Airport lies north of the city, in Langenhagen, and is Germany's ninth-busiest airport. The city's most notable institutes of higher education are the Hanover Medical School (), one of Germany's leading medical schools, with its university hospital , and the Leibniz University Hanover. The city is also home to International Neuroscience Institute.\nThe Hanover Fairground, owing to numerous extensions, especially for the Expo 2000, is the largest in the world. Hanover hosts annual commercial trade fairs such as the Hanover Fair and up to 2018 the CeBIT. It also hosts the biannual IAA Commercial Vehicles show, the world's leading trade show for transport, logistics and mobility. Every year Hanover hosts the Sch\u00fctzenfest Hanover, the world's largest marksmen's festival, and the Oktoberfest Hanover.\nEtymology.\nThe name of the city may derive from the German , literally 'on the high (river) bank'.\nTraditionally, the English spelling is \u27e8\"Hanover\"\u27e9. However, \u27e8\"Hannover\"\u27e9, the German spelling with a double-\u27e8n\u27e9, has become more popular in English. Recent editions of Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica prefer the German spelling, and the local government uses the German spelling on their English webpages. The English pronunciation, with stress on the first syllable, is applied to both the German and English spellings, which is different from German pronunciation, with stress on the second syllable and a long second vowel. The traditional English spelling is still used in historical contexts, especially when referring to the British House of Hanover.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nHanover was founded in medieval times on the east bank of the Leine River. Its original name \"Honovere\" may mean 'high river bank', but that is debated. Hanover was a small village of ferrymen and fishermen that became a comparatively large town in the 13th century and received town privileges in 1241 because of its position at a natural crossroads. As overland travel was relatively difficult, its position on the upper navigable reaches of the river helped it grow from increasing trade. It was connected to the Hanseatic League city of Bremen by the Leine River and was situated near the southern edge of the wide North German Plain and northwest of the Harz mountains, so east\u2013west traffic such as mule trains passed through it. Hanover was thus a gateway to the Rhine, Ruhr and Saar river valleys, and their industrial areas which grew up to the southwest and the plains regions to the east and north for overland traffic skirting the Harz between the Low Countries and Saxony or Thuringia.\nIn the 14th century, the main churches of Hanover were built, as well as a city wall with three city gates. The beginning of industrialization in Germany led to trade in iron and silver from the northern Harz Mountains, which increased the city's importance.\nIn 1636 George, Duke of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg, ruler of the Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg principality of Calenberg, moved his residence to Hanover. The Dukes of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg were elevated by the Holy Roman Emperor to the rank of Prince-Elector in 1692, which was confirmed by the Imperial Diet in 1708. Thus, the principality was upgraded to the Electorate of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg, colloquially known as the Electorate of Hanover after Calenberg's capital (see also House of Hanover). Its electors later became monarchs of Great Britain (and from 1801 of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland). The first of them was George I Louis, who acceded to the British throne in 1714. The last British monarch who reigned in Hanover was William IV. Semi-Salic law, which required succession by the male line if possible, forbade the accession of Queen Victoria in Hanover. As a male-line descendant of George I, Queen Victoria was herself a member of the House of Hanover. Her descendants, however, bore her husband's titular name of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha. Three kings of Great Britain, or the United Kingdom, were concurrently also Electoral Princes of Hanover.\nDuring the time of the personal union of the crowns of the United Kingdom and Hanover (1714\u20131837), the monarchs rarely visited the city. In fact during the reigns of the last three joint rulers (1760\u20131837), there was only one short visit, by George IV in 1821. From 1816 to 1837, Viceroy Adolphus represented the monarch in Hanover.\nDuring the Seven Years' War, the Battle of Hastenbeck was fought near the city on 26 July 1757. The French army defeated the Hanoverian Army of Observation, which led to the city's occupation as part of the Invasion of Hanover. It was recaptured by Anglo-German forces, led by Ferdinand of Brunswick, the following year.\n19th century.\nAfter Napoleon imposed the Convention of Artlenburg (treaty of the Elbe) on 5 July 1803, about 35,000 French soldiers occupied Hanover. The convention also required disbanding the Hanoverian Army. However, George III did not recognise the Convention of the Elbe, which resulted in a great number of soldiers from Hanover eventually emigrating to Great Britain, where the King's German Legion was formed. It was only troops from Hanover and Brunswick who consistently opposed France throughout the Napoleonic Wars. The Legion later played an important role in the Peninsular War and the Battle of Waterloo in 1815. In 1814 the electorate became the Kingdom of Hanover.\nIn 1837, the personal union of the United Kingdom and Hanover ended because William IV's heir in the United Kingdom was female (Queen Victoria). Hanover could be inherited only by male heirs. Thus, Hanover passed to William IV's brother, Ernest Augustus, and remained a kingdom until 1866, when it was annexed by the Prussia during the Austro-Prussian war. Though Hanover was expected to defeat Prussia at the Battle of Langensalza in 1866, Prussia employed Moltke the Elder's Kesselschlacht order of battle to destroy the Hanoverian Army. Thereafter the city of Hanover became the capital of the Prussian Province of Hanover.\nIn 1872, the first horse railway was inaugurated, and in 1893, an electric tram was installed.\nA local newspaper, the \"Hannoverscher Kurier\", was published in Hanover at this time.\nNazi era.\nAfter 1937 the lord mayor and the state commissioners of Hanover were members of the NSDAP (Nazi party). A large Jewish population then existed in Hanover. In October 1938, 484 Hanoverian Jews of Polish origin were expelled to Poland, including the Grynszpan family. However, Poland refused to accept them, leaving them stranded at the border with thousands of other Polish-Jewish deportees, fed only intermittently by the Polish Red Cross and Jewish welfare organisations. The Grynszpans' son Herschel Grynszpan was in Paris at the time. When he learned of what was happening, he drove to the German embassy in Paris and shot the German diplomat Eduard Ernst vom Rath, who died shortly afterwards.\nThe Nazis took this act as a pretext to stage a nationwide pogrom known as Kristallnacht (9 November 1938). On that day, the synagogue of Hanover, designed in 1870 by Edwin Oppler in neo-romantic style, was burnt by the Nazis.\nWorld War II.\nIn September 1941, through the \"Action Lauterbacher\" plan, a ghettoisation of the remaining Hanoverian Jewish families began. Even before the Wannsee Conference, on 15 December 1941, the first Jews from Hanover were deported to Riga. A total of 2,400 people were deported, and very few survived. During the war seven concentration camps were constructed in Hanover, in which many Jews were confined, but also Polish, French and Russian women. Of the approximately 2271 Jews who had lived in Hanover in 1939, fewer than 100 were still in the city when troops of the United States Army arrived on 10 April 1945 to occupy Hanover at the end of the war. Today, a memorial at the Opera Square is a reminder of the persecution of the Jews in Hanover. \nAfter the war a large group of Orthodox Jewish survivors of the nearby Bergen-Belsen concentration camp settled in Hanover.\nThere was also a camp for Sinti and Romani people (see \"Romani Holocaust\"), and dozens of forced labour subcamps of the Stalag XI-B prisoner-of-war camp for Allied POWs.\nAs an important railway and road junction and production centre, Hanover was a major target for strategic bombing during World War II, including the Oil Campaign. Targets included the AFA (St\u00f6cken), the Deurag-Nerag refinery (Misburg), the Continental plants (Vahrenwald and Limmer), the United light metal works (VLW) in Ricklingen and Laatzen (today Hanover fairground), the Hanover/Limmer rubber reclamation plant, the Hanomag factory (Linden) and the tank factory \"M.N.H. Maschinenfabrik Niedersachsen\" (Badenstedt). Residential areas were also targeted, and more than 6,000 civilians were killed by the Allied bombing raids. More than 90% of the city centre was destroyed in a total of 88 bombing raids. After the war, the Aegidienkirche was not rebuilt and its ruins were left as a war memorial. Today around 25% of the city consists of buildings from before 1950.\nThe Allied ground advance into Germany reached Hanover in April 1945. The US 84th Infantry Division captured the city on 10 April 1945.\nPost-war.\nHanover was in the British zone of occupation of Germany and became part of the new state (Land) of Lower Saxony in 1946. In 1947, Hanover established its relationship with Bristol, England in exchanges of goods, students and music. This would link the two cities as models for establishing programs and organizations like Sister Cities International. \nToday Hanover is a vice-president city of Mayors for Peace, an international mayoral organisation mobilising cities and citizens worldwide to abolish and eliminate nuclear weapons by 2020.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nHanover has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\") independent of the isotherm. Although the city is not on a coastal location, the predominant air masses are still from the ocean, unlike other places further east or south-central Germany.\nThe Hanover weather station has recorded the following extreme values:\nSubdivisions.\nThe city of Hanover is divided into 13 boroughs (\"Stadtbezirke\") and 53 quarters (\"Stadtteile\").\nQuarters.\nA selection of the 53 quarters:\nPolitics.\nMayor.\nThe current mayor of Hanover is Belit Onay of Alliance 90/The Greens, elected in 2019. The most recent mayoral election was held on 17 October 2019, with a runoff held on 10 November, and the results were as follows:\nCity council.\nThe Hanover city council governs the city alongside the mayor. The most recent city council election was held on 12 September 2021, and the results were as follows:\nMain sights.\nThere are around 5,500 buildings of major historic value within city limits. One of Hanover's most grandiose sights is the Royal Gardens of Herrenhausen. Its Great Garden is an important European Baroque garden. The palace itself was largely destroyed by Allied bombing, but was reconstructed and reopened in 2013. Among its points of interest is the Grotto, with the interior designed by French artist Niki de Saint Phalle. The Great Garden consists of several parts and features Europe's tallest garden fountain. The historic \"Garden Theatre\" has hosted the musicals of the German rock musician Heinz Rudolf Kunze.\nAlso at Herrenhausen, the \"Berggarten\" is a botanical garden with the most varied collection of orchids in Europe. Some points of interest are the \"Tropical House\", the \"Cactus House\", the \"Canary House\" and the \"Orchid House\", and free-flying birds and butterflies. Near the entrance to the Berggarten is the historic \"Library Pavillon\". The \"Mausoleum\" of the Guelphs is also in the Berggarten. Like the Great Garden, the Berggarten also consists of several parts, for example the \"Paradies\" and the \"Prairie Garden\". The \"Georgengarten\" is an English landscape garden. The \"Leibniz Temple\" and the \"Georgen Palace\" are two points of interest there.The landmark of Hanover is the New Town Hall (). Inside the building are four scale models of the city. An elevator ascends to the observation deck at the top of the large dome along a variable angle of up to 17 degrees, thought to be unique in the world.\nThe \"Hanover Zoo\" received the Park Scout Award for the fourth year running in 2009\u201310, placing it among the best zoos in Germany. The zoo consists of several theme areas: Sambesi, Meyers Farm, Gorilla-Mountain, Jungle-Palace, and Mullewapp. Some smaller areas are Australia, the wooded area for wolves, and the so-called swimming area with many seabirds. There is also a tropical house, a jungle house, and a show arena. The new Canadian-themed area, Yukon Bay, opened in 2010. In 2010 the Hanover Zoo had over 1.6 million visitors. There is also the \"Sea Life Centre Hanover\", which is the first tropical aquarium in Germany.\nAnother point of interest is the \"Old Town\". In the centre are the large \"Marktkirche\" (Church , preaching venue of the bishop of the Lutheran Landeskirche Hanovers), and the 15th century \"Old Town Hall\", heavily damaged by Allied bombing in 1943, and reconstructed after World War II. Nearby are the \"Leibniz House\", the \"Nolte House\", and the \"Beguine Tower\". The \"Kreuz-Church-Quarter\" around the \"Kreuz Church\" contains many little lanes. Nearby is the old royal sports hall, now called the \"Ballhof\" theatre. On the edge of the Old Town are the \"Market Hall\", the \"Leine Palace\", and the ruin of the \"Aegidien Church\" which is now a monument to the victims of war and violence. Through the \"Marstall Gate\" the bank of the river \"Leine\" can be reached; the \"Nanas\" of Niki de Saint Phalle are there. They are part of the \"Sculpture Mile\", which starts at \"Trammplatz\", runs along the river bank, crosses \"K\u00f6nigsworther Square\", and ends at the entrance of the \"Georgengarten\". Near the Old Town is the district of Calenberger Neustadt where the Catholic St. Clement's Basilica, the \"Reformed Church\" and the Lutheran Neust\u00e4dter Hof- und Stadtkirche St. Johannis stand.\nSome other popular sights are the \"Waterloo Column\", the \"Laves House\", the \"Wangenheim Palace\", the \"Lower Saxony State Archives\", the \"Hanover Playhouse\", the \"Kr\u00f6pcke Clock\", the \"Anzeiger Tower Block\", the \"Administration Building of the NORD/LB\", the \"Cupola Hall\" of the Congress Centre, the \"Lower Saxony Stock\", the \"Ministry of Finance\", the \"Garten Church\", the \"Luther Church\", the \"Gehry Tower\" (designed by the American architect Frank O. Gehry), the specially designed \"Bus Stops\", the \"Opera House\", the \"Hanover Central Station\", the \"Maschsee\" lake and the city forest \"Eilenriede\", which is one of the largest of its kind in Europe. For recreation, Hanover has 40 parks, forests and gardens, a couple of lakes, two rivers and a canal.\nThe historic \"Leibniz Letters\", which can be viewed in the \"Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Library\", have been on UNESCO's Memory of the World Register since 2007.\nOutside the city centre is the \"Hanover Fairground\", which was the site of EXPO 2000 fair. Some points of interest are the \"Planet M.\", the former \"German Pavillon\", some nations' vacant pavilions, the \"Expowale\", the \"EXPO-Plaza\" and the \"EXPO-Gardens\" (Parc Agricole, EXPO-Park South and the Gardens of change). The fairground can be reached by the \"Exponale\", one of the largest pedestrian bridges in Europe.\nThe \"Hanover Fairground\" is the largest exhibition centre in the world.\nIt provides of covered indoor space, of open-air space, 27 halls and pavilions. Many of the Exhibition Centre's halls are architectural highlights. Furthermore, it offers the Convention Center with its 35 function rooms, glassed-in areas between halls, grassy park-like recreation zones and its own heliport. Two important sights on the fairground are the \"Hermes Tower\" ( high) and the \"EXPO Roof\", the largest wooden roof in the world.\nIn the district of Anderten is the \"European Cheese Centre\", termed a \"Cheese Experience Centre.\" Another tourist sight in Anderten is the \"Hindenburg Lock\", which was the biggest lock in Europe when it was constructed in 1928. The \"Tiergarten\" in the district of Kirchrode is a forest originally used for deer and other game for the king's table.\nThe \"Telemax\" communications tower, the tallest building in Lower Saxony and the highest television tower in northern Germany, lies in the district of Gro\u00df-Buchholz. Some other notable towers are the \"VW-Tower\" in the city centre and the old towers of the former middle-age defence belt: \"D\u00f6hrener Tower\", \"Lister Tower\" and the \"Horse Tower\".\nThe 36 most significant sights of the city centre are connected by a walking trail called the \"Red Thread\" that is literally painted onto the pavement with red paint. It starts at the Tourist Information Office and ends on the Ernst-August-Square, both in front of the central train station. There is also a guided sightseeing bus tour through the city.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHanover has a population of about 540,000. It is the largest city in Lower Saxony and is the 13th largest city in Germany. The Hanover Region, a district that surrounds the city of Hanover and cities like Langenhagen, Garbsen and Laatzen has a population of about 1,160,000 and is the largest District (Landkreis) in Germany. Hanover metropolitan region, which includes also cities like Braunschweig, Hildesheim and G\u00f6ttingen, has a population of about 3,850,000 and is the 8th largest metropolitan area in Germany. Hanover passed a population of 100,000 in 1875, and Hanover's population has grown since 1946, when Hanover became the capital of Lower Saxony state and it grew rapidly in 1950s and 60s due to West German Wirtschaftswunder. This also saw the growth of a large migrant population, drawn largely from Turkey, Greece and Italy. Hanover has also one of the largest Vietnamese communities in former West Germany due to its proximity to former East Germany. The Vi\u00ean Gi\u00e1c pagoda in Mittelfeld, southern district of Hanover is the largest Vietnamese pagoda in Germany and one of the largest in Europe. Hanover is one of the liveable cities due to its good location and good population size.\nIt is the fifth-largest city in the Low German dialect area after Hamburg, Dortmund, Essen and Bremen.\nSociety and culture.\nReligious life.\nHanover is headquarters for several Protestant organizations, including the World Communion of Reformed Churches, the Protestant Church in Germany, the Reformed Alliance, the United Evangelical Lutheran Church of Germany, and the Independent Evangelical-Lutheran Church.\nIn 2015, 31.1% of the population were Protestant and 13.4% were Roman Catholic. The majority 55.5% were irreligious or other religion.\nMuseums and galleries.\nThe Historisches Museum Hanover (Historic museum) describes the history of Hanover, from the medieval settlement \"Honovere\" to the city of today. The museum focuses on the period from 1714 to 1834 when Hanover had a strong relationship with the British royal family of that period.\nWith more than 4,000 members, the Kestnergesellschaft is the largest art society in Germany. The museum hosts exhibitions from classical modernist art to contemporary art. Emphasis is placed on film, video, contemporary music and architecture, room installments and presentations of contemporary paintings, sculptures and video art.\nThe Kestner-Museum is located in the \"House of 5,000 windows\". The museum is named after August Kestner and exhibits 6,000 years of applied art in four areas: Ancient cultures, ancient Egypt, applied art and a valuable collection of historic coins.\nThe KUBUS is a forum for contemporary art. It features mostly exhibitions and projects of artists from Hanover.\nThe Kunstverein Hannover (Art Society Hanover) shows contemporary art and was established in 1832 as one of the first art societies in Germany. It is located in the \"K\u00fcnstlerhaus\" (House of artists). There are around seven international exhibitions each year.\nThe Landesmuseum Hanover is the largest museum in Hanover. The art gallery shows European art from the 11th to the 20th century, the nature department shows the zoology, geology, botanic, geology and a \"vivarium\" with fish, insects, reptiles and amphibians. The primeval department shows the primeval history of Lower Saxony, and the folklore department shows cultures from all over the world.\nThe Sprengel Museum shows the art of the 20th century. It is one of the most notable art museums in Germany. The focus is put on the classical modernist art with the collection of \"Kurt Schwitters\", works of German expressionism, and French cubism, the cabinet of abstracts, the graphics and the department of photography and media. Furthermore, the museum shows the works of the French artist Niki de Saint-Phalle.\nThe Theatre Museum shows an exhibition of the history of the theatre in Hanover from the 17th century up to now: opera, concert, drama and ballet. The museum also hosts several touring exhibitions during the year.\nThe Wilhelm Busch Museum is the \"German Museum of Caricature and Critical Graphic Arts\". The collection of the works of Wilhelm Busch and the extensive collection of cartoons and critical graphics is unique in Germany. Furthermore, the museum hosts several exhibitions of national and international artists during the year.\nA cabinet of coins is the M\u00fcnzkabinett der TUI-AG. The \"Polizeigeschichtliche Sammlung Niedersachsen\" is the largest police museum in Germany. Textiles from all over the world can be visited in the \"Museum for textile art\". The \"EXPOseeum\" is the museum of the world-exhibition \"EXPO 2000 Hanover\". Carpets and objects from the orient can be visited in the \"Oriental Carpet Museum\". The \"Museum for the visually impaired\" is a rarity in Germany, there is only one other of its kind in Berlin. The \"Museum of veterinary medicine\" is unique in Germany. The \"Museum for Energy History\" describes the 150 years old history of the application of energy. The \"Heimat-Museum Ahlem\" shows the history of the district of Ahlem. The \"Mahn- und Gedenkst\u00e4tte Ahlem\" describes the history of the Jewish people in Hanover and the \"Stiftung Ahlers Pro Arte / Kestner Pro Arte\" shows modern art. Modern art is also the main topic of the \"Kunsthalle Faust\", the \"Nord/LB Art Gallery\" and of the \"Foro Artistico / Eisfabrik\".\nSome leading art events in Hanover are the \"Long Night of the Museums\" and the \"Zinnober Kunstvolkslauf\" which features all the galleries in Hanover.\nPeople who are interested in astronomy should visit the \"Observatory Geschwister Herschel\" on the Lindener Mountain or the small planetarium inside of the Bismarck School.\nTheatre, cabaret and musical.\nAround 40 theatres are located in Hanover. The \"Opera House\", the \"Schauspielhaus\" (Play House), the \"Ballhof eins\", the \"Ballhof zwei\" and the \"Cumberlandsche Galerie\" belong to the \"Lower Saxony State Theatre\". The Theater am Aegi is Hanover's principal theatre for musicals, shows and guest performances. The \"Neues Theater\" (New Theatre) is the boulevard theatre of Hanover. The \"Theater f\u00fcr Niedersachsen\" is another large theatre in Hanover, which also has an own musical company. Some of the most important musical productions are the rock musicals of the German rock musician Heinz Rudolph Kunze, which take place at the \"Garden-Theatre\" in the Great Garden.\nSome important theatre events are the \"Tanztheater International\", the \"Long Night of the Theatres\", the \"Festival Theaterformen\" and the \"International Competition for Choreographers\".\nHanover's leading cabaret stage is the \"GOP Variety theatre\" which is located in the \"Georgs Palace\". Some other cabaret-stages are the \"Variety Marlene\", the \"Uhu-Theatre\". the theatre \"Die Hinterb\u00fchne\", the \"Rampenlich Variety\" and the revue-stage \"TAK\". The most important cabaret event is the \"Kleines Fest im Gro\u00dfen Garten\" (Little Festival in the Great Garden) which is the most successful cabaret festival in Germany. It features artists from around the world. Some other important events are the \"Calenberger Cabaret Weeks\", the \"Hanover Cabaret Festival\" and the \"Wintervariety\".\nMusic.\nClassical music.\nHanover has two symphony orchestras: The Lower Saxon State Orchestra Hanover and the NDR Radiophilharmonie (North German Radio Philharmonic Orchestra). Two notable choirs have their homes in Hanover: the M\u00e4dchenchor Hanover (girls' choir) and the Knabenchor Hanover (boys' choir).\nThere are two major international competitions for classical music in Hanover:\nPopular music.\nThe rock bands Scorpions and Fury in the Slaughterhouse are originally from Hanover. Acclaimed DJ Mousse T also has his main recording studio in the area. Rick J. Jordan, member of the band Scooter was born here in 1968. Lena, winner of the 2010 Eurovision Song Contest, is also from Hanover.\nSport.\nHanover 96 (nicknamed , literally 'the Reds') is the top local football team that currently plays in the 2. Bundesliga. Home games are played at the Niedersachsenstadion (\"Lower Saxony Stadium\"), which hosted matches in the 1974 and 2006 World Cups and the Euro 1988. Their reserve team Hanover 96 II plays in the 3rd division of German Football. Their home games were played in the traditional Eilenriedestadion until they moved to the HDI Arena due to DFL directives. Arminia Hanover is another traditional football team in Hanover that has played in the second division (then 2. Liga Nord) for years and plays now in the Niedersachsen-West Liga (Lower Saxony League West). Home matches are played in the Rudolf-Kalweit-Stadium.\nThe Hanover Indians are the local ice hockey team. They play in the third tier. Their home games are played at the traditional Eisstadion am Pferdeturm. The Hanover Scorpions played in Hanover in Germany's top league until 2013 when they sold their license and moved to Langenhagen.\nHanover was one of the rugby union capitals in Germany. The first German rugby team was founded in Hanover in 1878. Hanover-based teams dominated the German rugby scene for a long time. DSV 78 Hanover, SC Germania List, and SV Odin Hanover plays in the first division, and DRC Hanover as well as SG 78/08 Hanover play in the second division.\nHanover has traditionally been one of Germany's hubs in Water sports and especially in Water polo. The SG Waspo'98 Hanover won the Deutsche Wasserball-Liga in 2020 and 2021. In total, clubs from Hanover have won the German championship 11 times. Thanks to the Maschsee lake, the rivers Ihme and Leine and to the Mittellandkanal canal, Hanover hosts sailing schools, yacht schools, waterski clubs, rowing clubs, canoe clubs and paddle clubs.\nThe first German fencing club was founded in Hanover in 1862. Today there are three additional fencing clubs in Hanover.\nThe Hanover Korbj\u00e4ger are the city's top basketball team. They play their home games at the IGS Linden.\nThe Hanover Regents play in the third Bundesliga (baseball) division. The Hanover Grizzlies, Armina Spartans and Hanover Stampeders are the local American football teams.\nThe Hanover Marathon is the biggest running event in Hanover with more than 11,000 participants and usually around 200,000 spectators. Some other important running events are the Gilde Stadtstaffel (a relay event), the Sport-Check Nachtlauf (a night running event), the \"Herrenh\u00e4user Team-Challenge\", the \"Hannoversche Firmenlauf\" (a company running event) and the Silvesterlauf (New Year's running event).\nHanover also hosts an important international cycle race, the \"Nacht von Hannover\" (\"Night of Hanover\"). The race takes place around the market hall.\nThe lake Maschsee hosts international dragon boat races and canoe olo tournaments. Many regattas take place during the year. \"Head of the river Leine\" on the river Leine is one of the biggest rowing regattas in Hanover. One of Germany's most successful dragon boat teams, the All Sports Team Hanover, which has won since its foundation in year 2000 more than 100 medals on national and international competitions, regularly trains on the local Maschsee lake.\nSome other important sport events include the Lower Saxony beach volleyball tournament, the international horse show \"German Classics\" and the international ice hockey tournament Nations Cup.\nRegular events.\nHanover is one of the leading exhibition cities in the world. It hosts more than 60 international and national exhibitions every year. The most popular ones are the \"CeBIT\", the \"Hanover Fair\", the \"Domotex\", the \"Ligna\", the \"IAA Nutzfahrzeuge\" and the \"Agritechnica\". Hanover also hosts a huge number of congresses and symposiums like the \"International Symposium on Society and Resource Management.\"\nHanover is also host to the \"Sch\u00fctzenfest Hannover,\" the largest marksmen's fun fair in the world which takes place once a year from late June to early July. Founded in 1529, it consists of more than 260 rides and inns, five large beer tents and a large entertainment programme. The highlight of this fun fair is the \"Parade of the Marksmen\" with more than 12,000 participants from all over the world, including around 5,000 marksmen, 128 bands, and more than 70 wagons, carriages, and other festival vehicles. This makes it the longest procession in Europe. Around 2 million people visit this fun fair every year. The landmark of this event is one of the largest transportable Ferris wheels in the world, with a height of about .\nHanover also hosts one of the two largest spring festivals in Europe, with around 180 rides and inns, 2 large beer tents, and around 1.5 million visitors each year. The Oktoberfest Hanover is the second largest Oktoberfest in the world with around 160 rides and inns, two large beer tents and around 1 million visitors each year.\nThe \"Maschsee Festival\" takes place around the Maschsee Lake. Each year around 2 million visitors come to enjoy live music, comedy, cabaret, and much more. It is the largest Volksfest of its kind in Northern Germany. The Great Garden hosts every year the \"International Fireworks Competition\", and the \"International Festival Weeks Herrenhausen,\" with music and cabaret performances. The \"Carnival Procession\" is around long and consists of 3,000 participants, around 30 festival vehicles and around 20 bands and takes place every year.\nOther festivals include the Festival \"Feuer und Flamme\" (Fire and Flames), the \"Gartenfestival\" (Garden Festival), the \"Herbstfestival\" (Autumn Festival), the \"Harley Days\", the \"Steintor Festival\" (Steintor is a party area in the city centre) and the \"Lister-Meile-Festival\" (Lister Meile is a large pedestrian area).\nHanover also hosts food-oriented festivals including the \"Wine Festival\" and the \"Gourmet Festival\". It also hosts some special markets like the \"Old Town Flea Market\" and the \"Market for Art and Trade\". Some other major markets include the \"Christmas Markets of the City of Hanover\" in the Old Town and city centre, and the Lister Meile.\nTourism.\nHanover is an attractive tourist place due to its many sights and famous events. Hanover had about 580,000 visitors in 2021, predominantly from the Netherlands and the United Kingdom. Famous sights in Hanover are New Town Hall, Herrenhausen Gardens and Hanover Zoo, which is one of the largest zoos in Germany. \nThe annual trade fair \"Hannover Messe\" usually attracts between 100,000 and 200,000 visitors. First held in 1947, it is dedicated to the topic of industry development and is one of the world's largest trade fairs.\nTransport.\nRail.\nThe city's central station, Hanover Hauptbahnhof, is a hub of the German high-speed ICE network. It is the starting point of the Hanover-W\u00fcrzburg high-speed rail line and also the central hub for the Hanover S-Bahn. It offers many international and national connections.\nAir.\nHanover and its area is served by Hanover Airport (IATA code: HAJ; ICAO code: EDDV) in Langenhagen.\nRoad.\nHanover is also an important hub of Germany's autobahn network; the junction of two major autobahns, the A 2 and A 7 is at \"Kreuz Hanover-Ost\", at the northeastern edge of the city.\nLocal autobahns are A 352 (a shortcut between A7 and A2, also known as the \"Airport autobahn\" because it passes Hanover Airport), and the A 37.\nThe expressway () system, a number of Bundesstra\u00dfe roads, forms a structure loosely resembling a large ring road together with A2 and A7. The roads are B 3, B 6 and B 65, called \"Westschnellweg\" (B6 on the northern part, B3 on the southern part), \"Messeschnellweg\" (B3, becomes A37 near Burgdorf, crosses A2, becomes B3 again, changes to B6 at \"Seelhorster Kreuz\", then passes the Hanover fairground as B6 and becomes A37 again before merging into A7) and \"S\u00fcdschnellweg\" (starts out as B65, becomes B3/B6/B65 upon crossing Westschnellweg, then becomes B65 again at Seelhorster Kreuz).\nBus and light rail.\nHanover has an extensive Stadtbahn and bus system, operated by \u00fcstra. The city uses designer buses and tramways, the TW 6000 and TW 2000 trams being examples.\nBicycle.\nBicycle paths are very common in the city centre. At off-peak hours bikes can be taken on a tram or bus.\nEconomy.\nVarious industrial businesses are located in Hanover. The Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles Transporter (VWN) factory at Hanover-St\u00f6cken is the biggest employer in the region and operates a large plant at the northern edge of town adjoining the canal Mittellandkanal and the autobahn A2. Volkswagen shares a coal-burning power plant with a factory of German tire and automobile parts manufacturer Continental AG. Continental, founded in Hanover in 1871, is one of the city's major companies. Since 2008 a take-over has been in progress: the Schaeffler Group from Herzogenaurach (Bavaria) holds the majority of Continental's stock but were required due to the financial crisis to deposit the options as securities at banks.\nThe audio equipment company Sennheiser and the travel group TUI AG are both based in Hanover. Hanover is home to many insurance companies including Talanx, VHV Group, and Concordia Insurance. The major global reinsurance company Hannover Re also has its headquarters east of the city centre.\nKey figures.\nIn 2012, the city generated a GDP of \u20ac29.5 billion, which is equivalent to \u20ac74,822 per employee. The gross value of production in 2012 was \u20ac26.4 billion, which is equivalent to \u20ac66,822 per employee.\nAround 300,000 employees were counted in 2014. Of these, 189,000 had their primary residence in Hanover, while 164,892 commute into the city every day.\nIn 2014 the city was home to 34,198 businesses, of which 9,342 were registered in the German Trade Register and 24,856 counted as small businesses. Hence, more than half of the metropolitan area's businesses in the German Trade Register are located in Hanover (17,485 total).\nBusiness development.\nHannoverimpuls GMBH is a joint business development company from the city and region of Hanover. The company was founded in 2003 and supports the start-up, growth and relocation of businesses in the Hanover Region. The focus is on thirteen sectors, which stand for sustainable economic growth: Automotive, Energy Solutions, Information and Communications Technology, Life Sciences, Optical Technologies, Creative Industries and Production Engineering.\nA range of programmes supports companies from the key industries in their expansion plans in Hanover or abroad. Three regional centres specifically promote international economic relations with Russia, India and Turkey.\nThe Institut f\u00fcr Integrierte Produktion Hannover is a spin-off from Leibniz University Hanover in the field of production technology that promotes transfer of scientific knowledge to business.\nEducation.\nThe Leibniz University Hanover is the largest funded institution in Hanover for providing higher education to students from around the world. Below are the names of the universities and some of the important schools, including newly opened Hannover Medical Research School in 2003 for attracting the students from biology background from around the world.\nThere are several universities in Hanover:\nThere is one University of Applied Science and Arts in Hanover:\nThe \"Schulbiologiezentrum Hannover\" maintains practical biology schools in four locations (Botanischer Schulgarten Burg, Freiluftschule Burg, Zooschule Hannover, and Botanischer Schulgarten Linden). The University of Veterinary Medicine Hanover also maintains its own botanical garden specializing in medicinal and poisonous plants, the Heil- und Giftpflanzengarten der Tier\u00e4rztlichen Hochschule Hannover.\nHannover has several vocational schools like Berufsbildende Schulen (BBS) ME - Metalltechnik und Elektrotechnik, which specializes in metal and electrical engineering, and BBS Cora Berliner, which specializes in business administration as well as the leisure and trading industries.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nHanover is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHanover also cooperates with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14199", "revid": "18779361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14199", "title": "Handheld game console", "text": "Portable self-contained video game console\nA handheld game console, or simply handheld console, is a small, portable self-contained video game console with a built-in screen, game controls and speakers. Handheld game consoles are smaller than home video game consoles and contain the console, screen, speakers, and controls in one unit, allowing players to carry them and play them at any time or place.\nIn 1976, Mattel introduced the first handheld electronic game with the release of \"Auto Race\". Later, several companies\u2014including Coleco and Milton Bradley\u2014made their own single-game, lightweight table-top or handheld electronic game devices. The first commercially successful handheld console was Merlin from 1978, which sold more than 5 million units. The first handheld game console with interchangeable cartridges is the Milton Bradley Microvision in 1979.\nNintendo is credited with popularizing the handheld console concept with the release of the Game Boy in 1989 and continues to dominate the handheld console market. The first internet-enabled handheld console and the first with a touchscreen was the Game.com released by Tiger Electronics in 1997. The Nintendo DS, released in 2004, introduced touchscreen controls and wireless online gaming to a wider audience, becoming the best-selling handheld console with over 150 million units sold worldwide.\nHistory.\nTimeline.\nThis table describes handheld games consoles by generation, with over 1 million sales. No handheld achieved this prior to the fourth generation of game consoles. This list does not include dedicated consoles, such as LCD games and the Tamagotchi.\nOrigins.\nThe origins of handheld game consoles are found in handheld and tabletop electronic game devices of the 1970s and early 1980s. These electronic devices are capable of playing only a single game, they fit in the palm of the hand or on a tabletop, and they may make use of a variety of video displays such as LED, VFD, or LCD. In 1978, handheld electronic games were described by \"Popular Electronics\" magazine as \"nonvideo electronic games\" and \"non-TV games\" as distinct from devices that required use of a television screen. Handheld electronic games, in turn, find their origins in the synthesis of previous handheld and tabletop electro-mechanical devices such as Waco's \"Electronic Tic-Tac-Toe\" (1972) Cragstan's \"Periscope-Firing Range\" (1951), and the emerging optoelectronic-display-driven calculator market of the early 1970s. This synthesis happened in 1976, when \"Mattel began work on a line of calculator-sized sports games that became the world's first handheld electronic games. The project began when Michael Katz, Mattel's new product category marketing director, told the engineers in the electronics group to design a game the size of a calculator, using LED (light-emitting diode) technology.\"\nour big success was something that I conceptualized\u2014the first handheld game. I asked the design group to see if they could come up with a game that was electronic that was the same size as a calculator.\n\u2014Michael Katz, former marketing director, Mattel Toys.\nThe result was the 1976 release of \"Auto Race\". Followed by \"Football\" later in 1977, the two games were so successful that according to Katz, \"these simple electronic handheld games turned into a '$400 million category.'\" Mattel would later win the honor of being recognized by the industry for innovation in handheld game device displays. Soon, other manufacturers including Coleco, Parker Brothers, Milton Bradley, Entex, and Bandai began following up with their own tabletop and handheld electronic games.\nIn 1979 the LCD-based Microvision, designed by Smith Engineering and distributed by Milton-Bradley, became the first handheld game console and the first to use interchangeable game cartridges. The Microvision game \"Cosmic Hunter\" (1981) also introduced the concept of a directional pad on handheld gaming devices, and is operated by using the thumb to manipulate the on-screen character in any of four directions.\nIn 1979, Gunpei Yokoi, traveling on a bullet train, saw a bored businessman playing with an LCD calculator by pressing the buttons. Yokoi then thought of an idea for a watch that doubled as a miniature game machine for killing time. Starting in 1980, Nintendo began to release a series of electronic games designed by Yokoi called the Game &amp; Watch games. Taking advantage of the technology used in the credit-card-sized calculators that had appeared on the market, Yokoi designed the series of LCD-based games to include a digital time display in the corner of the screen. For later, more complicated Game &amp; Watch games, Yokoi invented a cross shaped directional pad or \"D-pad\" for control of on-screen characters. Yokoi also included his directional pad on the NES controllers, and the cross-shaped thumb controller soon became standard on game console controllers and ubiquitous across the video game industry since. When Yokoi began designing Nintendo's first handheld game console, he came up with a device that married the elements of his Game &amp; Watch devices and the Famicom console, including both items' D-pad controller. The result was the Nintendo Game Boy.\nIn 1982, the Bandai LCD Solarpower was the first solar-powered gaming device. Some of its games, such as the horror-themed game \"Terror House\", features two LCD panels, one stacked on the other, for an early 3D effect. In 1983, Takara Tomy's Tomytronic 3D simulates 3D by having two LCD panels that were lit by external light through a window on top of the device, making it the first dedicated home video 3D hardware.\nBeginnings.\nThe late 1980s and early 1990s saw the beginnings of the modern-day handheld game console industry, after the demise of the Microvision. As backlit LCD game consoles with color graphics consume a lot of power, they were not battery-friendly like the non-backlit original Game Boy whose monochrome graphics allowed longer battery life. By this point, rechargeable battery technology had not yet matured and so the more advanced game consoles of the time such as the Sega Game Gear and Atari Lynx did not have nearly as much success as the Game Boy.\nEven though third-party rechargeable batteries were available for the battery-hungry alternatives to the Game Boy, these batteries employed a nickel-cadmium process and had to be completely discharged before being recharged to ensure maximum efficiency; lead-acid batteries could be used with automobile circuit limiters (cigarette lighter plug devices); but the batteries had mediocre portability. The later NiMH batteries, which do not share this requirement for maximum efficiency, were not released until the late 1990s, years after the Game Gear, Atari Lynx, and original Game Boy had been discontinued. During the time when technologically superior handhelds had strict technical limitations, batteries had a very low mAh rating since batteries with heavy power density were not yet available.\nModern game systems such as the Nintendo DS and PlayStation Portable have rechargeable Lithium-Ion batteries with proprietary shapes. Other seventh-generation consoles, such as the GP2X, use standard alkaline batteries. Because the mAh rating of alkaline batteries has increased since the 1990s, the power needed for handhelds like the GP2X may be supplied by relatively few batteries.\nGame Boy.\nNintendo released the Game Boy on April 21, 1989 (September 1990 for the UK). The design team headed by Gunpei Yokoi had also been responsible for the Game &amp; Watch system, as well as the Nintendo Entertainment System games \"Metroid\" and \"Kid Icarus\". The Game Boy came under scrutiny by Nintendo president Hiroshi Yamauchi, saying that the monochrome screen was too small, and the processing power was inadequate. The design team had felt that low initial cost and battery economy were more important concerns, and when compared to the Microvision, the Game Boy was a huge leap forward.\nYokoi recognized that the Game Boy needed a killer app\u2014at least one game that would define the console, and persuade customers to buy it. In June 1988, Minoru Arakawa, then-CEO of Nintendo of America saw a demonstration of the game \"Tetris\" at a trade show. Nintendo purchased the rights for the game, and packaged it with the Game Boy system as a launch title. It was almost an immediate hit. By the end of the year more than a million units were sold in the US. As of March 31, 2005, the Game Boy and Game Boy Color combined to sell over 118 million units worldwide.\nAtari Lynx.\nIn 1987, Epyx created the Handy Game; a device that would become the Atari Lynx in 1989. It was the first color handheld console ever made, as well as the first with a backlit screen. It also featured networking support with up to 17 other players, and advanced hardware that allowed the zooming and scaling of sprites. The Lynx could also be turned upside down to accommodate left-handed players. However, all of these features came at a high price point, which drove consumers to seek cheaper alternatives. The Lynx was also unwieldy, consumed batteries quickly, and lacked the third-party support enjoyed by its competitors. Due to its high price, short battery life, production shortages, a dearth of compelling games, and Nintendo's aggressive marketing campaign, and despite a redesign in 1991, the Lynx became a commercial failure. Despite this, companies like Telegames helped to keep the system alive long past its commercial relevance, and when new owner Hasbro released the rights to develop for the public domain, independent developers like Songbird have managed to release new commercial games for the system every year until 2004's \"Winter Games\".\nTurboExpress.\nThe TurboExpress was a portable version of the TurboGrafx, released in 1990 for $249.99. Its Japanese equivalent was the PC Engine GT.\nIt was the most advanced handheld of its time and could play all the TurboGrafx-16's games (which are on a small, credit-card sized media called HuCards). It had a 66\u00a0mm (2.6 in.) screen, the same as the original Game Boy, but in a much higher resolution, and could display 64 sprites at once: 16 per scanline, in 512 colors (although the hardware could only handle 481 simultaneous colors). It had 8\u00a0kilobytes of RAM. The Turbo ran on the HuC6820 CPU at 1.79 or 7.16\u00a0MHz.\nThe optional \"TurboVision\" TV tuner included an RCA audio/video input allowing users to use TurboExpress as a video monitor. The \"TurboLink\" allowed two-player play. \"Falcon\", a flight simulator, included a \"head-to-head\" dogfight mode that could only be accessed via TurboLink. However, very few TG-16 games offered co-op play modes especially designed with the TurboExpress in mind.\nBitcorp Gamate.\nThe Bitcorp Gamate was one of the first handheld game systems created in response to the Nintendo Game Boy. It was released in Asia in 1990 and distributed worldwide by 1991.\nLike the Sega Game Gear, it was horizontal in orientation and like the Game Boy, required 4 AA batteries. Unlike many later Game Boy clones, its internal components were professionally assembled (no \"glop-top\" chips). Unfortunately the system's fatal flaw was its screen. Even by the standards of the day, its screen was rather difficult to use, suffering from similar ghosting problems that were common complaints with the first generation Game Boys. Likely because of this fact, sales were quite poor, and Bitcorp closed by 1992. However, new games continued to be published for the Asian market, possibly as late as 1994. The total number of games released for the system remains unknown.\nGamate games were designed for stereo sound, but the console was only equipped with a mono speaker. \nGame Gear.\nThe Game Gear was the first color handheld console produced by Sega. Released in Japan in 1990 and in North America and Europe in 1991, it was based on the Master System, which gave Sega the ability to quickly create Game Gear games from its large library of games for the Master System. While never reaching the level of success enjoyed by Nintendo, the Game Gear proved to be a fairly durable competitor, lasting longer than any other Game Boy rivals.\nWhile the Game Gear was most frequently seen in black or navy blue, it was also released in a variety of additional colors: red, light blue, yellow, violet, and transparent. All of these variations were released in small quantities and frequently only in the Asian market.\nFollowing Sega's success with the Game Gear they began development on a successor during the early 1990s which was intended to feature a touchscreen interface, many years before the Nintendo DS. However, such a technology was very expensive at the time, and the handheld itself was estimated to have cost around $289 were it to be released. Sega eventually chose to shelve the idea and instead release the Genesis Nomad, a handheld version of the Genesis, as the successor.\nWatara Supervision.\nThe Watara SuperVision was released in 1992 in an attempt to compete with the Nintendo Game Boy. The first model was designed very much like a Game Boy, but was grey in color and had a slightly larger screen. The second model was made with a hinge across the center and could be bent slightly to provide greater comfort for the user. While the system did enjoy a modest degree of success, it never impacted the sales of Nintendo or Sega. The SuperVision was redesigned a final time as \"The Magnum\". Released in limited quantities it was roughly equivalent to the Game Boy Pocket. It was available in three colors: yellow, green and grey. Watara designed many of the games themselves, but did receive some third party support, most notably from Sachen.\nA TV adapter was available in both PAL and NTSC formats that could transfer the Supervision's black-and-white palette to 4 colors, similar in some regards to the Super Game Boy from Nintendo.\nHartung Game Master.\nThe Hartung Game Master was an obscure handheld released at an unknown point in the early 1990s. Its graphics fidelity was much lower than most of its contemporaries, displaying just 64x64 pixels. It was available in black, white, and purple, and was frequently rebranded by its distributors, such as Delplay, Videojet and Systema.\nThe exact number of games released is not known, but was likely around 20. The system most frequently turns up in Europe and Australia.\nLate 1990s.\nBy this time, the lack of significant development in Nintendo's product line began allowing more advanced systems such as the Neo Geo Pocket Color and the WonderSwan Color to be developed.\nSega Nomad.\nThe Nomad was released in October 1995 in North America only. The release was six years into the market span of the Genesis, with an existing library of more than 500 Genesis games. According to former Sega of America research and development head Joe Miller, the Nomad was not intended to be the Game Gear's replacement; he believed that there was little planning from Sega of Japan for the new handheld. Sega was supporting five different consoles: Saturn, Genesis, Game Gear, Pico, and the Master System, as well as the Sega CD and 32X add-ons. In Japan, the Mega Drive had never been successful and the Saturn was more successful than Sony's PlayStation, so Sega Enterprises CEO Hayao Nakayama decided to focus on the Saturn. By 1999, the Nomad was being sold at less than a third of its original price.\nGame Boy Pocket.\nThe Game Boy Pocket was a redesigned version of the original Game Boy having the same features. It was released in 1996. Notably, this variation was smaller and lighter. It came in seven different colors: red, yellow, green, blue, pink, black, silver and transparent. It was powered by two AAA batteries, which provided approximately 10 hours of gameplay. The screen was changed to a true black-and-white display, rather than the \"pea soup\" monochromatic display of the original Game Boy. Although, like its predecessor, the Game Boy Pocket had no backlight to allow play in a darkened area, it did notably improve visibility and pixel response-time (mostly eliminating ghosting).\nThe first model of the Game Boy Pocket did not have an LED to show battery levels, but the feature was added due to public demand. The Game Boy Pocket was not a new software platform and played the same software as the original Game Boy model.\nGame.com.\nThe Game.com was a handheld game console released by Tiger Electronics in September 1997. It featured many new ideas for handheld consoles and was aimed at an older target audience, sporting PDA-style features and functions such as a touch screen and stylus.\nGame Boy Color.\nThe Game Boy Color (also referred to as GBC or CGB) was Nintendo's successor to the Game Boy and was released on October 21, 1998, in Japan and in November of the same year in the United States. It featured a color screen, and was slightly bigger than the Game Boy Pocket. The processor was twice as fast as a Game Boy's and had twice as much memory. It also had an infrared communications port for wireless linking which did not appear in later versions of the Game Boy, such as the Game Boy Advance.\nThe Game Boy Color was a response to pressure from game developers for a new system, as they felt that the Game Boy, even in its latest incarnation (the Game Boy Pocket) was insufficient. The resulting product was backward-compatible, a first for a handheld console system, and this leveraged the large library of games and the existing user base of the predecessor system. This became a major feature of the Game Boy line since it allowed each new launch to begin with a significantly larger library than any of its competitors. As of March 31, 2005, the Game Boy and Game Boy Color combined to sell 118.69 million units worldwide.\nThe console was capable of displaying up to 56 different colors simultaneously on screen from its palette of 32,768, and could add basic four-color shading to games that had been developed for the original Game Boy. It could also give the sprites and backgrounds separate colors, for a total of more than four colors.\nNeo Geo Pocket Color.\nThe Neo Geo Pocket Color (or NGPC) was released in 1999 in Japan, and later that year in the United States and Europe. It was a 16-bit color handheld game console designed by SNK, the maker of the Neo Geo home console and arcade machine. It came after SNK's original Neo Geo Pocket monochrome handheld, which debuted in 1998 in Japan.\nIn 2000, following SNK's purchase by Japanese Pachinko manufacturer Aruze, the Neo Geo Pocket Color was dropped from both the US and European markets, purportedly due to commercial failure.\nThe system seemed well on its way to being a success in the U.S. It was more successful than any Game Boy competitor since Sega's Game Gear, but was hurt by several factors, such as SNK's infamous lack of communication with third-party developers, and anticipation of the Game Boy Advance. The decision to ship U.S. games in cardboard boxes in a cost-cutting move rather than hard plastic cases that Japanese and European releases were shipped in may have also hurt US sales.\nWonderswan.\nThe WonderSwan was a handheld game console designed by Bandai. It was released on March 4, 1998, in Japan.\nEarly 2000s.\nThe 2000s saw a major leap in innovation, particularly in the second half with the release of the DS and PSP.\nWonderswan Color.\nThe WonderSwan Color was a handheld game console designed by Bandai. It was released on December 9, 2000, in Japan, Although the WonderSwan Color was slightly larger and heavier (7\u00a0mm and 2\u00a0g) compared to the original WonderSwan, the color version featured 512\u00a0KB of RAM and a larger color LCD screen. In addition, the WonderSwan Color was compatible with the original WonderSwan library of games.\nPrior to WonderSwan's release, Nintendo had virtually a monopoly in the Japanese video game handheld market. After the release of the WonderSwan Color, Bandai took approximately 8% of the market share in Japan partly due to its low price of 6800 yen (approximately US$65). Another reason for the WonderSwan's success in Japan was the fact that Bandai managed to get a deal with Square to port over the original Famicom \"Final Fantasy\" games with improved graphics and controls. However, with the popularity of the Game Boy Advance and the reconciliation between Square and Nintendo, the WonderSwan Color and its successor, the SwanCrystal quickly lost its competitive advantage.\nGame Boy Advance.\nIn 2001, Nintendo released the Game Boy Advance (GBA or AGB), which added two shoulder buttons, a larger screen, and more computing power than the Game Boy Color.\nThe design was revised two years later when the Game Boy Advance SP (GBA SP), a more compact version, was released. The SP featured a \"clamshell\" design (folding open and closed, like a laptop computer), as well as a frontlit color display and rechargeable battery. Despite the smaller form factor, the screen remained the same size as that of the original. In 2005, the Game Boy Micro was released. This revision sacrificed screen size and backwards compatibility with previous Game Boys for a dramatic reduction in total size and a brighter backlit screen. A new SP model with a backlit screen was released in some regions around the same time.\nAlong with the GameCube, the GBA also introduced the concept of \"connectivity\": using a handheld system as a console controller. A handful of games used this feature, most notably \"Animal Crossing\", \"Pac-Man Vs.\", \"Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles\", ', ', \"Metroid Prime\", and \"\".\nAs of December 31, 2007, the GBA, GBA SP, and the Game Boy Micro combined sold 80.72 million units worldwide.\nGame Park 32.\nThe original GP32 was released in 2001 by the South Korean company Game Park a few months after the launch of the Game Boy Advance. It featured a 32-bit CPU, 133\u00a0MHz processor, MP3 and Divx player, and e-book reader. SmartMedia cards were used for storage, and could hold up to 128mb of anything downloaded through a USB cable from a PC. The GP32 was redesigned in 2003. A front-lit screen was added and the new version was called GP32 FLU (Front Light Unit). In summer 2004, another redesign, the GP32 BLU, was made, and added a backlit screen. This version of the handheld was planned for release outside South Korea; in Europe, and it was released for example in Spain (VirginPlay was the distributor). While not a commercial success on the same level as mainstream handhelds (only 30,000 units were sold), it ended up being used mainly as a platform for user-made applications and emulators of other systems, being popular with developers and more technically adept users.\nN-Gage.\nNokia released the N-Gage in 2003. It was designed as a combination MP3 player, cellphone, PDA, radio, and gaming device. The system received much criticism alleging defects in its physical design and layout, including its vertically oriented screen and requirement of removing the battery to change game cartridges. The most well known of these was \"sidetalking\", or the act of placing the phone speaker and receiver on an edge of the device instead of one of the flat sides, causing the user to appear as if they are speaking into a taco.\nThe N-Gage QD was later released to address the design flaws of the original. However, certain features available in the original N-Gage, including MP3 playback, FM radio reception, and USB connectivity were removed.\nSecond generation of N-Gage launched on April 3, 2008 in the form of a service for selected Nokia Smartphones.\nTapwave Zodiac.\nIn 2003, Tapwave released the Zodiac. It was designed to be a PDA-handheld game console hybrid. It supported photos, movies, music, Internet, and documents. The Zodiac used a special version Palm OS 5, 5.2T, that supported the special gaming buttons and graphics chip. Two versions were available, Zodiac 1 and 2, differing in memory and looks. The Zodiac line ended in July 2005 when Tapwave declared bankruptcy.\nMid 2000s.\nNintendo DS.\nThe Nintendo DS was released in November 2004. Among its new features were the incorporation of two screens, a touchscreen, wireless connectivity, and a microphone port. As with the Game Boy Advance SP, the DS features a clamshell design, with the two screens aligned vertically on either side of the hinge.\nThe DS's lower screen is touch sensitive, designed to be pressed with a stylus, a user's finger or a special \"thumb pad\" (a small plastic pad attached to the console's wrist strap, which can be affixed to the thumb to simulate an analog stick). More traditional controls include four face buttons, two shoulder buttons, a D-pad, and \"Start\" and \"Select\" buttons. The console also features online capabilities via the Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection and ad-hoc wireless networking for multiplayer games with up to sixteen players. It is backwards-compatible with all Game Boy Advance games, but like the Game Boy Micro, it is not compatible with games designed for the Game Boy or Game Boy Color.\nIn January 2006, Nintendo revealed an updated version of the DS: the Nintendo DS Lite (released on March 2, 2006, in Japan) with an updated, smaller form factor (42% smaller and 21% lighter than the original Nintendo DS), a cleaner design, longer battery life, and brighter, higher-quality displays, with adjustable brightness. It is also able to connect wirelessly with Nintendo's Wii console.\nOn October 2, 2008, Nintendo announced the Nintendo DSi, with larger, 3.25-inch screens and two integrated cameras. It has an SD card storage slot in place of the Game Boy Advance slot, plus internal flash memory for storing downloaded games. It was released on November 1, 2008, in Japan, April 2, 2009, in Australia, April 3, 2009, in Europe, and April 5, 2009, in North America. On October 29, 2009, Nintendo announced a larger version of the DSi, called the DSi XL, which was released on November 21, 2009, in Japan, March 5, 2010, in Europe, March 28, 2010, in North America, and April 15, 2010, in Australia.\nAs of December 31, 2009, the Nintendo DS, Nintendo DS Lite, and Nintendo DSi combined have sold 125.13 million units worldwide.\nGame King.\nThe GameKing is a handheld game console released by the Chinese company TimeTop in 2004. The first model while original in design owes a large debt to Nintendo's Game Boy Advance. The second model, the GameKing 2, is believed to be inspired by Sony's PSP. This model also was upgraded with a backlit screen, with a distracting background transparency (which can be removed by opening up the console). A color model, the GameKing 3 apparently exists, but was only made for a brief time and was difficult to purchase outside of Asia.\nAs many of the games have an \"old school\" simplicity, the device has developed a small cult following. The Gameking's speaker is quite loud and the cartridges' sophisticated looping soundtracks (sampled from other sources) are seemingly at odds with its primitive graphics.\nTimeTop made at least one additional device sometimes labeled as \"GameKing\", but while it seems to possess more advanced graphics, is essentially an emulator that plays a handful of multi-carts (like the GB Station Light II). Outside of Asia (especially China) however the Gameking remains relatively unheard of due to the enduring popularity of Japanese handhelds such as those manufactured by Nintendo and Sony.\nPlayStation Portable.\nThe PlayStation Portable (officially abbreviated PSP) is a handheld game console manufactured and marketed by Sony Computer Entertainment. Development of the console was first announced during E3 2003, and it was unveiled on May 11, 2004, at a Sony press conference before E3\u00a02004. The system was released in Japan on December 12, 2004, in North America on March 24, 2005, and in the PAL region on September 1, 2005.\nThe PlayStation Portable is the first handheld video game console to use an optical disc format, Universal Media Disc (UMD), for distribution of its games. UMD Video discs with movies and television shows were also released. The PSP utilized the Sony/SanDisk Memory Stick Pro Duo format as its primary storage medium. Other distinguishing features of the console include its large viewing screen, multi-media capabilities, and connectivity with the PlayStation 3, other PSPs, and the Internet.\nGizmondo.\nTiger's Gizmondo came out in the UK during March 2005 and it was released in the U.S. during October 2005. It is designed to play music, movies, and games, have a camera for taking and storing photos, and have GPS functions. It also has Internet capabilities. It has a phone for sending text and multimedia messages. Email was promised at launch, but was never released before Gizmondo, and ultimately Tiger Telematics', downfall in early 2006. Users obtained a second service pack, unreleased, hoping to find such functionality. However, Service Pack B did not activate the e-mail functionality.\nGP2X Series.\nThe GP2X is an open-source, Linux-based handheld video game console and media player created by GamePark Holdings of South Korea, designed for homebrew developers as well as commercial developers. It is commonly used to run emulators for game consoles such as Neo-Geo, Genesis, Master System, Game Gear, Amstrad CPC, Commodore 64, Nintendo Entertainment System, TurboGrafx-16, MAME and others.\nA new version called the \"F200\" was released October 30, 2007, and features a touchscreen, among other changes. Followed by GP2X Wiz (2009) and GP2X Caanoo (2010).\nLate 2000s.\nDingoo.\nThe Dingoo A320 is a micro-sized gaming handheld that resembles the Game Boy Micro and is open to game development. It also supports music, radio, emulators (8 bit and 16 bit) and video playing capabilities with its own interface much like the PSP. There is also an onboard radio and recording program. It is currently available in two colors \u2014 white and black. Other similar products from the same manufacturer are the Dingoo A330 (also known as Geimi), Dingoo A360, Dingoo A380, and Dingoo A320E.\nPSP Go.\nThe PSP Go is a version of the PlayStation Portable handheld game console manufactured by Sony. It was released on October 1, 2009, in American and European territories, and on November 1 in Japan. It was revealed prior to E3 2009 through Sony's Qore VOD service. Although its design is significantly different from other PSPs, it is not intended to replace the PSP 3000, which Sony continued to manufacture, sell, and support. On April 20, 2011, the manufacturer announced that the PSP Go would be discontinued so that they may concentrate on the PlayStation Vita. Sony later said that only the European and Japanese versions were being cut, and that the console would still be available in the US.\nUnlike previous PSP models, the PSP Go does not feature a UMD drive, but instead has 16 GB of internal flash memory to store games, video, pictures, and other media. This can be extended by up to 32 GB with the use of a Memory Stick Micro (M2) flash card. Also unlike previous PSP models, the PSP Go's rechargeable battery is not removable or replaceable by the user. The unit is 43% lighter and 56% smaller than the original PSP-1000, and 16% lighter and 35% smaller than the PSP-3000. It has a 3.8\" 480 \u00d7 272 LCD (compared to the larger 4.3\" 480 \u00d7 272 pixel LCD on previous PSP models). The screen slides up to reveal the main controls. The overall shape and sliding mechanism are similar to that of Sony's mylo COM-2 internet device.\nPandora.\nThe Pandora is a handheld game console/UMPC/PDA hybrid designed to take advantage of existing open source software and to be a target for home-brew development. It runs a full distribution of Linux, and in functionality is like a small PC with gaming controls. It is developed by OpenPandora, which is made up of former distributors and community members of the GP32 and GP2X handhelds.\nOpenPandora began taking pre-orders for one batch of 4000 devices in November 2008 and after manufacturing delays, began shipping to customers on May 21, 2010.\nFC-16 Go.\nThe FC-16 Go is a portable Super NES hardware clone manufactured by Yobo Gameware in 2009. It features a 3.5-inch display, two wireless controllers, and CRT cables that allow cartridges to be played on a television screen. Unlike other Super NES clone consoles, it has region tabs that only allow NTSC North American cartridges to be played. Later revisions feature stereo sound output, larger shoulder buttons, and a slightly re-arranged button, power, and A/V output layout.\n2010s.\nNintendo 3DS.\nThe Nintendo 3DS is the successor to Nintendo's DS handheld. The autostereoscopic device is able to project stereoscopic three-dimensional effects without requirement of active shutter or passive polarized glasses, which are required by most current 3D televisions to display the 3D effect. The 3DS was released in Japan on February 26, 2011; in Europe on March 25, 2011; in North America on March 27, 2011, and in Australia on March 31, 2011. The system features backward compatibility with Nintendo DS series software, including Nintendo DSi software except those that require the Game Boy Advance slot. It also features an online service called the Nintendo eShop, launched on June 6, 2011, in North America and June 7, 2011, in Europe and Japan, which allows owners to download games, demos, applications and information on upcoming film and game releases. On November 24, 2011, a limited edition \"Legend of Zelda 25th Anniversary 3DS\" was released that contained a unique Cosmo Black unit decorated with gold Legend of Zelda related imagery, along with a copy of \"The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time 3D\".\nThere are also other models including the Nintendo 2DS and the New Nintendo 3DS, the latter with a larger (XL/LL) variant, like the original Nintendo 3DS, as well as the New Nintendo 2DS XL.\nXperia Play.\nThe Sony Ericsson Xperia PLAY is a handheld game console smartphone produced by Sony Ericsson under the Xperia smartphone brand. The device runs Android 2.3 Gingerbread, and is the first to be part of the PlayStation Certified program which means that it can play PlayStation Suite games. The device is a horizontally sliding phone with its original form resembling the Xperia X10 while the slider below resembles the slider of the PSP Go. The slider features a D-pad on the left side, a set of standard PlayStation buttons (, , and ) on the right, a long rectangular touchpad in the middle, start and select buttons on the bottom right corner, a menu button on the bottom left corner, and two shoulder buttons (L and R) on the back of the device. It is powered by a 1\u00a0GHz Qualcomm Snapdragon processor, a Qualcomm Adreno 205 GPU, and features a display measuring 4.0 inches (100\u00a0mm) (854 \u00d7 480), an 8-megapixel camera, 512 MB RAM, 8 GB internal storage, and a micro-USB connector. It supports microSD cards, versus the Memory Stick variants used in PSP consoles. The device was revealed officially for the first time in a Super Bowl ad on Sunday, February 6, 2011. On February 13, 2011, at Mobile World Congress (MWC) 2011, it was announced that the device would be shipping globally in March 2011, with a launch lineup of around 50 software titles.\nPlayStation Vita.\nThe PlayStation Vita is the successor to Sony's PlayStation Portable (PSP) Handheld series. It was released in Japan on December 17, 2011, and in Europe, Australia, North, and South America on February 22, 2012.\nThe handheld includes two analog sticks, a 5-inch (130\u00a0mm) OLED/LCD multi-touch capacitive touchscreen, and supports Bluetooth, Wi-Fi and optional 3G. Internally, the PS Vita features a 4 core ARM Cortex-A9 MPCore processor and a 4 core SGX543MP4+ graphics processing unit, as well as LiveArea software as its main user interface, which succeeds the XrossMediaBar.\nThe device is fully backwards-compatible with PlayStation Portable games digitally released on the PlayStation Network via the PlayStation Store. However, PSone Classics and PS2 titles were not compatible at the time of the primary public release in Japan. The Vita's dual analog sticks will be supported on selected PSP games. The graphics for PSP releases will be up-scaled, with a smoothing filter to reduce pixelation.\nOn September 20, 2018, Sony announced at Tokyo Game Show 2018 that the Vita would be discontinued in 2019, ending its hardware production. Production of Vita hardware officially ended on March 1, 2019.\nNvidia Shield.\nProject Shield is a handheld system developed by Nvidia announced at CES 2013. It runs on Android 4.2 and uses Nvidia Tegra 4 SoC. The hardware includes a 5-inches multitouch screen with support for HD graphics (720p). The console allows for the streaming of games running on a compatible desktop PC, or laptop.\nNvidia Shield Portable has received mixed reception from critics. Generally, reviewers praised the performance of the device, but criticized the cost and lack of worthwhile games. Engadget's review noted the system's \"extremely impressive PC gaming\", but also that due to its high price, the device was \"a hard sell as a portable game console\", especially when compared to similar handhelds on the market. CNET's Eric Franklin states in his review of the device that \"The Nvidia Shield is an extremely well made device, with performance that pretty much obliterates any mobile product before it; but like most new console launches, there is currently a lack of available games worth your time.\" Eurogamer's comprehensive review of the device provides a detailed account of the device and its features; concluded by saying: \"In the here and now, the first-gen Shield Portable is a gloriously niche, luxury product - the most powerful Android system on the market by a clear stretch and possessing a unique link to PC gaming that's seriously impressive in beta form, and can only get better.\"\nNintendo Switch.\nThe Nintendo Switch is a hybrid console that can either be used in a handheld form, or inserted into a docking station attached to a television to play on a bigger screen. The Switch features two detachable wireless controllers, called Joy-Con, which can be used individually or attached to a grip to provide a traditional gamepad form. A handheld-only revision named Nintendo Switch Lite was released on September 20, 2019.\nThe Switch Lite had sold about 1.95 million units worldwide by September 30, 2019, only 10 days after its launch.\n2020s.\nEvercade.\nEvercade is a handheld game console developed and manufactured by UK company Blaze Entertainment. It focuses on retrogaming with ROM cartridges that each contain a number of emulated games. Development began in 2018, and the console was released in May 2020, after a few delays. Upon its launch, the console offered 10 game cartridges with a combined total of 122 games.\nArc System Works, Atari, Data East, Interplay Entertainment, Bandai Namco Entertainment and Piko Interactive have released emulated versions of their games for the Evercade. Pre-existing homebrew games have also been re-released for the console by Mega Cat Studios. The Evercade is capable of playing games originally released for the Atari 2600, the Atari 7800, the Atari Lynx, the NES, the SNES, and the Sega Genesis/Mega Drive.\nAnalogue Pocket.\nThe Analogue Pocket is a FPGA-based handheld game console designed and manufactured by Analogue, It is designed to play games designed for handhelds of the fourth, fifth and sixth generation of video game consoles. The console features a design reminiscent of the Game Boy, with additional buttons for the supported platforms. It features a 3.5\" 1600x1440 LTPS LCD display, an SD card port, and a link cable port compatible with Game Boy link cables. The Analogue Pocket uses an Altera Cyclone V processor, and is compatible with the original Game Boy, Game Boy Color and Game Boy Advance cartridges out of the box. With cartridge adapters (sold separately) the Analogue Pocket can play Game Gear, Neo Geo Pocket, Neo Geo Pocket Color and Atari Lynx game cartridges. The Analogue Pocket includes an additional FPGA, allowing 3rd party FPGA development. The Analogue Pocket was released in December 2021.\nSteam Deck.\nThe Steam Deck is a handheld computer device, developed by Valve, which runs SteamOS 3.0, a tailored distro of Arch Linux and includes support for Proton, a compatibility layer that allows most Microsoft Windows games to be played on the Linux-based operating system. This device and other similar ones generally are not referred to as \"consoles\" but more commonly as handheld style gaming computers due to effectively being IBM PC\u2013compatible like contemporary desktop and laptop gaming PCs. In terms of hardware, the Deck includes a custom AMD APU based on their Zen 2 and RDNA 2 architectures, with the CPU running a four-core/eight-thread unit and the GPU running on eight compute units with a total estimated performance of 1.6 TFLOPS. Both the CPU and GPU use variable timing frequencies, with the CPU running between 2.4 and 3.5\u00a0GHz and the GPU between 1.0 and 1.6\u00a0GHz based on current processor needs. Valve stated that the CPU has comparable performance to Ryzen 3000 desktop computer processors and the GPU performance to the Radeon RX 6000 series. The Deck includes 16 GB of LPDDR5 RAM in a quad channel configuration.\nValve revealed the Steam Deck on July 15, 2021, with pre-orders being made option the next day. The Deck was expected to ship in December 2021 to the US, Canada, the EU and the UK but was delayed to February 2022, with other regions to follow in 2022. Pre-orders were limited to those with Steam accounts opened before June 2021 to prevent resellers from controlling access to the device. Pre-order reservations were on July 16, 2021, through the Steam storefront briefly crashed the servers due to the demand. While initial shipments are still planned by February 2022, Valve has reported to new purchasers that wider availability will be later, with the 64\u00a0GB model and 256 GB NVMe model due in Q2 2022, and the 512 GB NVMe model by Q3 2022. Steam Deck was released on February 25, 2022.\nNintendo Switch 2.\nThe Nintendo Switch 2 is the direct successor of the Nintendo Switch, which was released on June 5, 2025. Like its predecessor, Switch 2 is a hybrid console: Either be used in a handheld form, or inserted into a docking station attached to a television to play on a bigger screen.\nROG Xbox Ally.\nThe ROG Xbox Ally is a handheld gaming computer and handheld game console co-developed by Asus and Microsoft, and manufactured by Asus as part of the Republic of Gamers (ROG) and Xbox brands. A successor to the Asus ROG Ally, it was released on October 16, 2025.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14200", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14200", "title": "Heinrich Abeken", "text": "German theologian (1809\u20131872)\nHeinrich Abeken (19 August 1809 \u2013 8 August 1872) was a German theologian and Prussian Privy Legation Councillor in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Berlin.\nEarly life.\nAbeken was born and raised in the city of Osnabr\u00fcck as a son of a merchant, he was incited to a higher education by the example of his uncle Bernhard Rudolf Abeken. After finishing the college in Osnabr\u00fcck, he moved in 1827 to visit the University of Berlin to study theology. He combined philosophical and philological studies and was interested in art and modern literature.\nCareer.\nIn 1831, Abeken acquired a licenciate of theology. At the end of the year he visited Rome, and was welcomed in the house of Christian Karl Josias, Freiherr von Bunsen. Abeken participated in Bunsen's works, namely an evangelical prayer and hymn-book. In 1834 he became chaplain to the Prussian embassy in Rome. He married his first wife, who died soon thereafter. Bunsen left Rome in 1838 and Abeken followed soon thereafter to Germany. In 1841, he was sent to England to help in founding a German-English missionary bishopric in Jerusalem. In the same year, he was sent by Frederick William IV of Prussia to Egypt and Ethiopia, where he joined an expedition led by professor Karl Richard Lepsius. In 1845 and 1846 he returned via Jerusalem and Rome to Germany. He became Legation Councillor in Berlin, later Council Referee at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.\nIn 1848 he received an appointment in the Prussian ministry for foreign affairs, and in 1853, he was promoted to be privy councillor of legation (\"Geheimer Legationsrath\"). Abeken remained in charge for more than twenty years of Prussian politics, assisting Otto Theodor Freiherr von Manteuffel and Chancellor Otto von Bismarck. The latter was so much pleased with Abeken's work that officials started to call Abeken \"the quill [i.e., the scribe] of Bismarck.\" Abeken married again in 1866; his second wife was Hedwig von Olfers, daughter of the general director of the royal museums, Privy Councilor von Olfers.\nHe was much employed by Bismarck in the writing of official despatches, and stood high in the favour of King William, whom he often accompanied on his journeys as representative of the foreign office. He was present with the king during the campaigns of 1866 and 1870\u201371. In 1851, he published anonymously \"Babylon und Jerusalem,\" a scathing criticism of the views of Ida, Countess von Hahn-Hahn.\nDuring the war against Austria in 1866 as well as in the wars against France in 1870 and 1871, Abeken stayed in the Prussian headquarters. A major part of the dispatches of the time have been written by him, especially the Ems Dispatch of 13 July 1870. Unfortunately his health was damaged by the endeavours of these travels, and he died after an illness of several months. Emperor Wilhelm I described Abeken in a condolence letter to his widow: \"One of my most reliable advisors, standing on my side in the most decisive moments; His loss is irreplaceable to me; In him his fatherland has lost one of the most noble and most loyal men and officials\".\nDespite his engagement in politics, Abeken never lost his interest in theology and continued to publish and speak in this sector during all of his life. He was interested in art and archeology, and was sponsor of the Archeological Institute of Rome and member of the Archeological Society of Rome. He founded a Circle of Friends of the Greek Literature in Berlin and was member of the prize commission for the royal Schiller-Prize.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14201", "revid": "49409179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14201", "title": "Henry Bruce, 1st Baron Aberdare", "text": "British politician (1815\u20131895)\nHenry Austin Bruce, 1st Baron Aberdare (16 April 1815 \u2013 25 February 1895), was a British Liberal Party politician, who served in government most notably as Home Secretary (1868\u20131873) and as Lord President of the Council.\nOrigin.\nLord Aberdare was born at Duffryn, Aberdare, Glamorganshire, the second son of John Bruce Bruce-Pryce (born John Bruce Knight), a Royal Navy agent and banker, and his first wife, Sarah, daughter of Rev. Hugh Williams Austin.\nAberdare's father was the eldest son of John Knight (died 1799) and Margaret Bruce (died 1809), daughter and heiress of William Bruce of Llanblethian, High Sheriff of Glamorganshire. His younger brother was James Knight-Bruce. Aberdare's paternal grandmother, Margaret Bruce, came from the Welsh Bruces, a branch of Bruce of Kennet of Clackmannan, that dates to the 14th century.\nIn 1805, Aberdare's father changed his surname from Knight to Bruce when he reached the age of majority and inherited the Llanblethian estates. In 1837, he changed his name again to Bruce-Pryce when he inherited Duffryn and the Monknash estates from a distant cousin, Frances Anne Grey (\"n\u00e9e\" Pryce), the daughter and heiress of Thomas Pryce, who had married Hon. William Booth Grey (1773-1852), the second son of 5th Earl of Stamford.\nLord Aberdare's younger brother was Gen. Robert Bruce (1821\u20131891).\nEducation.\nHenry Bruce was educated from the age of twelve at the Bishop Gore School, Swansea (Swansea Grammar School). In 1837 he was called to the bar from Lincoln's Inn. Shortly after he had begun to practice, the discovery of coal beneath the Duffryn and other Aberdare Valley estates brought his family great wealth. From 1847 to 1854 Bruce was stipendiary magistrate for Merthyr Tydfil and Aberdare, resigning the position in the latter year, after entering parliament as Liberal member for Merthyr Tydfil.\nIndustrialist and politician, 1852\u20131868.\nBruce was returned unopposed as MP for Merthyr Tydfil in December 1852, following the death of Sir John Guest. He did so with the enthusiastic support of the late member's political allies, notably the iron masters of Dowlais, and he was thereafter regarded by his political opponents, most notably in the Aberdare Valley, as their nominee. Even so, Bruce's parliamentary record demonstrated support for liberal policies, with the exception of the ballot. The electorate in the constituency at this time remained relatively small, excluding the vast majority of the working classes.\nSignificantly, however, Bruce's relationship with the miners of the Aberdare Valley, in particular, deteriorated as a result of the Aberdare Strike of 1857\u201358. In a speech to a large audience of miners at the Aberdare Market Hall, Bruce sought to strike a conciliatory tone in persuading the miners to return to work. In a second speech, however, he delivered a broadside against the trade union movement generally, referring to the violence engendered elsewhere as a result of strikes and to alleged examples of intimidation and violence in the immediate locality. The strike damaged his reputation and may well have contributed to his eventual election defeat ten years later. In 1855, Bruce was appointed a trustee of the Dowlais Iron Company and played a role in the further development of the iron industry.\nIn November 1862, after nearly ten years in Parliament, he became Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department, and held that office until April 1864. He became a Privy Councillor and a Charity Commissioner for England and Wales in 1864, when he was moved to be vice-president of the Council of Education.\n1868 general election.\nAt the 1868 general election, Merthyr Tydfil became a two-member constituency with a much-increased electorate as a result of the Reform Act 1867. Since the formation of the constituency, Merthyr Tydfil had dominated representation as the vast majority of the electorate lived in the town and its vicinity, whereas there was a much lower number of electors in the neighbouring Aberdare Valley. During the 1850s and 1860s, however, the population of Aberdare grew rapidly, and the franchise changes in 1867 gave the vote to large numbers of miners in that valley. Amongst these new electors, Bruce remained unpopular as a result of his actions during the 1857\u201358 dispute. Initially, it appeared that the Aberdare iron master, Richard Fothergill, would be elected to the second seat alongside Bruce. However, the appearance of a third Liberal candidate, Henry Richard, a nonconformist radical popular in both Merthyr and Aberdare, left Bruce on the defensive and he was ultimately defeated, finishing in third place behind both Richard and Fothergill.\nLater political career.\nAfter losing his seat, Bruce was elected for Renfrewshire on 25 January 1869, and was made Home Secretary by William Ewart Gladstone. His tenure of this office was conspicuous for a reform of the licensing laws, and he was responsible for the Licensing Act 1872, which made the magistrates the licensing authority, increased the penalties for misconduct in public-houses and shortened the number of hours for the sale of drink. In 1873 Bruce relinquished the home secretaryship, at Gladstone's request, to become Lord President of the Council, and was elevated to the peerage as Baron Aberdare, of Duffryn in the County of Glamorgan, on 23 August that year. Being a Gladstonian Liberal, Aberdare had hoped for a much more radical proposal to keep existing licensee holders for a further ten years, and to prevent any new applicants. Its unpopularity pricked his nonconformist's conscience, when like Gladstone himself he had a strong leaning towards Temperance. He had already pursued 'moral improvement' on miners in the regulations attempting to further ban boys from the pits. The Trades Union Act 1871 was another more liberal regime giving further rights to unions, and protection from malicious prosecutions.\nThe defeat of the Liberal government in the following year terminated Lord Aberdare's official political life, and he subsequently devoted himself to social, educational and economic questions. Education became one of Lord Aberdare's main interests in later life. His interest had been shown by the speech on Welsh education which he had made on 5 May 1862. In 1880, he was appointed to chair the Departmental Committee on Intermediate and Higher Education in Wales and Monmouthshire, whose report ultimately led to the Welsh Intermediate Education Act of 1889. The report also stimulated the campaign for the provision of university education in Wales. In 1883, Lord Aberdare was elected the first president of the University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire. In his inaugural address he declared that the framework of Welsh education would not be complete until there was a University of Wales. The university was eventually founded in 1893 and Aberdare became its first chancellor.\nIn 1876 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society; from 1878 to 1891 he was president of the Royal Historical Society. and in 1881 he became president of both the Royal Geographical Society and the Girls' Day School Trust. In 1888 he headed the commission that established the Official Table of Drops, listing how far a person of a particular weight should be dropped when hanged for a capital offence (the only method of 'judicial execution' in the United Kingdom at that time), to ensure an instant and painless death, by cleanly breaking the neck between the 2nd and 3rd vertebrae, an 'exacting science', eventually brought to perfection by Chief Executioner Albert Pierrepoint. Prisoners health, clothing and discipline was a particular concern even at the end of his career. In the Lords he spoke at some length to the Home Affairs Committee chaired by Arthur Balfour about the prison rules system. Aberdare had always expressed concern about intemperate working-classes; in 1878 urging greater vigilance against the vice of excessive drinking, he took evidence on miners and railway colliers drinking habits. The committee tried to establish special legislation based on a link between Sunday Opening and absenteeism established in 1868. Aberdare had been interested in the plight of working class drinkers since Gladstone had appointed him Home Secretary. The defeat of the Licensing Bill by the Tory 'beerage' and publicans was drafted to limit hours and protect the public, but it persuaded a convinced Anglican forever more of the iniquities.\nIn 1882 he began a connection with West Africa which lasted the rest of his life, by accepting the chairmanship of the National African Company, formed by Sir George Goldie, which in 1886 received a charter under the title of the Royal Niger Company and in 1899 was taken over by the British government, its territories being constituted the protectorate of Nigeria. West African affairs, however, by no means exhausted Lord Aberdare's energies, and it was principally through his efforts that a charter was in 1894 obtained for the University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire, a constituent institution of the University of Wales. This is now Cardiff University. Lord Aberdare, who in 1885 was made a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath, presided over several Royal Commissions at different times.\nAnimal welfare.\nBruce was President of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals from 1878 to 1893. In 1879, he voted against legislation proposing total abolition of vivisection which resulted in criticism from anti-vivisectionists. Bruce commented that the RSPCA had no position on vivisection and should be kept distinct from the Society. Anti-vivisectionist Frances Power Cobbe noted Bruce's contradictory behaviour, as he had publicly spoken against the abolition of vivisection and voted against it.\nFamily.\nHenry Bruce married firstly Annabella, daughter of Richard Beadon, of Clifton by Annabella \u00e0 Court, sister of the 1st Baron Heytesbury, on 6 January 1846. They had one son and three daughters. \nAfter her death on 28 July 1852 he married secondly on 17 August 1854 Norah Creina Blanche, youngest daughter of Lt-Gen Sir William Napier, KCB the historian of the Peninsular War, whose biography he edited, by Caroline Amelia, second daughter of Gen. Henry Edward Fox, son of the Earl of Ilchester. They had seven daughters and two sons, of whom:\nLord Aberdare died at his London home, 39 Princes Gardens, South Kensington, on 25 February 1895, aged 79, and was succeeded in the barony by his only son by his first marriage, Henry. He was survived by his wife, Lady Aberdare, born 1827, who died on 27 April 1897. She was a proponent of women's education and active in the establishment of Aberdare Hall in Cardiff.\nMemorial.\nHenry Austin Bruce is buried at Aberffrwd Cemetery in Mountain Ash, Wales. His large family plot is surrounded by a chain, and his gravestone is a simple Celtic cross with double plinth and kerb. In place is written \"To God the Judge of all and to the spirits of just men more perfect.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14203", "revid": "40934158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14203", "title": "Harpers Ferry (disambiguation)", "text": "Harpers Ferry is the name of several places in the United States of America:\nHarpers Ferry may also refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "14204", "revid": "6054316", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14204", "title": "Halophile", "text": "Organisms that live in high salt concentrations\nA halophile (from the Greek word for 'salt-loving') is an extremophile that thrives in high salt concentrations. In chemical terms, halophile refers to a Lewis acidic species that has some ability to extract halides from other chemical species.\nWhile most halophiles are classified into the domain Archaea, there are also bacterial halophiles and some eukaryotic species, such as the alga \"Dunaliella salina\" and fungus \"Wallemia ichthyophaga\". Some well-known species give off a red color from carotenoid compounds, notably bacteriorhodopsin. \nHalophiles can be found in water bodies with salt concentration more than five times greater than that of the ocean, such as the Great Salt Lake in Utah, Owens Lake in California, the Lake Urmia in Iran, the Dead Sea, and in evaporation ponds. They are theorized to be a possible analogues for modeling extremophiles that might live in the salty subsurface water ocean of Jupiter's Europa and similar moons.\nClassification.\nHalophiles are categorized by the extent of their halotolerance: slight, moderate, or extreme. Slight halophiles prefer 0.3 to 0.8 M (1.7 to 4.8%\u2014seawater is 0.6 M or 3.5%), moderate halophiles 0.8 to 3.4 M (4.7 to 20%), and extreme halophiles 3.4 to 5.1 M (20 to 30%) salt content. Halophiles require sodium chloride (salt) for growth, in contrast to halotolerant organisms, which do not require salt but can grow under saline conditions.\nLifestyle.\nHigh salinity represents an extreme environment in which relatively few organisms have been able to adapt and survive. Most halophilic and all halotolerant organisms expend energy to exclude salt from their cytoplasm to avoid protein aggregation ('salting out'). To survive the high salinities, halophiles employ two differing strategies to prevent desiccation through osmotic movement of water out of their cytoplasm. Both strategies work by increasing the internal osmolarity of the cell. The first strategy is employed by some archaea, the majority of halophilic bacteria, yeasts, algae, and fungi; the organism accumulates organic compounds in the cytoplasm\u2014osmoprotectants which are known as compatible solutes. These can be either synthesised or accumulated from the environment. The most common compatible solutes are neutral or zwitterionic, and include amino acids, sugars, polyols, betaines, and ectoines, as well as derivatives of some of these compounds.\nThe second, more radical adaptation involves selectively absorbing potassium (K+) ions into the cytoplasm. This adaptation is restricted to the extremely halophilic archaeal family \"Halobacteriaceae\", the moderately halophilic bacterial order \"Halanaerobiales\", and the extremely halophilic bacterium \"Salinibacter ruber\". The presence of this adaptation in three distinct evolutionary lineages suggests convergent evolution of this strategy, it being unlikely to be an ancient characteristic retained in only scattered groups or passed on through massive lateral gene transfer. The primary reason for this is the entire intracellular machinery (enzymes, structural proteins, etc.) must be adapted to high salt levels, whereas in the compatible solute adaptation, little or no adjustment is required to intracellular macromolecules; in fact, the compatible solutes often act as more general stress protectants, as well as just osmoprotectants.\nOf particular note are the extreme halophiles or haloarchaea (often known as halobacteria), a group of archaea, which require at least a 2 M salt concentration and are usually found in saturated solutions (about 36% w/v salts). These are the primary inhabitants of salt lakes, inland seas, and evaporating ponds of seawater, such as the deep salterns, where they tint the water column and sediments bright colors. These species most likely perish if they are exposed to anything other than a very high-concentration, salt-conditioned environment. These prokaryotes require salt for growth. The high concentration of sodium chloride in their environment limits the availability of oxygen for respiration. Their cellular machinery is adapted to high salt concentrations by having charged amino acids on their surfaces, allowing the retention of water molecules around these components. They are heterotrophs that normally respire by aerobic means. Most halophiles are unable to survive outside their high-salt native environments. Many halophiles are so fragile that when they are placed in distilled water, they immediately lyse from the change in osmotic conditions.\nHalophiles use a variety of energy sources and can be aerobic or anaerobic; anaerobic halophiles include phototrophic, fermentative, sulfate-reducing, homoacetogenic, and methanogenic species.\nThe Haloarchaea, and particularly the family Halobacteriaceae, are members of the domain \"Archaea\", and comprise the majority of the prokaryotic population in hypersaline environments. Currently, 15 recognised genera are in the family. The domain Bacteria (mainly \"Salinibacter ruber\") can comprise up to 25% of the prokaryotic community, but is more commonly a much lower percentage of the overall population. At times, the alga \"Dunaliella salina\" can also proliferate in this environment.\nA comparatively wide range of taxa has been isolated from saltern crystalliser ponds, including members of these genera: \"Haloferax, Halogeometricum, Halococcus, Haloterrigena, Halorubrum, Haloarcula\", and \"Halobacterium\". However, the viable counts in these cultivation studies have been small when compared to total counts, and the numerical significance of these isolates has been unclear. Only recently has it become possible to determine the identities and relative abundances of organisms in natural populations, typically using PCR-based strategies that target 16S small subunit ribosomal ribonucleic acid (16S rRNA) genes. While comparatively few studies of this type have been performed, results from these suggest that some of the most readily isolated and studied genera may not in fact be significant in the \"in situ\" community. This is seen in cases such as the genus \"Haloarcula\", which is estimated to make up less than 0.1% of the\" in situ\" community, but commonly appears in isolation studies.\nGenomic and proteomic signature.\nThe comparative genomic and proteomic analysis showed distinct molecular signatures exist for the environmental adaptation of halophiles. At the protein level, the halophilic species are characterized by low hydrophobicity, an overrepresentation of acidic residues, underrepresentation of Cys, lower propensities for helix formation, and higher propensities for coil structure. The core of these proteins is less hydrophobic, such as DHFR, that was found to have narrower \u03b2-strands.\nIn one study, the net charges (at pH 7.4) of the ribosomal proteins (r-proteins) that comprise the \"S10-spc\" cluster were observed to have an inverse relationship with the halophilicity/halotolerance levels in both bacteria and archaea. At the DNA level, the halophiles exhibit distinct dinucleotide and codon usage.\nExamples.\n\"Halobacteriaceae\" is a family that includes a large part of halophilic archaea. The genus \"Halobacterium\" under it has a high tolerance for elevated levels of salinity. Some species of halobacteria have acidic proteins that resist the denaturing effects of salts. \"Halococcus\" is another genus of the family Halobacteriaceae.\nSome hypersaline lakes are habitat to numerous families of halophiles. For example, the Makgadikgadi Pans in Botswana form a vast, seasonal, high-salinity water body that manifests halophilic species within the diatom genus \"Nitzschia\" in the family Bacillariaceae, as well as species within the genus \"Lovenula\" in the family Diaptomidae. Owens Lake in California also contains a large population of the halophilic bacterium \"Halobacterium halobium\".\n\"Wallemia ichthyophaga\" is a basidiomycetous fungus, which requires at least 1.5 M sodium chloride for \"in vitro\" growth, and it thrives even in media saturated with salt. Obligate requirement for salt is an exception in fungi. Even species that can tolerate salt concentrations close to saturation (for example \"Hortaea werneckii\") in almost all cases grow well in standard microbiological media without the addition of salt.\nThe fermentation of salty foods (such as soy sauce, Chinese fermented beans, salted cod, salted anchovies, sauerkraut, etc.) often involves halophiles as either essential ingredients or accidental contaminants. One example is \"Chromohalobacter beijerinckii\", found in salted beans preserved in brine and in salted herring. \"Tetragenococcus halophilus\" is found in salted anchovies and soy sauce.\n\"Artemia\" is a ubiquitous genus of small halophilic crustaceans living in salt lakes (such as Great Salt Lake) and solar salterns that can exist in water approaching the precipitation point of NaCl (340\u2009g/L) and can withstand strong osmotic shocks due to its mitigating strategies for fluctuating salinity levels, such as its unique larval salt gland and osmoregulatory capacity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14205", "revid": "14176974", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14205", "title": "Herbert A. Simon", "text": "American academic and Nobel Laureate (1916\u20132001)\nHerbert Alexander Simon (June 15, 1916\u00a0\u2013 February 9, 2001) was an American scholar whose work influenced the fields of computer science, economics, and cognitive psychology. His primary research interest was decision-making within organizations and he is best known for the theories of \"bounded rationality\" and \"satisficing\". He received the Turing Award in 1975 and the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1978. His research was noted for its interdisciplinary nature, spanning the fields of cognitive science, computer science, public administration, management, and political science. He was at Carnegie Mellon University for most of his career, from 1949 to 2001, where he helped found the Carnegie Mellon School of Computer Science, one of the first such departments in the world.\nNotably, Simon was among the pioneers of several modern-day scientific domains such as artificial intelligence, information processing, decision-making, problem-solving, organization theory, and complex systems. He was among the earliest to analyze the architecture of complexity and to propose a preferential attachment mechanism to explain power law distributions.\nEarly life and education.\nHerbert Alexander Simon was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin on June 15, 1916. Simon's father, Arthur Simon (1881\u20131948), was a Jewish electrical engineer who came to the United States from Germany in 1903 after earning his engineering degree at Technische Hochschule Darmstadt. An inventor, Arthur also was an independent patent attorney. Simon's mother, Edna Marguerite Merkel (1888\u20131969), was an accomplished pianist whose Jewish, Lutheran, and Catholic ancestors came from Braunschweig, Prague and Cologne. Simon's European ancestors were piano makers, goldsmiths, and vintners.\nSimon attended Milwaukee Public Schools, where he developed an interest in science and established himself as an atheist. While attending middle school, Simon wrote a letter to \"the editor of the \"Milwaukee Journal\" defending the civil liberties of atheists\". Simon's family introduced him to the idea that human behavior could be studied scientifically; his mother's younger brother, Harold Merkel (1892\u20131922), who studied economics at the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison under John R. Commons, became one of his earliest influences. Through Harold's books on economics and psychology, Simon discovered social science. Among his earliest influences, Simon cited Norman Angell for his book \"The Great Illusion\" and Henry George for his book \"Progress and Poverty\". While attending high school, Simon joined the debate team, where he argued \"from conviction, rather than cussedness\" in favor of George's single tax.\nIn 1933, Simon entered the University of Chicago, and, following his early influences, decided to study social science and mathematics. Simon was interested in studying biology but chose not to pursue the field because of his \"color-blindness and awkwardness in the laboratory\". At an early age, Simon learned he was color blind and discovered the external world is not the same as the perceived world. While in college, Simon focused on political science and economics. Simon's most important mentor was Henry Schultz, an econometrician and mathematical economist. Simon received both his B.A. (1936) and his Ph.D. (1943) in political science from the University of Chicago, where he studied under Harold Lasswell, Nicolas Rashevsky, Rudolf Carnap, Henry Schultz, and Charles Edward Merriam. After enrolling in a course on \"Measuring Municipal Governments,\" Simon became a research assistant for Clarence Ridley, and the two co-authored \"Measuring Municipal Activities: A Survey of Suggested Criteria for Appraising Administration\" in 1938. Simon's studies led him to the field of organizational decision-making, which became the subject of his doctoral dissertation.\nCareer.\nAfter receiving his undergraduate degree, Simon obtained a research assistantship in municipal administration that turned into the directorship of an operations research group at the University of California, Berkeley, where he worked from 1939 to 1942. By arrangement with the University of Chicago, during his years at Berkeley, he took his doctoral exams by mail and worked on his dissertation after hours.\nFrom 1942 to 1949, Simon was a professor of political science and also served as department chairman at Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago. There, he began participating in the seminars held by the staff of the Cowles Commission who at that time included Trygve Haavelmo, Jacob Marschak, and Tjalling Koopmans. He thus began an in-depth study of economics in the area of institutionalism. Marschak brought Simon in to assist in the study he was currently undertaking with Sam Schurr of the \"prospective economic effects of atomic energy\".\nFrom 1949 to 2001, Simon was a faculty member at Carnegie-Mellon University, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. In 1949, Simon became a professor of administration and chairman of the Department of Industrial Management at Carnegie Institute of Technology (\"Carnegie Tech\"), which, in 1967, became Carnegie-Mellon University. Simon later also taught psychology and computer science in the same university, (occasionally visiting other universities).\nResearch.\nSeeking to replace the highly simplified classical approach to economic modeling, Simon became best known for his theory of corporate decision in his book \"Administrative Behavior\". In this book he based his concepts with an approach that recognized multiple factors that contribute to decision making. His organization and administration interest allowed him to not only serve three times as a university department chairman, but he also played a big part in the creation of the Economic Cooperation Administration in 1948; administrative team that administered aid to the Marshall Plan for the U.S. government, serving on President Lyndon Johnson's Science Advisory Committee, and also the National Academy of Sciences. Simon has made a great number of contributions to both economic analysis and applications. Because of this, his work can be found in a number of economic literary works, making contributions to areas such as mathematical economics including theorem-proving, human rationality, behavioral study of firms, theory of casual ordering, and the analysis of the parameter identification problem in econometrics.\nDecision-making.\n\"Administrative Behavior\", first published in 1947 and updated across the years, was based on Simon's doctoral dissertation. It served as the foundation for his life's work. The centerpiece of this book is the behavioral and cognitive processes of humans making rational decisions. By his definition, an operational administrative decision should be correct, efficient, and practical to implement with a set of coordinated means.\nSimon recognized that a theory of administration is largely a theory of human decision making, and as such must be based on both economics and on psychology. He states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[If] there were no limits to human rationality administrative theory would be barren. It would consist of the single precept: Always select that alternative, among those available, which will lead to the most complete achievement of your goals. (p. xxviii)\nContrary to the \"homo economicus\" model, Simon argued that alternatives and consequences may be partly known, and means and ends imperfectly differentiated, incompletely related, or poorly detailed.\nSimon defined the task of rational decision making as selecting the alternative that results in the more preferred set of all the possible consequences. Correctness of administrative decisions was thus measured by:\nThe task of choice was divided into three required steps:\nAny given individual or organization attempting to implement this model in a real situation would be unable to comply with the three requirements. Simon argued that knowledge of all alternatives, or all consequences that follow from each alternative is impossible in many realistic cases.\nSimon attempted to determine the techniques or behavioral processes that a person or organization could bring to bear to achieve approximately the best result given limits on rational decision making. Simon writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The human being striving for rationality and restricted within the limits of his knowledge has developed some working procedures that partially overcome these difficulties. These procedures consist in assuming that he can isolate from the rest of the world a closed system containing a limited number of variables and a limited range of consequences.\nTherefore, Simon describes work in terms of an economic framework, conditioned on human cognitive limitations: \"Economic man\" and \"Administrative man\".\n\"Administrative Behavior\" addresses a wide range of human behaviors, cognitive abilities, management techniques, personnel policies, training goals and procedures, specialized roles, criteria for evaluation of accuracy and efficiency, and all of the ramifications of communication processes. Simon is particularly interested in how these factors influence the making of decisions, both directly and indirectly.\nSimon argued that the two outcomes of a choice require monitoring and that many members of the organization would be expected to focus on adequacy, but that administrative management must pay particular attention to the efficiency with which the desired result was obtained. 36-49\nSimon followed Chester Barnard, who stated \"the decisions that an individual makes as a member of an organization are quite distinct from his personal decisions\". Personal choices may be determined whether an individual joins a particular organization and continue to be made in his or her extra\u2013organizational private life. As a member of an organization, however, that individual makes decisions not in relationship to personal needs and results, but in an impersonal sense as part of the organizational intent, purpose, and effect. Organizational inducements, rewards, and sanctions are all designed to form, strengthen, and maintain this identification.212\nSimon saw two universal elements of human social behavior as key to creating the possibility of organizational behavior in human individuals: Authority (addressed in Chapter VII\u2014The Role of Authority) and in Loyalties and Identification (Addressed in Chapter X: Loyalties, and Organizational Identification).\nAuthority is a well-studied, primary mark of organizational behavior, straightforwardly defined in the organizational context as the ability and right of an individual of higher rank to guide the decisions of an individual of lower rank. The actions, attitudes, and relationships of the dominant and subordinate individuals constitute components of role behavior that may vary widely in form, style, and content, but do not vary in the expectation of obedience by the one of superior status, and willingness to obey from the subordinate.\nLoyalty was defined by Simon as the \"process whereby the individual substitutes organizational objectives (service objectives or conservation objectives) for his own aims as the value-indices which determine his organizational decisions\". This entailed evaluating alternative choices in terms of their consequences for the group rather than only for oneself or one's family.\nDecisions can be complex admixtures of facts and values. Information about facts, especially empirically proven facts or facts derived from specialized experience, are more easily transmitted in the exercise of authority than are the expressions of values. Simon is primarily interested in seeking identification of the individual employee with the organizational goals and values. Following Lasswell, he states that \"a person identifies himself with a group when, in making a decision, he evaluates the several alternatives of choice in terms of their consequences for the specified group\".\nSimon has been critical of traditional economics' elementary understanding of decision-making, and argues it \"is too quick to build an idealistic, unrealistic picture of the decision-making process and then prescribe on the basis of such unrealistic picture\".\nHerbert Simon rediscovered path diagrams, which were originally invented by Sewall Wright around 1920.\nArtificial intelligence.\nSimon was a pioneer in the field of artificial intelligence, creating with Allen Newell the Logic Theory Machine (1956) and the General Problem Solver (GPS) (1957) programs. GPS may possibly be the first method developed for separating problem solving strategy from information about particular problems. Both programs were developed using the Information Processing Language (IPL) (1956) developed by Newell, Cliff Shaw, and Simon. Donald Knuth mentions the development of list processing in IPL, with the linked list originally called \"NSS memory\" for its inventors. In 1957, Simon predicted that computer chess would surpass human chess abilities within \"ten years\" when, in reality, that transition took about forty years. He also predicted in 1965 that \"machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do.\"\nIn the early 1960s psychologist Ulric Neisser asserted that while machines are capable of replicating \"cold cognition\" behaviors such as reasoning, planning, perceiving, and deciding, they would never be able to replicate \"hot cognition\" behaviors such as pain, pleasure, desire, and other emotions. Simon responded to Neisser's views in 1963 by writing a paper on emotional cognition, which he updated in 1967 and published in \"Psychological Review\". Simon's work on emotional cognition was largely ignored by the artificial intelligence research community for several years, but subsequent work on emotions by Sloman and Picard helped refocus attention on Simon's paper and eventually, made it highly influential on the topic.\nSimon also collaborated with James G. March on several works in organization theory.\nWith Allen Newell, Simon developed a theory for the simulation of human problem solving behavior using production rules. The study of human problem solving required new kinds of human measurements and, with Anders Ericsson, Simon developed the experimental technique of verbal protocol analysis. Simon was interested in the role of knowledge in expertise. He said that to become an expert on a topic required about ten years of experience and he and colleagues estimated that expertise was the result of learning roughly 50,000 chunks of information. A chess expert was said to have learned about 50,000 chunks or chess position patterns.\nHe was awarded the ACM Turing Award, along with Allen Newell, in 1975. \"In joint scientific efforts extending over twenty years, initially in collaboration with J.C. (Cliff) Shaw at the RAND Corporation, and subsequentially [\"sic\"] with numerous faculty and student colleagues at Carnegie Mellon University, they have made basic contributions to artificial intelligence, the psychology of human cognition, and list processing.\"\nPsychology.\nSimon was interested in how humans learn and, with Edward Feigenbaum, he developed the EPAM (Elementary Perceiver and Memorizer) theory, one of the first theories of learning to be implemented as a computer program. EPAM was able to explain a large number of phenomena in the field of verbal learning. Later versions of the model were applied to concept formation and the acquisition of expertise. With Fernand Gobet, he has expanded the EPAM theory into the CHREST computational model. The theory explains how simple chunks of information form the building blocks of schemata, which are more complex structures. CHREST has been used predominantly, to simulate aspects of chess expertise.\nSociology and economics.\nSimon has been credited for revolutionary changes in microeconomics. He is responsible for the concept of organizational decision-making as it is known today. He was the first to rigorously examine how administrators made decisions when they did not have perfect and complete information. It was in this area that he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1978.\nAt the Cowles Commission, Simon's main goal was to link economic theory to mathematics and statistics. His main contributions were to the fields of general equilibrium and econometrics. He was greatly influenced by the marginalist debate that began in the 1930s. The popular work of the time argued that it was not apparent empirically that entrepreneurs needed to follow the marginalist principles of profit-maximization/cost-minimization in running organizations. The argument went on to note that profit maximization was not accomplished, in part, because of the lack of complete information. In decision-making, Simon believed that agents face uncertainty about the future and costs in acquiring information in the present. These factors limit the extent to which agents may make a fully rational decision, thus they possess only \"bounded rationality\" and must make decisions by \"satisficing\", or choosing that which might not be optimal, but which will make them happy enough. Bounded rationality is a central theme in behavioral economics. It is concerned with the ways in which the process of decision-making influences the decision itself. The term is used to designate rational choices that take into account the cognitive limitations of both knowledge and cognitive capacity.\nFurther, Simon emphasized that psychologists invoke a \"procedural\" definition of rationality, whereas economists employ a \"substantive\" definition. Gustavos Barros argued that the procedural rationality concept does not have a significant presence in the economics field and has never had nearly as much weight as the concept of bounded rationality. However, in an earlier article, Bhargava (1997) noted the importance of Simon's arguments and emphasized that there are several applications of the \"procedural\" definition of rationality in econometric analyses of data on health. In particular, economists should employ \"auxiliary assumptions\" that reflect the knowledge in the relevant biomedical fields, and guide the specification of econometric models for health outcomes.\nSimon was also known for his research on industrial organization. He determined that the internal organization of firms and the external business decisions thereof, did not conform to the neoclassical theories of \"rational\" decision-making. Simon wrote many articles on the topic over the course of his life, mainly focusing on the issue of decision-making within the behavior of bounded rationality\". \"Rational behavior, in economics, means that individuals maximize their utility function under the constraints they face (e.g., their budget constraint, limited choices, ...) in pursuit of their self-interest. This is reflected in the theory of subjective expected utility. Theories of bounded rationality relax one or more assumptions of standard expected utility theory\".\nSimon determined that the best way to study these areas was through computer simulations. As such, he developed an interest in computer science. Simon's main interests in computer science were in artificial intelligence, human\u2013computer interaction, principles of the organization of humans and machines as information processing systems, the use of computers to study (by modeling) philosophical problems of the nature of intelligence and of epistemology, and the social implications of computer technology.\nIn his youth, Simon took an interest in land economics and Georgism, an idea known at the time as \"single tax\". The system is meant to redistribute unearned economic rent to the public and improve land use. In 1979, Simon still maintained these ideas and argued that land value tax should replace taxes on wages.\nSome of Simon's economic research was directed toward understanding technological change in general and the information processing revolution in particular.\nPedagogy.\nSimon's work has strongly influenced John Mighton, developer of a program that has achieved significant success in improving mathematics performance among elementary and high school students. Mighton cites a 2000 paper by Simon and two coauthors that counters arguments by French mathematics educator, Guy Brousseau, and others suggesting that excessive practice hampers children's understanding:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The] criticism of practice (called \"drill and kill,\" as if this phrase constituted empirical evaluation) is prominent in constructivist writings. Nothing flies more in the face of the last 20 years of research than the assertion that practice is bad. All evidence, from the laboratory and from extensive case studies of professionals, indicates that real competence only comes with extensive practice... In denying the critical role of practice one is denying children the very thing they need to achieve real competence. The instructional task is not to \"kill\" motivation by demanding drill, but to find tasks that provide practice while at the same time sustaining interest.\u2014\u200a\nAwards and honors.\nSimon received many top-level honors in life, including becoming a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and a member of the American Philosophical Society in 1959; election as a Member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1967; APA Award for Distinguished Scientific Contributions to Psychology (1969); the ACM's Turing Award for making \"basic contributions to artificial intelligence, the psychology of human cognition, and list processing\" (1975); the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics \"for his pioneering research into the decision-making process within economic organizations\" (1978); the National Medal of Science (1986); Founding Fellow of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (1990); the APA's Award for Outstanding Lifetime Contributions to Psychology (1993); ACM fellow (1994); and IJCAI Award for Research Excellence (1995).\nSelected publications.\nSimon was a prolific writer and authored 27 books and almost a thousand papers. As of 2016[ [update]], Simon was the most cited person in artificial intelligence and cognitive psychology on Google Scholar. With almost a thousand highly cited publications, he was one of the most influential social scientists of the twentieth century.\n \u2013 4th ed. in 1997, The Free Press\n \u2013 2nd ed. in 1981, MIT Press. As stated in the Preface, the second edition provided the author an opportunity \"to amend and expand [his] thesis and to apply it to several additional fields\" beyond organization theory, economics, management science, and psychology that were covered in the previous edition.\n \u2013 3rd ed. in 1996, MIT Press.\n \u2013 Vol. 3. in 1997, MIT Press. His papers on economics since the publication of Vols. 1 and 2 in 1982. The papers grouped under the category \"The Structure of Complex Systems\"\u2013 dealing with issues such as causal ordering, decomposability, aggregation of variables, model abstraction\u2013 are of general interest in systems modelling, not just in economics.\n \u2013 Reprinted in 1982, In: H.A. Simon, Models of Bounded Rationality, Volume 1, Economic Analysis and Public Policy, Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press, 235\u201344.\nPersonal life and interests.\nSimon married Dorothea Pye in 1938. Their marriage lasted 63 years until his death. They had three children, Katherine, Peter, and Barbara.\nFrom 1950 to 1955, Simon studied mathematical economics and during this time, together with David Hawkins, discovered and proved the Hawkins\u2013Simon theorem on the \"conditions for the existence of positive solution vectors for input-output matrices\". He also developed theorems on near-decomposability and aggregation. Having begun to apply these theorems to organizations, by 1954 Simon determined that the best way to study problem-solving was to simulate it with computer programs, which led to his interest in computer simulation of human cognition. Founded during the 1950s, he was among the first members of the Society for General Systems Research.\nSimon was a pianist and had a keen interest in the arts. He was a friend of Robert Lepper and Richard Rappaport. Rappaport also painted Simon's commissioned portrait at Carnegie Mellon University. He was also a keen mountain climber. As a testament to his wide interests, he at one point taught an undergraduate course on the French Revolution.\nIn January 2001, Simon underwent surgery at UPMC Presbyterian to remove a cancerous tumor in his abdomen. Although the surgery was successful, Simon later died from the complications that followed. His wife died a year later in 2002.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14206", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14206", "title": "History of Ceuta", "text": ""}
{"id": "14207", "revid": "213864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14207", "title": "Hematite", "text": "Common iron oxide mineral\nHematite (), also spelled as haematite, is a common iron oxide compound with the formula Fe2O3 and is widely found in rocks and soils. Hematite crystals belong to the rhombohedral lattice system which is designated the alpha polymorph of Fe2O3. It has the same crystal structure as corundum (Al2O3) and ilmenite (FeTiO3). With this crystal structure geometry it forms a complete solid solution at temperatures above .\nHematite occurs naturally in black to steel or silver-gray, brown to reddish-brown, or red colors. It is mined as an important ore mineral of iron. It is electrically conductive. Hematite varieties include \"kidney ore\", \"martite\" (pseudomorphs after magnetite), \"iron rose\" and \"specularite\" (specular hematite). While these forms vary, they all have a rust-red streak. Hematite is not only harder than pure iron, but also much more brittle. The term \"kidney ore\" may be broadly used to describe botryoidal, mammillary, or reniform hematite. Maghemite is a polymorph of hematite (\u03b3-Fe2O3) with the same chemical formula, but with a spinel structure like magnetite.\nLarge deposits of hematite are found in banded iron formations. Gray hematite is typically found in places that have still, standing water, or mineral hot springs, such as those in Yellowstone National Park in North America. The mineral may precipitate in the water and collect in layers at the bottom of the lake, spring, or other standing water. Hematite can also occur in the absence of water, usually as the result of volcanic activity.\nClay-sized hematite crystals also may occur as a secondary mineral formed by weathering processes in soil, and along with other iron oxides or oxyhydroxides such as goethite, which is responsible for the red color of many tropical, ancient, or otherwise highly weathered soils.\nEtymology and history.\nThe name hematite is derived from the Greek word for blood, \"(haima)\", due to the red coloration found in some varieties of hematite. The color of hematite is often used as a pigment. The English name of the stone is derived from Middle French \"h\u00e9matite pierre\", which was taken from Latin \"lapis haematites\" c. the 15th century, which originated from Ancient Greek (\"haimatit\u0113s lithos\", \"blood-red stone\").\nOchre is a clay that is colored by varying amounts of hematite, varying between 20% and 70%. Red ochre contains unhydrated hematite, whereas yellow ochre contains hydrated hematite (Fe2O3\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0H2O). The principal use of ochre is for tinting with a permanent color.\nUse of the red chalk of this iron-oxide mineral in writing, drawing, and decoration is among the earliest in human history. To date, the earliest known human use of the powdery mineral is 164,000 years ago by the inhabitants of the Pinnacle Point caves in what now is South Africa, possibly for social purposes. Hematite residues are also found in graves from 80,000 years ago. Near Rydno in Poland and Lovas in Hungary red chalk mines have been found that are from 5000\u00a0BC, belonging to the Linear Pottery culture at the Upper Rhine.\nRich deposits of hematite have been found on the island of Elba that have been mined since the time of the Etruscans.\nUnderground hematite mining is classified as a carcinogenic hazard to humans.\nMagnetism.\nHematite shows only a very feeble response to a magnetic field. Unlike magnetite, it is not noticeably attracted to an ordinary magnet. Hematite is an antiferromagnetic material below the Morin transition at , and a canted antiferromagnet or weakly ferromagnetic above the Morin transition and below its N\u00e9el temperature at , above which it is paramagnetic.\nThe magnetic structure of \u03b1-hematite was the subject of considerable discussion and debate during the 1950s, as it appeared to be ferromagnetic with a Curie temperature of approximately , but with an extremely small magnetic moment (0.002\u00a0Bohr magnetons). Adding to the surprise was a transition with a decrease in temperature at around to a phase with no net magnetic moment. It was shown that the system is essentially antiferromagnetic, but that the low symmetry of the cation sites allows spin\u2013orbit coupling to cause canting of the moments when they are in the plane perpendicular to the \"c\" axis. The disappearance of the moment with a decrease in temperature at is caused by a change in the anisotropy which causes the moments to align along the \"c\" axis. In this configuration, spin canting does not reduce the energy. The magnetic properties of bulk hematite differ from their nanoscale counterparts. For example, the Morin transition temperature of hematite decreases with a decrease in the particle size. The suppression of this transition has been observed in hematite nanoparticles and is attributed to the presence of impurities, water molecules and defects in the crystals lattice. Hematite is part of a complex solid solution oxyhydroxide system having various contents of H2O (water), hydroxyl groups and vacancy substitutions that affect the mineral's magnetic and crystal chemical properties. Two other end-members are referred to as protohematite and hydrohematite.\nEnhanced magnetic coercivities for hematite have been achieved by dry-heating a two-line ferrihydrite precursor prepared from solution. Hematite exhibited temperature-dependent magnetic coercivity values ranging from . The origin of these high coercivity values has been interpreted as a consequence of the subparticle structure induced by the different particle and crystallite size growth rates at increasing annealing temperature. These differences in the growth rates are translated into a progressive development of a subparticle structure at the nanoscale (super small). At lower temperatures (350\u2013600\u00a0\u00b0C), single particles crystallize. However, at higher temperatures (600\u20131000\u00a0\u00b0C), the growth of crystalline aggregates, and a subparticle structure is favored.\nMine tailings.\nHematite is present in the waste tailings of iron mines. A recently developed process, magnetation, uses magnets to glean waste hematite from old mine tailings in Minnesota's vast Mesabi Range iron district. Falu red is a pigment used in traditional Swedish house paints. It is made from tailings of the Falun Mine.\nMars.\nThe spectral signature of hematite was seen on the planet Mars by the infrared spectrometer on the NASA \"Mars Global Surveyor\" and \"2001 Mars Odyssey\" spacecraft in orbit around Mars. The mineral was seen in abundance at two sites on the planet, the Terra Meridiani site, near the Martian equator at 0\u00b0 longitude, and the Aram Chaos site near the Valles Marineris. Several other sites also showed hematite, such as Aureum Chaos. Because terrestrial hematite is typically a mineral formed in aqueous environments or by aqueous alteration, this detection was scientifically interesting enough that the second of the two Mars Exploration Rovers was sent to a site in the Terra Meridiani region designated Meridiani Planum. In-situ investigations by the \"Opportunity\" rover showed a significant amount of hematite, much of it in the form of small \"Martian spherules\" that were informally named \"blueberries\" by the science team. Analysis indicates that these spherules are apparently concretions formed from a water solution. \"Knowing just how the hematite on Mars was formed will help us characterize the past environment and determine whether that environment was favorable for life\".\nJewelry.\nHematite is often shaped into beads, tumbling stones, and other jewellery components. Hematite was once used as mourning jewelry. Certain types of hematite- or iron-oxide-rich clay, especially Armenian bole, have been used in gilding. Hematite is also used in art such as in the creation of intaglio engraved gems. Hematine is a synthetic material sold as \"magnetic hematite\".\nPigment.\nHematite has been sourced to make pigments since earlier origins of human pictorial depictions, such as on cave linings and other surfaces, and has been employed continually in artwork through the eras. In Roman times, the pigment obtained by finely grinding hematite was known as \"sil atticum\". Other names for the mineral when used in painting include \"colcotar\" and \"caput mortuum\". In Spanish, it is called \"almagre\" or \"almagra\", from the Arabic \"al-maghrah\", red earth, which passed into English and Portuguese. Other ancient names for the pigment include \"ochra hispanica\", \"sil atticum antiquorum\", and \"Spanish brown\". It forms the basis for red, purple, and brown iron-oxide pigments, as well as being an important component of ochre, sienna, and umber pigments. The main producer of hematite for the pigment industry is India, followed distantly by Spain.\nIndustrial purposes.\nAs mentioned earlier, hematite is an important mineral for iron ore. The physical properties of hematite are also employed in the areas of medical equipment, shipping industries, and coal production. Having high density and capable as an effective barrier against X-ray passage, it often is incorporated into radiation shielding. As with other iron ores, it often is a component of ship ballasts because of its density and economy. In the coal industry, it can be formed into a high specific density solution, to help separate coal powder from impurities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14208", "revid": "51052053", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14208", "title": "Holocene extinction", "text": "Ongoing extinction event caused by human activity\nThe Holocene or Anthropocene extinction is an ongoing extinction event caused by human activity during the current geological epoch, impacting diverse families of plants and animals, including mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish, and invertebrates, as well as both terrestrial and marine species. It is sometimes also called the sixth mass extinction (or seventh if counting the Capitanian and End Permian extinctions separately).\nCurrent extinction rates are estimated at 100 to 1,000 times higher than natural background extinction rates and are accelerating. The Holocene extinction was preceded by the Late Pleistocene megafauna extinctions (lasting from 50,000 to 10,000 years ago), in which many large mammals\u00a0\u2013 including 81% of megaherbivores\u00a0\u2013 went extinct, a decline attributed at least in part to human (anthropogenic) activities. There continue to be strong debates about the relative importance of anthropogenic factors and climate change, but a recent review concluded that there is little evidence for a major role of climate change and \"strong\" evidence for human activities as the principal driver. Examples from regions such as New Zealand, Madagascar, and Hawaii have shown how human colonization and habitat destruction have led to significant biodiversity losses.\nIn the 20th century, the human population quadrupled, and the global economy grew twenty-five-fold. This period, often called the Great Acceleration, has intensified species' extinction. Humanity has become an unprecedented \"global superpredator\", preying on adult apex predators, invading habitats of other species, and disrupting food webs. \nThe Holocene extinction continues into the 21st century, driven by anthropogenic climate change, destruction of wetlands, deforestation, overfishing, ocean acidification, human population growth, economic growth, and increasing consumption, particularly among affluent societies. Factors such as rising meat production and the destruction of critical habitats compound these issues. Other drivers include overexploitation of natural resources, pollution, and climate change-induced shifts in ecosystems.\nMajor extinction events during this period have been recorded across all continents, including Africa, Asia, Europe, Australia, North and South America, and various islands.\nBackground.\n &lt;imagemap&gt;\nImage:Extinction intensity.svg\nMarine extinction intensity during Phanerozoic\nMillions of years ago\nK\u2013Pg\nTr\u2013J\nP\u2013Tr\nCap\nLate D\nO\u2013S\n&lt;imagemap&gt;\nImage:Extinction intensity.svg\nThe percentage of marine animal extinction at the genus level through the six mass extinctions\nMass extinctions are characterized by the loss of at least 75% of species within a geologically short period of time (i.e., less than 2 million years). The Holocene extinction is also known as the \"sixth extinction\", as it is possibly the sixth mass extinction event, after the Ordovician\u2013Silurian extinction events, the Late Devonian extinction, the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction event, the Triassic\u2013Jurassic extinction event, and the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event. If the Capitanian extinction event is included among the first-order mass extinctions, the Holocene extinction would correspondingly be known as the \"seventh extinction\". The Holocene is the current geological epoch.\nOverview.\nThe precise timing of the Holocene extinction event remains debated, with no clear consensus on when it began or whether it should be considered distinct from the Quaternary extinction event. However, most scientists agree that human activities are the primary driver of the Holocene extinction. A 1998 survey conducted by the American Museum of Natural History found that 70% of biologists acknowledged an ongoing anthropogenic extinction event. Some researchers suggested that the activities of earlier archaic humans may have contributed to earlier extinctions, especially in Australia, New Zealand, and Madagascar. Even modest hunting pressure, combined with the vulnerability of large animals on isolated islands, is thought to have been enough to wipe out entire species. Only in the more recent stages of the Holocene have plants suffered extensive losses, which are also linked to human activities such as deforestation and land conversion.\nExtinction rate.\nThe contemporary rate of extinction is estimated at 100 to 1,000 times higher than the natural background extinction rate\u2014the typical rate of species loss through natural evolutionary processes. One estimation suggested the rate could be as high as 10,000 times the background extinction rate, though this figure remains controversial. Theoretical ecologist Stuart Pimm has noted that the extinction rate for plants alone is 100 times higher than normal.\nWhile some argue that the current extinction rates have not yet reached the catastrophic levels of past mass extinctions, Barnosky et al. (2011) and Hull et al. (2015) points out that extinction rates during past mass extinctions cannot be fully determined because of gaps in the fossil record. However, they agree that the ongoing biodiversity loss is nonetheless unprecedented. Estimates of species lost per year vary widely\u2014from 1.5 to 40,000 species\u2014but all indicate that human activity is driving this crisis.\nIn \"The Future of Life\" (2002), biologist Edward Osborne Wilson predicted that, if current trend continues, half of Earth's higher lifeforms could be extinct by 2100. More recent studies further support this view. A 2015 study on Hawaiian snails suggested that up to 7% of Earth's species may already be extinct. A 2021 study also found that only around 3% of the planet's terrestrial surface remains ecologically and faunally intact\u2014areas that still have healthy populations of native species and minimal human footprint. A 2022 study suggests that if global warming continues, between 13% and 27% of terrestrial vertebrate species could be driven to extinction by 2100, with habitat destructions and co-extinctions accounting for the rest.\nThe 2019 \"Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services\", published by the United Nations IPBES, estimated that about one million species are currently at risk of extinction within decades because of human activities. Organized human existence is jeopardised by increasingly rapid destruction of the systems that support life on Earth, according to the report, the result of one of the most comprehensive studies of the health of the planet ever conducted. Moreover, the 2021 \"Economics of Biodiversity\" review, published by the UK government, asserts that \"biodiversity is declining faster than at any time in human history.\" According to a 2022 study published in \"Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment\", a survey of more than 3,000 experts says that the extent of the mass extinction might be greater than previously thought, and estimates that roughly 30% of species \"have been globally threatened or driven extinct since the year 1500.\" In a 2022 report, IPBES listed unsustainable fishing, hunting, and logging as some of the primary drivers of the global extinction crisis. \nA 2023 study published in \"PLOS One\" shows that around two million species are threatened with extinction, double the estimate put forward in the 2019 IPBES report. According to a 2023 study published in \"PNAS\", at least 73 genera of animals have gone extinct since 1500. If humans had never existed, the study estimates it would have taken 18,000 years for the same genera to have disappeared naturally, leading the authors to conclude that \"the current generic extinction rates are 35 times higher than expected background rates prevailing in the last million years under the absence of human impacts\" and that human civilization is causing the \"rapid mutilation of the tree of life.\"\nAttribution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe are currently, in a systematic manner, exterminating all non-human living beings.\n\u2014Anne Larigauderie, IPBES executive secretary\nThere is widespread consensus among scientists that human activities\u2014especially habitat destruction, resource consumption, and the elimination of species\u2014are the main drivers of the current extinction crisis. Rising extinction rates among mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and other groups have led many scientists to declare a global biodiversity crisis.\nScientific debate.\nThe description of recent extinction as a mass extinction has been debated among scientists. Stuart Pimm, for example, asserts that the sixth mass extinction \"is something that hasn't happened yet\u2014we are on the edge of it.\" Several studies posit that the Earth has entered a sixth mass extinction event, including a 2015 paper by Barnosky et al. and a November 2017 statement titled \"World Scientists' Warning to Humanity: A Second Notice\", led by eight authors and signed by 15,364 scientists from 184 countries which asserted, among other things, that \"we have unleashed a mass extinction event, the sixth in roughly 540 million years, wherein many current life forms could be extirpated or at least committed to extinction by the end of this century.\" The World Wide Fund for Nature's 2020 \"Living Planet Report\" says that wildlife populations have declined by 68% since 1970 as a result of overconsumption, population growth, and intensive farming, which is further evidence that humans have unleashed a sixth mass extinction event; however, this finding has been disputed by one 2020 study, which posits that this major decline was primarily driven by a few extreme outlier populations, and that when these outliers are removed, the trend shifts to that of a decline between the 1980s and 2000s, but a roughly positive trend after 2000. A 2021 report in \"Frontiers in Conservation Science\" which cites both of the aforementioned studies, says \"population sizes of vertebrate species that have been monitored across years have declined by an average of 68% over the last five decades, with certain population clusters in extreme decline, thus presaging the imminent extinction of their species,\" and asserts \"that we are already on the path of a sixth major extinction is now scientifically undeniable.\" A January 2022 review article published in \"Biological Reviews\" builds upon previous studies documenting biodiversity decline to assert that a sixth mass extinction event caused by anthropogenic activity is currently under way. A December 2022 study published in \"Science Advances\" states that \"the planet has entered the sixth mass extinction\" and warns that current anthropogenic trends, particularly regarding climate and land-use changes, could result in the loss of more than a tenth of plant and animal species by the end of the century. 12% of all bird species are threatened with extinction. A 2023 study published in \"Biological Reviews\" found that, of 70,000 monitored species, some 48% are experiencing population declines from anthropogenic pressures, whereas only 3% have increasing populations.\nAccording to the UNDP's 2020 Human Development Report, \"The Next Frontier: Human Development and the Anthropocene\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The planet's biodiversity is plunging, with a quarter of species facing extinction, many within decades. Numerous experts believe we are living through, or on the cusp of, a mass species extinction event, the sixth in the history of the planet and the first to be caused by a single organism\u2014us.\nThe 2022 \"Living Planet Report\" found that vertebrate wildlife populations have plummeted by an average of almost 70% since 1970, with agriculture and fishing being the primary drivers of this decline.\nSome scientists, including Rodolfo Dirzo and Paul R. Ehrlich, contend that the sixth mass extinction is largely unknown to most people globally and is also misunderstood by many in the scientific community. They say it is not the disappearance of species, which gets the most attention, that is at the heart of the crisis, but \"the existential threat of myriad population extinctions.\"\nAnthropocene.\nThe abundance of species extinctions considered anthropogenic, or due to human activity, has sometimes (especially when referring to hypothesized future events) been collectively called the \"Anthropocene extinction\". \"Anthropocene\" is a term introduced in 2000. Some now postulate that a new geological epoch has begun, with the most abrupt and widespread extinction of species since the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event 66 million years ago.\nThe term \"anthropocene\" is being used more frequently by scientists, and some commentators may refer to the current and projected future extinctions as part of a longer Holocene extinction. The Holocene\u2013Anthropocene boundary is contested, with some commentators asserting significant human influence on climate for much of what is normally regarded as the Holocene Epoch. Some experts mark the transition from the Holocene to the Anthropocene at the onset of the industrial revolution. They also note that the official use of this term in the near future will heavily rely on its usefulness, especially for Earth scientists studying late Holocene periods.\nIt has been suggested that human activity has made the period starting from the mid-20th century different enough from the rest of the Holocene to consider it a new geological epoch, known as the Anthropocene, a term which was considered for inclusion in the timeline of Earth's history by the International Commission on Stratigraphy in 2016, but the proposal was rejected in 2024. To constitute the Holocene as an extinction event, scientists must determine exactly when anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions began to measurably alter natural atmospheric levels on a global scale, and when these alterations caused changes to global climate. Using chemical proxies from Antarctic ice cores, researchers have estimated the fluctuations of carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) gases in the Earth's atmosphere during the Late Pleistocene and Holocene epochs. Estimates of the fluctuations of these two gases in the atmosphere, using chemical proxies from Antarctic ice cores, generally indicate that the peak of the Anthropocene occurred within the previous two centuries: typically beginning with the Industrial Revolution, when the highest greenhouse gas levels were recorded.\nHuman ecology.\nA 2015 article in \"Science\" suggested that humans are unique in ecology as an unprecedented \"global superpredator\", regularly preying on large numbers of fully grown terrestrial and marine apex predators, and with a great deal of influence over food webs and climatic systems worldwide. Although significant debate exists as to how much human predation and indirect effects contributed to prehistoric extinctions, certain population crashes have been directly correlated with human arrival. Human activity has been the main cause of mammalian extinctions since the Late Pleistocene. A 2018 study published in \"PNAS\" found that since the dawn of human civilization, the biomass of wild mammals has decreased by 83%. The biomass decrease is 80% for marine mammals, 50% for plants, and 15% for fish. Currently, livestock make up 60% of the biomass of all mammals on Earth, followed by humans (36%) and wild mammals (4%). As for birds, 70% are domesticated, such as poultry, whereas only 30% are wild.\nHistoric extinction.\nHuman activity.\nActivities contributing to extinctions.\nExtinction of animals, plants, and other organisms caused by human actions may go as far back as the late Pleistocene, over 12,000 years ago. There is a correlation between megafaunal extinction and the arrival of humans. Megafauna that are still extant also suffered severe declines that were highly correlated with human expansion and activity. Over the past 125,000 years, the average body size of wildlife has fallen by 14% as actions by prehistoric humans eradicated megafauna on all continents with the exception of Africa. Over the past 130,000 years, avian functional diversity has declined precipitously and disproportionately relative to phylogenetic diversity losses.\nHuman civilization was founded on and grew from agriculture. The more land used for farming, the greater the population a civilization could sustain, and subsequent popularization of farming led to widespread habitat conversion.\nHabitat destruction by humans, thus replacing the original local ecosystems, is a major driver of extinction. The sustained conversion of biodiversity rich forests and wetlands into poorer fields and pastures (of lesser carrying capacity for wild species), over the last 10,000 years, has considerably reduced the Earth's carrying capacity for wild birds and mammals, among other organisms, in both population size and species count.\nOther, related human causes of the extinction event include deforestation, hunting, pollution, the introduction in various regions of non-native species, and the widespread transmission of infectious diseases spread through livestock and crops.\nAgriculture and climate change.\nRecent investigations into the practice of landscape burning during the Neolithic Revolution have a major implication for the current debate about the timing of the Anthropocene and the role that humans may have played in the production of greenhouse gases prior to the Industrial Revolution. Studies of early hunter-gatherers raise questions about the current use of population size or density as a proxy for the amount of land clearance and anthropogenic burning that took place in pre-industrial times. Scientists have questioned the correlation between population size and early territorial alterations. Ruddiman and Ellis' research paper in 2009 makes the case that early farmers involved in systems of agriculture used more land per capita than growers later in the Holocene, who intensified their labor to produce more food per unit of area (thus, per laborer); arguing that agricultural involvement in rice production implemented thousands of years ago by relatively small populations created significant environmental impacts through large-scale means of deforestation.\nWhile a number of human-derived factors are recognized as contributing to rising atmospheric concentrations of CH4 (methane) and CO2 (carbon dioxide), deforestation and territorial clearance practices associated with agricultural development may have contributed most to these concentrations globally in earlier millennia. Scientists that are employing a variance of archaeological and paleoecological data argue that the processes contributing to substantial human modification of the environment spanned many thousands of years on a global scale and thus, not originating as late as the Industrial Revolution. Palaeoclimatologist William Ruddiman has argued that in the early Holocene 11,000 years ago, atmospheric carbon dioxide and methane levels fluctuated in a pattern which was different from the Pleistocene epoch before it. He argued that the patterns of the significant decline of CO2 levels during the last ice age of the Pleistocene inversely correlate to the Holocene where there have been dramatic increases of CO2 around 8000 years ago and CH4 levels 3000 years after that. The correlation between the decrease of CO2 in the Pleistocene and the increase of it during the Holocene implies that the causation of this spark of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere was the growth of human agriculture during the Holocene.\nClimate change.\nOne of the main theories explaining early Holocene extinctions is historic climate change. The climate change theory has suggested that a change in climate near the end of the late Pleistocene stressed the megafauna to the point of extinction. Some scientists favor abrupt climate change as the catalyst for the extinction of the megafauna at the end of the Pleistocene, most who believe increased hunting from early modern humans also played a part, with others even suggesting that the two interacted. In the Americas, a controversial explanation for the shift in climate is presented under the Younger Dryas impact hypothesis, which states that the impact of comets cooled global temperatures. Despite its popularity among nonscientists, this hypothesis has never been accepted by relevant experts, who dismiss it as a fringe theory.\nContemporary extinction.\nHistory.\nContemporary human overpopulation and continued population growth, along with economic growth and per-capita consumption growth, prominently in the past two centuries, are regarded as the underlying causes of extinction. Inger Andersen, the executive director of the United Nations Environment Programme, stated that \"we need to understand that the more people there are, the more we put the Earth under heavy pressure. As far as biodiversity is concerned, we are at war with nature.\"\nSome scholars assert that the emergence of capitalism as the dominant economic system has accelerated ecological exploitation and destruction, and has also exacerbated mass species extinction. CUNY professor David Harvey, for example, posits that the neoliberal era \"happens to be the era of the fastest mass extinction of species in the Earth's recent history\". Ecologist William E. Rees concludes that the \"neoliberal paradigm contributes significantly to planetary unraveling\" by treating the economy and the ecosphere as totally separate systems, and by neglecting the latter. Major lobbying organizations representing corporations in the agriculture, fisheries, forestry and paper, mining, and oil and gas industries, including the United States Chamber of Commerce, have been pushing back against legislation that could address the extinction crisis. A 2022 report by the climate think tank InfluenceMap stated that \"although industry associations, especially in the US, appear reluctant to discuss the biodiversity crisis, they are clearly engaged on a wide range of policies with significant impacts on biodiversity loss.\"\nThe loss of animal species from ecological communities, defaunation, is primarily driven by human activity. This has resulted in empty forests, ecological communities depleted of large vertebrates. This is not to be confused with extinction, as it includes both the disappearance of species and declines in abundance. Defaunation effects were first implied at the Symposium of Plant-Animal Interactions at the University of Campinas, Brazil in 1988 in the context of Neotropical forests. Since then, the term has gained broader usage in conservation biology as a global phenomenon.\nBig cat populations have severely declined over the last half-century and could face extinction in the following decades. According to 2011 IUCN estimates: lions are down to 25,000, from 450,000; leopards are down to 50,000, from 750,000; cheetahs are down to 12,000, from 45,000; tigers are down to 3,000 in the wild, from 50,000. A December 2016 study by the Zoological Society of London, Panthera Corporation and Wildlife Conservation Society showed that cheetahs are far closer to extinction than previously thought, with only 7,100 remaining in the wild, existing within only 9% of their historic range. Human pressures are to blame for the cheetah population crash, including prey loss due to overhunting by people, retaliatory killing from farmers, habitat loss and the illegal wildlife trade. Populations of brown bears have experienced similar population decline.\nThe term pollinator decline refers to the reduction in abundance of insect and other animal pollinators in many ecosystems worldwide beginning at the end of the twentieth century, and continuing into the present day. Pollinators, which are necessary for 75% of food crops, are declining globally in both abundance and diversity. A 2017 study led by Radboud University's Hans de Kroon indicated that the biomass of insect life in Germany had declined by three-quarters in the previous 25 years. Participating researcher Dave Goulson of Sussex University stated that their study suggested that humans are making large parts of the planet uninhabitable for wildlife. Goulson characterized the situation as an approaching \"ecological Armageddon\", adding that \"if we lose the insects then everything is going to collapse.\" A 2019 study found that over 40% of insect species are threatened with extinction. The most significant drivers in the decline of insect populations are associated with intensive farming practices, along with pesticide use and climate change. The world's insect population decreases by around 1 to 2% per year.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We have driven the rate of biological extinction, the permanent loss of species, up several hundred times beyond its historical levels, and are threatened with the loss of a majority of all species by the end of the 21st century.\u2014\u200a\nVarious species are predicted to become extinct in the near future, among them some species of rhinoceros, primates, and pangolins. Others, including several species of giraffe, are considered \"vulnerable\" and are experiencing significant population declines from anthropogenic impacts including hunting, deforestation and conflict. Hunting alone threatens bird and mammalian populations around the world. The direct killing of megafauna for meat and body parts is the primary driver of their destruction, with 70% of the 362 megafauna species in decline as of 2019. Mammals in particular have suffered such severe losses as the result of human activity (mainly during the Quaternary extinction event, but partly during the Holocene) that it could take several million years for them to recover. Contemporary assessments have discovered that roughly 41% of amphibians, 25% of mammals, 21% of reptiles and 14% of birds are threatened with extinction, which could disrupt ecosystems on a global scale and eliminate billions of years of phylogenetic diversity. 189 countries, which are signatory to the Convention on Biological Diversity (Rio Accord), have committed to preparing a Biodiversity Action Plan, a first step at identifying specific endangered species and habitats, country by country.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For the first time since the demise of the dinosaurs 65 million years ago, we face a global mass extinction of wildlife. We ignore the decline of other species at our peril\u2014for they are the barometer that reveals our impact on the world that sustains us.\u2014\u200a\nA 2023 study published in \"Current Biology\" concluded that current biodiversity loss rates could reach a tipping point and inevitably trigger a total ecosystem collapse.\nRecent extinction.\nRecent extinctions are more directly attributable to human influences, whereas prehistoric extinctions can be attributed to other factors. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) characterizes 'recent' extinction as those that have occurred past the cut-off point of 1500, and at least 875 plant and animal species have gone extinct since that time and 2009. Some species, such as the P\u00e8re David's deer and the Hawaiian crow, are extinct in the wild, and survive solely in captive populations. Other populations are only locally extinct (extirpated), still existent elsewhere, but reduced in distribution, as with the extinction of gray whales in the Atlantic, and of the leatherback sea turtle in Malaysia.\nSince the Late Pleistocene, humans (together with other factors) have been rapidly driving the largest vertebrate animals towards extinction, and in the process interrupting a 66-million-year-old feature of ecosystems, the relationship between diet and body mass, which researchers suggest could have unpredictable consequences. A 2019 study published in \"Nature Communications\" found that rapid biodiversity loss is impacting larger mammals and birds to a much greater extent than smaller ones, with the body mass of such animals expected to shrink by 25% over the next century. Another 2019 study published in \"Biology Letters\" found that extinction rates are perhaps much higher than previously estimated, in particular for bird species.\nThe 2019 \"Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services\" lists the primary causes of contemporary extinctions in descending order: (1) changes in land and sea use (primarily agriculture and overfishing respectively); (2) direct exploitation of organisms such as hunting; (3) anthropogenic climate change; (4) pollution and (5) invasive alien species spread by human trade. This report, along with the 2020 \"Living Planet Report\" by the WWF, both project that climate change will be the leading cause in the next several decades.\nA June 2020 study published in \"PNAS\" posits that the contemporary extinction crisis \"may be the most serious environmental threat to the persistence of civilization, because it is irreversible\" and that its acceleration \"is certain because of the still fast growth in human numbers and consumption rates.\" The study found that more than 500 vertebrate species are poised to be lost in the next two decades.\nHabitat destruction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHumans both create and destroy crop cultivar and domesticated animal varieties. Advances in transportation and industrial farming has led to monoculture and the extinction of many cultivars. The use of certain plants and animals for food has also resulted in their extinction, including silphium and the passenger pigeon. It was estimated in 2012 that 13% of Earth's ice-free land surface is used as row-crop agricultural sites, 26% used as pastures, and 4% urban-industrial areas.\nIn March 2019, \"Nature Climate Change\" published a study by ecologists from Yale University, who found that over the next half century, human land use will reduce the habitats of 1,700 species by up to 50%, pushing them closer to extinction. That same month \"PLOS Biology\" published a similar study drawing on work at the University of Queensland, which found that \"more than 1,200 species globally face threats to their survival in more than 90% of their habitat and will almost certainly face extinction without conservation intervention\".\nSince 1970, the populations of migratory freshwater fish have declined by 76%, according to research published by the Zoological Society of London in July 2020. Overall, around one in three freshwater fish species are threatened with extinction due to human-driven habitat degradation and overfishing.\nSome scientists and academics assert that industrial agriculture and the growing demand for meat is contributing to significant global biodiversity loss as this is a significant driver of deforestation and habitat destruction; species-rich habitats, such as the Amazon region and Indonesia being converted to agriculture. A 2017 study by the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) found that 60% of biodiversity loss can be attributed to the vast scale of feed crop cultivation required to rear tens of billions of farm animals. Moreover, a 2006 report by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations, \"Livestock's Long Shadow\", also found that the livestock sector is a \"leading player\" in biodiversity loss. More recently, in 2019, the IPBES \"Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services\" attributed much of this ecological destruction to agriculture and fishing, with the meat and dairy industries having a very significant impact. Since the 1970s food production has soared to feed a growing human population and bolster economic growth, but at a huge price to the environment and other species. The report says some 25% of the Earth's ice-free land is used for cattle grazing. A 2020 study published in \"Nature Communications\" warned that human impacts from housing, industrial agriculture and in particular meat consumption are wiping out a combined 50\u00a0billion years of Earth's evolutionary history (defined as phylogenetic diversity) and driving to extinction some of the \"most unique animals on the planet,\" among them the Aye-aye lemur, the Chinese crocodile lizard and the pangolin. Said lead author Rikki Gumbs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We know from all the data we have for threatened species, that the biggest threats are agriculture expansion and the global demand for meat. Pasture land, and the clearing of rainforests for production of soy, for me, are the largest drivers\u2014and the direct consumption of animals.\nUrbanization has also been cited as a significant driver of biodiversity loss, particularly of plant life. A 1999 study of local plant extirpations in Great Britain found that urbanization contributed at least as much to local plant extinction as did agriculture.\nClimate change.\nClimate change is expected to be a major driver of extinctions from the 21st century. Rising levels of carbon dioxide are resulting in influx of this gas into the ocean, increasing its acidity. Marine organisms which possess calcium carbonate shells or exoskeletons experience physiological pressure as the carbonate reacts with acid. For example, this is already resulting in coral bleaching on various coral reefs worldwide, which provide valuable habitat and maintain a high biodiversity. Marine gastropods, bivalves, and other invertebrates are also affected, as are the organisms that feed on them. Some studies have suggested that it is not climate change that is driving the current extinction crisis, but the demands of contemporary human civilization on nature. However, a rise in average global temperatures greater than 5.2\u00a0\u00b0C is projected to cause a mass extinction similar to the \"Big Five\" mass extinction events of the Phanerozoic, even without other anthropogenic impacts on biodiversity.\nOverexploitation.\nOverhunting can reduce the local population of game animals by more than half, as well as reducing population density, and may lead to extinction for some species. Populations located nearer to villages are significantly more at risk of depletion. Several conservationist organizations, among them IFAW and HSUS, assert that trophy hunters, particularly from the United States, are playing a significant role in the decline of giraffes, which they refer to as a \"silent extinction\".\nThe surge in the mass killings by poachers involved in the illegal ivory trade along with habitat loss is threatening African elephant populations. In 1979, their populations stood at 1.7\u00a0million; at present there are fewer than 400,000 remaining. Prior to European colonization, scientists believe Africa was home to roughly 20 million elephants. According to the Great Elephant Census, 30% of African elephants (or 144,000 individuals) disappeared over a seven-year period, 2007 to 2014. African elephants could become extinct by 2035 if poaching rates continue.\nFishing has had a devastating effect on marine organism populations for several centuries even before the explosion of destructive and highly effective fishing practices like trawling. Humans are unique among predators in that they regularly prey on other adult apex predators, particularly in marine environments; bluefin tuna, blue whales, North Atlantic right whales, and over fifty species of sharks and rays are vulnerable to predation pressure from human fishing, in particular commercial fishing. A 2016 study published in \"Science\" concludes that humans tend to hunt larger species, and this could disrupt ocean ecosystems for millions of years. A 2020 study published in \"Science Advances\" found that around 18% of marine megafauna, including iconic species such as the Great white shark, are at risk of extinction from human pressures over the next century. In a worst-case scenario, 40% could go extinct over the same time period. According to a 2021 study published in \"Nature\", 71% of oceanic shark and ray populations have been destroyed by overfishing (the primary driver of ocean defaunation) from 1970 to 2018, and are nearing the \"point of no return\" as 24 of the 31 species are now threatened with extinction, with several being classified as critically endangered. Almost two-thirds of sharks and rays around coral reefs are threatened with extinction from overfishing, with 14 of 134 species being critically endangered.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If this pattern goes unchecked, the future oceans would lack many of the largest species in today's oceans. Many large species play critical roles in ecosystems and so their extinctions could lead to ecological cascades that would influence the structure and function of future ecosystems beyond the simple fact of losing those species.\u2014\u200a\nDisease.\nThe decline of amphibian populations has also been identified as an indicator of environmental degradation. As well as habitat loss, introduced predators and pollution, Chytridiomycosis, a fungal infection accidentally spread by human travel, globalization, and the wildlife trade, has caused severe population drops of over 500 amphibian species, and perhaps 90 extinctions, including (among many others) the extinction of the golden toad in Costa Rica, the Gastric-brooding frog in Australia, the Rabb's Fringe-limbed Treefrog and the extinction of the Panamanian golden frog in the wild. Chytrid fungus has spread across Australia, New Zealand, Central America and Africa, including countries with high amphibian diversity such as cloud forests in Honduras and Madagascar. \"Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans\" is a similar infection currently threatening salamanders. Amphibians are now the most endangered vertebrate group, having existed for more than 300 million years through three other mass extinctions.\nMillions of bats in the US have been dying off since 2012 due to a fungal infection known as white-nose syndrome that spread from European bats, who appear to be immune. Population drops have been as great as 90% within five years, and extinction of at least one bat species is predicted. There is currently no form of treatment, and such declines have been described as \"unprecedented\" in bat evolutionary history by Alan Hicks of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.\nBetween 2007 and 2013, over ten million beehives were abandoned due to colony collapse disorder, which causes worker bees to abandon the queen. Though no single cause has gained widespread acceptance by the scientific community, proposals include infections with \"Varroa\" and \"Acarapis\" mites; malnutrition; various pathogens; genetic factors; immunodeficiencies; loss of habitat; changing beekeeping practices; or a combination of factors.\nBy region.\nMegafauna were once found on every continent of the world, but are now almost exclusively found on the continent of Africa. In some regions, megafauna experienced population crashes and trophic cascades shortly after the earliest human settlers. Worldwide, 178 species of the world's largest mammals died out between 52,000 and 9,000 BC; it has been suggested that a higher proportion of African megafauna survived because they evolved alongside humans. The timing of South American megafaunal extinction appears to precede human arrival, although the possibility that human activity at the time impacted the global climate enough to cause such an extinction has been suggested.\nAfrica.\nAfrica experienced the smallest decline in megafauna compared to the other continents. This is presumably due to the idea that African megafauna evolved alongside humans, and thus developed a healthy fear of them, unlike the comparatively tame animals of other continents.\nEurasia.\nUnlike other continents, the megafauna of Eurasia went extinct over a relatively long period of time, possibly due to climate fluctuations fragmenting and decreasing populations, leaving them vulnerable to over-exploitation, as with the steppe bison (\"Bison priscus\"). The warming of the arctic region caused the rapid decline of grasslands, which had a negative effect on the grazing megafauna of Eurasia. Most of what once was mammoth steppe was converted to mire, rendering the environment incapable of supporting them, notably the woolly mammoth. However, all these megafauna had survived previous interglacials with the same or more intense warming, suggesting that even during warm periods, refugia may have existed and that human hunting may have been the critical factor for their extinction.\nIn the western Mediterranean region, anthropogenic forest degradation began around 4,000 BP, during the Chalcolithic, and became especially pronounced during the Roman era. The reasons for the decline of forest ecosystems stem from agriculture, grazing, and mining. During the twilight years of the Western Roman Empire, forests in northwestern Europe rebounded from losses incurred throughout the Roman period, though deforestation on a large scale resumed once again around 800 BP, during the High Middle Ages.\nIn southern China, human land use is believed to have permanently altered the trend of vegetation dynamics in the region, which was previously governed by temperature. This is evidenced by high fluxes of charcoal from that time interval.\nAmericas.\nThere has been a debate as to the extent to which the disappearance of megafauna at the end of the last glacial period can be attributed to human activities by hunting, or even by slaughter of prey populations. Discoveries at Monte Verde in South America and at Meadowcroft Rock Shelter in Pennsylvania have caused a controversy regarding the Clovis culture. There likely would have been human settlements prior to the Clovis culture, and the history of humans in the Americas may extend back many thousands of years before the Clovis culture. The amount of correlation between human arrival and megafauna extinction is still being debated: for example, in Wrangel Island in Siberia the extinction of dwarf woolly mammoths (approximately 2000 BC) did not coincide with the arrival of humans, nor did megafaunal mass extinction on the South American continent, although it has been suggested climate changes induced by anthropogenic effects elsewhere in the world may have contributed.\nComparisons are sometimes made between recent extinctions (approximately since the Industrial Revolution) and the Pleistocene extinction near the end of the last glacial period. The latter is exemplified by the extinction of large herbivores such as the woolly mammoth and the carnivores that preyed on them. Humans of this era actively hunted the mammoth and the mastodon, but it is not known if this hunting was the cause of the subsequent massive ecological changes, widespread extinctions and climate changes.\nThe ecosystems encountered by the first Americans had not been exposed to human interaction, and may have been far less resilient to human made changes than the ecosystems encountered by industrial era humans. Therefore, the actions of the Clovis people, despite seeming insignificant by today's standards could indeed have had a profound effect on the ecosystems and wild life which was entirely unused to human influence.\nIn the Yukon, the mammoth steppe ecosystem collapsed between 13,500 and 10,000 BP, though wild horses and woolly mammoths somehow persisted in the region for millennia after this collapse. In what is now Texas, a drop in local plant and animal biodiversity occurred during the Younger Dryas cooling, though while plant diversity recovered after the Younger Dryas, animal diversity did not. In the Channel Islands, multiple terrestrial species went extinct around the same time as human arrival, but direct evidence for an anthropogenic cause of their extinction remains lacking. In the montane forests of the Colombian Andes, spores of coprophilous fungi indicate megafaunal extinction occurred in two waves, the first occurring around 22,900 BP and the second around 10,990 BP. A 2023 study of megafaunal extinctions in the Jun\u00edn Plateau of Peru found that the timing of the disappearance of megafauna was concurrent with a large uptick in fire activity attributed to human actions, implicating humans as the cause of their local extinction on the plateau.\nNew Guinea.\nHumans in New Guinea used volcanically fertilised soil following major eruptions and interfered with vegetation succession patterns since the Late Pleistocene, with this process intensifying in the Holocene. \nAustralia.\nAustralia was once home to a large assemblage of megafauna, with many parallels to those found on the African continent today. Australia's fauna is characterized by primarily marsupial mammals, and many reptiles and birds, all existing as giant forms until recently. Humans arrived on the continent very early, about 50,000 years ago. The extent human arrival contributed is controversial; climatic drying of Australia 40,000\u201360,000 years ago was an unlikely cause, as it was less severe in speed or magnitude than previous regional climate change which failed to kill off megafauna. Extinctions in Australia continued from original settlement until today in both plants and animals, while many more animals and plants have declined or are endangered.\nDue to the older timeframe and the soil chemistry on the continent, very little subfossil preservation evidence exists relative to elsewhere. However, continent-wide extinction of all genera weighing over 100 kilograms, and six of seven genera weighing between 45 and 100 kilograms occurred around 46,400 years ago and the fact that megafauna survived until a later date on the island of Tasmania following the establishment of a land bridge suggest direct hunting or anthropogenic ecosystem disruption such as fire-stick farming as likely causes. The first evidence of direct human predation leading to extinction in Australia was published in 2016.\nA 2021 study found that the rate of extinction of Australia's megafauna is rather unusual, with some generalistic species having gone extinct earlier while highly specialized ones having become extinct later or even still surviving today. A mosaic cause of extinction with different anthropogenic and environmental pressures has been proposed.\nThe arrival of invasive species such as feral cats and cane toads has further devastated Australia's ecosystems.\nSince European colonisation Australia has lost over 100 plant and animal species, including 10% of its mammal species, the highest of any continent.\nCaribbean.\nHuman arrival in the Caribbean around 6,000 years ago is correlated with the extinction of many species. These include many different genera of ground and arboreal sloths across all islands. These sloths were generally smaller than those found on the South American continent. \"Megalocnus\" were the largest genus at up to , \"Acratocnus\" were medium-sized relatives of modern two-toed sloths endemic to Cuba, \"Imagocnus\" also of Cuba, \"Neocnus\" and many others.\nMacaronesia.\nThe arrival of the first human settlers in the Azores saw the introduction of invasive plants and livestock to the archipelago, resulting in the extinction of at least two plant species on Pico Island. On Faial Island, the decline of \"Prunus lusitanica\" has been hypothesized by some scholars to have been related to the tree species being endozoochoric, with the extirpation or extinction of various bird species drastically limiting its seed dispersal. Lacustrine ecosystems were ravaged by human colonization, as evidenced by hydrogen isotopes from C30 fatty acids recording hypoxic bottom waters caused by eutrophication in Lake Funda on Flores Island beginning between 1500 and 1600 AD.\nThe arrival of humans on the archipelago of Madeira caused the extinction of approximately two-thirds of its endemic bird species, with two non-endemic birds also being locally extirpated from the archipelago. Of thirty-four land snail species collected in a subfossil sample from eastern Madeira Island, nine became extinct following the arrival of humans. On the Desertas Islands, of forty-five land snail species known to exist before human colonization, eighteen are extinct and five are no longer present on the islands. \"Eurya stigmosa\", whose extinction is typically attributed to climate change following the end of the Pleistocene rather than humans, may have survived until the colonization of the archipelago by the Portuguese and gone extinct as a result of human activity. Introduced mice have been implicated as a leading driver of extinction on Madeira following its discovery and settlement by humans.\nIn the Canary Islands, native thermophilous woodlands were decimated and two tree taxa were driven extinct following the arrival of its first humans, primarily as a result of increased fire clearance and soil erosion and the introduction of invasive pigs, goats, and rats. Invasive species introductions accelerated during the Age of Discovery when Europeans first settled the Macaronesian archipelago. The archipelago's laurel forests, though still negatively impacted, fared better due to being less suitable for human economic use.\nCabo Verde, like the Canary Islands, witnessed precipitous deforestation upon the arrival of European settlers and various invasive species brought by them in the archipelago, with the archipelago's thermophilous woodlands suffering the greatest destruction. Introduced species, overgrazing, increased fire incidence, and soil degradation have been attributed as the chief causes of Cabo Verde's ecological devastation.\nPacific.\nArchaeological and paleontological digs on 70 different Pacific islands suggested that numerous species became extinct as people moved across the Pacific, starting 30,000 years ago in the Bismarck Archipelago and Solomon Islands. It is currently estimated that among the bird species of the Pacific, some 2000 species have gone extinct since the arrival of humans, representing a 20% drop in the biodiversity of birds worldwide. In Polynesia, the Late Holocene declines in avifaunas only abated after they were heavily depleted and there were increasingly fewer bird species able to be driven to extinction. Iguanas were likewise decimated by the spread of humans. Additionally, the endemic faunas of Pacific archipelagos are exceptionally at risk in the coming decades due to rising sea levels caused by global warming.\nLord Howe Island, which remained uninhabited until the arrival of Europeans in the South Pacific in the 18th century, lost much of its endemic avifauna when it became a whaling station in the early 19th century. Another wave of bird extinctions occurred following the introduction of black rats in 1918.\nThe endemic megafaunal meiolaniid turtles of Vanuatu - representing the final members of a group that had existed for over 100 million years - became extinct immediately following the first human arrivals and remains of them containing evidence of butchery by humans have been found.\nThe arrival of humans in New Caledonia marked the commencement of coastal forest and mangrove decline on the island. The archipelago's megafauna - such as the large, flightless galliform \"Sylviornis\" - was still extant when humans arrived, but indisputable evidence for the anthropogenicity of their extinction remains elusive.\nIn Fiji, the giant iguanas \"Brachylophus gibbonsi\" and \"Lapitiguana impensa\" both succumbed to human-induced extinction shortly after encountering the first humans on the island.\nIn American Samoa, deposits dating back to the period of initial human colonisation contain elevated quantities of bird, turtle, and fish remains caused by increased predation pressure.\nOn Mangaia in the Cook Islands, human colonisation was associated with a major extinction of endemic avifauna, along with deforestation, erosion of volcanic hillsides, and increased charcoal influx, causing additional environmental damage.\nOn Rapa in the Austral Archipelago, human arrival, marked by the increase in charcoal and in taro pollen in the palynological record, is associated with the extinction of an endemic palm.\nHenderson Island, once thought to be untouched by humans, was colonised and later abandoned by Polynesians. The ecological collapse on the island caused by the anthropogenic extinctions is believed to have caused the island's abandonment.\nThe first human settlers of the Hawaiian Islands are thought to have arrived between 300 and 800 AD, with European arrival in the 16th century. Hawaii is notable for its endemism of plants, birds, insects, mollusks and fish; 30% of its organisms are endemic. Many of its species are endangered or have gone extinct, primarily due to accidentally introduced species and livestock grazing. Over 40% of its bird species have gone extinct, and it is the location of 75% of extinctions in the United States. Evidence suggests that the introduction of the Polynesian rat, above all other factors, drove the ecocide of the endemic forests of the archipelago. Extinction has increased in Hawaii over the last 200 years and is relatively well documented, with extinctions among native snails used as estimates for global extinction rates. High rates of habitat fragmentation on the archipelago have further reduced biodiversity. The extinction of endemic Hawaiian avifauna is likely to accelerate even further as anthropogenic global warming adds additional pressure on top of land-use changes and invasive species.\nMadagascar.\nWithin centuries of the arrival of humans around the 1st millennium AD, nearly all of Madagascar's distinct, endemic, and geographically isolated megafauna became extinct. The largest animals, of more than , were extinct very shortly after the first human arrival, with large and medium-sized species dying out after prolonged hunting pressure from an expanding human population moving into more remote regions of the island around 1000 years ago. as well as 17 species of \"giant\" lemurs. Some of these lemurs typically weighed over , and their fossils have provided evidence of human butchery on many species. Other megafauna present on the island included the Malagasy hippopotamuses as well as the large flightless elephant birds, both groups are thought to have gone extinct in the interval 750\u20131050 AD. Smaller fauna experienced initial increases due to decreased competition, and then subsequent declines over the last 500 years. All fauna weighing over died out. The primary reasons for the decline of Madagascar's biota, which at the time was already stressed by natural aridification, were human hunting, herding, farming, and forest clearing, all of which persist and threaten Madagascar's remaining taxa today. The natural ecosystems of Madagascar as a whole were further impacted by the much greater incidence of fire as a result of anthropogenic fire production; evidence from Lake Amparihibe on the island of Nosy Be indicates a shift in local vegetation from intact rainforest to a fire-disturbed patchwork of grassland and woodland between 1300 and 1000 BP.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand is characterized by its geographic isolation and island biogeography, and had been isolated from mainland Australia for 80 million years. It was the last large land mass to be colonized by humans. Upon the arrival of Polynesian settlers in the late 13th century, the native biota suffered a catastrophic decline due to deforestation, hunting, and the introduction of invasive species. The extinction of all of the islands' megafaunal birds occurred within several hundred years of human arrival. The moa, large flightless ratites, were thriving during the Late Holocene, but became extinct within 200 years of the arrival of human settlers, as did the enormous Haast's eagle - their primary predator - the omnivorous adzebills and at least two species of large, flightless geese. The Polynesians also introduced the Polynesian rat, which may have consumed avian eggs and chicks. This may have put some pressure on other birds, but at the time of early European contact (18th century) and colonization (19th century), the bird life was nonetheless prolific. The megafaunal extinction happened extremely rapidly despite a very small population density, which never exceeded 0.01 people per km2. Extinctions of parasites followed the extinction of New Zealand's megafauna. With them, the Europeans brought various invasive species including ship rats, possums, cats and mustelids which devastated native bird life, some of which had adapted flightlessness and ground nesting habits, and had no defensive behavior as a result of having no native mammalian predators. The k\u0101k\u0101p\u014d, the world's biggest parrot, which is flightless, now only exists in managed breeding sanctuaries. New Zealand's national emblem, the kiwi, is on the endangered bird list.\nMitigation.\nStabilizing human populations; reining in capitalism, decreasing economic demands, and shifting them to economic activities with low impacts on biodiversity; transitioning to plant-based diets; and increasing the number and size of terrestrial and marine protected areas have been suggested to avoid or limit biodiversity loss and a possible sixth mass extinction. Rodolfo Dirzo and Paul R. Ehrlich suggest that \"the one fundamental, necessary, 'simple' cure, ... is reducing the scale of the human enterprise.\" According to a 2021 paper published in \"Frontiers in Conservation Science\", humanity almost certainly faces a \"ghastly future\" of mass extinction, biodiversity collapse, climate change, and their impacts unless major efforts to change human industry and activity are rapidly undertaken.\nA 2018 article in \"Science\" advocated for the global community to designate 30% of the planet by 2030, and 50% by 2050, as protected areas to mitigate the contemporary extinction crisis. It highlighted that the human population is projected to grow to 10\u00a0billion by the middle of the century, and consumption of food and water resources is projected to double by this time. A 2022 report published in \"Science\" warned that 44% of Earth's terrestrial surface, or , must be conserved and made \"ecologically sound\" to prevent further biodiversity loss.\nIn November 2018, the UN's biodiversity chief Cristiana Pa\u0219ca Palmer urged people worldwide to pressure governments to implement significant protections for wildlife by 2020. She called biodiversity loss a \"silent killer\" as dangerous as global warming but said it had received little attention by comparison. \"It's different from climate change, where people feel the impact in everyday life. With biodiversity, it is not so clear but by the time you feel what is happening, it may be too late.\" In January 2020, the UN Convention on Biological Diversity drafted a Paris-style plan to stop biodiversity and ecosystem collapse by setting the deadline of 2030 to protect 30% of the Earth's land and oceans and to reduce pollution by 50%, to allow for the restoration of ecosystems by 2050. The world failed to meet the Aichi Biodiversity Targets for 2020 set by the convention during a summit in Japan in 2010. Of the 20 biodiversity targets proposed, only six were \"partially achieved\" by the deadline. It was called a global failure by Inger Andersen, head of the United Nations Environment Programme:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"From COVID-19 to massive wildfires, floods, melting glaciers and unprecedented heat, our failure to meet the Aichi (biodiversity) targets\u2014to protect our home\u2014has very real consequences. We can no longer afford to cast nature to the side.\"\nSome scientists have proposed keeping extinctions below 20 per year for the next century as a global target to reduce species loss, which is the biodiversity equivalent of the 2\u00a0\u00b0C climate target, although it is still much higher than the normal background rate of two per year prior to anthropogenic impacts on the natural world.\nAn October 2020 report on the \"era of pandemics\" from IPBES found that many of the same human activities that contribute to biodiversity loss and climate change, including deforestation and the wildlife trade, have also increased the risk of future pandemics. The report offers several policy options to reduce such risk, such as taxing meat production and consumption, cracking down on the illegal wildlife trade, removing high disease-risk species from the legal wildlife trade, and eliminating subsidies to businesses which are harmful to the environment. According to marine zoologist John Spicer, \"the COVID-19 crisis is not just another crisis alongside the biodiversity crisis and the climate change crisis. Make no mistake, this is one big crisis\u2014the greatest that humans have ever faced.\"\nIn December 2022, nearly every country on Earth, with the United States and the Holy See being the only exceptions, signed onto the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework agreement formulated at the 2022 United Nations Biodiversity Conference (COP 15) which includes protecting 30% of land and oceans by 2030 and 22 other targets intended to mitigate the extinction crisis. The agreement is weaker than the Aichi Targets of 2010. It was criticized by some countries for being rushed and not going far enough to protect endangered species.\nReducing human population growth has been suggested as a means of mitigating climate change and the biodiversity crisis, although many scholars believe it has been largely ignored in mainstream policy discourse. An alternative proposal is greater agricultural efficiency &amp; sustainability. Lots of non-arable land can be made into arable land good for growing food crops. Mushrooms have also been known to repair damaged soil.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14209", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14209", "title": "Hollywood-style Lindy Hop", "text": ""}
{"id": "14210", "revid": "1312231778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14210", "title": "Harrison Narcotics Tax Act", "text": "U.S. federal law regulating and taxing narcotics\nThe Harrison Narcotics Tax Act (Ch. 1, 38\u00a0Stat.\u00a0https://) was a United States federal law that regulated and taxed the production, importation, and distribution of opiates and coca products. The act was proposed by Representative Francis Burton Harrison of New York and was signed into law by President Woodrow Wilson on December 17, 1914.\n\"An Act To provide for the registration of, with collectors of internal revenue, and to impose a special tax on all persons who produce, import, manufacture, compound, deal in, dispense, sell, distribute, or give away opium or coca leaves, their salts, derivatives, or preparations, and for other purposes.\" In \"Webb v. United States\", the act was interpreted to prohibit prescribing maintenance doses for narcotics unless it was intended to cure the patient's addiction.\nThe Harrison anti-narcotic legislation consisted of three U.S. House bills imposing restrictions on the availability and consumption of the psychoactive drug opium. House Resolution (H.R.) 1966 and passed conjointly with (the Opium and Coca Leaves Trade Restrictions Act).\nAlthough technically illegal for purposes of distribution and use, the distribution, sale and use of cocaine was still legal for registered companies and individuals.\nBackground.\nInternational.\nFollowing the Spanish\u2013American War and the Philippine\u2013American War, the Philippines saw a proliferation of opium use. A cholera outbreak in 1902 further strengthened this tendency due to the astringent properties of opium.\nCharles Henry Brent was an American Episcopal bishop who served as Missionary Bishop of the Philippines beginning in 1901. He convened a Commission of Inquiry, known as the Brent Commission, for the purpose of examining alternatives to a licensing system for opium addicts. Although Governor William Taft supported this policy, Brent opposed it \"on moral grounds\". The Commission recommended that narcotics should be subject to international control. The recommendations of the Brent Commission were endorsed by the United States Department of State and in 1906 President Theodore Roosevelt called for an international conference, the International Opium Commission, which was held in Shanghai in February 1909. A second conference was held at The Hague in May 1911, and out of it came the first international drug control treaty, the First International Opium Convention of 1912.\nDomestic.\nBetween 1895 and 1900 there were probably more people using morphine in the United States than today on a per capita basis. Opium usage peaked in 1896 and then began to decline gradually. Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr., then dean Harvard Medical school, blamed the prevalence of opiate addiction on ignorance. As awareness of the addictiveness of morphine and patent medicines grew public opinion in the 1890s was in favor of state laws restricting morphine. Demand gradually declined thereafter in response to mounting public concern, local and state regulations, and the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906, which required labeling of patent medicines that contained opiates, cocaine, alcohol, cannabis and other intoxicants. By 1914, forty-six states had regulations on cocaine and twenty-nine states had laws against opium, morphine, and heroin.\nOpium.\nIn the 1800s opiates were mostly unregulated drugs. Morphine use had spread rapidly during and after the Civil war. The consumption of household remedies and marketed syrups containing morphine was commonplace and mostly associated with the upper and middle class of society. Many women (not all) who were prescribed and dispensed legal opiates by physicians and pharmacist for \"female problems\" (probably pain at menstruation) became addicted. It's likely many who became addicted initially did not know what the syrups and concoctions contained.\nAlthough morphine syrups were easily available, opium smoking was already banned by many municipalities. There was more hostility to opium smoking than laudanum and other widely available tonics because of anti-Chinese sentiments and accusations that proprietors lured young white girls to opium dens. Chinese immigrants were blamed for importing the opium-smoking habit to the U.S. The 1903 blue-ribbon citizens' panel, the Committee on the Acquirement of the Drug Habit, concluded: \"If the Chinaman cannot get along without his dope we can get along without him.\"\nHeroin use became widespread among low-income immigrants in the early 20th century. In the 1890s, the Sears &amp; Roebuck catalogue started offering a syringe and a small amount of cocaine or heroin for $1.50.\nCocaine.\nCocaine was first isolated in 1855. Within a few decades public opinion had associated cocaine use with crime sprees committed by black men. There were many hysterical news reports in the early 20th-century about cocaine-fueled rampages using hyperbole like \"cocaine-crazed negro\" and others exaggerating the addictiveness of cocaine saying it quickly reduced users to \"another entry in Satan's ledger\". In 1900, the \"Journal of the American Medical Association\" published an editorial stating, \"Negroes in the South are reported as being addicted to a new form of vice \u2013 that of 'cocaine sniffing' or the 'coke habit.'\" A well-known article published in \"The New York Times\" on February 8, 1914 claimed cocaine use caused blacks to rape white women. This article and similar articles of the era, however, do not provide examples of such crimes. The people who made such allegations used racism to manipulate public opinion, but their allegations were unfounded. The article titled \"Negro Cocaine 'Fiends' Are a New Southern Menace\" is remembered for its portrayal of \"the cocaine-crazed negro\" who was invulnerable to bullets. The use of the term \"fiends\" by Dr. Edward Huntington Williams, the author of the article, is understood to connote the demonization of the non-white drug user.\nAccording to historian David F. Musto public opinion about cocaine turned negative as newspapers and even \"Good Housekeeping\" scapegoated the drug to explain rising crime in the South:\nThus the problem of cocaine proceeded from an association with Negroes in about 1900, when a massive repression and disenfranchisement were under way in the South, to a convenient explanation for crime waves, and eventually Northerners used it as an argument against Southern fear of infringement of states's rights.\nDespite the extreme racialization of the issue that took place in the buildup to the act's passage, contemporary research in Northern cities found relatively few cocaine users compared with alcoholics and opium addicts overall and no significant concentration among blacks. Blacks did use \"patent medicines\" containing opiates and cocaine for pulmonary conditions. It's possible that higher rates of disease among blacks in the early 20th century may explain why blacks consumed patent medicines more than whites.\nHearings.\nTheodore Roosevelt appointed Dr. Hamilton Wright as the first opium commissioner of the United States in 1908. Wright testified at the hearing about the dangers alleging that drugs made blacks uncontrollable, gave them superhuman powers and caused them to rebel against white authority. He said cocaine was often \"the direct incentive to the crime of rape of white women by Negroes\". He also stated that \"one of the most unfortunate phases of smoking opium in this country is the large number of women who have become involved and were living as common-law wives or cohabitating with Chinese in the Chinatowns of our various cities\".\nDr. Christopher Koch of the State Pharmacy Board of Pennsylvania testified of the dangerous \"cocaine-crazed\" blacks in the South: \"Most of the attacks upon the white women of the South are the direct result of a cocaine-crazed Negro brain\".\nWriting in 1953 Rufus G. King explained that the Harrison Act was \"intended partly to carry out a treaty obligation, but mainly to aid the states in combating a local police problem which had gotten somewhat out of hand.\"\nCongressional passage.\nWhen Representative Francis Burton Harrison of New York placed HR 1966 for debate before the full House of Representatives on June 26, 1913, he began by noting that the Smoking Opium Exclusion Act of 1909 failed to limit importation of opium because it regulated the maritime shipping industry, rather than the individual drug users. In Harrison's view, shipping companies could evade regulation by forging documents and smuggling opium across the Mexico\u2013United States border, whereas individual drug users would struggle to dispute their role in smuggling networks.\nThe Congressional Record showcases that the House was unsure whether the Commerce Clause actually permitted the federal government to restrict what types of goods could be exported, but the chamber adopted an expansive view based on dicta from the 1904 antitrust case \"Northern Securities Co. v. United States\". While the House agreed that the Export Clause clearly prohibits taxing exported opium, they were divided as to whether they could outright prohibit such exports. Though the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act prohibited the importation of adulterated or misbranded food and drugs, that law was considered a product standard, whereas the Harrison Narcotics Tax Act would not allow any form of opium as imports or exports. Congress would not attempt another restriction on the types of goods that can be exported until the 1940 Export Control Act.\nRepresentative Thomas U. Sisson of Mississippi objected to restricting the market for narcotics as encroaching on state police power in violation of the Tenth Amendment. Harrison admitted that the federal authority to tax those involved in the market for narcotics under the Taxing and Spending Clause was weak because the federal government stood to earn more in import taxes without this act. Surprisingly, Sisson and Harrison were in agreement that the bill would allow physicians to continue prescribing narcotics as part of medical treatment for those with substance use disorder, yet the act's enforcement by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue frequently prosecuted such patients.\nEnforcement.\nEnforcement began in 1915. The act appears to be mainly concerned about the marketing of opiates. However, a clause applying to doctors allowed distribution \"in the course of his professional practice only.\" Physicians believed relieving the suffering of physical dependance was within the \"professional practice\" exception. King says \"there is not the slightest suggestion that Congress intended to change this\". He says the public hysteria surrounding contemporaneous press reports about violent \"dope fiends\" probably distorted the Congressional intent and turned addicts into criminals.\nThe \"professional practice\" clause was interpreted after 1917 to mean that a doctor could not prescribe opiates to an addict. Addicts and doctors were jailed for decades under theories adopted by the Narcotics Division that addiction could not be successfully treated in a clinical setting. A number of doctors were arrested and some were imprisoned. The medical profession quickly learned not to supply opiates to addicts. In \"United States v. Doremus\", 249 U.S. 86 (1919), the Supreme Court ruled that the Harrison Act was constitutional, and in \"Webb v. United States\", 249 U.S. 96, 99 (1919) that physicians could not prescribe narcotics solely for maintenance.\nThe impact of diminished supply was obvious by mid-1915. A 1918 commission called for sterner law enforcement, while newspapers published sensational articles about addiction-related crime waves. Congress responded by tightening up the Harrison Act\u2014the importation of heroin for any purpose was banned in 1924.\nSecretary of the Treasury William Gibbs McAdoo appointed Representative Henry T. Rainey to lead a special committee to investigate the law's effects. In June 1919, this Rainey Committee found that criminal organizations were smuggling drugs into the country across all four of the United States' coastal and land borders. Annually, the United States consumed 470,000 pounds of opium, whereas France and Germany each purchased around 17,000 pounds of opium. While the United States' 1920 population of 106 million was far larger than France's 1921 population of 39 million and Germany's 1920 population of 62 million, per capita opium consumption was still much higher in America. Based on the US Department of Commerce's monthly summaries of foreign commerce, between July 1919 and January 1920, imports of opium increased to 528,635 pounds from only 74,650 pounds during the same period a year prior.\nChallenges.\nIn the 1919 cases \"United States v. Doremus\" and \"Webb v. United States\", the Harrison Narcotics Tax Act was upheld by the Supreme Court under an expansive reading of the Taxing and Spending Clause based on the earlier \"License Tax Cases\" (1866).\nThe act's applicability in prosecuting doctors who prescribe narcotics to addicts was successfully challenged in \"Linder v. United States\" in 1925, as Associate Justice James Clark McReynolds ruled that the federal government has no power to regulate medical practice.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14211", "revid": "3188090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14211", "title": "Heisenbug (bug)", "text": ""}
{"id": "14215", "revid": "50184715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14215", "title": "Horse tack", "text": "Equipment for use on domesticated horses\nTack is equipment or accessories equipped on horses and other equines in the course of their use as domesticated animals. This equipment includes such items as saddles, stirrups, bridles, halters, reins, bits, and harnesses. Equipping a horse is often referred to as tacking up, and involves putting the tack equipment on the horse. A room to store such equipment, usually near or in a stable, is a tack room. A craftsman who makes horse tack is a saddler and the trade is saddlery.\nIn English, the word \"tack\" is an uncountable noun with no plural form.\nSaddles.\nSaddles are seats for the rider, fastened to the horse's back by means of a \"girth\" in English-style riding, or a \"cinch\" in the use of Western tack. Girths are generally a wide strap that goes around the horse at a point about four inches behind the forelegs. Some western saddles will also have a second strap known as a \"flank\" or \"back cinch\" that fastens at the rear of the saddle and goes around the widest part of the horse's belly.\nIt is important that the saddle be comfortable for both the rider and the horse as an improperly fitting saddle may create pressure points on the horse's back muscle (Latissimus dorsi) and cause the horse pain and can lead to the horse, rider, or both getting injured.\nThere are many types of saddle, each specially designed for its given task.\nSaddles are usually divided into two major categories: \"English saddles\" and \"Western saddles\" according to the riding discipline they are used in. Other types of saddles, such as racing saddles, Australian saddles, sidesaddles and endurance saddles do not necessarily fit neatly in either category.\nStirrups.\nStirrups are supports for the rider's feet that hang down on either side of the saddle. They provide greater stability for the rider but can have safety concerns due to the potential for a rider's feet to get stuck in them. If a rider is thrown from a horse but has a foot caught in the stirrup, they could be dragged if the horse runs away. To minimize this risk, a number of safety precautions are taken. First, most riders wear riding boots with a heel and a smooth sole. Next, some saddles, particularly English saddles, have safety bars that allow a stirrup leather to fall off the saddle if pulled backwards by a falling rider. Other precautions are done with stirrup design itself. Western saddles have wide stirrup treads that make it more difficult for the foot to become trapped. A number of saddle styles incorporate a tapedero, which is a covering over the front of the stirrup that keeps the foot from sliding all the way through the stirrup. The English stirrup (or \"iron\") has several design variations which are either shaped to allow the rider's foot to slip out easily or are closed with a very heavy rubber band. The invention of stirrups was of great historic significance in mounted combat, giving the rider secure foot support while on horseback.\nHeadgear.\n\"Bridles\", hackamores, \"halters\", or \"headcollars\", and similar equipment consist of various arrangements of straps around the horse's head, and are used for control and communication with the animal.\nHalters.\nA \"halter\" (United States) or \"headcollar\" (United Kingdom) (occasionally \"headstall\") consists of a noseband and headstall that buckles around the horse's head and allows the horse to be led or tied. The lead rope is separate, and it may be short (from six to ten feet, two to three meters) for everyday leading and tying, or much longer (up to , eight meters) for tasks such as for leading packhorses or for picketing a horse out to graze.\nSome horses, particularly stallions, may have a chain attached to the lead rope and placed over the nose or under the jaw to increase the control provided by a halter while being led. Most of the time, horses are not ridden with a halter, as it offers insufficient precision and control. Halters have no bit.\nIn Australian and British English, a \"halter\" is a rope with a spliced running loop around the nose and another over the poll, used mainly for unbroken horses or for cattle. The lead rope cannot be removed from the halter. A show halter is made from rolled leather and the lead attaches to form the chinpiece of the noseband. These halters are not suitable for paddock usage or in loose stalls. An \"underhalter\" is a lightweight halter or headcollar which is made with only one small buckle, and can be worn under a bridle for tethering a horse without untacking.\nBridles.\nBridles usually have a \"bit\" attached to \"reins\" and are used for riding and driving horses.\n\"English Bridles\" have a \"cavesson\" style noseband and are seen in English riding. Their reins are buckled to one another, and they have little adornment or flashy hardware.\n\"Western Bridles\" used in Western riding usually have no noseband, are made of thin bridle leather. They may have long, separated \"Split\" reins or shorter closed reins, which sometimes include an attached \"Romal\". Western bridles are often adorned with silver or other decorative features.\n\"Double bridles\" are a type of English bridle that use two bits in the mouth at once, a snaffle and a curb. The two bits allow the rider to have very precise control of the horse. As a rule, only very advanced horses and riders use double bridles. Double bridles are usually seen in the top levels of dressage, but also are seen in certain types of show hack and Saddle seat competition.158\nHackamores and other bitless designs.\nA \"hackamore\" is a headgear that utilizes a heavy noseband of some sort, rather than a bit, most often used to train young horses or to go easy on an older horse's mouth. Hackamores are more often seen in western riding.158 Some related styles of headgear that control a horse with a noseband rather than a bit are known as bitless bridles.\nThe word \"hackamore\" is derived from the Spanish word \".\" Hackamores are seen in western riding disciplines, as well as in endurance riding and English riding disciplines such as show jumping and the stadium phase of eventing. While the classic bosal-style hackamore is usually used to start young horses, other designs, such as various bitless bridles and the mechanical hackamore are often seen on mature horses with dental issues that make bit use painful, horses with certain training problems, and on horses with mouth or tongue injuries. Some riders also like to use them in the winter to avoid putting a frozen metal bit into a horse's mouth.153\nLike bitted bridles, noseband-based designs can be gentle or harsh, depending on the hands of the rider. It is a myth that a bit is cruel and a hackamore is gentler. The horse's face is very soft and sensitive with many nerve endings. Misuse of a hackamore can cause swelling on the nose, scraping on the nose and jawbone, and extreme misuse may cause damage to the bones and cartilage of the horse's head.\nOther headgear.\nA \"longeing cavesson\" (UK: \"lungeing\") is a special type of halter or noseband used for longeing a horse. Longeing is the activity of having a horse walk, trot and/or canter in a large circle around the handler at the end of a rope that is 25 to long. It is used for training and exercise.194\nA \"neck rope\" or \"cordeo\" is a rope tied around a horse's neck used to guide the horse during bridleless riding or groundwork.\nReins.\nReins consist of leather straps or rope attached to the outer ends of a \"bit\" and extend to the rider's or driver's hands. Reins are the means by which a horse rider or driver communicates directional commands to the horse's head. Pulling on the reins can be used to steer or stop the horse. The sides of a horse's mouth are sensitive, so pulling on the reins pulls the bit, which then pulls the horse's head from side to side, which is how the horse is controlled.\nOn some types of harnesses there might be supporting rings to carry the reins over the horse's back. When pairs of horses are used in drawing a wagon or coach it is usual for the outer side of each pair to be connected to reins and the inside of the bits connected by a short bridging strap or rope. The driver carries \"four-in-hand\" or \"six-in-hand\" being the number of reins connecting to the pairs of horses.\nA rein may be attached to a halter to lead or guide the horse in a circle for training purposes or to lead a packhorse, but a simple lead rope is more often used for these purposes. A longe line is sometimes called a \"longe rein\", but it is actually a flat line about long, usually made of nylon or cotton web, about one inch wide, thus longer and wider than even a driving rein.\nBits.\nA bit is a device placed in a horse's mouth, kept on a horse's head by means of a headstall. There are many types, each useful for specific types of riding and training.\nThe mouthpiece of the bit does not rest on the teeth of the horse, but rather rests on the gums or \"bars\" of the horse's mouth in an interdental space behind the front incisors and in front of the back molars. It is important that the style of bit is appropriate to the horse's needs and is fitted properly for it to function properly and be as comfortable as possible for the horse.\nThe basic \"classic\" styles of bits are:\nWhile there are literally hundreds of types of bit mouthpieces, bit rings and bit shanks, essentially there are really only two broad categories: direct pressure bits, broadly termed snaffle bits; and leverage bits, usually termed curbs.\nBits that act with direct pressure on the tongue and lips of the bit are in the general category of \"snaffle\" bits. Snaffle bits commonly have a single jointed mouthpiece and act with a nutcracker effect on the bars, tongue and occasionally roof of the mouth. However, regardless of mouthpiece, any bit that operates only on direct pressure is a \"snaffle\" bit.\nLeverage bits have shanks coming off the mouthpiece to create leverage that applies pressure to the poll, chin groove and mouth of the horse are in the category of \"curb\" bits. Any bit with shanks that works off of leverage is a \"curb\" bit, regardless of whether the mouthpiece is solid or jointed.\nSome combination or hybrid bits combine direct pressure and leverage, such as the Kimblewick or Kimberwicke, which adds slight leverage to a two-rein design that resembles a snaffle; and the four rein designs such as the single mouthpiece Pelham bit and the double bridle, which places a curb and a snaffle bit simultaneously in the horse's mouth.\nIn the wrong hands even the mildest bit can hurt the horse. Conversely, a very severe bit, in the right hands, can transmit subtle commands that cause no pain to the horse. Bit commands should be given with only the quietest movements of the hands, and much steering and stopping should be done with the legs and seat.\nHarness.\nA horse harness is a set of devices and straps that attaches a horse to a cart, carriage, sledge or any other load. There are two main styles of harnesses - breaststrap and collar and hames style. These differ in how the weight of the load is attached. Most Harnesses are made from leather, which is the traditional material for harnesses, though some designs are now made of nylon webbing or synthetic biothane.\nA breaststrap harness has a wide leather strap going horizontally across the horses' breast, attached to the traces and then to the load. This is used only for lighter loads. A collar and hames harness has a collar around the horses' neck with wood or metal hames in the collar. The traces attach from the hames to the load. This type of harness is needed for heavy draft work.\nBoth types will also have a bridle and reins. A harness that is used to support shafts, such as on a cart pulled by a single horse, will also have a \"saddle\" attached to the harness to help the horse support the shafts and \"breeching\" to brake the forward motion of the vehicle, especially when stopping or moving downhill. Horses guiding vehicles by means of a pole, such as two-horse teams pulling a wagon, a hay-mower, or a dray, will have \"pole-straps\" attached to the lower part of the horse collar.\nBreastplates and martingales.\nBreastplates, breastcollars or breastgirths attach to the front of the saddle, cross the horse's chest, and usually have a strap that runs between the horse's front legs and attaches to the girth. They keep the saddle from sliding back or sideways. They are usually seen in demanding, fast-paced sports. They are crucial pieces of safety equipment for English riding activities requiring jumping, such as eventing, show jumping, polo, and fox hunting. They are also seen in Western riding events, particularly in rodeo, reining and cutting, where it is particularly important to prevent a saddle from shifting. They may also be worn in other horse show classes for decorative purposes.\nA martingale is a piece of equipment that keeps a horse from raising its head too high. Various styles can be used as a control measure, to prevent the horse from avoiding rider commands by raising its head out of position; or as a safety measure to keep the horse from tossing its head high or hard enough to smack its rider in the face.\nThey are allowed in many types of competition, especially those where speed or jumping may be required, but are not allowed in most \"flat\" classes at horse shows, though an exception is made in a few classes limited exclusively to young or \"green\" horses who may not yet be fully trained.\nMartingales are usually attached to the horse one of two ways. They are either attached to the center chest ring of a breastplate or, if no breastplate is worn, they are attached by two straps, one that goes around the horse's neck, and the other that attaches to the girth, with the martingale itself beginning at the point in the center of the chest where the neck and girth straps intersect.\nMartingale types include the standing martingale, running, German, Market Harborough, and Irish.\nThere are other training devices that fall loosely in the martingale category, in that they use straps attached to the reins or bit which limit the movement of the horse's head or add leverage to the rider's hands in order to control the horse's head. Common devices of this nature include the overcheck, the chambon, de Gogue, grazing reins, draw reins and the \"bitting harness\" or \"bitting rig\". However, most of this equipment is used for training purposes and is not legal in any competition. In some disciplines, use of leverage devices, even in training, is controversial.\nAssociated equipment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14216", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14216", "title": "Hausa language", "text": "Chadic language spoken in West Africa\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nHausa (; in Hausa: / ; Ajami: ) is a Chadic language spoken primarily by the Hausa people in Niger (where it is the sole official language, having replaced French in 2025) and in the northern parts of Nigeria, Ghana, Cameroon, Benin and Togo and the southern parts of Chad. It is also spoken by a significant minority in Ivory Coast and a small number of speakers in Sudan.\nHausa is a member of the Afroasiatic language family and is the most widely spoken language within the Chadic branch of that family. Despite originating from a non-tonal language family, Hausa utilizes differences in pitch to distinguish words and grammar. \"Ethnologue\" estimated that it was spoken as a first language by some 58\u00a0million people and as a second language by another 36\u00a0million, bringing the total number of Hausa speakers to an estimated 94\u00a0million.\nIn Nigeria, the Hausa film industry is known as Kannywood.\nClassification.\nHausa belongs to the West Chadic languages subgroup of the Chadic languages group, which in turn is part of the Afroasiatic language family.\nGeographic distribution.\nNative speakers of Hausa, the Hausa people, are mostly found in southern Niger and northern Nigeria. The language is used as a lingua franca by non-native speakers in most of northern Nigeria, southern Niger, northern Cameroon, northern Ghana, northern Benin, northern Togo, southern Chad and parts of Sudan.\nBy country.\nNigeria.\nIn Nigeria, Hausa is dominant throughout the north, though not in the states of Kwara, Kogi and Benue. States and cities in which Hausa predominates include Kano, Kaduna, Katsina, Daura, Gobir, Zaria, Sokoto, Birnin Kebbi, Gusau, Dutse, Hadejia, Bauchi, Misau, Zamfara, Gombe, Nafada, Maiduguri, Yobe, Yola, Jalingo, Jos, Lafia, Nasarawa, Minna, Kontagora, Keffi and Abuja.\nNiger.\nHausa is spoken by approximately 53% of the population of Niger and was declared the country's official language in 2025. It is commonly spoken in the cities of Maradi, Diffa, Tahoua, Zinder, Tillaberi, Dosso, and Agadez.\nCameroon.\nHausa is spoken in the north of Cameroon, including the cities of Ngaoundere, Garoua, and Maroua.\nGhana.\nHausa is the lingua franca of the Zongo communities across Ghana.\nBenin.\nHausa is spoken in northern Benin, including Parakou, Kandi, Natitingou, and Djougou.\nTogo.\nHausa is spoken in northern Togo, including Sokode, Kara, and Dapaong.\nChad.\nHausa is spoken in the southern part of Chad, including N'Djamena.\nSudan.\nIn Sudan, Hausa is spoken throughout most of Jazirah, Blue Nile, and Kordofan, Darfur States, Gadaref State, Red Sea State, White Nile State, and River Nile.\nSpeakers by country.\nHausa is widely used as a lingua franca across much of West Africa and is spoken by people from various ethnic and cultural backgrounds across Northern Nigeria and Niger.\nDialects.\nHausa presents a wide uniformity wherever it is spoken. However, linguists have identified dialect areas with a cluster of features characteristic of each one.\nTraditional dialects.\nEastern Hausa dialects include \"Dauranci\" in Daura, \"Kananci\" in Kano, \"Bausanci\" in Bauchi, \"Gudduranci\" in Katagum Misau and part of Borno, and \"Hadejanci\" in Hadejiya.\nWestern Hausa dialects include \"Sakkwatanci\" in Sokoto, \"Katsinanci\" in Katsina, \"Arewanci\" in Gobir, Adar, Kebbi, and Zanhwaranci in Zamfara, and \"Kurhwayanci\" in Kurfey in Niger. Katsina is transitional between Eastern and Western dialects. Sokoto is used in a variety of classical Hausa literature, and is often known as \"Classical Hausa\".\nNorthern Hausa dialects include \"Arewa\" (meaning 'North') and \"Arewaci\".\n\"Zazzaganci\" in Zazzau is the major Southern dialect.\nThe Daura (\"Dauranchi\") and Kano (\"Kananci\") dialects are the standard. The BBC, Deutsche Welle, Radio France Internationale and Voice of America offer Hausa services on their international news web sites using Dauranci and Kananci. In recent language development Zazzaganci took over the innovation of writing and speaking the current Hausa language use.\nNorthernmost dialects and loss of tonality.\nThe western to eastern Hausa dialects of \"Kurhwayanci\", Dam\"agaram\" and \"Adarawa\", represent the traditional northernmost limit of native Hausa communities. These are spoken in the northernmost sahel and mid-Saharan regions in west and central Niger in the Tillaberi, Tahoua, Dosso, Maradi, Agadez and Zinder regions. While mutually comprehensible with other dialects (especially \"Sakkwatanci\", and to a lesser extent \"Gaananci\"), the northernmost dialects have slight grammatical and lexical differences owing to frequent contact with the Zarma, Fula, and Tuareg groups and cultural changes owing to the geographical differences between the grassland and desert zones. These dialects also have the quality of bordering on non-tonal pitch accent dialects.\nThis link between non-tonality and geographic location is not limited to Hausa alone, but is exhibited in other northern dialects of neighbouring languages; example includes differences within the Songhay language (between the non-tonal northernmost dialects of Koyra Chiini in Timbuktu and Koyraboro Senni in Gao; and the tonal southern Zarma dialect, spoken from western Niger to northern Ghana), and within the Soninke language (between the non-tonal northernmost dialects of Imraguen and Nemadi spoken in east-central Mauritania; and the tonal southern dialects of Senegal, Mali and the Sahel).\nGhanaian Hausa dialect.\nThe Ghanaian Hausa dialect (\"Gaananci\"), spoken in Ghana and Togo, is a distinct western native Hausa dialect-bloc with adequate linguistic and media resources available. Separate smaller Hausa dialects are spoken by an unknown number of Hausa further west in parts of Burkina Faso, and in the Haoussa Foulane, Badji Haoussa, Guezou Haoussa, and Ansongo districts of northeastern Mali (where it is designated as a minority language by the Malian government), but there are very little linguistic resources and research done on these particular dialects at this time.\nGaananci forms a separate group from other Western Hausa dialects, as it now falls outside the contiguous Hausa-dominant area, and is usually identified by the use of \"c\" for \"ky\", and \"j\" for \"gy\". This is attributed to the fact that Ghana's Hausa population descend from Hausa-Fulani traders settled in the zongo districts of major trade-towns up and down the previous Asante, Gonja and Dagomba kingdoms stretching from the sahel to coastal regions, in particular the cities of Accra (Sabon Zango, Nima), Takoradi and Cape Coast\nGaananci exhibits noted inflected influences from Zarma, Gur, Jula-Bambara, Akan, and Soninke, as Ghana is the westernmost area in which the Hausa language is a major lingua-franca among sahelian/Muslim West Africans, including both Ghanaian and non-Ghanaian zango migrants primarily from the northern regions, or Mali and Burkina Faso. Ghana also marks the westernmost boundary in which the Hausa people inhabit in any considerable number. Immediately west and north of Ghana (in C\u00f4te d'Ivoire, and Burkina Faso), Hausa is abruptly replaced with Dioula\u2013Bambara as the main sahelian/Muslim lingua-franca of what become predominantly Manding areas, and native Hausa-speakers plummet to a very small urban minority.\nBecause of this, and the presence of surrounding Akan, Gbe, Gur and Mande languages, Gaananci was historically isolated from the other Hausa dialects. Despite this difference, grammatical similarities between \"Sakkwatanci\" and Ghanaian Hausa determine that the dialect, and the origin of the Ghanaian Hausa people themselves, are derived from the northwestern Hausa area surrounding Sokoto.\nHausa is also widely spoken by non-native Gur, and Mand\u00e9 Ghanaian Muslims, but differs from Gaananci, and rather has features consistent with non-native Hausa dialects.\nOther native dialects.\nHausa is also spoken in various parts of Cameroon and Chad, which combined the mixed dialects of Northern Nigeria and Niger. In addition, Arabic has had a great influence in the way Hausa is spoken by the native Hausa speakers in these areas.\nNon-native Hausa.\nIn West Africa, Hausa's use as a lingua franca has given rise to a non-native pronunciation that differs vastly from native pronunciation by way of key omissions of implosive and ejective consonants present in native Hausa dialects, such as \"\u0257\", \"\u0253\" and \"k\u02bc/\u0199\", which are pronounced by non-native speakers as \"d\", \"b\" and \"k\" respectively. This creates confusion among non-native and native Hausa speakers, as non-native pronunciation does not distinguish words like ' (\"correct\") and ' (\"one-by-one\"). Another difference between native and non-native Hausa is the omission of vowel length in words and change in the standard tone of native Hausa dialects (ranging from native Fulani and Tuareg Hausa-speakers omitting tone altogether, to Hausa speakers with Gur or Yoruba mother tongues using additional tonal structures similar to those used in their native languages). Use of masculine and feminine gender nouns and sentence structure are usually omitted or interchanged, and many native Hausa nouns and verbs are substituted with non-native terms from local languages.\nNon-native speakers of Hausa numbered more than 25\u00a0million and, in some areas, live close to native Hausa. It has replaced many other languages especially in the north-central and north-eastern part of Nigeria and continues to gain popularity in other parts of Africa as a result of Hausa movies and music which spread out throughout the region.\nHausa-based pidgins.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThere are several pidgin forms of Hausa. Barikanchi was formerly used in the colonial army of Nigeria. Gibanawa is currently in widespread use in Jega in northwestern Nigeria, south of the native Hausa area.\nLoan words.\nThe Hausa language has a long history of borrowing words from other languages, usually from the languages being spoken around and near Hausaland. \nPhonology.\nConsonants.\nHausa has between 23 and 25 consonant phonemes depending on the speaker.\nThe three-way contrast between palatals , plain velars , and labialized velars is found only before long and short , e.g. ('grass'), ('to increase'), ('shea-nuts'). Before front vowels, only palatals and labialized velars occur, e.g. ('jealousy') vs. ('side of body'). Before rounded vowels, only labialized velars occur, e.g. ('ringworm').\nGlottalic consonants.\nHausa has glottalic consonants (implosives and ejectives) at four or five places of articulation (depending on the dialect). They require movement of the glottis during pronunciation and have a staccato sound.\nThey are written with modified versions of Latin letters. They can also be denoted with an apostrophe, either before or after depending on the letter, as shown below:\nVowels.\nHausa vowels occur in five different vowel qualities, all of which can be short or long, totaling 10 monophthongs. In addition, there are four diphthongs, giving a total number of 14 vocalic phonemes.\nIn comparison with the long vowels, the short can be similar in quality to the long vowels, mid-centralized to or centralized to .\nMedial can be neutralized to , with the rounding depending on the environment.\nMedial are neutralized with .\nThe short can be either similar in quality to the long , or it can be as high as , with possible intermediate pronunciations ().\nThe 4 diphthongs in Hausa are .\nTones.\nHausa is a tonal language. Each of its five vowels may have low tone, high tone or falling tone. In standard written Hausa, tone is not marked. In recent linguistic and pedagogical materials, tone is marked by means of diacritics.\n \u00e0 \u00e8 \u00ec \u00f2 \u00f9\u00a0\u2013 low tone: grave accent (`)\n \u00e2 \u00ea \u00ee \u00f4 \u00fb\u00a0\u2013 falling tone: circumflex (\u02c6)\nAn acute accent (\u00b4) may be used for high tone, but the usual practice is to leave high tone unmarked.\nMorphology.\nNouns.\nExcept for the Zaria and Bauchi dialects spoken south of Kano, Hausa distinguishes between masculine and feminine genders.\nHausa, like the rest of the Chadic languages in particular and Afro-Asiatic languages in general, is known for its complex, irregular pluralization of nouns. Noun plurals in Hausa are derived using a variety of morphological processes, such as suffixation, infixation, reduplication, or a combination of any of these processes. There are 20 plural classes proposed by Newman (2000).\nPronouns.\nHausa marks tense differences by different sets of subject pronouns, sometimes with the pronoun combined with some additional particle. For this reason, a subject pronoun must accompany every verb in Hausa, regardless of whether the subject is known from previous context or is expressed by a noun subject. Thus Hausa is a non pro-drop language.\nVerbs.\nHausa verbs are classified into 7 grades:\nAlso note that Hausa has many irregular verbs that do not conform to the system above.\nWriting systems.\n\"Boko\" (Latin).\nHausa's modern official orthography is a Latin-based alphabet called \"boko\", which was introduced in the 1930s by the British colonial administration.\nThe letter \"\u01b4\" (y with a right hook) is used only in Niger; in Nigeria it is written \"\u02bcy\".\nTone and vowel length are not marked in writing. So, for example, \"from\" and \"battle\" are both written \"daga\". The distinction between and (which does not exist for all speakers) is not marked in orthography, but may be indicated with R\u0303 r\u0303 for the trill in linguistic transcription.\n\"Ajami\" (Arabic).\nHausa has also been written in \"ajami\", an Arabic alphabet, since the early 17th century. The first known work to be written in Hausa is Riwayar Nabi Musa by Abdullahi Suka in the 17th century.[] There is no standard system of using \"ajami\", and different writers may use letters with different values. Short vowels are written regularly with the help of vowel marks, which are seldom used in Arabic texts other than the Quran. Many medieval Hausa manuscripts in \"ajami\", similar to the Timbuktu Manuscripts, have been discovered recently; some of them even describe constellations and calendars.\nAs Hausa Ajami script was never recognized and regulated officially, there has never been a top down imposition of a unified convention. Standardization of letters in Ajami has happened over time and in various stages, in synch with neighbouring Ajami traditions, as well as external factors.\nIn Niger and Nigeria, there exists two general orthographic traditions, each derived from two Quranic orthographic practices. One of these is based on the Quran recitation and inscription of the 8th century religious scholar Hafs ibn Sulayman, the other based on the Quran recitation and inscription of another 8th Century scholar, Warsh. \"Hafs\" tradition is the most popular across the Muslim world, and especially in Egypt, the Levant, and the Arabian Peninsula. \"Warsh\" tradition is the second most popular tradition across the Muslim world, and has been especially popular in North Africa, West Africa, and Andalusia.\nFor example, vowels in Hausa Ajami script, including representation of vowel [e], and differentiation of short versus long vowels, were one of the first aspects to be unified and standardized. Consonants on the other hand, especially consonant letters for representing sounds that don't exist in Arabic, took longer to become standardized. Some new letters were even coined in the late 19th and early 20th century, and because of the direct influence of the Boko alphabet (Latin alphabet). For example, whereas previously in writing, sounds [b] and [\u0253] may have usually been written with a singe letter \"ba\" '\u0628\u200e', it was the innovation of introducing the separate letter in Latin alphabet that created an impetus for scholars writing in Ajami script, to innovate and introduce a separate Ajami letter for the distinct sound as well.\nBelow is the list of letters of Hausa Ajami, in both Warsh and Hafs traditions. Beige highlight marks letters that are only used for writing of loan words of Arabic or European origin. Green highlight marks letters that are innovations of Hausa orthography and are not used in Arabic language.\nOther systems.\nHausa is one of three indigenous languages of Nigeria that have been rendered in braille.\nAt least three other writing systems for Hausa have been proposed or \"discovered\". None of these are in active use beyond perhaps some individuals.\nOral literature.\nIn 1905, George Charleton Merrick (a British army officer and Hausa interpreter) published \"Hausa Proverbs,\" a collection of over 400 proverbs in Hausa (Roman script) with English translations. Here are some of those proverbs: \nCharles Henry Robinson's \"Hausa Grammar\", also published in 1905, contains a selection of proverbs in Hausa (Roman script) with English translations; here are a few of those proverbs:\nA collection of over 100 Hausa proverbs in both Hausa and English translation appears in Volume 2 of R. S. Rattray's \"Hausa Folklore, Customs, Proverbs, etc. by Malam Shaihu\". The Hausa text is printed both in Arabic script as provided by Malam Shaihu, a Kano-born Hausa teacher, and in Roman transliteration provided by Rattray. Here are some of those proverbs:\nRattray also includes 30 stories told in Hausa by Malam Shaihu: 21 stories with human characters in volume 1, and 9 animal stories in volume 2, featuring a cycle of stories about Gizo, the trickster spider of Hausa tradition.\nThere are several other collections of traditional Hausa tales available in both Hausa and English translation. J.F. Schon's \"Magana Hausa\" of 1885 includes the Hausa text of 83 tales with an English translation available in some, but not all, editions. In 1914, A.J.N. Tremearne published the Hausa texts of over 170 Hausa stories in \"Hausa Folktales\", which features Gizo the trickster spider on its cover, with English translations having appeared earlier in Tremearne's \"Hausa Superstitions and Customs\" and other publications. More recently, Neil Skinner's \"Hausa Tales and Traditions\" provides English translations of the stories that first appeared in 1924 in Frank Edgar\u2019s \"Tatsuniyoyi na Hausa\".\nExample text.\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in Hausa:\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in English\n\"All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14219", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14219", "title": "Homophobic", "text": ""}
{"id": "14220", "revid": "47120006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14220", "title": "History of mathematics", "text": "The history of mathematics deals with the origin of discoveries in mathematics and the mathematical methods and notation of the past. Before the modern age and worldwide spread of knowledge, written examples of new mathematical developments have come to light only in a few locales. From 3000 BC the Mesopotamian states of Sumer, Akkad and Assyria, followed closely by Ancient Egypt and the Levantine state of Ebla began using arithmetic, algebra and geometry for taxation, commerce, trade, and in astronomy, to record time and formulate calendars.\nThe earliest mathematical texts available are from Mesopotamia and Egypt \u2013 \"Plimpton 322\" (Babylonian c.\u20092000 \u2013 1900 BC), the \"Rhind Mathematical Papyrus\" (Egyptian c. 1800 BC) and the \"Moscow Mathematical Papyrus\" (Egyptian c. 1890 BC). All these texts mention the so-called Pythagorean triples, so, by inference, the Pythagorean theorem seems to be the most ancient and widespread mathematical development, after basic arithmetic and geometry.\nThe study of mathematics as a \"demonstrative discipline\" began in the 6th century BC with the Pythagoreans, who coined the term \"mathematics\" from the ancient Greek \"\u03bc\u03ac\u03b8\u03b7\u03bc\u03b1\" (\"mathema\"), meaning \"subject of instruction\". Greek mathematics greatly refined the methods (especially through the introduction of deductive reasoning and mathematical rigor in proofs) and expanded the subject matter of mathematics. The ancient Romans used applied mathematics in surveying, structural engineering, mechanical engineering, bookkeeping, creation of lunar and solar calendars, and even arts and crafts. Chinese mathematics made early contributions, including a place value system and the first use of negative numbers. The Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system and the rules for the use of its operations, in use throughout the world today, evolved over the course of the first millennium AD in India and were transmitted to the Western world via Islamic mathematics through the work of Khw\u0101rizm\u012b. Islamic mathematics, in turn, developed and expanded the mathematics known to these civilizations. Contemporaneous with but independent of these traditions were the mathematics developed by the Maya civilization of Mexico and Central America, where the concept of zero was given a standard symbol in Maya numerals.\nMany Greek and Arabic texts on mathematics were translated into Latin from the 12th century, leading to further development of mathematics in Medieval Europe. From ancient times through the Middle Ages, periods of mathematical discovery were often followed by centuries of stagnation. Beginning in Renaissance Italy in the 15th century, new mathematical developments, interacting with new scientific discoveries, were made at an increasing pace that continues through the present day. This includes the groundbreaking work of both Isaac Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in the development of infinitesimal calculus during the 17th century and following discoveries of German mathematicians like Carl Friedrich Gauss and David Hilbert.\nPrehistoric.\nThe origins of mathematical thought lie in the concepts of number, patterns in nature, magnitude, and form. Modern studies of animal cognition have shown that these concepts are not unique to humans. Such concepts would have been part of everyday life in hunter-gatherer societies. The idea of the \"number\" concept evolving gradually over time is supported by the existence of languages that preserve the distinction between \"one\", \"two\", and \"many\", but not of numbers larger than two.\nThe use of yarn by Neanderthals some 40,000 years ago at a site in Abri du Maras in the south of France suggests they knew basic concepts in mathematics. The Ishango bone, found near the headwaters of the Nile river (northeastern Congo), may be more than 20,000 years old and consists of a series of marks carved in three columns running the length of the bone. Common interpretations are that the Ishango bone shows either a \"tally\" of the earliest known demonstration of sequences of prime numbers or a six-month lunar calendar. Peter Rudman argues that the development of the concept of prime numbers could only have come about after the concept of division, which he dates to after 10,000 BC, with prime numbers probably not being understood until about 500 BC. He also writes that \"no attempt has been made to explain why a tally of something should exhibit multiples of two, prime numbers between 10 and 20, and some numbers that are almost multiples of 10.\" The Ishango bone, according to scholar Alexander Marshack, may have influenced the later development of mathematics in Egypt as, like some entries on the Ishango bone, Egyptian arithmetic also made use of multiplication by 2; this however, is disputed.\nPredynastic Egyptians of the 5th millennium BC pictorially represented geometric designs. It has been claimed that megalithic monuments in England and Scotland, dating from the 3rd millennium BC, incorporate geometric ideas such as circles, ellipses, and Pythagorean triples in their design. All of the above are disputed, however, and the currently oldest undisputed mathematical documents are from Babylonian and dynastic Egyptian sources.\nBabylonian.\nBabylonian mathematics refers to any mathematics of the peoples of Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) from the days of the early Sumerians through the Hellenistic period, almost to the dawn of Christianity. The majority of Babylonian mathematical work comes from two widely separated periods: The first few hundred years of the second millennium BC (Old Babylonian period) and the last few centuries of the first millennium BC (Seleucid period). It is named Babylonian mathematics due to the central role of Babylon as a place of study. Later, under the Arab Empire, Mesopotamia, especially Baghdad, once again became an important center of study for Islamic mathematics.\nIn contrast to the sparsity of sources in Egyptian mathematics, knowledge of Babylonian mathematics is derived from more than 400 clay tablets unearthed since the 1850s. Written in Cuneiform script, tablets were inscribed whilst the clay was moist, and baked hard in an oven or by the heat of the sun. Some of these appear to be graded homework.\nThe earliest evidence of written mathematics dates back to the ancient Sumerians, who built the earliest civilization in Mesopotamia. They developed a complex system of metrology from 3000 BC that was chiefly concerned with administrative/financial counting, such as grain allotments, workers, weights of silver, or even liquids, among other things. From around 2500 BC onward, the Sumerians wrote multiplication tables on clay tablets and dealt with geometrical exercises and division problems. The earliest traces of the Babylonian numerals also date back to this period.\nBabylonian mathematics was written using a sexagesimal (base-60) numeral system. From this derives the modern-day usage of 60 seconds in a minute, 60 minutes in an hour, and 360 (60 \u00d7 6) degrees in a circle, as well as the use of seconds and minutes of arc to denote fractions of a degree. It is thought the sexagesimal system was initially used by Sumerian scribes because 60 can be evenly divided by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 12, 15, 20 and 30, and for scribes (doling out the aforementioned grain allotments, recording weights of silver, etc.) being able to easily calculate by hand was essential, and so a sexagesimal system is pragmatically easier to calculate by hand with; however, there is the possibility that using a sexagesimal system was an ethno-linguistic phenomenon (that might not ever be known), and not a mathematical/practical decision. Also, unlike the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, the Babylonians had a place-value system, where digits written in the left column represented larger values, much as in the decimal system. The power of the Babylonian notational system lay in that it could be used to represent fractions as easily as whole numbers; thus, multiplying two numbers that contained fractions was no different from multiplying integers, similar to modern notation. The notational system of the Babylonians was the best of any civilization until the Renaissance, and its power allowed it to achieve remarkable computational accuracy; for example, the Babylonian tablet YBC 7289 gives an approximation of \u221a2 accurate to five decimal places. The Babylonians lacked, however, an equivalent of the decimal point, and so the place value of a symbol often had to be inferred from the context. By the Seleucid period, the Babylonians had developed a zero symbol as a placeholder for empty positions; however, it was only used for intermediate positions. This zero sign does not appear in terminal positions; thus, the Babylonians came close but did not develop a true place value system.\nOther topics covered by Babylonian mathematics include fractions, algebra, quadratic and cubic equations, and the calculation of regular numbers and their reciprocal pairs. The tablets also include multiplication tables and methods for solving linear, quadratic equations, and cubic equations, a remarkable achievement for the time. Tablets from the Old Babylonian period also contain the earliest known statement of the Pythagorean theorem. However, as with Egyptian mathematics, Babylonian mathematics shows no awareness of the difference between exact and approximate solutions, or the solvability of a problem, and most importantly, no explicit statement of the need for proofs or logical principles.\nEgyptian.\nEgyptian mathematics refers to mathematics written in the Egyptian language. From the Hellenistic period, Greek replaced Egyptian as the written language of Egyptian scholars. Mathematical study in Egypt later continued under the Arab Empire as part of Islamic mathematics, when Arabic became the written language of Egyptian scholars. Archaeological evidence has suggested that the Ancient Egyptian counting system had origins in Sub-Saharan Africa. Also, fractal geometry designs which are widespread among Sub-Saharan African cultures are also found in Egyptian architecture and cosmological signs.\nThe most extensive Egyptian mathematical text is the Rhind papyrus (sometimes also called the Ahmes Papyrus after its author), dated to c. 1650 BC but likely a copy of an older document from the Middle Kingdom of about 2000\u20131800 BC. It is an instruction manual for students in arithmetic and geometry. In addition to giving area formulas and methods for multiplication, division and working with unit fractions, it also contains evidence of other mathematical knowledge, including composite and prime numbers; arithmetic, geometric and harmonic means; and simplistic understandings of both the Sieve of Eratosthenes and perfect number theory (namely, that of the number 6). It also shows how to solve first order linear equations as well as arithmetic and geometric series.\nAnother significant Egyptian mathematical text is the Moscow papyrus, also from the Middle Kingdom period, dated to c. 1890 BC. It consists of what are today called \"word problems\" or \"story problems\", which were apparently intended as entertainment. One problem is considered to be of particular importance because it gives a method for finding the volume of a frustum (truncated pyramid).\nFinally, the Berlin Papyrus 6619 (c. 1800 BC) shows that ancient Egyptians could solve a second-order algebraic equation.\nGreek.\nGreek mathematics refers to the mathematics written in the Greek language from the time of Thales of Miletus (~600 BC) to the closure of the Academy of Athens in 529 AD. Greek mathematicians lived in cities spread over the entire Eastern Mediterranean, from Italy to North Africa, but were united by culture and language. Greek mathematics of the period following Alexander the Great is sometimes called Hellenistic mathematics.\nGreek mathematics was much more sophisticated than the mathematics that had been developed by earlier cultures. All surviving records of pre-Greek mathematics show the use of inductive reasoning, that is, repeated observations used to establish rules of thumb. Greek mathematicians, by contrast, used deductive reasoning. The Greeks used logic to derive conclusions from definitions and axioms, and used mathematical rigor to prove them.\nGreek mathematics is thought to have begun with Thales of Miletus (c. 624\u2013c.546 BC) and Pythagoras of Samos (c. 582\u2013c. 507 BC). Although the extent of the influence is disputed, they were probably inspired by Egyptian and Babylonian mathematics. According to legend, Pythagoras traveled to Egypt to learn mathematics, geometry, and astronomy from Egyptian priests.\nThales used geometry to solve problems such as calculating the height of pyramids and the distance of ships from the shore. He is credited with the first use of deductive reasoning applied to geometry, by deriving four corollaries to Thales' Theorem. As a result, he has been hailed as the first true mathematician and the first known individual to whom a mathematical discovery has been attributed. Pythagoras established the Pythagorean School, whose doctrine it was that mathematics ruled the universe and whose motto was \"All is number\". It was the Pythagoreans who coined the term \"mathematics\", and with whom the study of mathematics for its own sake begins. The Pythagoreans are credited with the first proof of the Pythagorean theorem, though the statement of the theorem has a long history, and with the proof of the existence of irrational numbers. Although he was preceded by the Babylonians, Indians and the Chinese, the Neopythagorean mathematician Nicomachus (60\u2013120 AD) provided one of the earliest Greco-Roman multiplication tables, whereas the oldest extant Greek multiplication table is found on a wax tablet dated to the 1st century AD (now found in the British Museum). The association of the Neopythagoreans with the Western invention of the multiplication table is evident in its later Medieval name: the \"mensa Pythagorica\".\nPlato (428/427 BC \u2013 348/347 BC) is important in the history of mathematics for inspiring and guiding others. His Platonic Academy, in Athens, became the mathematical center of the world in the 4th century BC, and it was from this school that the leading mathematicians of the day, such as Eudoxus of Cnidus (c. 390 - c. 340 BC), came. Plato also discussed the foundations of mathematics, clarified some of the definitions (e.g. that of a line as \"breadthless length\").\nEudoxus developed the method of exhaustion, a precursor of modern integration and a theory of ratios that avoided the problem of incommensurable magnitudes. The former allowed the calculations of areas and volumes of curvilinear figures, while the latter enabled subsequent geometers to make significant advances in geometry. Though he made no specific technical mathematical discoveries, Aristotle (384\u2013c.\u2009322 BC) contributed significantly to the development of mathematics by laying the foundations of logic.\nIn the 3rd century BC, the premier center of mathematical education and research was the Musaeum of Alexandria. It was there that Euclid (c.\u2009300 BC) taught, and wrote the \"Elements\", widely considered the most successful and influential textbook of all time. The \"Elements\" introduced mathematical rigor through the axiomatic method and is the earliest example of the format still used in mathematics today, that of definition, axiom, theorem, and proof. Although most of the contents of the \"Elements\" were already known, Euclid arranged them into a single, coherent logical framework. The \"Elements\" was known to all educated people in the West up through the middle of the 20th century and its contents are still taught in geometry classes today. In addition to the familiar theorems of Euclidean geometry, the \"Elements\" was meant as an introductory textbook to all mathematical subjects of the time, such as number theory, algebra and solid geometry, including proofs that the square root of two is irrational and that there are infinitely many prime numbers. Euclid also wrote extensively on other subjects, such as conic sections, optics, spherical geometry, and mechanics, but only half of his writings survive.\nArchimedes (c.\u2009287\u2013212 BC) of Syracuse, widely considered the greatest mathematician of antiquity, used the method of exhaustion to calculate the area under the arc of a parabola with the summation of an infinite series, in a manner not too dissimilar from modern calculus. He also showed one could use the method of exhaustion to calculate the value of \u03c0 with as much precision as desired, and obtained the most accurate value of \u03c0 then known, 3+ &lt; \u03c0 &lt; 3+. He also studied the spiral bearing his name, obtained formulas for the volumes of surfaces of revolution (paraboloid, ellipsoid, hyperboloid), and an ingenious method of exponentiation for expressing very large numbers. While he is also known for his contributions to physics and several advanced mechanical devices, Archimedes himself placed far greater value on the products of his thought and general mathematical principles. He regarded as his greatest achievement his finding of the surface area and volume of a sphere, which he obtained by proving these are 2/3 the surface area and volume of a cylinder circumscribing the sphere.\nApollonius of Perga (c.\u2009262\u2013190 BC) made significant advances to the study of conic sections, showing that one can obtain all three varieties of conic section by varying the angle of the plane that cuts a double-napped cone. He also coined the terminology in use today for conic sections, namely parabola (\"place beside\" or \"comparison\"), \"ellipse\" (\"deficiency\"), and \"hyperbola\" (\"a throw beyond\"). His work \"Conics\" is one of the best known and preserved mathematical works from antiquity, and in it he derives many theorems concerning conic sections that would prove invaluable to later mathematicians and astronomers studying planetary motion, such as Isaac Newton. While neither Apollonius nor any other Greek mathematicians made the leap to coordinate geometry, Apollonius' treatment of curves is in some ways similar to the modern treatment, and some of his work seems to anticipate the development of analytical geometry by Descartes some 1800 years later.\nAround the same time, Eratosthenes of Cyrene (c.\u2009276\u2013194 BC) devised the Sieve of Eratosthenes for finding prime numbers. The 3rd century BC is generally regarded as the \"Golden Age\" of Greek mathematics, with advances in pure mathematics henceforth in relative decline. Nevertheless, in the centuries that followed significant advances were made in applied mathematics, most notably trigonometry, largely to address the needs of astronomers. Hipparchus of Nicaea (c.\u2009190\u2013120 BC) is considered the founder of trigonometry for compiling the first known trigonometric table, and to him is also due the systematic use of the 360 degree circle. Heron of Alexandria (c.\u200910\u201370 AD) is credited with Heron's formula for finding the area of a scalene triangle and with being the first to recognize the possibility of negative numbers possessing square roots. Menelaus of Alexandria (c.\u2009100 AD) pioneered spherical trigonometry through Menelaus' theorem. The most complete and influential trigonometric work of antiquity is the \"Almagest\" of Ptolemy (c.\u2009AD 90\u2013168), a landmark astronomical treatise whose trigonometric tables would be used by astronomers for the next thousand years. Ptolemy is also credited with Ptolemy's theorem for deriving trigonometric quantities, and the most accurate value of \u03c0 outside of China until the medieval period, 3.1416.\nFollowing a period of stagnation after Ptolemy, the period between 250 and 350 AD is sometimes referred to as the \"Silver Age\" of Greek mathematics. During this period, Diophantus made significant advances in algebra, particularly indeterminate analysis, which is also known as \"Diophantine analysis\". The study of Diophantine equations and Diophantine approximations is a significant area of research to this day. His main work was the \"Arithmetica\", a collection of 150 algebraic problems dealing with exact solutions to determinate and indeterminate equations. The \"Arithmetica\" had a significant influence on later mathematicians, such as Pierre de Fermat, who arrived at his famous Last Theorem after trying to generalize a problem he had read in the \"Arithmetica\" (that of dividing a square into two squares). Diophantus also made significant advances in notation, the \"Arithmetica\" being the first instance of algebraic symbolism and syncopation.\nAmong the last great Greek mathematicians is Pappus of Alexandria (4th century AD). He is known for his hexagon theorem and centroid theorem, as well as the Pappus configuration and Pappus graph. His \"Collection\" is a major source of knowledge on Greek mathematics as most of it has survived. Pappus is considered the last major innovator in Greek mathematics, with subsequent work consisting mostly of commentaries on earlier work.\nThe first woman mathematician recorded was Hypatia of Alexandria (AD 350\u2013415), who wrote many works on applied mathematics. Because of a political dispute, the Christian community in Alexandria had her stripped publicly and executed. Her death is sometimes taken as the end of the era of the Alexandrian Greek mathematics, although work did continue in Athens for another century with figures such as Proclus, Simplicius and Eutocius. Although Proclus and Simplicius were more philosophers than mathematicians, their commentaries on earlier works are valuable sources on Greek mathematics. The closure of the neo-Platonic Academy of Athens by the emperor Justinian in 529 AD is traditionally held as marking the end of the era of Greek mathematics, although the Greek tradition continued unbroken in the Byzantine empire with mathematicians such as Anthemius of Tralles and Isidore of Miletus, the architects of the Hagia Sophia. Nevertheless, Byzantine mathematics consisted mostly of commentaries, with little in the way of innovation, and the centers of mathematical innovation were to be found elsewhere by this time.\nRoman.\nAlthough ethnic Greek mathematicians continued under the rule of the late Roman Republic and subsequent Roman Empire, there were no noteworthy native Latin mathematicians in comparison. Ancient Romans such as Cicero (106\u201343 BC), an influential Roman statesman who studied mathematics in Greece, believed that Roman surveyors and calculators were far more interested in applied mathematics than the theoretical mathematics and geometry that were prized by the Greeks. It is unclear if the Romans first derived their numerical system directly from the Greek precedent or from Etruscan numerals used by the Etruscan civilization centered in what is now Tuscany, central Italy.\nUsing calculation, Romans were adept at both instigating and detecting financial fraud, as well as managing taxes for the treasury. Siculus Flaccus, one of the Roman \"gromatici\" (i.e. land surveyor), wrote the \"Categories of Fields\", which aided Roman surveyors in measuring the surface areas of allotted lands and territories. Aside from managing trade and taxes, the Romans also regularly applied mathematics to solve problems in engineering, including the erection of architecture such as bridges, road-building, and preparation for military campaigns. Arts and crafts such as Roman mosaics, inspired by previous Greek designs, created illusionist geometric patterns and rich, detailed scenes that required precise measurements for each tessera tile, the opus tessellatum pieces on average measuring eight millimeters square and the finer opus vermiculatum pieces having an average surface of four millimeters square.\nThe creation of the Roman calendar also necessitated basic mathematics. The first calendar allegedly dates back to 8th century BC during the Roman Kingdom and included 356 days plus a leap year every other year. In contrast, the lunar calendar of the Republican era contained 355 days, roughly ten-and-one-fourth days shorter than the solar year, a discrepancy that was solved by adding an extra month into the calendar after the 23rd of February. This calendar was supplanted by the Julian calendar, a solar calendar organized by Julius Caesar (100\u201344 BC) and devised by Sosigenes of Alexandria to include a leap day every four years in a 365-day cycle. This calendar, which contained an error of 11 minutes and 14 seconds, was later corrected by the Gregorian calendar organized by Pope Gregory XIII (r.\u20091572\u00a0\u2013\u00a01585), virtually the same solar calendar used in modern times as the international standard calendar.\nAt roughly the same time, the Han Chinese and the Romans both invented the wheeled odometer device for measuring distances traveled, the Roman model first described by the Roman civil engineer and architect Vitruvius (c.\u200980 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u200915 BC). The device was used at least until the reign of emperor Commodus (r.\u2009177\u00a0\u2013\u00a0192 AD), but its design seems to have been lost until experiments were made during the 15th century in Western Europe. Perhaps relying on similar gear-work and technology found in the Antikythera mechanism, the odometer of Vitruvius featured chariot wheels measuring 4 feet (1.2\u00a0m) in diameter turning four-hundred times in one Roman mile (roughly 4590\u00a0ft/1400\u00a0m). With each revolution, a pin-and-axle device engaged a 400-tooth cogwheel that turned a second gear responsible for dropping pebbles into a box, each pebble representing one mile traversed.\nChinese.\nAn analysis of early Chinese mathematics has demonstrated its unique development compared to other parts of the world, leading scholars to assume an entirely independent development. The oldest extant mathematical text from China is the \"Zhoubi Suanjing\" (\u5468\u9ac0\u7b97\u7d93), variously dated to between 1200 BC and 100 BC, though a date of about 300 BC during the Warring States Period appears reasonable. However, the Tsinghua Bamboo Slips, containing the earliest known decimal multiplication table (although ancient Babylonians had ones with a base of 60), is dated around 305 BC and is perhaps the oldest surviving mathematical text of China.\nOf particular note is the use in Chinese mathematics of a decimal positional notation system, the so-called \"rod numerals\" in which distinct ciphers were used for numbers between 1 and 10, and additional ciphers for powers of ten. Thus, the number 123 would be written using the symbol for \"1\", followed by the symbol for \"100\", then the symbol for \"2\" followed by the symbol for \"10\", followed by the symbol for \"3\". This was the most advanced number system in the world at the time, apparently in use several centuries before the common era and well before the development of the Indian numeral system. Rod numerals allowed the representation of numbers as large as desired and allowed calculations to be carried out on the \"suan pan\", or Chinese abacus. The date of the invention of the \"suan pan\" is not certain, but the earliest written mention dates from AD 190, in Xu Yue's \"Supplementary Notes on the Art of Figures\".\nThe oldest extant work on geometry in China comes from the philosophical Mohist canon c.\u2009330 BC, compiled by the followers of Mozi (470\u2013390 BC). The \"Mo Jing\" described various aspects of many fields associated with physical science, and provided a small number of geometrical theorems as well. It also defined the concepts of circumference, diameter, radius, and volume.\nIn 212 BC, the Emperor Qin Shi Huang commanded all books in the Qin Empire other than officially sanctioned ones be burned. This decree was not universally obeyed, but as a consequence of this order little is known about ancient Chinese mathematics before this date. After the book burning of 212 BC, the Han dynasty (202 BC\u2013220 AD) produced works of mathematics which presumably expanded on works that are now lost. The most important of these is \"The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art\", the full title of which appeared by AD 179, but existed in part under other titles beforehand. It consists of 246 word problems involving agriculture, business, employment of geometry to figure height spans and dimension ratios for Chinese pagoda towers, engineering, surveying, and includes material on right triangles. It created mathematical proof for the Pythagorean theorem, and a mathematical formula for Gaussian elimination. The treatise also provides values of \u03c0, which Chinese mathematicians originally approximated as 3 until Liu Xin (d. 23 AD) provided a figure of 3.1457 and subsequently Zhang Heng (78\u2013139) approximated pi as 3.1724, as well as 3.162 by taking the square root of 10. Liu Hui commented on the \"Nine Chapters\" in the 3rd century AD and gave a value of \u03c0 accurate to 5 decimal places (i.e. 3.14159). Though more of a matter of computational stamina than theoretical insight, in the 5th century AD Zu Chongzhi computed the value of \u03c0 to seven decimal places (between 3.1415926 and 3.1415927), which remained the most accurate value of \u03c0 for almost the next 1000 years. He also established a method which would later be called Cavalieri's principle to find the volume of a sphere.\nThe high-water mark of Chinese mathematics occurred in the 13th century during the latter half of the Song dynasty (960\u20131279), with the development of Chinese algebra. The most important text from that period is the \"Precious Mirror of the Four Elements\" by Zhu Shijie (1249\u20131314), dealing with the solution of simultaneous higher order algebraic equations using a method similar to Horner's method. The \"Precious Mirror\" also contains a diagram of Pascal's triangle with coefficients of binomial expansions through the eighth power, though both appear in Chinese works as early as 1100. The Chinese also made use of the complex combinatorial diagram known as the magic square and magic circles, described in ancient times and perfected by Yang Hui (AD 1238\u20131298).\nEven after European mathematics began to flourish during the Renaissance, European and Chinese mathematics were separate traditions, with significant Chinese mathematical output in decline from the 13th century onwards. Jesuit missionaries such as Matteo Ricci carried mathematical ideas back and forth between the two cultures from the 16th to 18th centuries, though at this point far more mathematical ideas were entering China than leaving.\nJapanese mathematics, Korean mathematics, and Vietnamese mathematics are traditionally viewed as stemming from Chinese mathematics and belonging to the Confucian-based East Asian cultural sphere. Korean and Japanese mathematics were heavily influenced by the algebraic works produced during China's Song dynasty, whereas Vietnamese mathematics was heavily indebted to popular works of China's Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644). For instance, although Vietnamese mathematical treatises were written in either Chinese or the native Vietnamese Ch\u1eef N\u00f4m script, all of them followed the Chinese format of presenting a collection of problems with algorithms for solving them, followed by numerical answers. Mathematics in Vietnam and Korea were mostly associated with the professional court bureaucracy of mathematicians and astronomers, whereas in Japan it was more prevalent in the realm of private schools.\nIndian.\nThe earliest civilization on the Indian subcontinent is the Indus Valley civilization (mature second phase: 2600 to 1900 BC) that flourished in the Indus river basin. Their cities were laid out with geometric regularity, but no known mathematical documents survive from this civilization.\nThe oldest extant mathematical records from India are the Sulba Sutras (dated variously between the 8th century BC and the 2nd century AD), appendices to religious texts which give simple rules for constructing altars of various shapes, such as squares, rectangles, parallelograms, and others. As with Egypt, the preoccupation with temple functions points to an origin of mathematics in religious ritual. The Sulba Sutras give methods for constructing a circle with approximately the same area as a given square, which imply several different approximations of the value of \u03c0. In addition, they compute the square root of 2 to several decimal places, list Pythagorean triples, and give a statement of the Pythagorean theorem. All of these results are present in Babylonian mathematics, indicating Mesopotamian influence. It is not known to what extent the Sulba Sutras influenced later Indian mathematicians. As in China, there is a lack of continuity in Indian mathematics; significant advances are separated by long periods of inactivity.\nP\u0101\u1e47ini (c. 5th century BC) formulated the rules for Sanskrit grammar. His notation was similar to modern mathematical notation, and used metarules, transformations, and recursion. Pingala (roughly 3rd\u20131st centuries BC) in his treatise of prosody uses a device corresponding to a binary numeral system. His discussion of the combinatorics of meters corresponds to an elementary version of the binomial theorem. Pingala's work also contains the basic ideas of Fibonacci numbers (called \"m\u0101tr\u0101meru\").\nThe next significant mathematical documents from India after the \"Sulba Sutras\" are the \"Siddhantas\", astronomical treatises from the 4th and 5th centuries AD (Gupta period) showing strong Hellenistic influence. They are significant in that they contain the first instance of trigonometric relations based on the half-chord, as is the case in modern trigonometry, rather than the full chord, as was the case in Ptolemaic trigonometry. Through a series of translation errors, the words \"sine\" and \"cosine\" derive from the Sanskrit \"jiya\" and \"kojiya\".\nAround 500 AD, Aryabhata wrote the \"Aryabhatiya\", a slim volume, written in verse, intended to supplement the rules of calculation used in astronomy and mathematical mensuration, though with no feeling for logic or deductive methodology. It is in the \"Aryabhatiya\" that the decimal place-value system first appears. Several centuries later, the Muslim mathematician Abu Rayhan Biruni described the \"Aryabhatiya\" as a \"mix of common pebbles and costly crystals\".\nIn the 7th century, Brahmagupta identified the Brahmagupta theorem, Brahmagupta's identity and Brahmagupta's formula, and for the first time, in \"Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta\", he lucidly explained the use of zero as both a placeholder and decimal digit, and explained the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system. It was from a translation of this Indian text on mathematics (c. 770) that Islamic mathematicians were introduced to this numeral system, which they adapted as Arabic numerals. Islamic scholars carried knowledge of this number system to Europe by the 12th century, and it has now displaced all older number systems throughout the world. Various symbol sets are used to represent numbers in the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system, all of which evolved from the Brahmi numerals. Each of the roughly dozen major scripts of India has its own numeral glyphs. In the 10th century, Halayudha's commentary on Pingala's work contains a study of the Fibonacci sequence and Pascal's triangle.\nIn the 12th century, Bh\u0101skara II, who lived in southern India, wrote extensively on all then known branches of mathematics. His work contains mathematical objects equivalent or approximately equivalent to infinitesimals, the mean value theorem and the derivative of the sine function although he did not develop the notion of a derivative. In the 14th century, Narayana Pandita completed his \"Ganita Kaumudi\".\nAlso in the 14th century, Madhava of Sangamagrama, the founder of the Kerala School of Mathematics, found the Madhava\u2013Leibniz series and obtained from it a transformed series, whose first 21 terms he used to compute the value of \u03c0 as 3.14159265359. Madhava also found the Madhava-Gregory series to determine the arctangent, the Madhava-Newton power series to determine sine and cosine and the Taylor approximation for sine and cosine functions. In the 16th century, Jyesthadeva consolidated many of the Kerala School's developments and theorems in the \"Yukti-bh\u0101\u1e63\u0101\". It has been argued that certain ideas of calculus like infinite series and taylor series of some trigonometry functions, were transmitted to Europe in the 16th century via Jesuit missionaries and traders who were active around the ancient port of Muziris at the time and, as a result, directly influenced later European developments in analysis and calculus. However, other scholars argue that the Kerala School did not formulate a systematic theory of differentiation and integration, and that there is not any direct evidence of their results being transmitted outside Kerala.\nIslamic empires.\nThe Islamic Empire established across the Middle East, Central Asia, North Africa, Iberia, and in parts of India in the 8th century made significant contributions towards mathematics. Although most Islamic texts on mathematics were written in Arabic, they were not all written by Arabs, since much like the status of Greek in the Hellenistic world, Arabic was used as the written language of non-Arab scholars throughout the Islamic world at the time.\nIn the 9th century, the Persian mathematician Mu\u1e25ammad ibn M\u016bs\u0101 al-Khw\u0101rizm\u012b wrote an important book on the Hindu\u2013Arabic numerals and one on methods for solving equations. His book \"On the Calculation with Hindu Numerals\", written about 825, along with the work of Al-Kindi, were instrumental in spreading Indian mathematics and Indian numerals to the West. The word \"algorithm\" is derived from the Latinization of his name, Algoritmi, and the word \"algebra\" from the title of one of his works, \"Al-Kit\u0101b al-mukhta\u1e63ar f\u012b h\u012bs\u0101b al-\u011fabr wa\u2019l-muq\u0101bala\" (\"The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing\"). He gave an exhaustive explanation for the algebraic solution of quadratic equations with positive roots, and he was the first to teach algebra in an elementary form and for its own sake. He also discussed the fundamental method of \"reduction\" and \"balancing\", referring to the transposition of subtracted terms to the other side of an equation, that is, the cancellation of like terms on opposite sides of the equation. This is the operation which al-Khw\u0101rizm\u012b originally described as \"al-jabr\". His algebra was also no longer concerned \"with a series of problems to be resolved, but an exposition which starts with primitive terms in which the combinations must give all possible prototypes for equations, which henceforward explicitly constitute the true object of study.\" He also studied an equation for its own sake and \"in a generic manner, insofar as it does not simply emerge in the course of solving a problem, but is specifically called on to define an infinite class of problems.\"\nIn Egypt, Abu Kamil extended algebra to the set of irrational numbers, accepting square roots and fourth roots as solutions and coefficients to quadratic equations. He also developed techniques used to solve three non-linear simultaneous equations with three unknown variables. One unique feature of his works was trying to find all the possible solutions to some of his problems, including one where he found 2676 solutions. His works formed an important foundation for the development of algebra and influenced later mathematicians, such as al-Karaji and Fibonacci.\nFurther developments in algebra were made by Al-Karaji in his treatise \"al-Fakhri\", where he extends the methodology to incorporate integer powers and integer roots of unknown quantities. Something close to a proof by mathematical induction appears in a book written by Al-Karaji around 1000 AD, who used it to prove the binomial theorem, Pascal's triangle, and the sum of integral cubes. The historian of mathematics, F. Woepcke, praised Al-Karaji for being \"the first who introduced the theory of algebraic calculus.\" Also in the 10th century, Abul Wafa translated the works of Diophantus into Arabic. Ibn al-Haytham was the first mathematician to derive the formula for the sum of the fourth powers, using a method that is readily generalizable for determining the general formula for the sum of any integral powers. He performed an integration in order to find the volume of a paraboloid, and was able to generalize his result for the integrals of polynomials up to the fourth degree. He thus came close to finding a general formula for the integrals of polynomials, but he was not concerned with any polynomials higher than the fourth degree.\nIn the late 11th century, Omar Khayyam wrote \"Discussions of the Difficulties in Euclid\", a book about what he perceived as flaws in Euclid's \"Elements\", especially the parallel postulate. He was also the first to find the general geometric solution to cubic equations. He was also very influential in calendar reform.\nIn the 13th century, Nasir al-Din Tusi (Nasireddin) made advances in spherical trigonometry. He also wrote influential work on Euclid's parallel postulate. In the 15th century, Ghiyath al-Kashi computed the value of \u03c0 to the 16th decimal place. Kashi also had an algorithm for calculating \"n\"th roots, which was a special case of the methods given many centuries later by Ruffini and Horner.\nOther achievements of Muslim mathematicians during this period include the addition of the decimal point notation to the Arabic numerals, the discovery of all the modern trigonometric functions besides the sine, al-Kindi's introduction of cryptanalysis and frequency analysis, the development of analytic geometry by Ibn al-Haytham, the beginning of algebraic geometry by Omar Khayyam and the development of an algebraic notation by al-Qalas\u0101d\u012b.\nDuring the time of the Ottoman Empire and Safavid Empire from the 15th century, the development of Islamic mathematics became stagnant.\nMaya.\nIn the Pre-Columbian Americas, the Maya civilization that flourished in Mexico and Central America during the 1st millennium AD developed a unique tradition of mathematics that, due to its geographic isolation, was entirely independent of existing European, Egyptian, and Asian mathematics. Maya numerals used a base of twenty, the vigesimal system, instead of a base of ten that forms the basis of the decimal system used by most modern cultures. The Maya used mathematics to create the Maya calendar as well as to predict astronomical phenomena in their native Maya astronomy. While the concept of zero had to be inferred in the mathematics of many contemporary cultures, the Maya developed a standard symbol for it.\nMedieval European.\nMedieval European interest in mathematics was driven by concerns quite different from those of modern mathematicians. One driving element was the belief that mathematics provided the key to understanding the created order of nature, frequently justified by Plato's \"Timaeus\" and the biblical passage (in the \"Book of Wisdom\") that God had \"ordered all things in measure, and number, and weight\".\nBoethius provided a place for mathematics in the curriculum in the 6th century when he coined the term \"quadrivium\" to describe the study of arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music. He wrote \"De institutione arithmetica\", a free translation from the Greek of Nicomachus's \"Introduction to Arithmetic\"; \"De institutione musica\", also derived from Greek sources; and a series of excerpts from Euclid's \"Elements\". His works were theoretical, rather than practical, and were the basis of mathematical study until the recovery of Greek and Arabic mathematical works.\nIn the 12th century, European scholars traveled to Spain and Sicily seeking scientific Arabic texts, including al-Khw\u0101rizm\u012b's \"The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing\", translated into Latin by Robert of Chester, and the complete text of Euclid's \"Elements\", translated in various versions by Adelard of Bath, Herman of Carinthia, and Gerard of Cremona. These and other new sources sparked a renewal of mathematics.\nLeonardo of Pisa, now known as Fibonacci, serendipitously learned about the Hindu\u2013Arabic numerals on a trip to what is now B\u00e9ja\u00efa, Algeria with his merchant father. (Europe was still using Roman numerals.) There, he observed a system of arithmetic (specifically algorism) which due to the positional notation of Hindu\u2013Arabic numerals was much more efficient and greatly facilitated commerce. Leonardo wrote \"Liber Abaci\" in 1202 (updated in 1254) introducing the technique to Europe and beginning a long period of popularizing it. The book also brought to Europe what is now known as the Fibonacci sequence (known to Indian mathematicians for hundreds of years before that) which Fibonacci used as an unremarkable example.\nThe 14th century saw the development of new mathematical concepts to investigate a wide range of problems. One important contribution was development of mathematics of local motion. Thomas Bradwardine proposed that speed (V) increases in arithmetic proportion as the ratio of force (F) to resistance (R) increases in geometric proportion. Bradwardine expressed this by a series of specific examples, but although the logarithm had not yet been conceived, we can express his conclusion anachronistically by writing:\nV = log (F/R). Bradwardine's analysis is an example of transferring a mathematical technique used by al-Kindi and Arnald of Villanova to quantify the nature of compound medicines to a different physical problem.\nOne of the 14th-century Oxford Calculators, William of Heytesbury, lacking differential calculus and the concept of limits, proposed to measure instantaneous speed \"by the path that \"would\" be described by [a body] \"if\"... it were moved uniformly at the same degree of speed with which it is moved in that given instant\".\nHeytesbury and others mathematically determined the distance covered by a body undergoing uniformly accelerated motion (today solved by integration), stating that \"a moving body uniformly acquiring or losing that increment [of speed] will traverse in some given time a [distance] completely equal to that which it would traverse if it were moving continuously through the same time with the mean degree [of speed]\".\nNicole Oresme at the University of Paris and the Italian Giovanni di Casali independently provided graphical demonstrations of this relationship, asserting that the area under the line depicting the constant acceleration, represented the total distance traveled. In a later mathematical commentary on Euclid's \"Elements\", Oresme made a more detailed general analysis in which he demonstrated that a body will acquire in each successive increment of time an increment of any quality that increases as the odd numbers. Since Euclid had demonstrated the sum of the odd numbers are the square numbers, the total quality acquired by the body increases as the square of the time.\nRenaissance.\nDuring the Renaissance, the development of mathematics and of accounting were intertwined. While there is no direct relationship between algebra and accounting, the teaching of the subjects and the books published often intended for the children of merchants who were sent to reckoning schools (in Flanders and Germany) or abacus schools (known as \"abbaco\" in Italy), where they learned the skills useful for trade and commerce. There is probably no need for algebra in performing bookkeeping operations, but for complex bartering operations or the calculation of compound interest, a basic knowledge of arithmetic was mandatory and knowledge of algebra was very useful.\nPiero della Francesca (c. 1415\u20131492) wrote books on solid geometry and linear perspective, including \"De Prospectiva Pingendi (On Perspective for Painting)\", \"Trattato d\u2019Abaco (Abacus Treatise)\", and \"De quinque corporibus regularibus (On the Five Regular Solids)\".\nLuca Pacioli's \"Summa de Arithmetica, Geometria, Proportioni et Proportionalit\u00e0\" (Italian: \"Review of Arithmetic, Geometry, Ratio and Proportion\") was first printed and published in Venice in 1494. It included a 27-page treatise on bookkeeping, \"Particularis de Computis et Scripturis\" (Italian: \"Details of Calculation and Recording\"). It was written primarily for, and sold mainly to, merchants who used the book as a reference text, as a source of pleasure from the mathematical puzzles it contained, and to aid the education of their sons. In \"Summa Arithmetica\", Pacioli introduced symbols for plus and minus for the first time in a printed book, symbols that became standard notation in Italian Renaissance mathematics. \"Summa Arithmetica\" was also the first known book printed in Italy to contain algebra. Pacioli obtained many of his ideas from Piero Della Francesca whom he plagiarized.\nIn Italy, during the first half of the 16th century, Scipione del Ferro and Niccol\u00f2 Fontana Tartaglia discovered solutions for cubic equations. Gerolamo Cardano published them in his 1545 book \"Ars Magna\", together with a solution for the quartic equations, discovered by his student Lodovico Ferrari. In 1572 Rafael Bombelli published his \"L'Algebra\" in which he showed how to deal with the imaginary quantities that could appear in Cardano's formula for solving cubic equations.\nSimon Stevin's \"De Thiende\" ('the art of tenths'), first published in Dutch in 1585, contained the first systematic treatment of decimal notation in Europe, which influenced all later work on the real number system.\nDriven by the demands of navigation and the growing need for accurate maps of large areas, trigonometry grew to be a major branch of mathematics. Bartholomaeus Pitiscus was the first to use the word, publishing his \"Trigonometria\" in 1595. Regiomontanus's table of sines and cosines was published in 1533.\nDuring the Renaissance the desire of artists to represent the natural world realistically, together with the rediscovered philosophy of the Greeks, led artists to study mathematics. They were also the engineers and architects of that time, and so had need of mathematics in any case. The art of painting in perspective, and the developments in geometry that were involved, were studied intensely.\nMathematics during the Scientific Revolution.\n16th century.\nIn the 16th century, Vi\u00e8te laid down the foundations of algebra in 1591. This was foundational for the mathematics of Descartes.\n17th century.\nThe 17th century saw an unprecedented increase of mathematical and scientific ideas across Europe. Tycho Brahe had gathered a large quantity of mathematical data describing the positions of the planets in the sky. By his position as Brahe's assistant, Johannes Kepler was first exposed to and seriously interacted with the topic of planetary motion. Kepler's calculations were made simpler by the contemporaneous invention of logarithms by John Napier and Jost B\u00fcrgi. Kepler succeeded in formulating mathematical laws of planetary motion.\nThe analytic geometry developed by Ren\u00e9 Descartes (1596\u20131650) allowed those orbits to be plotted on a graph, in Cartesian coordinates.\nBuilding on earlier work by many predecessors, Isaac Newton discovered the laws of physics that explain Kepler's Laws, and brought together the concepts now known as calculus. Independently, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, developed calculus and much of the calculus notation still in use today. He also refined the binary number system, which is the foundation of nearly all digital (electronic, solid-state, discrete logic) computers.\nScience and mathematics had become an international endeavor, which would soon spread over the entire world.\nIn addition to the application of mathematics to the studies of the heavens, applied mathematics began to expand into new areas, with the correspondence of Pierre de Fermat and Blaise Pascal. Pascal and Fermat set the groundwork for the investigations of probability theory and the corresponding rules of combinatorics in their discussions over a game of gambling. Pascal, with his wager, attempted to use the newly developing probability theory to argue for a life devoted to religion, on the grounds that even if the probability of success was small, the rewards were infinite. In some sense, this foreshadowed the development of utility theory in the 18th and 19th centuries.\n18th century.\nThe most influential mathematician of the 18th century was arguably Leonhard Euler (1707\u201383). His contributions range from founding the study of graph theory with the Seven Bridges of K\u00f6nigsberg problem to standardizing many modern mathematical terms and notations. For example, he named the square root of minus 1 with the symbol \"i\", and he popularized the use of the Greek letter formula_1 to stand for the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter. He made numerous contributions to the study of topology, graph theory, calculus, combinatorics, and complex analysis, as evidenced by the multitude of theorems and notations named for him.\nOther important European mathematicians of the 18th century included Joseph Louis Lagrange, who did pioneering work in number theory, algebra, differential calculus, and the calculus of variations, and Pierre-Simon Laplace, who, in the age of Napoleon, did important work on the foundations of celestial mechanics and on statistics.\nModern.\n19th century.\nThroughout the 19th century mathematics became increasingly abstract. Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777\u20131855) did revolutionary work on functions of complex variables, in geometry, and on the convergence of series, leaving aside his many contributions to science. He also gave the first satisfactory proofs of the fundamental theorem of algebra and quadratic reciprocity law.\nThis century saw the development of the two forms of non-Euclidean geometry, where the parallel postulate of Euclidean geometry no longer holds.\nThe Russian mathematician Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky and his rival, the Hungarian mathematician J\u00e1nos Bolyai, independently defined and studied hyperbolic geometry, where uniqueness of parallels no longer holds. In this geometry the sum of angles in a triangle add up to less than 180\u00b0. Elliptic geometry was developed later in the 19th century by the German mathematician Bernhard Riemann; here no parallel can be found and the angles in a triangle add up to more than 180\u00b0. Riemann also developed Riemannian geometry, which unifies and vastly generalizes the three types of geometry, and he defined the concept of a manifold, which generalizes the ideas of curves and surfaces, and set the mathematical foundations for the theory of general relativity.\nThe 19th century saw the beginning of a great deal of abstract algebra. Hermann Grassmann in Germany gave a first version of vector spaces, William Rowan Hamilton in Ireland developed noncommutative algebra.The British mathematician George Boole devised an algebra that soon evolved into what is now called Boolean algebra, in which the only numbers were 0 and 1. Boolean algebra is the starting point of mathematical logic and has important applications in electrical engineering and computer science. \nAugustin-Louis Cauchy, Bernhard Riemann, and Karl Weierstrass reformulated the calculus in a more rigorous fashion.\nAlso, for the first time, the limits of mathematics were explored. Paolo Ruffini, Niels Henrik Abel, and \u00c9variste Galois proved there is no general algebraic method for solving polynomial equations of degree greater than four (Abel\u2013Ruffini theorem). Other 19th-century mathematicians used this in their proofs that straight edge and compass alone are not sufficient to trisect an arbitrary angle, to construct the side of a cube twice the volume of a given cube, nor to construct a square equal in area to a given circle. Mathematicians had vainly attempted to solve these problems since the ancient Greeks. On the other hand, the limitation of three dimensions in geometry was surpassed in the 19th century through considerations of parameter space and hypercomplex numbers.\nAbel and Galois's investigations into the solutions of various polynomial equations laid the groundwork for further developments of group theory, and the associated fields of abstract algebra. In the 20th century physicists and other scientists have seen group theory as the ideal way to study symmetry.\nIn the later 19th century, Georg Cantor established the first foundations of set theory, which enabled the rigorous treatment of the notion of infinity and has become the common language of nearly all mathematics. Cantor's set theory, and the rise of mathematical logic in the hands of Peano, L.E.J. Brouwer, David Hilbert, Bertrand Russell, and A.N. Whitehead, initiated a long running debate on the foundations of mathematics.\nThe 19th century saw the founding of a number of national mathematical societies: the London Mathematical Society in 1865, the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 math\u00e9matique de France in 1872, the Circolo Matematico di Palermo in 1884, the Edinburgh Mathematical Society in 1883, and the American Mathematical Society in 1888. The first international, special-interest society, the Quaternion Association, was formed in 1899, in the context of a vector controversy. In 1897, Kurt Hensel introduced p-adic numbers.\n20th century.\nThe 20th century saw mathematics become a major profession. By the end of the century, thousands of new Ph.D.s in mathematics were being awarded every year, and jobs were available in both teaching and industry. An effort to catalogue the areas and applications of mathematics was undertaken in Klein's encyclopedia.\nIn a 1900 speech to the International Congress of Mathematicians, David Hilbert set out a list of 23 unsolved problems in mathematics. These problems, spanning many areas of mathematics, formed a central focus for much of 20th-century mathematics. 10 have been solved, 7 partially solved, and 2 are still open. The remaining 4 are too loosely formulated to be stated as solved or not.\nNotable historical conjectures were finally proven. In 1976, Wolfgang Haken and Kenneth Appel proved the four color theorem, controversial at the time for the use of a computer to do so. Andrew Wiles, building on the work of others, proved Fermat's Last Theorem in 1995. Paul Cohen and Kurt G\u00f6del proved that the continuum hypothesis is independent of (could neither be proved nor disproved from) the standard axioms of set theory. In 1998, Thomas Callister Hales proved the Kepler conjecture, also using a computer.\nMathematical collaborations of unprecedented size and scope took place. An example is the classification of finite simple groups (also called the \"enormous theorem\"), whose proof between 1955 and 2004 required 500-odd journal articles by about 100 authors, and filling tens of thousands of pages. A group of French mathematicians, including Jean Dieudonn\u00e9 and Andr\u00e9 Weil, publishing under the pseudonym \"Nicolas Bourbaki\", attempted to exposit all of known mathematics as a coherent rigorous whole. The resulting several dozen volumes has had a controversial influence on mathematical education.\nDifferential geometry came into its own when Albert Einstein used it in general relativity. Entirely new areas of mathematics such as mathematical logic, topology, and John von Neumann's game theory changed the kinds of questions that could be answered by mathematical methods. All kinds of structures were abstracted using axioms and given names like metric spaces, topological spaces etc. The concept of an abstract structure was itself abstracted and led to category theory. Grothendieck and Serre recast algebraic geometry using sheaf theory. Large advances were made in the qualitative study of dynamical systems that Poincar\u00e9 had begun in the 1890s.\nMeasure theory was developed in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Applications of measures include the Lebesgue integral, Kolmogorov's axiomatisation of probability theory, and ergodic theory. Knot theory greatly expanded. Quantum mechanics aided the development of functional analysis, a branch of mathematics developed by Stefan Banach and his collaborators who formed the Lw\u00f3w School of Mathematics. Other new areas include Laurent Schwartz's distribution theory, fixed point theory, singularity theory and Ren\u00e9 Thom's catastrophe theory, model theory, and Mandelbrot's fractals. Lie theory with its Lie groups and Lie algebras became one of the major areas of study.\nNonstandard analysis, introduced by Abraham Robinson, rehabilitated the infinitesimal approach to calculus, which had fallen into disrepute in favour of the theory of limits, by extending the field of real numbers to the Hyperreal numbers which include infinitesimal and infinite quantities. An even larger number system, the surreal numbers were discovered by John Horton Conway in connection with combinatorial games.\nThe development and continual improvement of computers, at first mechanical analog machines and then digital electronic machines, allowed industry to deal with larger and larger amounts of data to facilitate mass production and distribution and communication, and new areas of mathematics were developed to deal with this: Alan Turing's computability theory; complexity theory; Derrick Henry Lehmer's use of ENIAC to further number theory and the Lucas\u2013Lehmer primality test; R\u00f3zsa P\u00e9ter's recursive function theory; Claude Shannon's information theory; signal processing; data analysis; optimization and other areas of operations research. In the preceding centuries much mathematical focus was on calculus and continuous functions, but the rise of computing and communication networks led to an increasing importance of discrete concepts and the expansion of combinatorics including graph theory. The speed and data processing abilities of computers also enabled the handling of mathematical problems that were too time-consuming to deal with by pencil and paper calculations, leading to areas such as numerical analysis and computer algebra. Some of the most important methods and algorithms of the 20th century are: the simplex algorithm, the fast Fourier transform, error-correcting codes, the Kalman filter from control theory and the RSA algorithm of public-key cryptography.\nAt the same time, deep insights were made about the limitations to mathematics. In 1929 and 1930, it was proved by Moj\u017cesz Presburger, that the truth or falsity of all statements formulated about the natural numbers plus either addition or multiplication (but not both), was decidable, i.e. could be determined by some algorithm. In 1931, Kurt G\u00f6del found that this was not the case for the natural numbers plus both addition and multiplication; this system, known as Peano arithmetic, was in fact incomplete. (Peano arithmetic is adequate for a good deal of number theory, including the notion of prime number.) A consequence of G\u00f6del's two incompleteness theorems is that in any mathematical system that includes Peano arithmetic (including all of analysis and geometry), truth necessarily outruns proof, i.e. there are true statements that cannot be proved within the system. Hence mathematics cannot be reduced to mathematical logic, and David Hilbert's dream of making all of mathematics complete and consistent needed to be reformulated.\nOne of the more colorful figures in 20th-century mathematics was Srinivasa Ramanujan (1887\u20131920), an Indian autodidact who conjectured or proved over 3000 theorems, including properties of highly composite numbers, the partition function and its asymptotics, and mock theta functions. He also made major investigations in the areas of gamma functions, modular forms, divergent series, hypergeometric series and prime number theory.\nPaul Erd\u0151s published more papers than any other mathematician in history, working with hundreds of collaborators. Mathematicians have a game equivalent to the Kevin Bacon Game, which leads to the Erd\u0151s number of a mathematician. This describes the \"collaborative distance\" between a person and Erd\u0151s, as measured by joint authorship of mathematical papers.\nEmmy Noether has been described by many as the most important woman in the history of mathematics. She studied the theories of rings, fields, and algebras.\nAs in most areas of study, the explosion of knowledge in the scientific age has led to specialization: by the end of the century, there were hundreds of specialized areas in mathematics, and the Mathematics Subject Classification was dozens of pages long. More and more mathematical journals were published and, by the end of the century, the development of the World Wide Web led to online publishing.\n21st century.\nIn 2000, the Clay Mathematics Institute announced the seven Millennium Prize Problems. In 2003 the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture was solved by Grigori Perelman (who declined to accept an award, as he was critical of the mathematics establishment).\nMost mathematical journals now have online versions as well as print versions, and many online-only journals are launched. There is an increasing drive toward open access publishing, first made popular by arXiv.\nMany other important problems have been solved in this century. Examples include the Green\u2013Tao theorem (2004), existence of bounded gaps between arbitrarily large primes (2013), and the modularity theorem (2001). The AKS primality test was published in 2002, which is the first algorithm that can determine whether a number is prime or composite in polynomial time. A proof of Goldbach's weak conjecture was published by Harald Helfgott in 2013; as of 2025, the proof has not yet been fully reviewed. The first einstein was discovered in 2023.\nIn addition, a lot of work has been done toward long-lasting projects which began in the twentieth century. For example, the classification of finite simple groups was completed in 2008. Similarly, work on the Langlands program has progressed significantly, and there have been proofs of the fundamental lemma (2008), as well as a proposed proof of the geometric Langlands correspondence in 2024.\nFuture.\nThere are many observable trends in mathematics, the most notable being that the subject is growing ever larger as computers are ever more important and powerful; the volume of data being produced by science and industry, facilitated by computers, continues expanding exponentially. As a result, there is a corresponding growth in the demand for mathematics to help process and understand this big data. Math science careers are also expected to continue to grow, with the US Bureau of Labor Statistics estimating (in 2018) that \"employment of mathematical science occupations is projected to grow 27.9 percent from 2016 to 2026.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14221", "revid": "5049449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14221", "title": "Herrenvolk", "text": ""}
{"id": "14222", "revid": "35930533", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14222", "title": "Horrendous Space Kablooie", "text": ""}
{"id": "14223", "revid": "32798152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14223", "title": "HSK", "text": "HSK may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "14225", "revid": "50141052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14225", "title": "Hydrogen atom", "text": "Atom of the element hydrogen\nA hydrogen atom is an atom of the chemical element hydrogen. The electrically neutral hydrogen atom contains a single positively charged proton in the nucleus, and a single negatively charged electron bound to the nucleus by the Coulomb force. Atomic hydrogen constitutes about 75% of the baryonic mass of the universe.\nIn everyday life on Earth, isolated hydrogen atoms (called \"atomic hydrogen\") are extremely rare. Instead, a hydrogen atom tends to combine with other atoms in compounds, or with another hydrogen atom to form ordinary (diatomic) hydrogen gas, H2. \"Atomic hydrogen\" and \"hydrogen atom\" in ordinary English use have overlapping, yet distinct, meanings. For example, a water molecule contains two hydrogen atoms, but does not contain atomic hydrogen (which would refer to isolated hydrogen atoms).\nAtomic spectroscopy shows that there is a discrete infinite set of states in which a hydrogen (or any) atom can exist, contrary to the predictions of classical physics. Attempts to develop a theoretical understanding of the states of the hydrogen atom have been important to the history of quantum mechanics, since all other atoms can be roughly understood by knowing in detail about this simplest atomic structure.\nIsotopes.\nThe most abundant isotope, protium (1H), or light hydrogen, contains no neutrons and is simply a proton and an electron. Protium is stable and makes up 99.985% of naturally occurring hydrogen atoms.\nDeuterium (2H) contains one neutron and one proton in its nucleus. Deuterium is stable, makes up 0.0156% of naturally occurring hydrogen, and is used in industrial processes like nuclear reactors and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.\nTritium (3H) contains two neutrons and one proton in its nucleus and is not stable, decaying with a half-life of 12.32 years. Because of its short half-life, tritium does not exist in nature except in trace amounts.\nHeavier isotopes of hydrogen are only created artificially in particle accelerators and have half-lives on the order of 10\u221222 seconds. They are unbound resonances located beyond the neutron drip line; this results in prompt emission of a neutron.\nThe formulas below are valid for all three isotopes of hydrogen, but slightly different values of the Rydberg constant (correction formula given below) must be used for each hydrogen isotope.\nHydrogen ion.\nLone neutral hydrogen atoms are rare under normal conditions. However, neutral hydrogen is common when it is covalently bound to another atom, and hydrogen atoms can also exist in cationic and anionic forms.\nIf a neutral hydrogen atom loses its electron, it becomes a cation. The resulting ion, which consists solely of a proton for the usual isotope, is written as \"H+\" and sometimes called \"hydron\". Free protons are common in the interstellar medium, and solar wind. In the context of aqueous solutions of classical Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry acids, such as hydrochloric acid, it is actually hydronium, H3O+, that is meant. Instead of a literal ionized single hydrogen atom being formed, the acid transfers the hydrogen to H2O, forming H3O+.\nIf instead a hydrogen atom gains a second electron, it becomes an anion. The hydrogen anion is written as \"H\u2013\" and called \"hydride\".\nTheoretical analysis.\nThe hydrogen atom has special significance in quantum mechanics and quantum field theory as a simple two-body problem physical system which has yielded many simple analytical solutions in closed-form.\nFailed classical description.\nExperiments by Ernest Rutherford in 1909 showed the structure of the atom to be a dense, positive nucleus with a tenuous negative charge cloud around it. This immediately raised questions about how such a system could be stable. Classical electromagnetism had shown that any accelerating charge radiates energy, as shown by the Larmor formula. If the electron is assumed to orbit in a perfect circle and radiates energy continuously, the electron would rapidly spiral into the nucleus with a fall time of:\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the Bohr radius and formula_3 is the classical electron radius. If this were true, all atoms would instantly collapse. However, atoms seem to be stable. Furthermore, the spiral inward would release a smear of electromagnetic frequencies as the orbit got smaller. Instead, atoms were observed to emit only discrete frequencies of radiation. The resolution would lie in the development of quantum mechanics.\nBohr\u2013Sommerfeld model.\nIn 1913, Niels Bohr obtained the energy levels and spectral frequencies of the hydrogen atom after making a number of simple assumptions in order to correct the failed classical model. The assumptions included:\nBohr supposed that the electron's angular momentum is quantized with possible values:\nformula_4 where formula_5\nand formula_6 is Planck constant over formula_7. He also supposed that the centripetal force which keeps the electron in its orbit is provided by the Coulomb force, and that energy is conserved. Bohr derived the energy of each orbit of the hydrogen atom to be:\nformula_8\nwhere formula_9 is the electron mass, formula_10 is the electron charge, formula_11 is the vacuum permittivity, and formula_12 is the quantum number (now known as the principal quantum number). Bohr's predictions matched experiments measuring the hydrogen spectral series to the first order, giving more confidence to a theory that used quantized values.\nFor formula_13, the value\nformula_14\nis called the Rydberg unit of energy. It is related to the Rydberg constant formula_15 of atomic physics by formula_16\nThe exact value of the Rydberg constant assumes that the nucleus is infinitely massive with respect to the electron. For hydrogen-1, hydrogen-2 (deuterium), and hydrogen-3 (tritium) which have finite mass, the constant must be slightly modified to use the reduced mass of the system, rather than simply the mass of the electron. This includes the kinetic energy of the nucleus in the problem, because the total (electron plus nuclear) kinetic energy is equivalent to the kinetic energy of the reduced mass moving with a velocity equal to the electron velocity relative to the nucleus. However, since the nucleus is much heavier than the electron, the electron mass and reduced mass are nearly the same. The Rydberg constant \"RM\" for a hydrogen atom (one electron), \"R\" is given by\nformula_17\nwhere formula_18 is the mass of the atomic nucleus. For hydrogen-1, the quantity formula_19 is about 1/1836 (i.e. the electron-to-proton mass ratio). For deuterium and tritium, the ratios are about 1/3670 and 1/5497 respectively. These figures, when added to 1 in the denominator, represent very small corrections in the value of \"R\", and thus only small corrections to all energy levels in corresponding hydrogen isotopes.\nThere were still problems with Bohr's model:\nMost of these shortcomings were resolved by Arnold Sommerfeld's modification of the Bohr model. Sommerfeld introduced two additional degrees of freedom, allowing an electron to move on an elliptical orbit characterized by its eccentricity and declination with respect to a chosen axis. This introduced two additional quantum numbers, which correspond to the orbital angular momentum and its projection on the chosen axis. Thus the correct multiplicity of states (except for the factor 2 accounting for the yet unknown electron spin) was found. Further, by applying special relativity to the elliptic orbits, Sommerfeld succeeded in deriving the correct expression for the fine structure of hydrogen spectra (which happens to be exactly the same as in the most elaborate Dirac theory). However, some observed phenomena, such as the anomalous Zeeman effect, remained unexplained. These issues were resolved with the full development of quantum mechanics and the Dirac equation. It is often alleged that the Schr\u00f6dinger equation is superior to the Bohr\u2013Sommerfeld theory in describing hydrogen atom. This is not the case, as most of the results of both approaches coincide or are very close (a remarkable exception is the problem of hydrogen atom in crossed electric and magnetic fields, which cannot be self-consistently solved in the framework of the Bohr\u2013Sommerfeld theory), and in both theories the main shortcomings result from the absence of the electron spin. It was the complete failure of the Bohr\u2013Sommerfeld theory to explain many-electron systems (such as helium atom or hydrogen molecule) which demonstrated its inadequacy in describing quantum phenomena.\nSchr\u00f6dinger equation.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation is the standard quantum-mechanics model; it allows one to calculate the stationary states and also the time evolution of quantum systems. Exact analytical answers are available for the nonrelativistic hydrogen atom. Before we go to present a formal account, here we give an elementary overview.\nGiven that the hydrogen atom contains a nucleus and an electron, quantum mechanics allows one to predict the probability of finding the electron at any given radial distance formula_22. It is given by the square of a mathematical function known as the \"wavefunction\", which is a solution of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation. The lowest energy equilibrium state of the hydrogen atom is known as the ground state. The ground state wave function is known as the formula_23 wavefunction. It is written as:\nformula_24\nHere, formula_2 is the numerical value of the Bohr radius. The probability density of finding the electron at a distance formula_22 in any radial direction is the squared value of the wavefunction:\nformula_27\nThe formula_28 wavefunction is spherically symmetric, and the surface area of a shell at distance formula_22 is formula_30, so the total probability formula_31 of the electron being in a shell at a distance formula_22 and thickness formula_33 is\nformula_34\nIt turns out that this is a maximum at formula_35. That is, the Bohr picture of an electron orbiting the nucleus at radius formula_2 corresponds to the most probable radius. Actually, there is a finite probability that the electron may be found at any place formula_22, with the\nprobability indicated by the square of the wavefunction. Since the probability of finding the electron \"somewhere\" in the whole volume is unity, the integral of formula_38 is unity. Then we say that the wavefunction is properly normalized.\nAs discussed below, the ground state formula_28 is also indicated by the quantum numbers formula_40. The second lowest energy states, just above the ground state, are given by the quantum numbers formula_41, formula_42, and formula_43. These formula_44 states all have the same energy and are known as the formula_45 and formula_46 states. There is one formula_45 state:\nformula_48\nand there are three formula_46 states:\nformula_50\nformula_51\nAn electron in the formula_45 or formula_46 state is most likely to be found in the second Bohr orbit with energy given by the Bohr formula.\nWavefunction.\nThe Hamiltonian of the hydrogen atom is the radial kinetic energy operator plus the Coulomb electrostatic potential energy between the positive proton and the negative electron. Using the time-independent Schr\u00f6dinger equation, ignoring all spin-coupling interactions and using the reduced mass formula_54, the equation is written as:\nformula_55\nExpanding the Laplacian in spherical coordinates:\nformula_56\nThis is a separable, partial differential equation which can be solved in terms of special functions. When the wavefunction is separated as product of functions formula_57, formula_58, and formula_59 three independent differential functions appears with A and B being the separation constants:\nThe normalized position wavefunctions, given in spherical coordinates are:\nformula_63\nwhere:\nNote that the generalized Laguerre polynomials are defined differently by different authors. The usage here is consistent with the definitions used by Messiah, and Mathematica. In other places, the Laguerre polynomial includes a factor of formula_72, or the generalized Laguerre polynomial appearing in the hydrogen wave function is formula_73 instead.\nThe quantum numbers can take the following values:\nAdditionally, these wavefunctions are \"normalized\" (i.e., the integral of their modulus square equals 1) and orthogonal:\nformula_77\nwhere formula_78 is the state represented by the wavefunction formula_79 in Dirac notation, and formula_80 is the Kronecker delta function.\nThe wavefunctions in momentum space are related to the wavefunctions in position space through a Fourier transform\nformula_81\nwhich, for the bound states, results in\nformula_82\nwhere formula_83 denotes a Gegenbauer polynomial and formula_84 is in units of formula_85.\nThe solutions to the Schr\u00f6dinger equation for hydrogen are analytical, giving a simple expression for the hydrogen energy levels and thus the frequencies of the hydrogen spectral lines and fully reproduced the Bohr model and went beyond it. It also yields two other quantum numbers and the shape of the electron's wave function (\"orbital\") for the various possible quantum-mechanical states, thus explaining the anisotropic character of atomic bonds.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation also applies to more complicated atoms and molecules. When there is more than one electron or nucleus the solution is not analytical and either computer calculations are necessary or simplifying assumptions must be made.\nSince the Schr\u00f6dinger equation is only valid for non-relativistic quantum mechanics, the solutions it yields for the hydrogen atom are not entirely correct. The Dirac equation of relativistic quantum theory improves these solutions (see below).\nResults of Schr\u00f6dinger equation.\nThe solution of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation (wave equation) for the hydrogen atom uses the fact that the Coulomb potential produced by the nucleus is isotropic (it is radially symmetric in space and only depends on the distance to the nucleus). Although the resulting energy eigenfunctions (the \"orbitals\") are not necessarily isotropic themselves, their dependence on the angular coordinates follows completely generally from this isotropy of the underlying potential: the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian (that is, the energy eigenstates) can be chosen as simultaneous eigenstates of the angular momentum operator. This corresponds to the fact that angular momentum is conserved in the orbital motion of the electron around the nucleus. Therefore, the energy eigenstates may be classified by two angular momentum quantum numbers, formula_70 and formula_71 (both are integers). The angular momentum quantum number formula_88 determines the magnitude of the angular momentum. The magnetic quantum number formula_89 determines the projection of the angular momentum on the (arbitrarily chosen) formula_90-axis.\nIn addition to mathematical expressions for total angular momentum and angular momentum projection of wavefunctions, an expression for the radial dependence of the wave functions must be found. It is only here that the details of the formula_91 Coulomb potential enter (leading to Laguerre polynomials in formula_22). This leads to a third quantum number, the principal quantum number formula_74. The principal quantum number in hydrogen is related to the atom's total energy.\nNote that the maximum value of the angular momentum quantum number is limited by the principal quantum number: it can run only up to formula_94, i.e., formula_95.\nDue to angular momentum conservation, states of the same formula_70 but different formula_71 have the same energy (this holds for all problems with rotational symmetry). In addition, for the hydrogen atom, states of the same formula_98 but different formula_70 are also degenerate (i.e., they have the same energy). However, this is a specific property of hydrogen and is no longer true for more complicated atoms which have an (effective) potential differing from the form formula_91 (due to the presence of the inner electrons shielding the nucleus potential).\nTaking into account the spin of the electron adds a last quantum number, the projection of the electron's spin angular momentum along the formula_90-axis, which can take on two values. Therefore, any eigenstate of the electron in the hydrogen atom is described fully by four quantum numbers. According to the usual rules of quantum mechanics, the actual state of the electron may be any superposition of these states. This explains also why the choice of formula_90-axis for the directional quantization of the angular momentum vector is immaterial: an orbital of given formula_70 and formula_104 obtained for another preferred axis formula_105 can always be represented as a suitable superposition of the various states of different formula_71 (but same formula_70) that have been obtained for formula_90.\nMathematical summary of eigenstates of hydrogen atom.\nIn 1928, Paul Dirac found an equation that was fully compatible with special relativity, and (as a consequence) made the wave function a 4-component \"Dirac spinor\" including \"up\" and \"down\" spin components, with both positive and \"negative\" energy (or matter and antimatter). The solution to this equation gave the following results, more accurate than the Schr\u00f6dinger solution.\nEnergy levels.\nThe energy levels of hydrogen, including fine structure (excluding Lamb shift and hyperfine structure), are given by the Sommerfeld fine-structure expression:\nformula_109\nwhere formula_21 is the fine-structure constant and formula_111 is the total angular momentum quantum number, which is equal to formula_112, depending on the orientation of the electron spin relative to the orbital angular momentum. This formula represents a small correction to the energy obtained by Bohr and Schr\u00f6dinger as given above. The factor in square brackets in the last expression is nearly one; the extra term arises from relativistic effects (for details, see #Features going beyond the Schr\u00f6dinger solution). It is worth noting that this expression was first obtained by A. Sommerfeld in 1916 based on the relativistic version of the old Bohr theory. Sommerfeld has however used different notation for the quantum numbers.\nVisualizing the hydrogen electron orbitals.\nThe image to the right shows the first few hydrogen atom orbitals (energy eigenfunctions). These are cross-sections of the probability density that are color-coded (black represents zero density and white represents the highest density). The angular momentum (orbital) quantum number \"\u2113\" is denoted in each column, using the usual spectroscopic letter code (\"s\" means \"\u2113\"\u00a0=\u00a00, \"p\" means \"\u2113\"\u00a0=\u00a01, \"d\" means \"\u2113\"\u00a0=\u00a02). The main (principal) quantum number \"n\" (= 1, 2, 3, ...) is marked to the right of each row. For all pictures the magnetic quantum number \"m\" has been set to 0, and the cross-sectional plane is the \"xz\"-plane (\"z\" is the vertical axis). The probability density in three-dimensional space is obtained by rotating the one shown here around the \"z\"-axis.\nThe \"ground state\", i.e. the state of lowest energy, in which the electron is usually found, is the first one, the 1\"s\" state (principal quantum level \"n\" = 1, \"\u2113\" = 0).\nBlack lines occur in each but the first orbital: these are the nodes of the wavefunction, i.e. where the probability density is zero. (More precisely, the nodes are spherical harmonics that appear as a result of solving the Schr\u00f6dinger equation in spherical coordinates.)\nThe quantum numbers determine the layout of these nodes. There are:\nOscillation of orbitals.\nThe frequency of a state in level n is formula_120, so in case of a superposition of multiple orbitals, they would oscillate due to the difference in frequency. For example two states, \u03c81and \u03c82: The wavefunction is given by formula_121 and the probability function is \nformula_122 formula_123 \nThe result is a rotating wavefunction. The movement of electrons and change of quantum states radiates light at a frequency of the cosine.\nFeatures going beyond the Schr\u00f6dinger solution.\nThere are several important effects that are neglected by the Schr\u00f6dinger equation and which are responsible for certain small but measurable deviations of the real spectral lines from the predicted ones:\nBoth of these features (and more) are incorporated in the relativistic Dirac equation, with predictions that come still closer to experiment. Again the Dirac equation may be solved analytically in the special case of a two-body system, such as the hydrogen atom. The resulting solution quantum states now must be classified by the total angular momentum number \"j\" (arising through the coupling between electron spin and orbital angular momentum). States of the same \"j\" and the same \"n\" are still degenerate. Thus, direct analytical solution of Dirac equation predicts 2S() and 2P() levels of hydrogen to have exactly the same energy, which is in a contradiction with observations (Lamb\u2013Retherford experiment).\nFor these developments, it was essential that the solution of the Dirac equation for the hydrogen atom could be worked out exactly, such that any experimentally observed deviation had to be taken seriously as a signal of failure of the theory.\nAlternatives to the Schr\u00f6dinger theory.\nIn the language of Heisenberg's matrix mechanics, the hydrogen atom was first solved by Wolfgang Pauli using a rotational symmetry in four dimensions [O(4)-symmetry] generated by the angular momentum\nand the Laplace\u2013Runge\u2013Lenz vector. By extending the symmetry group O(4) to the dynamical group O(4,2),\nthe entire spectrum and all transitions were embedded in a single irreducible group representation.\nIn 1979 the (non-relativistic) hydrogen atom was solved for the first time within Feynman's path integral formulation\nof quantum mechanics by Duru and Kleinert. This work greatly extended the range of applicability of Feynman's method.\nFurther alternative models are Bohm mechanics and the complex Hamilton\u2013Jacobi formulation of quantum mechanics.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14227", "revid": "18221537", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14227", "title": "Elagabalus", "text": "Roman emperor from 218 to 222\nMarcus Aurelius Antoninus (born Sextus Varius Avitus Bassianus, c. 204 \u2013 13 March 222), better known by his posthumous nicknames Elagabalus ( ) and Heliogabalus ( ), was Roman emperor from 218 to 222, while he was still a teenager. His short reign was notorious for religious controversy and alleged sexual debauchery. A close relative to the Severan dynasty, he came from a prominent Syrian Arab family in Emesa (Homs), Syria, where he served as the head priest of the sun god Elagabal from a young age. After the death of his cousin, the emperor Caracalla, Elagabalus was raised to the Principate at 14 years of age in an army revolt instigated by his grandmother Julia Maesa against Caracalla's short-lived successor, Macrinus. He only posthumously became known by the Latinised name of his god.\nElagabalus is largely known from accounts by the contemporary senator Cassius Dio who was hostile to him, Herodian, who likely relied extensively on Dio, and the much later \"Historia Augusta\". The reliability of the accounts of Cassius Dio and the \"Historia Augusta\", particularly their most salacious elements, has been questioned. Elagabalus showed a disregard for Roman religious traditions. He brought the cult of Elagabal (including the large baetyl stone that represented the god) to Rome, making it a prominent part of religious life in the city. He forced leading members of Rome's government to participate in religious rites celebrating this deity, presiding over them in person. According to the accounts of Cassius Dio and the \"Augusta\", he married four women, including a Vestal Virgin, in addition to lavishing favours on male courtiers they suggested to have been his lovers, and prostituted himself. His behaviour estranged the Praetorian Guard, the Senate, and the common people alike. Amidst growing opposition, at just 18 years of age he was assassinated and replaced by his cousin Severus Alexander in March 222. The assassination plot against Elagabalus was devised by Julia Maesa and carried out by disaffected members of the Praetorian Guard.\nElagabalus developed a posthumous reputation for extreme eccentricity, decadence, zealotry, and sexual promiscuity. Among writers of the early modern age, he endured one of the worst reputations among Roman emperors. Edward Gibbon, notably, wrote that Elagabalus \"abandoned himself to the grossest pleasures with ungoverned fury\". According to Barthold Georg Niebuhr, \"the name of Elagabalus is branded in history above all others; [...] \"Elagabalus had nothing at all to make up for his vices, which are of such a kind that it is too disgusting even to allude to them\". An example of a modern historian's assessment is Adrian Goldsworthy's: \"Elagabalus was not a tyrant, but he was an incompetent, probably the least able emperor Rome had ever had\". Despite near-universal condemnation of his reign, some scholars write warmly about his religious innovations, including the 6th-century Byzantine chronicler John Malalas, as well as Warwick Ball, a modern historian who described him as \"a tragic enigma lost behind centuries of prejudice\".\nModern scholars have questioned the accuracy of Roman accounts of his reign, with suggestions that the reports of his salacious behaviour and sexual excess likely reflected a desire to politically discredit him in the immediate aftermath of his death, as well as reflecting Roman stereotypes regarding people from the Orient as effeminate.\nFamily and priesthood.\nElagabalus was born in 203 or 204, to Sextus Varius Marcellus and Julia Soaemias Bassiana, who had probably married around the year 200 (and no later than 204). Elagabalus's full birth name was probably (Sextus) Varius Avitus Bassianus, the last name being apparently a cognomen of the Emesene dynasty. Marcellus was an equestrian, later elevated to a senatorial position. Julia Soaemias was a cousin of the emperor Caracalla, and there were rumors (which Soaemias later publicly supported) that Elagabalus was Caracalla's child.\nMarcellus's tombstone attests that Elagabalus had at least one sibling, possibly a brother, about whom nothing is known. Elagabalus's grandmother, Julia Maesa, was the widow of the consul Julius Avitus Alexianus, the sister of Julia Domna, and the sister-in-law of the emperor Septimius Severus. Other relatives included Elagabalus's aunt Julia Avita Mamaea and uncle Marcus Julius Gessius Marcianus and their son Severus Alexander.\nElagabalus's family held hereditary rights to the priesthood of the sun god Elagabal, of whom Elagabalus was the high priest at Emesa (modern Homs) in Roman Syria as part of the Arab Emesene dynasty. The deity's Latin name, \"Elagabalus\", is a Latinized version of the Arabic \u0625\u0650\u0644\u0670\u0647\u064f \u0627\u0644\u0652\u062c\u064e\u0628\u064e\u0644\u0650 \"Il\u0101h al-Jabal\", from \"il\u0101h\" (\"god\") and \"jabal\" (\"mountain\"), meaning \"God of the Mountain\", the Emesene manifestation of Ba'al.\nInitially venerated at Emesa, the deity's cult spread to other parts of the Roman Empire in the second century; a dedication has been found as far away as Woerden (in the Netherlands), near the Roman \"limes\". The god was later imported to Rome and assimilated with the sun god known as Sol Indiges in the era of the Roman Republic and as Sol Invictus during the late third century. In Greek, the sun god is Helios, hence Elagabal was later known as \"Heliogabalus\", a hybrid of \"Helios\" and \"Elagabalus\".\nRise to power.\nHerodian writes that when the emperor Macrinus came to power, he suppressed the threat to his reign from the family of his assassinated predecessor, Caracalla, by exiling them\u2014Julia Maesa, her two daughters, and her eldest grandson Elagabalus\u2014to their estate at Emesa in Syria. Almost upon arrival in Syria, Maesa began a plot with her advisor and Elagabalus's tutor, Gannys, to overthrow Macrinus and elevate the fourteen-year-old Elagabalus to the imperial throne.\nMaesa spread a rumor, which Soaemias publicly supported, that Elagabalus was the illegitimate child of Caracalla and so deserved the loyalty of Roman soldiers and senators who had sworn allegiance to Caracalla. The soldiers of the Third Legion \"Gallica\" at Raphana, who had enjoyed greater privileges under Caracalla and resented Macrinus (and may have been impressed or bribed by Maesa's wealth), supported this claim. At sunrise on 16 May 218, Elagabalus was declared emperor by Publius Valerius Comazon, commander of the legion. To strengthen his legitimacy, Elagabalus adopted the same name Caracalla bore as emperor, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. Cassius Dio states that some officers tried to keep the soldiers loyal to Macrinus, but they were unsuccessful.\nPraetorian prefect Ulpius Julianus responded by attacking the Third Legion, most likely on Macrinus's orders (though one account says he acted on his own before Macrinus knew of the rebellion). Herodian suggests Macrinus underestimated the threat, considering the rebellion inconsequential. During the fighting, Julianus's soldiers killed their officers and joined Elagabalus's forces.\nMacrinus asked the Roman Senate to denounce Elagabalus as \"the False Antoninus\", and they complied, declaring war on Elagabalus and his family. Macrinus made his son Diadumenian co-emperor, and attempted to secure the loyalty of the Second Legion with large cash payments. During a banquet to celebrate this at Apamea, however, a messenger presented Macrinus with the severed head of his defeated prefect Julianus. Macrinus therefore retreated to Antioch, after which the Second Legion shifted its loyalties to Elagabalus.\nElagabalus's legionaries, commanded by Gannys, defeated Macrinus and Diadumenian and their Praetorian Guard at the Battle of Antioch on 8 June 218, prevailing when Macrinus's troops broke ranks after he fled the battlefield. Macrinus made for Italy, but was intercepted near Chalcedon and executed in Cappadocia, while Diadumenian was captured at Zeugma and executed.\nThat month, Elagabalus wrote to the Senate, assuming the imperial titles without waiting for senatorial approval, which violated tradition but was a common practice among third-century emperors. Letters of reconciliation were dispatched to Rome extending amnesty to the Senate and recognizing its laws, while also condemning the administration of Macrinus and his son.\nThe senators responded by acknowledging Elagabalus as emperor and accepting his claim to be the son of Caracalla. Elagabalus was made consul for the year 218 in the middle of June. Caracalla and Julia Domna were both deified by the Senate, both Julia Maesa and Julia Soaemias were elevated to the rank of Augustae, and the memory of Macrinus was expunged by the Senate. (Elagabalus's imperial artifacts assert that he succeeded Caracalla directly.) Comazon was appointed commander of the Praetorian Guard. Elagabalus was named \"Pater Patriae\" by the Senate before 13 July 218. On 14 July, Elagabalus was inducted into the colleges of all the Roman priesthoods, including the College of Pontiffs, of which he was named \"pontifex maximus\".\nEmperor (218\u2013222).\nJourney to Rome and political appointments.\nElagabalus stayed for a time at Antioch, apparently to quell various mutinies. Dio outlines several, which historian Fergus Millar places prior to the winter of 218\u2013219. These included one by Gellius Maximus, who commanded the Fourth Legion and was executed, and one by Verus, who commanded the Third Legion \"Gallica\", which was disbanded once the revolt was put down.\nNext, according to Herodian, Elagabalus and his entourage spent the winter of 218\u2013219 in Bithynia at Nicomedia, and then traveled through Thrace and Moesia to Italy in the first half of 219, the year of Elagabalus's second consulship. Herodian says that Elagabalus had a painting of himself sent ahead to Rome to be hung over a statue of the goddess Victoria in the Senate House so people would not be surprised by his Eastern garb, but it is unclear if such a painting actually existed, and Dio does not mention it. If the painting was indeed hung over Victoria, it put senators in the position of seeming to make offerings to Elagabalus when they made offerings to Victoria.\nOn his way to Rome, Elagabalus and his allies executed several prominent supporters of Macrinus, such as Syrian governor Fabius Agrippinus and former Thracian governor C. Claudius Attalus Paterculianus. Arriving at the imperial capital in August or September 219, Elagabalus staged an \"adventus\", a ceremonial entrance to the city. In Rome, his offer of amnesty for the Roman upper class was largely honored, though the jurist Ulpian was exiled. Elagabalus made Comazon praetorian prefect, and later consul (220) and prefect of the city (three times, 220\u2013222), which Dio regarded as a violation of Roman norms. Elagabalus himself held a consulship for the third year in a row in 220. Herodian and the \"Augustan History\" say that Elagabalus alienated many by giving powerful positions to other allies.\nHe developed the imperial palace at Horti Spei Veteris with the inclusion of the nearby land inherited from his father Sextus Varius Marcellus. Elagabalus made it his favourite retreat and designed it (as for Nero's Domus Aurea project) as a vast suburban villa divided into various building and landscape nuclei with the Amphitheatrum Castrense which he built and the Circus Varianus hippodrome fired by his unbridled passion for circuses and his habit of driving chariots inside the villa. He raced chariots under the family name of Varius.\nDio states that Elagabalus wanted to marry a charioteer named Hierocles and to declare him \"caesar\", just as (Dio says) he had previously wanted to marry Gannys and name him \"caesar\". The athlete Aurelius Zoticus is said by Dio to have been Elagabalus's lover and \"cubicularius\" (a non-administrative role), while the \"Augustan History\" says Zoticus was a husband to Elagabalus and held greater political influence.\nElagabalus's relationships to his mother Julia Soaemias and grandmother Julia Maesa were strong at first; they were influential supporters from the beginning, and Macrinus declared war on them as well as Elagabalus. Accordingly, they became the first women allowed into the Senate, and both received senatorial titles: Soaemias the established title of \"Clarissima,\" and Maesa the more unorthodox \"Mater Castrorum et Senatus\" (\"Mother of the army camp and of the Senate\"). They exercised influence over the young emperor throughout his reign, and are found on many coins and inscriptions, a rare honour for Roman women.\nUnder Elagabalus, the gradual devaluation of Roman \"aurei\" and \"denarii\" continued (with the silver purity of the \"denarius\" dropping from 58% to 46.5%), though \"antoniniani\" had a higher metal content than under Caracalla.\nReligious controversy.\nSince the reign of Septimius Severus, sun worship had increased throughout the Empire. At the end of 220, Elagabalus instated Elagabal as the chief deity of the Roman pantheon, possibly on the date of the winter solstice. In his official titulature, Elagabalus was then entitled in . That a foreign god should be honored above Jupiter, with Elagabalus himself as chief priest, shocked many Romans.\nAs a token of respect for Roman religion, however, Elagabalus joined either Astarte, Minerva, Urania, or some combination of the three to Elagabal as consort. A union between Elagabal and a traditional goddess would have served to strengthen ties between the new religion and the imperial cult. There may have been an effort to introduce Elagabal, Urania, and Athena as the new Capitoline Triad of Rome\u2014replacing Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva.\nHe aroused further discontent when he married the Vestal Virgin Aquilia Severa, Vesta's high priestess, claiming the marriage would produce \"godlike children\". This was a flagrant breach of Roman law and tradition, which held that any Vestal found to have engaged in sexual intercourse was to be buried alive.\nA lavish temple called the Elagabalium was built on the east face of the Palatine Hill to house Elagabal, who was represented by a black conical meteorite from Emesa. This was a \"baetyl\". Herodian wrote \"this stone is worshipped as though it were sent from heaven; on it there are some small projecting pieces and markings that are pointed out, which the people would like to believe are a rough picture of the sun, because this is how they see them\".\nDio writes that in order to increase his piety as high priest of Elagabal atop a new Roman pantheon, Elagabalus had himself circumcised and swore to abstain from swine. He forced senators to watch while he danced circling the altar of Elagabal to the accompaniment of drums and cymbals. Each summer solstice he held a festival dedicated to the god, which became popular with the masses because of the free food distributed on these occasions. During this festival, Elagabalus placed the black stone on a chariot adorned with gold and jewels, which he paraded through the city:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A six horse chariot carried the divinity, the horses huge and flawlessly white, with expensive gold fittings and rich ornaments. No one held the reins, and no one rode in the chariot; the vehicle was escorted as if the god himself were the charioteer. Elagabalus ran backward in front of the chariot, facing the god and holding the horses' reins. He made the whole journey in this reverse fashion, looking up into the face of his god.\nThe most sacred relics from the Roman religion were transferred from their respective shrines to the Elagabalium, including the emblem of the Great Mother, the fire of Vesta, the Shields of the Salii, and the Palladium, so that no other god could be worshipped except in association with Elagabal. Although his native cult was widely ridiculed by contemporaries, sun-worship was popular among the soldiers and would be promoted by several later emperors.\nMarriages, sexual orientation and gender identity.\nThe question of Elagabalus's sexual orientation and gender identity is disputed, owing to salacious and unreliable sources. Cassius Dio states that Elagabalus was married five times (twice to the same woman). His first wife was Julia Cornelia Paula, whom he married prior to 29 August 219; between then and 28 August 220, he divorced Paula, took the Vestal Virgin Julia Aquilia Severa as his second wife, divorced her, and took a third wife, who Herodian says was Annia Aurelia Faustina, a descendant of Marcus Aurelius and the widow of a man Elagabalus had recently executed, Pomponius Bassus. In the last year of his reign, Elagabalus divorced Annia Faustina and remarried Aquilia Severa.\nDio states that another \"husband of this woman [Elagabalus] was Hierocles\", an ex-slave and chariot driver from Caria. The \"Historia Augusta\" claims that Elagabalus also married a man named Zoticus, an athlete from Smyrna, while Dio says only that Zoticus was his cubicularius. Dio says that Elagabalus prostituted himself in taverns and brothels.\nSome writers suggest that Elagabalus may have identified as female or been transgender, and may have sought sex reassignment surgery. Dio says Elagabalus delighted in being called Hierocles's mistress, wife, and queen. The emperor reportedly wore makeup and wigs, preferred to be called a lady and not a lord, and supposedly offered vast sums to any physician who could provide him with a vagina by means of incision (Cassius Dio, \"Roman History\", 80.16.7). Some historians, including the classicists Mary Beard, Zachary Herz, and Martijn Icks, treat these accounts with caution, as sources for Elagabalus' life were often antagonistic towards him and largely untrustworthy.\nFall from power.\nElagabalus alienated the Roman elites and the Praetorian Guard through his perceptibly foreign conduct and his religious provocations. When Elagabalus's grandmother Julia Maesa perceived that popular support for the emperor was waning, she decided that he and his mother, who had encouraged his religious practices, had to be replaced. As alternatives, she turned to her other daughter, Julia Avita Mamaea, and her daughter's son, the fifteen-year-old Severus Alexander.\nPrevailing on Elagabalus, she arranged that he appoint his cousin Alexander as his heir and that the boy be given the title of \"Caesar\". Alexander was elevated to \"Caesar\" in June 221, possibly on 26 June. Elagabalus and Alexander were each named \"consul designatus\" for the following year, probably on 1 July. Elagabalus took up his fourth consulship for the year of 222. Alexander shared the consulship with the emperor that year. Elagabalus reconsidered this arrangement when he began to suspect that the Praetorian Guard preferred his cousin to him.\nElagabalus ordered attempts on Alexander's life, after failing to obtain approval from the Senate for stripping Alexander of his shared title. According to Dio, Elagabalus invented the rumor that Alexander was near death to see how the Praetorians would react. A riot ensued, and the Guard demanded to see Elagabalus and Alexander in the Praetorian camp.\nOn 13 March, the emperor complied and publicly presented his cousin along with his own mother, Julia Soaemias. On their arrival the soldiers started cheering Alexander while ignoring Elagabalus, who ordered the summary arrest and execution of anyone who had taken part in this display of insubordination. In response, members of the Praetorian Guard attacked Elagabalus and his mother:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He made an attempt to flee, and would have got away somewhere by being placed in a chest had he not been discovered and slain, at the age of eighteen. His mother, who embraced him and clung tightly to him, perished with him; their heads were cut off and their bodies, after being stripped naked, were first dragged all over the city, and then the mother's body was cast aside somewhere or other, while his was thrown into the Tiber. \nFollowing his assassination, many associates of Elagabalus were killed or deposed. His lover Hierocles was executed. His religious edicts were reversed and the stone of Elagabal was sent back to Emesa. Women were again barred from attending meetings of the Senate. The practice of \"damnatio memoriae\"\u2014erasing from the public record a disgraced personage formerly of note\u2014was systematically applied in his case. Several images, including an over-life-size statue of him as Hercules now in Naples, were re-carved with the face of Alexander Severus.\nSources.\nCassius Dio.\nThe historian Cassius Dio, who lived from the second half of the second century until sometime after 229, wrote a contemporary account of Elagabalus. Born into a patrician family, Dio spent the greater part of his life in public service. He was a senator under emperor Commodus and governor of Smyrna after the death of Septimius Severus, and then he served as suffect consul around 205, and as proconsul in Africa and Pannonia.\nDio's \"Roman History\" spans nearly a millennium, from the arrival of Aeneas in Italy until the year 229. His contemporaneous account of Elagabalus's reign is generally considered more reliable than the \"Augustan History\" or other accounts for this period, though by his own admission Dio spent the greater part of the relevant period outside of Rome and had to rely on second-hand information.\nThe political climate in the aftermath of Elagabalus's reign, as well as Dio's position within the government of Severus Alexander, who held him in high esteem and made him consul again, likely influenced the truth of this part of his history for the worse. Dio regularly refers to Elagabalus as Sardanapalus, partly to distinguish him from his divine namesake, but chiefly to do his part in maintaining the \"damnatio memoriae\" and to associate him with another autocrat notorious for a dissolute life.\nHistorian Clare Rowan calls Dio's account a mixture of reliable information and \"literary exaggeration\", noting that Elagabalus's marriages and time as consul are confirmed by numismatic and epigraphic records. In other instances, Dio's account is inaccurate, such as when he says Elagabalus appointed entirely unqualified officials and that Comazon had no military experience before being named to head the Praetorian Guard, when Comazon had commanded the Third Legion. Dio also gives different accounts in different places of when and by whom Diadumenian (whose forces Elagabalus fought) was given imperial names and titles. Martin Icks has written that \"It is clear that Dio was not attempting an accurate portrayal of the emperor\", an assessment endorsed by Josiah Osgood, who described it as \"put[ting] it mildly\".\nHerodian.\nAnother contemporary of Elagabalus was Herodian, a minor Roman civil servant who lived from c.\u2009170 until 240. His work, \"History of the Roman Empire since Marcus Aurelius\", commonly abbreviated as \"Roman History\", is a witness account of the reign of Commodus until the beginning of the reign of Gordian III. His work largely overlaps with Dio's \"Roman History\", and the texts, written independently of each other, agree more often than not about Elagabalus and his short but eventful reign. Herodian may have used Dio's work as a source for parts of his account about Elagabalus.\nArrizabalaga writes that Herodian is in most ways \"less detailed and punctilious than Dio\" and he is deemed less reliable by many modern scholars, though Rowan considers his account of Elagabalus's reign more reliable than Dio's and Herodian's lack of literary and scholarly pretensions are considered to make him less biased than senatorial historians. He is considered an important source for the religious reforms which took place during the reign of Elagabalus, which have been confirmed by numismatic and archaeological evidence.\n\"Augustan History\".\nThe source of many stories of Elagabalus's depravity is the \"Historia Augusta\", which includes controversial claims. It is most likely that the \"Historia Augusta\" was written towards the end of the fourth century, during the reign of emperor Theodosius I. The account of Elagabalus in the \"Historia Augusta\" is of uncertain historical merit. Sections 13 to 17, relating to the fall of Elagabalus, are less controversial among historians. The author of the most scandalous stories in the \"Historia Augusta\" concedes that \"both these matters and some others which pass belief were, I think, invented by people who wanted to depreciate Heliogabalus to win favour with Alexander\". The \"Historia Augusta\" is widely regarded to have been written by a single author who used multiple pseudonyms throughout the work, and has been described as a \"fantasist\" who invented large parts of his historical accounts.\nModern historians.\nFor readers of the modern age, \"The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\" by Edward Gibbon (1737\u20131794) further cemented the scandalous reputation of Elagabalus. Gibbon not only accepted and expressed outrage at the allegations of the ancient historians, but he might have added some details of his own; for example, he is the first historian known to claim that Gannys was a eunuch. Gibbon wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To confound the order of the season and climate, to sport with the passions and prejudices of his subjects, and to subvert every law of nature and decency, were in the number of his most delicious amusements. A long train of concubines, and a rapid succession of wives, among whom was a vestal virgin, ravished by force from her sacred asylum, were insufficient to satisfy the impotence of his passions. The master of the Roman world affected to copy the manners and dress of the female sex, preferring the distaff to the sceptre, and dishonored the principal dignities of the empire by distributing them among his numerous lovers; one of whom was publicly invested with the title and authority of the emperor's, or, as he more properly styled himself, the empress's husband. It may seem probable, the vices and follies of Elagabalus have been adorned by fancy, and blackened by prejudice. Yet, confining ourselves to the public scenes displayed before the Roman people, and attested by grave and contemporary historians, their inexpressible infamy surpasses that of any other age or country.\nThe 20th-century anthropologist James George Frazer (author of \"The Golden Bough\") took seriously the monotheistic aspirations of the emperor, but also ridiculed him: \"The dainty priest of the Sun [was] the most abandoned reprobate who ever sat upon a throne\u00a0... It was the intention of this eminently religious but crack-brained despot to supersede the worship of all the gods, not only at Rome but throughout the world, by the single worship of Elagabalus or the Sun\".\nThe first book-length biography was \"The Amazing Emperor Heliogabalus\" (1911) by J. Stuart Hay, \"a serious and systematic study\" more sympathetic than that of previous historians, which nonetheless stressed the exoticism of Elagabalus, calling his reign one of \"enormous wealth and excessive prodigality, luxury and aestheticism, carried to their ultimate extreme, and sensuality in all the refinements of its Eastern habit\".\nSome recent historians paint a more favourable picture of the emperor's rule. Martijn Icks, in \"Images of Elagabalus\" (2008; republished as \"The Crimes of Elagabalus\" in 2011 and 2012), doubts the reliability of the ancient sources and argues that it was the emperor's unorthodox religious policies that alienated the power elite of Rome, to the point that his grandmother saw fit to eliminate him and replace him with his cousin. He described ancient stories pertaining to the emperor as \"part of a long tradition of 'character assassination' in ancient historiography and biography\".\nLeonardo de Arrizabalaga y Prado, in \"The Emperor Elagabalus: Fact or Fiction?\" (2008), is also critical of the ancient historians and speculates that neither religion nor sexuality played a role in the fall of the young emperor. Prado instead suggests Elagabalus was the loser in a power struggle within the imperial family, that the loyalty of the Praetorian Guards was up for sale, and that Julia Maesa had the resources to outmaneuver and outbribe her grandson. In this version of events, once Elagabalus, his mother, and his immediate circle had been murdered, a campaign of character assassination began, resulting in a grotesque caricature that has persisted to the present day. Other historians, including Icks, criticized Prado for being overly skeptical of primary sources.\nWarwick Ball, in his book \"Rome in the East\", writes an apologetic account of the emperor, arguing that descriptions of his religious rites were exaggerated and should be dismissed as propaganda, similar to how pagan descriptions of Christian rites have since been dismissed. Ball describes the emperor's ritual processions as sound political and religious policy, arguing that syncretism of eastern and western deities deserves praise rather than ridicule. Ultimately, he paints Elagabalus as a child forced to become emperor who, as expected of the high-priest of a cult, continued his rituals even after becoming emperor. Ball justified Elagabalus's executions of prominent Roman figures who criticized his religious activities in the same way. Finally, Ball asserts Elagabalus's eventual victory in the sense that his deity would be welcomed by Rome in its Sol Invictus form 50 years later. Ball claims that Sol Invictus came to influence the monotheist Christian beliefs of Constantine, asserting that this influence remains in Christianity to this day.\nCultural references.\nDespite the attempted \"damnatio memoriae\", stories about Elagabalus survived and figured in many works of art and literature. In Spanish, his name became a word for \"glutton\", \"heliog\u00e1balo\". Due to the ancient stories about him, he often appears in literature and other creative media as a decadent figure (becoming something of an anti-hero in the Decadent movement of the late 19th century, and inspiring many famous works of art, especially by Decadents) and the epitome of a young, amoral aesthete. The most notable of these works include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary material.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14229", "revid": "210259", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14229", "title": "Homeopathy", "text": "Pseudoscientific system of alternative medicine\nHomeopathy or homoeopathy is a pseudoscientific system of alternative medicine. It was conceived in 1796 by the German physician Samuel Hahnemann. Its practitioners, called homeopaths or homeopathic physicians, believe that a substance that causes symptoms of a disease in healthy people can cure similar symptoms in sick people; this doctrine is called \"similia similibus curentur\", or \"like cures like\". \nHomeopathic preparations are termed \"remedies\" and are made using homeopathic dilution. In this process, the selected substance is repeatedly diluted until the final product is indistinguishable from the diluent. Often not even a single molecule of the original substance can be expected to remain in the product. Between each dilution homeopaths may hit and/or shake the product, claiming this makes the diluent \"remember\" the original substance after its removal. Practitioners claim that such preparations, upon oral intake, can treat or cure disease.\nAll relevant scientific knowledge about physics, chemistry, biochemistry and biology contradicts homeopathy. Homeopathic remedies are typically biochemically inert, and have no effect on any known disease. Its theory of disease, centered around principles Hahnemann termed miasms, is inconsistent with subsequent identification of viruses and bacteria as causes of disease. Clinical trials have been conducted and generally demonstrated no objective effect from homeopathic preparations. The fundamental implausibility of homeopathy as well as a lack of demonstrable effectiveness has led to it being characterized within the scientific and medical communities as quackery and fraud.\nHomeopathy achieved its greatest popularity in the 19th century. It was introduced to the United States in 1825, and the first American homeopathic school opened in 1835. Throughout the 19th century, dozens of homeopathic institutions appeared in Europe and the United States. During this period, homeopathy was able to appear relatively successful, as other forms of treatment could be harmful and ineffective. By the end of the century the practice began to wane, with the last exclusively homeopathic medical school in the United States closing in 1920. During the 1970s, homeopathy made a significant comeback, with sales of some homeopathic products increasing tenfold. The trend corresponded with the rise of the New Age movement, and may be in part due to chemophobia, an irrational aversion to synthetic chemicals, and the longer consultation times homeopathic practitioners provided.\nIn the 21st century, a series of meta-analyses have shown that the therapeutic claims of homeopathy lack scientific justification. As a result, national and international bodies have recommended the withdrawal of government funding for homeopathy in healthcare. National bodies from Australia, the United Kingdom, Switzerland and France, as well as the European Academies' Science Advisory Council and the Russian Academy of Sciences have all concluded that homeopathy is ineffective, and recommended against the practice receiving any further funding. The National Health Service in England no longer provides funding for homeopathic remedies and asked the Department of Health to add homeopathic remedies to the list of forbidden prescription items. France removed funding in 2021, while Spain has also announced moves to ban homeopathy and other pseudotherapies from health centers.\nHistory.\nHomeopathy was created in 1796 by Samuel Hahnemann. Hahnemann rejected the mainstream medicine of the late 18th century as irrational and inadvisable, because it was largely ineffective and often harmful. He advocated the use of single drugs at lower doses and promoted an immaterial, vitalistic view of how living organisms function. The term \"homeopathy\" was coined by Hahnemann and first appeared in print in 1807. He also coined the expression \"allopathic medicine\", which was used to pejoratively refer to traditional Western medicine.\nConcept.\nHahnemann conceived of homeopathy while translating a medical treatise by the Scottish physician and chemist William Cullen into German. Being sceptical of Cullen's theory that cinchona cured malaria because it was bitter, Hahnemann ingested some bark specifically to investigate what would happen. He experienced fever, shivering and joint pain: symptoms similar to those of malaria itself. From this, Hahnemann came to believe that all effective drugs produce symptoms in healthy individuals similar to those of the diseases that they treat. This led to the name \"homeopathy\", which comes from the \"h\u00f3moios\", \"-like\" and \"p\u00e1thos\", \"suffering\".\nThe doctrine that those drugs are effective which produce symptoms similar to the symptoms caused by the diseases they treat, called \"the law of similars\", was expressed by Hahnemann with the Latin phrase \"similia similibus curentur\", or \"like cures like\". Hahnemann's law of similars is unproven and does not derive from the scientific method. An account of the effects of eating cinchona bark noted by Oliver Wendell Holmes, published in 1861, failed to reproduce the symptoms Hahnemann reported. Subsequent scientific work showed that cinchona cures malaria because it contains quinine, which kills the \"Plasmodium falciparum\" parasite that causes the disease; the mechanism of action is unrelated to Hahnemann's ideas.\nProvings.\nHahnemann began to test what effects various substances may produce in humans, a procedure later called \"homeopathic proving\". These tests required subjects to test the effects of ingesting substances by recording all their symptoms as well as the ancillary conditions under which they appeared. He published a collection of provings in 1805, and a second collection of 65 preparations appeared in his book, \"Materia Medica Pura\" (1810).\nAs Hahnemann believed that large doses of drugs that caused similar symptoms would only aggravate illness, he advocated for extreme dilutions. A technique was devised for making dilutions that Hahnemann claimed would preserve the substance's therapeutic properties while removing its harmful effects. Hahnemann believed that this process enhanced \"the spirit-like medicinal powers of the crude substances\". He gathered and published an overview of his new medical system in his book, \"The Organon of the Healing Art\" (1810), with a sixth edition published in 1921 that homeopaths still use today.\nMiasms and disease.\nIn the \"Organon\", Hahnemann introduced the concept of \"miasms\" as the \"infectious principles\" underlying chronic disease and as \"peculiar morbid derangement[s] of vital force\". Hahnemann associated each miasm with specific diseases, and thought that initial exposure to miasms causes local symptoms, such as skin or venereal diseases. His assertion was that if these symptoms were suppressed by medication, the cause went deeper and began to manifest itself as diseases of the internal organs. Homeopathy maintains that treating diseases by directly alleviating their symptoms, as is sometimes done in conventional medicine, is ineffective because all \"disease can generally be traced to some latent, deep-seated, underlying chronic, or inherited tendency\". The underlying imputed miasm still remains, and deep-seated ailments can be corrected only by removing the deeper disturbance of the vital force.\nHahnemann's hypotheses for miasms originally presented only three local symptoms: psora (the itch), syphilis (venereal disease) or sycosis (fig-wart disease). Of these the most important was \"psora\", described as being related to any itching diseases of the skin and was claimed to be the foundation of many further disease conditions. Hahnemann believed it to be the cause of such diseases as epilepsy, cancer, jaundice, deafness, and cataracts. Since Hahnemann's time, other miasms have been proposed, some replacing illnesses previously attributed to the psora, including tuberculosis and cancer miasms.\nHahnemann's miasm theory remains disputed and controversial within homeopathy even in modern times. The theory of miasms has been criticized as an explanation developed to preserve the system of homeopathy in the face of treatment failures, and for being inadequate to cover the many hundreds of sorts of diseases, as well as for failing to explain disease predispositions, as well as genetics, environmental factors, and the unique disease history of each patient.\n19th century: rise to popularity and early criticism.\nHomeopathy achieved its greatest popularity in the 19th century. It was introduced to the United States in 1825 by Hans Birch Gram, a student of Hahnemann. The first homeopathic school in the United States opened in 1835 and the American Institute of Homeopathy was established in 1844. Throughout the 19th century, dozens of homeopathic institutions appeared in Europe and the United States, and by 1900, there were 22 homeopathic colleges and 15,000 practitioners in the United States.\nBecause medical practice of the time relied on treatments which were often ineffective and harmful, patients of homeopaths often had better outcomes than those being treated by medical practitioners. Though ineffective, homeopathic preparations are rarely detrimental, thus users were less likely to be harmed by the treatment that was supposed to be helping them. The relative success of homeopathy in the 19th century may have led to the abandonment of the ineffective and harmful treatments of bloodletting and purging and begun the move towards more effective, science-based medicine. One reason for the growing popularity of homeopathy was its apparent success in treating people suffering from infectious disease epidemics. During 19th-century epidemics of diseases such as cholera, death rates in homeopathic hospitals were often lower than in conventional hospitals, where the treatments used at the time were often harmful and did little or nothing to combat the diseases.\nEven during its rise in popularity, homeopathy was criticized by scientists and physicians. Sir John Forbes, physician to Queen Victoria, said in 1843 that the extremely small doses of homeopathy were regularly derided as useless and considered it \"an outrage to human reason\". James Young Simpson said in 1853 of the highly diluted drugs: \"No poison, however strong or powerful, the billionth or decillionth of which would in the least degree affect a man or harm a fly.\" Nineteenth-century American physician and author Oliver Wendell Holmes was also a vocal critic of homeopathy and published an essay entitled \"Hom\u0153opathy and Its Kindred Delusions\" (1842). The members of the French Homeopathic Society observed in 1867 that some leading homeopaths of Europe not only were abandoning the practice of administering infinitesimal doses but were also no longer defending it. The last school in the United States exclusively teaching homeopathy closed in 1920.\nRevival in the 20th century.\nAccording to academics Paul U. Unschuld and Edzard Ernst, the Nazi regime in Germany was fond of homeopathy, and spent large sums of money on researching its mechanisms, but without gaining a positive result. Unschuld also states that homeopathy never subsequently took root in the United States, but remained more deeply established in European thinking. In the United States, the \"Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act\" of 1938 (sponsored by Royal Copeland, a Senator from New York and homeopathic physician) recognized homeopathic preparations as drugs. In the 1950s, there were only 75 solely homeopathic practitioners in the U.S. By the mid to late 1970s, homeopathy made a significant comeback and the sales of some homeopathic companies increased tenfold.\nSome homeopaths credit the revival to Greek homeopath George Vithoulkas, who conducted a \"great deal of research to update the scenarios and refine the theories and practice of homeopathy\" in the 1970s, but Ernst and Simon Singh consider it to be linked to the rise of the New Age movement. Bruce Hood has argued that the increased popularity of homeopathy in recent times may be due to the comparatively long consultations practitioners are willing to give their patients, and to a preference for \"natural\" products, which people think are the basis of homeopathic preparations.\nTowards the end of the century, opposition to homeopathy began to increase again, with William T. Jarvis, the President of the National Council Against Health Fraud, saying that \"Homeopathy is a fraud perpetrated on the public with the government's blessing, thanks to the abuse of political power of Sen. Royal S. Copeland.\"\n21st century: renewed criticism.\nSince the beginning of the 21st century, a series of meta-analyses have further shown that the therapeutic claims of homeopathy lack scientific justification. This had led to a decrease or suspension of funding by many governments. In a 2010 report, the Science and Technology Committee of the United Kingdom House of Commons recommended that homeopathy should no longer receive National Health Service (NHS) funding due its lack of scientific credibility; NHS funding for homeopathy ceased in 2017. They also asked the Department of Health in the UK to add homeopathic remedies to the list of forbidden prescription items.\nIn 2015, the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia found that \"there are no health conditions for which there is reliable evidence that homeopathy is effective\". The federal government only ended up accepting three of the 45 recommendations made by the 2018 review of Pharmacy Remuneration and Regulation. The same year the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) held a hearing requesting public comment on the regulation of homeopathic drugs. In 2017, the FDA announced it would strengthen regulation of homeopathic products.\nThe American non-profit Center for Inquiry (CFI) filed a lawsuit in 2018 against the CVS pharmacy for consumer fraud over its sale of homeopathic medicines. It claimed that CVS was selling homeopathic products on an easier-to-obtain basis than standard medication. In 2019, CFI brought a similar lawsuit against Walmart for \"committing wide-scale consumer fraud and endangering the health of its customers through its sale and marketing of homeopathic medicines\". They also conducted a survey in which they found consumers felt ripped off when informed of the lack of evidence for the efficacy of homeopathic remedies, such as those sold by Walmart and CVS.\nIn 2021, the French healthcare minister phased out social security reimbursements for homeopathic drugs. France has long had a stronger belief in the virtues of homeopathic drugs than many other countries and the world's biggest manufacturer of alternative medicine drugs, Boiron, is located in that country. Spain also announced moves to ban homeopathy and other pseudotherapies. In 2016, the University of Barcelona cancelled its master's degree in Homeopathy citing \"lack of scientific basis\", after advice from the Spanish Ministry of Health. Shortly afterwards the University of Valencia announced the elimination of its Masters in Homeopathy.\nPreparations and treatment.\nHomeopathic preparations are referred to as \"homeopathic remedies\". Practitioners rely on two types of reference when prescribing: \"Materia medica\" and repertories. A homeopathic \"materia medica\" is a collection of \"drug pictures\", organized alphabetically. A homeopathic repertory is a quick reference version of the \"materia medica\" that indexes the symptoms and then the associated remedies for each. In both cases different compilers may dispute particular inclusions in the references. The first symptomatic homeopathic \"materia medica\" was arranged by Hahnemann. The first homeopathic repertory was Georg Jahr's \"Symptomenkodex\", published in German in 1835, and translated into English as the \"Repertory to the more Characteristic Symptoms of Materia Medica\" in 1838. This version was less focused on disease categories and was the forerunner to later works by James Tyler Kent. There are over 118 repertories published in English, with Kent's being one of the most used.\nConsultation.\nHomeopaths generally begin with a consultation, which can be a 10\u201315 minute appointment or last for over an hour, where the patient describes their medical history. The patient describes the \"modalities\", or if their symptoms change depending on the weather and other external factors. The practitioner also solicits information on mood, likes and dislikes, physical, mental and emotional states, life circumstances, and any physical or emotional illnesses. This information (also called the \"symptom picture\") is matched to the \"drug picture\" in the \"materia medica\" or repertory and used to determine the appropriate homeopathic remedies. In classical homeopathy, the practitioner attempts to match a single preparation to the totality of symptoms (the \"simlilum\"), while \"clinical homeopathy\" involves combinations of preparations based on the illness's symptoms.\nPreparation.\nHomeopathy uses animal, plant, mineral, and synthetic substances in its preparations, generally referring to them using Latin names. Examples include \"arsenicum album\" (arsenic oxide), \"natrum muriaticum\" (sodium chloride or table salt), \"Lachesis muta\" (the venom of the bushmaster snake), \"opium\", and \"thyroidinum\" (thyroid hormone). Homeopaths say this is to ensure accuracy. In the USA the common name must be displayed, although the Latin one can also be present. Homeopathic pills are made from an inert substance (often sugars, typically lactose), upon which a drop of liquid homeopathic preparation is placed and allowed to evaporate.\nIsopathy is a therapy derived from homeopathy in which the preparations come from diseased or pathological products such as fecal, urinary and respiratory discharges, blood, and tissue. They are called nosodes (from the Greek \"nosos\", disease) with preparations made from \"healthy\" specimens being termed \"sarcodes\". Many so-called \"homeopathic vaccines\" are a form of isopathy. Tautopathy is a form of isopathy where the preparations are composed of drugs or vaccines that a person has consumed in the past, in the belief that this can reverse the supposed lingering damage caused by the initial use. There is no convincing scientific evidence for isopathy as an effective method of treatment.\nSome modern homeopaths use preparations they call \"imponderables\" because they do not originate from a substance but some other phenomenon presumed to have been \"captured\" by alcohol or lactose. Examples include X-rays and sunlight. Another derivative is electrohomeopathy, where an electric bio-energy of therapeutic value is supposedly extracted from plants. Popular in the late nineteenth century, electrohomeopathy is extremely pseudo-scientific. In 2012, the Allahabad High Court in Uttar Pradesh, India, handed down a decree stating that electrohomeopathy was quackery and no longer recognized it as a system of medicine.\nOther minority practices include paper preparations, in which the terms for substances and dilutions are written on pieces of paper and either pinned to the patients' clothing, put in their pockets, or placed under glasses of water that are then given to the patients. Radionics, the use of electromagnetic radiation such as radio waves, can also be used to manufacture preparations. Such practices have been strongly criticized by classical homeopaths as unfounded, speculative, and verging upon magic and superstition. Flower preparations are produced by placing flowers in water and exposing them to sunlight. The most famous of these are the Bach flower remedies, which were developed by Edward Bach.\nDilutions.\nHahnemann claimed that undiluted doses caused reactions, sometimes dangerous ones, and thus that preparations be given at the lowest possible dose. A solution that is more dilute is described as having a higher \"potency\", and thus are claimed to be stronger and deeper-acting. The general method of dilution is serial dilution, where solvent is added to part of the previous mixture, but the \"Korsakovian\" method may also be used. In the Korsakovian method, the vessel in which the preparations are manufactured is emptied, refilled with solvent, with the volume of fluid adhering to the walls of the vessel deemed sufficient for the new batch. The Korsakovian method is sometimes referred to as K on the label of a homeopathic preparation. Another method is Fluxion, which dilutes the substance by continuously passing water through the vial. Insoluble solids, such as granite, diamond, and platinum, are diluted by grinding them with lactose (\"trituration\").\nThree main logarithmic dilution scales are in regular use in homeopathy. Hahnemann created the \"centesimal\" or \"C scale\", diluting a substance by a factor of 100 at each stage. There is also a decimal dilution scale (notated as \"X\" or \"D\") in which the preparation is diluted by a factor of 10 at each stage. The centesimal scale was favoured by Hahnemann for most of his life, although in his last ten years Hahnemann developed a quintamillesimal (Q) scale which diluted the drug 1 part in 50,000. A 2C dilution works out to one part of the original substance in 10,000 parts of the solution. In standard chemistry, this produces a substance with a concentration of 0.01% (volume-volume percentage). A 6C dilution ends up with the original substance diluted by a factor of 100\u22126 (one part in one trillion). The end product is usually so diluted as to be indistinguishable from the diluent (pure water, sugar or alcohol). The greatest dilution reasonably likely to contain at least one molecule of the original substance is approximately 12C.\nHahnemann advocated dilutions of 1 part to 1060 or 30C. Hahnemann regularly used dilutions of up to 30C but opined that \"there must be a limit to the matter\". To counter the reduced potency at high dilutions he formed the view that vigorous shaking by striking on an elastic surface \u2013 a process termed \"succussion\" \u2013 was necessary. Homeopaths are unable to agree on the number and force of strikes needed, and there is no way that the claimed results of succussion can be tested.\nCritics of homeopathy commonly emphasize the dilutions involved in homeopathy, using analogies. One mathematically correct example is that a 12C solution is equivalent to \"a pinch of salt in both the North and South Atlantic Oceans\". One-third of a drop of some original substance diluted into all the water on Earth would produce a preparation with a concentration of about 13C. The science animation YouTube channel notes that a dilution of 30C, a homeopathic pill with just a single atom of target substance would have to be so large that it would be as long as the distance from the Earth to the Sun and would collapse into a black hole under its own gravity. Robert L. Park points out that a 200C dilution of duck liver, marketed under the name Oscillococcinum, would require 10320 universes worth of molecules to contain just one original molecule in the final substance. The high dilutions characteristically used are often considered to be the most controversial and implausible aspect of homeopathy.\nProvings.\nHomeopaths claim that they can determine the properties of their preparations by following a method which they call \"proving\". As performed by Hahnemann, provings involved administering various preparations to healthy volunteers. The volunteers were then observed, often for months at a time. They were made to keep extensive journals detailing all of their symptoms at specific times throughout the day. They were forbidden from consuming coffee, tea, spices, or wine for the duration of the experiment; playing chess was also prohibited because Hahnemann considered it to be \"too exciting\", though they were allowed to drink beer and encouraged to exercise in moderation. At first Hahnemann used undiluted doses for provings, but he later advocated provings with preparations at a 30C dilution, and most modern provings are carried out using ultra-dilute preparations.\nProvings are claimed to have been important in the development of the clinical trial, due to their early use of simple control groups, systematic and quantitative procedures, and some of the first application of statistics in medicine. The lengthy records of self-experimentation by homeopaths have occasionally proven useful in the development of modern drugs: For example, evidence that nitroglycerin might be useful as a treatment for angina was discovered by looking through homeopathic provings, though homeopaths themselves never used it for that purpose at that time. The first recorded provings were published by Hahnemann in his 1796 \"Essay on a New Principle\". His \"Fragmenta de Viribus\" (1805) contained the results of 27 provings, and his 1810 \"Materia Medica Pura\" contained 65. For James Tyler Kent's 1905 \"Lectures on Homoeopathic Materia Medica\", 217 preparations underwent provings and newer substances are continually added to contemporary versions.\nThough the proving process has superficial similarities with clinical trials, it is fundamentally different in that the process is subjective, not blinded, and modern provings are unlikely to use pharmacologically active levels of the substance under proving. As early as 1842, Oliver Holmes had noted that provings were impossibly vague, and the purported effect was not repeatable among different subjects.\nEvidence and efficacy.\nOutside of the alternative medicine community, scientists have long considered homeopathy a sham or a pseudoscience, and the medical community regards it as quackery. There is an overall absence of sound statistical evidence of therapeutic efficacy, which is consistent with the lack of any biologically plausible pharmacological agent or mechanism. Proponents argue that homeopathic medicines must work by some, as yet undefined, biophysical mechanism. No homeopathic preparation has been shown to be different from placebo.\nLack of scientific evidence.\nThe lack of convincing scientific evidence supporting its efficacy and its use of preparations without active ingredients have led to characterizations of homeopathy as pseudoscience and quackery, or, in the words of a 1998 medical review, \"placebo therapy at best and quackery at worst\". The Russian Academy of Sciences considers homeopathy a \"dangerous 'pseudoscience' that does not work\", and \"urges people to treat homeopathy 'on a par with magic'\". The Chief Medical Officer for England, Dame Sally Davies, has stated that homeopathic preparations are \"rubbish\" and do not serve as anything more than placebos. In 2013, Mark Walport, the UK Government Chief Scientific Adviser and head of the Government Office for Science said \"homeopathy is nonsense, it is non-science.\" His predecessor, John Beddington, also said that homeopathy \"has no underpinning of scientific basis\" and is being \"fundamentally ignored\" by the Government.\nJack Killen, acting deputy director of the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine, says homeopathy \"goes beyond current understanding of chemistry and physics\". He adds: \"There is, to my knowledge, no condition for which homeopathy has been proven to be an effective treatment.\" Ben Goldacre says that homeopaths who misrepresent scientific evidence to a scientifically illiterate public, have \"... walled themselves off from academic medicine, and critique has been all too often met with avoidance rather than argument\". Homeopaths often prefer to ignore meta-analyses in favour of cherry picked positive results, such as by promoting a particular observational study (one which Goldacre describes as \"little more than a customer-satisfaction survey\") as if it were more informative than a series of randomized controlled trials.\nIn an article entitled \"Should We Maintain an Open Mind about Homeopathy?\" published in the \"American Journal of Medicine\", Michael Baum and Edzard Ernst\u00a0\u2013 writing to other physicians\u00a0\u2013 wrote that \"Homeopathy is among the worst examples of faith-based medicine... These axioms [of homeopathy] are not only out of line with scientific facts but also directly opposed to them. If homeopathy is correct, much of physics, chemistry, and pharmacology must be incorrect...\".\nPlausibility of dilutions.\nThe exceedingly low concentration of homeopathic preparations, which often lack even a single molecule of the diluted substance, has been the basis of questions about the effects of the preparations since the 19th century. The laws of chemistry give this dilution limit, which is related to the Avogadro number, as being roughly equal to 12C homeopathic dilutions (1 part in 1024). James Randi and the groups have highlighted the lack of active ingredients by taking large 'overdoses'. None of the hundreds of demonstrators in the UK, Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the US were injured and \"no one was cured of anything, either\".\nModern advocates of homeopathy have proposed a concept of \"water memory\", according to which water \"remembers\" the substances mixed in it, and transmits the effect of those substances when consumed. This concept is inconsistent with the current understanding of matter, and water memory has never been demonstrated to have any detectable effect, biological or otherwise. Existence of a pharmacological effect in the absence of any true active ingredient is inconsistent with the law of mass action and the observed dose-response relationships characteristic of therapeutic drugs. Homeopaths contend that their methods produce a therapeutically active preparation, selectively including only the intended substance, though in reality any water will have been in contact with millions of different substances throughout its history, and homeopaths cannot account for the selected homeopathic substance being isolated as a special case in their process.\nPractitioners also hold that higher dilutions produce stronger medicinal effects. This idea is also inconsistent with observed dose-response relationships, where effects are dependent on the concentration of the active ingredient in the body. Some contend that the phenomenon of hormesis may support the idea of dilution increasing potency, but the dose-response relationship outside the zone of hormesis declines with dilution as normal, and nonlinear pharmacological effects do not provide any credible support for homeopathy.\nEfficacy.\nNo individual homeopathic preparation has been unambiguously shown by research to be different from placebo. The methodological quality of the early primary research was low, with problems such as weaknesses in study design and reporting, small sample size, and selection bias. Since better quality trials have become available, the evidence for efficacy of homeopathy preparations has diminished; the highest-quality trials indicate that the preparations themselves exert no intrinsic effect. A review conducted in 2010 of all the pertinent studies of \"best evidence\" produced by the Cochrane Collaboration concluded that this evidence \"fails to demonstrate that homeopathic medicines have effects beyond placebo.\"\nIn 2009, the United Kingdom's House of Commons Science and Technology Committee concluded that there was no compelling evidence of effect other than placebo. The Australian National Health and Medical Research Council completed a comprehensive review of the effectiveness of homeopathic preparations in 2015, in which it concluded that \"there were no health conditions for which there was reliable evidence that homeopathy was effective.\" The European Academies' Science Advisory Council (EASAC) published its official analysis in 2017 finding a lack of evidence that homeopathic products are effective, and raising concerns about quality control. In contrast a 2011 book was published, purportedly financed by the Swiss government, that concluded that homeopathy was effective and cost efficient. Although hailed by proponents as proof that homeopathy works, it was found to be scientifically, logically and ethically flawed, with most authors having a conflict of interest. The Swiss Federal Office of Public Health later released a statement saying the book was published without the consent of the Swiss government.\nMeta-analyses, essential tools to summarize evidence of therapeutic efficacy, and systematic reviews have found that the methodological quality in the majority of randomized trials in homeopathy have shortcomings and that such trials were generally of lower quality than trials of conventional medicine. A major issue has been publication bias, where positive results are more likely to be published in journals. This has been particularly marked in alternative medicine journals, where few of the published articles (just 5% during the year 2000) tend to report null results. A systematic review of the available systematic reviews confirmed in 2002 that higher-quality trials tended to have less positive results, and found no convincing evidence that any homeopathic preparation exerts clinical effects different from placebo. The same conclusion was also reached in 2005 in a meta-analysis published in \"The Lancet\". A 2017 systematic review and meta-analysis found that the most reliable evidence did not support the effectiveness of non-individualized homeopathy.\nHealth organizations, including the UK's National Health Service, the American Medical Association, the FASEB, and the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia, have issued statements saying that there is no good-quality evidence that homeopathy is effective as a treatment for any health condition. In 2009, World Health Organization official Mario Raviglione criticized the use of homeopathy to treat tuberculosis; similarly, another WHO spokesperson argued there was no evidence homeopathy would be an effective treatment for diarrhoea. They warned against the use of homeopathy for serious conditions such as depression, HIV and malaria. The American College of Medical Toxicology and the American Academy of Clinical Toxicology recommend that no one use homeopathic treatment for disease or as a preventive health measure. These organizations report that no evidence exists that homeopathic treatment is effective, but that there is evidence that using these treatments produces harm and can bring indirect health risks by delaying conventional treatment.\nPurported effects in other biological systems.\nWhile some articles have suggested that homeopathic solutions of high dilution can have statistically significant effects on organic processes including the growth of grain and enzyme reactions, such evidence is disputed since attempts to replicate them have failed. In 2001 and 2004, Madeleine Ennis published a number of studies that reported that homeopathic dilutions of histamine exerted an effect on the activity of basophils. In response to the first of these studies, \"Horizon\" aired a programme in which British scientists attempted to replicate Ennis' results; they were unable to do so. A 2007 systematic review of high-dilution experiments found that none of the experiments with positive results could be reproduced by all investigators.\nIn 1988, French immunologist Jacques Benveniste published a paper in the journal \"Nature\" while working at INSERM. The paper purported to have discovered that basophils released histamine when exposed to a homeopathic dilution of anti-immunoglobulin E antibody. Skeptical of the findings, \"Nature\" assembled an independent investigative team to determine the accuracy of the research. After investigation the team found that the experiments were \"statistically ill-controlled\", \"interpretation has been clouded by the exclusion of measurements in conflict with the claim\", and concluded, \"We believe that experimental data have been uncritically assessed and their imperfections inadequately reported.\"\nEthics and safety.\nThe provision of homeopathic preparations has been described as unethical. Michael Baum, professor emeritus of surgery and visiting professor of medical humanities at University College London (UCL), has described homeopathy as a \"cruel deception\". Edzard Ernst, the first professor of complementary medicine in the United Kingdom and a former homeopathic practitioner, has expressed his concerns about pharmacists who violate their ethical code by failing to provide customers with \"necessary and relevant information\" about the true nature of the homeopathic products they advertise and sell. In 2013 the UK Advertising Standards Authority concluded that the Society of Homeopaths were targeting vulnerable ill people and discouraging the use of essential medical treatment while making misleading claims of efficacy for homeopathic products. In 2015 the Federal Court of Australia imposed penalties on a homeopathic company for making false or misleading statements about the efficacy of the whooping cough vaccine and recommending homeopathic remedies as an alternative.A 2000 review by homeopaths reported that homeopathic preparations are \"unlikely to provoke severe adverse reactions\". In 2012, a systematic review evaluating evidence of homeopathy's possible adverse effects concluded that \"homeopathy has the potential to harm patients and consumers in both direct and indirect ways\". A 2016 systematic review and meta-analysis found that, in homeopathic clinical trials, adverse effects were reported among the patients who received homeopathy about as often as they were reported among patients who received placebo or conventional medicine.\nSome homeopathic preparations involve poisons such as Belladonna, arsenic, and poison ivy. In rare cases, the original ingredients are present at detectable levels. This may be due to improper preparation or intentional low dilution. Serious adverse effects such as seizures and death have been reported or associated with some homeopathic preparations. Instances of arsenic poisoning have occurred. In 2009, the FDA advised consumers to stop using three discontinued cold remedy Zicam products because it could cause permanent damage to users' sense of smell. In 2016 the FDA issued a safety alert to consumers warning against the use of homeopathic teething gels and tablets following reports of adverse events after their use. A previous FDA investigation had found that these products were improperly diluted and contained \"unsafe levels of belladonna\" and that the reports of serious adverse events in children using this product were \"consistent with belladonna toxicity\".\nPatients who choose to use homeopathy rather than evidence-based medicine risk missing timely diagnosis and effective treatment, thereby worsening the outcomes of serious conditions such as cancer. The Russian Commission on Pseudoscience has said homeopathy is not safe because \"patients spend significant amounts of money, buying medicines that do not work and disregard already known effective treatment.\" Critics have cited cases of patients failing to receive proper treatment for diseases that could have been easily managed with conventional medicine and who have died as a result. They have also condemned the \"marketing practice\" of criticizing and downplaying the effectiveness of medicine. Homeopaths claim that use of conventional medicines will \"push the disease deeper\" and cause more serious conditions, a process referred to as \"suppression\". In 1978, Anthony Campbell, a consultant physician at the Royal London Homeopathic Hospital, criticized statements by George Vithoulkas claiming that syphilis, when treated with antibiotics, would develop into secondary and tertiary syphilis with involvement of the central nervous system. Vithoulkas' claims echo the idea that treating a disease with external medication used to treat the symptoms would only drive it deeper into the body and conflict with scientific studies, which indicate that penicillin treatment produces a complete cure of syphilis in more than 90% of cases.\nThe use of homeopathy as a preventive for serious infectious diseases, called homeoprophylaxis, is especially controversial. Some homeopaths (particularly those who are non-physicians) advise their patients against immunization. Others have suggested that vaccines be replaced with homeopathic \"nosodes\". While Hahnemann was opposed to such preparations, modern homeopaths often use them although there is no evidence to indicate they have any beneficial effects. Promotion of homeopathic alternatives to vaccines has been characterized as dangerous, inappropriate and irresponsible. In December 2014, the Australian homeopathy supplier Homeopathy Plus! was found to have acted deceptively in promoting homeopathic alternatives to vaccines. In 2019, an investigative journalism piece by the \"Telegraph\" revealed that homeopathy practitioners were actively discouraging patients from vaccinating their children. Cases of homeopaths advising against the use of anti-malarial drugs have also been identified, putting visitors to the tropics in severe danger.\nA 2006 review recommends that pharmacy colleges include a required course where ethical dilemmas inherent in recommending products lacking proven safety and efficacy data be discussed and that students should be taught where unproven systems such as homeopathy depart from evidence-based medicine.\nRegulation and prevalence.\nHomeopathy is fairly common in some countries while being uncommon in others; is highly regulated in some countries and mostly unregulated in others. It is practiced worldwide and professional qualifications and licences are needed in most countries. A 2019 WHO report found that 100 out of 133 Member States surveyed in 2012 acknowledged that their population used homeopathy, with 22 saying the practice was regulated and 13 providing health insurance coverage. In some countries, there are no specific legal regulations concerning the use of homeopathy, while in others, licences or degrees in conventional medicine from accredited universities are required. In 2001 homeopathy had been integrated into the national health care systems of many countries, including India, Mexico, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and the United Kingdom.\nRegulation.\nSome homeopathic treatment is covered by the public health service of several European countries, including Scotland, and Luxembourg. It used to be covered in France until 2021. In other countries, such as Belgium, homeopathy is not covered. In Austria, the public health service requires scientific proof of effectiveness in order to reimburse medical treatments and homeopathy is listed as not reimbursable, but exceptions can be made; private health insurance policies sometimes include homeopathic treatments. In 2018, Austria's Medical University of Vienna stopped teaching homeopathy. The Swiss government withdrew coverage of homeopathy and four other complementary treatments in 2005, stating that they did not meet efficacy and cost-effectiveness criteria, but following a referendum in 2009 the five therapies were reinstated for a further 6-year trial period. In Germany, homeopathic treatments are covered by 70 percent of government medical plans, and available in almost every pharmacy. In January 2024, German health minister Karl Lauterbach announced plans to withdraw all statutory health insurance coverage for homeopathic and anthroposophic treatments, citing a lack of scientific evidence for their efficacy.\nThe English NHS recommended against prescribing homeopathic preparations in 2017. In 2018, prescriptions worth \u00a355,000 were written in defiance of the guidelines, representing less than 0.001% of the total NHS prescribing budget. In 2016 the UK's Committee of Advertising Practice compliance team wrote to homeopaths in the UK to \"remind them of the rules that govern what they can and can't say in their marketing materials\". The letter told homeopaths to \"ensure that they do not make any direct or implied claims that homeopathy can treat medical conditions\" and asks them to review their marketing communications \"including websites and social media pages\" to ensure compliance. Homeopathic services offered at Bristol Homeopathic Hospital in the UK ceased in October 2015.\nMember states of the European Union are required to ensure that homeopathic products are registered, although this process does not require any proof of efficacy. In Spain, the Association for the protection of patients from pseudo-scientific therapies is lobbying to get rid of the easy registration procedure for homeopathic remedies. In Bulgaria, Hungary, Latvia, Romania and Slovenia homeopathy, by law, can only be practiced by medical practitioners. However, in Slovenia if doctors practice homeopathy their medical license will be revoked. In Germany, to become a homeopathic physician, one must attend a three-year training program, while France, Austria and Denmark mandate licences to diagnose any illness or dispense of any product whose purpose is to treat any illness. Homeopaths in the UK are under no legal regulations, meaning anyone can call themselves homeopaths and administer homeopathic remedies.\nThe Indian government recognizes homeopathy as one of its national systems of medicine and they are sold with medical claims. It has established the Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH) under the Ministry of Health &amp; Family Welfare. The south Indian state of Kerala also has a cabinet-level AYUSH department. The Central Council of Homoeopathy was established in 1973 to monitor higher education in homeopathy, and the National Institute of Homoeopathy in 1975. Principals and standards for homeopathic products are covered by the \"Homoeopathic pharmacopoeia of India\". A minimum of a recognized diploma in homeopathy and registration on a state register or the Central Register of Homoeopathy is required to practice homeopathy in India.\nIn the United States each state is responsible for the laws and licensing requirements for homeopathy. In 2015, the FDA held a hearing on homeopathic product regulation. At the hearing, representatives from the Center for Inquiry and the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry summarized the harm that is done to the general public from homeopathics and proposed regulatory actions: In 2016 the United States Federal Trade Commission (FTC) issued an \"Enforcement Policy Statement Regarding Marketing Claims for Over-the-Counter Homeopathic Drugs\" which specified that the FTC will apply the same standard to homeopathic drugs that it applies to other products claiming similar benefits. A related report concluded that claims of homeopathy effectiveness \"are not accepted by most modern medical experts and do not constitute competent and reliable scientific evidence that these products have the claimed treatment effects.\" In 2019, the FDA removed an enforcement policy that permitted unapproved homeopathics to be sold. Currently no homeopathic products are approved by the FDA.\nHomeopathic remedies are regulated as natural health products in Canada. Ontario became the first province in the country to regulate the practice of homeopathy, a move that was widely criticized by scientists and doctors. Health Canada requires all products to have a licence before being sold and applicants have to submit evidence on \"the safety, efficacy and quality of a homeopathic medicine\". In 2015 the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation tested the system by applying for and then receiving a government approved licence for a made-up drug aimed at kids.\nIn Australia, the sale of homeopathic products is regulated by the Therapeutic Goods Administration. In 2015, the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia concluded that there is \"no reliable evidence that homeopathy is effective and should not be used to treat health conditions that are chronic, serious, or could become serious\". They recommended anyone considering using homeopathy should first get advice from a registered health practitioner. A 2017 review into Pharmacy Remuneration and Regulation recommended that products be banned from pharmacies; while noting the concerns the government did not adopt the recommendation. In New Zealand there are no regulations specific to homeopathy and the New Zealand Medical Association does not oppose the use of homeopathy, a stance that has been called unethical by some doctors.\nPrevalence.\nHomeopathy is one of the most commonly used forms of alternative medicines and it has a large worldwide market. The exact size is uncertain, but information available on homeopathic sales suggests it forms a large share of the medical market.\nIn 1999, about 1000 UK doctors practiced homeopathy, most being general practitioners who prescribe a limited number of remedies. A further 1500 homeopaths with no medical training are also thought to practice. Over ten thousand German and French doctors use homeopathy. In the United States a National Health Interview Survey estimated 5 million adults and 1 million children used homeopathy in 2011. An analysis of this survey concluded that most cases were self-prescribed for colds and musculoskeletal pain. Major retailers like Walmart, CVS, and Walgreens sell homeopathic products that are packaged to resemble conventional medicines.\nThe homeopathic drug market in Germany is worth about 650 million euro with a 2014 survey finding that 60 percent of Germans reported trying homeopathy. A 2009 survey found that only 17 percent of respondents knew how homeopathic medicine was made. France spent more than US$408 million on homeopathic products in 2008. In the United States the homeopathic market is worth about $3 billion-a-year; with 2.9 billion spent in 2007. Australia spent US$7.3 million on homeopathic medicines in 2008.\nIn India, a 2014 national health survey found that homeopathy was used by about 3% of the population. Homeopathy is used in China, although it arrived a lot later than in many other countries, partly due to the restriction on foreigners that persisted until late in the nineteenth century. Throughout Africa there is a high reliance on traditional medicines, which can be attributed to the cost of modern medicines and the relative prevalence of practitioners. Many African countries do not have any official training facilities.\nVeterinary use.\nUsing homeopathy as a treatment for animals is termed \"veterinary homeopathy\" and dates back to the inception of homeopathy; Hahnemann himself wrote and spoke of the use of homeopathy in animals other than humans. The use of homeopathy in the organic farming industry is heavily promoted. Given that homeopathy's effects in humans are due to the placebo effect and the counseling aspects of the consultation, such treatments are even less effective in animals. Studies have also found that giving animals placebos can play active roles in influencing pet owners to believe in the effectiveness of the treatment when none exists. This means that animals given homeopathic remedies will continue to suffer, resulting in animal welfare concerns.\nLittle existing research on the subject is of a high enough scientific standard to provide reliable data on efficacy. A 2016 review of peer-reviewed articles from 1981 to 2014 by scientists from the University of Kassel, Germany, concluded that there is not enough evidence to support homeopathy as an effective treatment of infectious diseases in livestock. The UK's Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) has adopted a robust position against use of \"alternative\" pet preparations including homeopathy. The British Veterinary Association's position statement on alternative medicines says that it \"cannot endorse\" homeopathy, and the Australian Veterinary Association includes it on its list of \"ineffective therapies\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14230", "revid": "45079649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14230", "title": "Hurricane", "text": ""}
{"id": "14231", "revid": "46159820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14231", "title": "Hairpin", "text": "Long pin used to secure the hair\nA hairpin or hair pin is a long device used to hold a person's hair in place. It may be used simply to secure long hair out of the way for convenience or as part of an elaborate hairstyle or coiffure. The earliest evidence for dressing the hair may be seen in carved \"Venus figurines\" such as the Venus of Brassempouy and the Venus of Willendorf. The creation of different hairstyles, especially among women, seems to be common to all cultures and all periods and many past, and current, societies use hairpins.\nHairpins made of metal, ivory, bronze, carved wood, etc. were used in ancient Egypt for securing decorated hairstyles. Such hairpins suggest, as graves show, that many were luxury objects among the Egyptians and later the Greeks, Etruscans, and Romans. Major success came in 1901 with the invention of the spiral hairpin by New Zealand inventor Ernest Godward. This was a predecessor of the hair clip.\nThe hairpin may be decorative and encrusted with jewels and ornaments, or it may be utilitarian, and designed to be almost invisible while holding a hairstyle in place. Some hairpins are a single straight pin, but modern versions are more likely to be constructed from different lengths of wire that are bent in half with a u-shaped end and a few kinks along the two opposite portions. The finished pin may vary from two to six inches in last length. The length of the wires enables placement in several designs of hairstyles to hold the nature in place. The kinks enable retaining the pin during normal movements.\nA hairpin patent was issued to Kelly Chamandy in 1925.\nHairpins in Chinese culture.\nHairpins (generally known as ; ) are an important symbol in Chinese culture. In ancient China, hairpins were worn by men as well as women, and they were essential items for everyday hairstyling, mainly for securing and decorating a hair bun. Furthermore, hairpins worn by women could also represent their social status.\nIn Han Chinese culture, when young girls reached the age of fifteen, they were allowed to take part in a rite of passage known as (), or \"hairpin initiation\". This ceremony marked the coming of age of young women. Particularly, before the age of fifteen, girls did not use hairpins as they wore their hair in braids, and they were considered as children. When they turned fifteen, they could be considered as young women after the ceremony, and they started to style their hair as buns secured and embellished by hairpins. This practice indicated that these young women could now enter into marriage. However, if a young woman had not been consented to marriage before age twenty, or she had not yet participated in a coming of age ceremony, she would attend a ceremony when she turned twenty.\nIn comparison with , the male equivalent known as () or \"hat initiation\", usually took place five years later, at the age of twenty. In the 21st century Hanfu Movement, an attempt to revive the traditional Han Chinese coming of age ceremonies has been made, and the ideal age to attend the ceremony is twenty years old for all genders.\nWhile hairpins can symbolize the transition from childhood to adulthood, they were closely connected to the concept of marriage as well. At the time of an engagement, the fianc\u00e9e may take a hairpin from her hair and give it to her fianc\u00e9 as a pledge: this can be seen as a reversal of the Western tradition, in which the future groom presents an engagement ring to his betrothed. After the wedding ceremony, the husband should put the hairpin back into his spouse's hair.\nHair has always carried many psychological, philosophical, romantic, and cultural meanings in Chinese culture. In Han culture, people call the union between two people (), literally \"tying hair\". During the wedding ceremony, some Chinese couples exchange a lock of hair as a pledge, while others break a hairpin into two parts, and then, each of the betrothed take one part with them for keeping. If this couple were ever to get separated in the future, when they reunite, they can piece the two halves together, and the completed hairpin would serve as a proof of their identities as well as a symbol of their reunion. In addition, a married couple is sometimes referred to as (), an idiom which implies the relationship between the pair is very intimate and happy, just like how their hair has been tied together.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14232", "revid": "23645052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14232", "title": "Hz", "text": ""}
{"id": "14233", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14233", "title": "Hate speech", "text": "Speech that expresses hatred towards individuals or groups\nHate speech is a term with varied meaning and has no single, consistent definition. \"Cambridge Dictionary\" defines hate speech as \"public speech that expresses hate or encourages violence towards a person or group based on something such as race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation\". The \"Encyclopedia of the American Constitution\" states that hate speech is \"usually thought to include communications of animosity or disparagement of an individual or a group on account of a group characteristic such as race, color, national origin, sex, disability, religion, or sexual orientation\". Hate speech can include incitement based on social class or political beliefs. There is no single definition of what constitutes \"hate\" or \"disparagement\". Legal definitions of hate speech vary from country to country. \nThere has been much debate over freedom of speech, hate speech, and hate speech legislation. The laws of some countries describe hate speech as speech, gestures, conduct, writing, or displays that incite violence or prejudicial actions against a group or individuals on the basis of their membership in the group, or that disparage or intimidate a group or individuals on the basis of their membership in the group. The law may identify protected groups based on certain characteristics. In some countries, a victim of hate speech may seek redress under civil law, criminal law, or both. In the United States, what is usually labelled \"hate speech\" is constitutionally protected. \nHate speech is generally accepted to be one of the prerequisites for mass atrocities such as genocide. Incitement to genocide is an extreme form of hate speech, and has been prosecuted in international courts such as the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.\nHistory.\nEarly hate speech laws were enacted in the 1820s in France and 1851 in Prussia.\nStarting in the 1940s and 50s, various American civil rights groups responded to the atrocities of World War II by advocating for restrictions on hateful speech targeting groups on the basis of race and religion. These organizations used group libel as a legal framework for describing hate speech and addressing its harm. In his discussion of the history of criminal libel, scholar Jeremy Waldron states that these laws helped \"vindicate public order, not just by preempting violence, but by upholding against attack a shared sense of the basic elements of each person's status, dignity, and reputation as a citizen or member of society in good standing\". A key legal victory for this view came in 1952 when group libel law was affirmed by the United States Supreme Court in \"Beauharnais v. Illinois\". However, the group libel approach lost ground due to a rise in support for individual rights within civil rights movements during the 60s. Critiques of group defamation laws are not limited to defenders of individual rights. Some legal theorists, such as critical race theorist Richard Delgado, support legal limits on hate speech, but claim that defamation is too narrow a category to fully counter hate speech. Ultimately, Delgado advocates a legal strategy that would establish a specific section of tort law for responding to racist insults, citing the difficulty of receiving redress under the existing legal system.\nInternet.\nThe rise of the internet and social media has presented a new medium through which hate speech can spread. Hate speech on the internet can be traced all the way back to its initial years, with a 1983 bulletin board system created by neo-Nazi George Dietz considered the first instance of hate speech online. As the internet evolved over time hate speech continued to spread and create its footprint; the first hate speech website Stormfront was published in 1996, and hate speech has become one of the central challenges for social media platforms.\nThe structure and nature of the internet contribute to both the creation and persistence of hate speech online. The widespread use and access to the internet gives hate mongers an easy way to spread their message to wide audiences with little cost and effort. According to the International Telecommunication Union, approximately 66% of the world population has access to the internet. Additionally, the pseudo-anonymous nature of the internet imboldens many to make statements constituting hate speech that they otherwise wouldn't for fear of social or real life repercussions. While some governments and companies attempt to combat this type of behavior by leveraging real name systems, difficulties in verifying identities online, public opposition to such policies, and sites that don't enforce these policies leave large spaces for this behavior to persist.\nBecause the internet crosses national borders, comprehensive government regulations on online hate speech can be difficult to implement and enforce. Governments who want to regulate hate speech contend with issues around lack of jurisdiction and conflicting viewpoints from other countries. In an early example of this, the case of \"Yahoo! Inc. v. La Ligue Contre Le Racisme et l'Antisemitisme\" had a French court hold Yahoo! liable for allowing Nazi memorabilia auctions to be visible to the public. Yahoo! refused to comply with the ruling and ultimately won relief in a U.S. court which found that the ruling was unenforceable in the U.S. Disagreements like these make national level regulations difficult, and while there are some international efforts and laws that attempt to regulate hate speech and its online presence, as with most international agreements the implementation and interpretation of these treaties varies by country.\nMuch of the regulation regarding online hate speech is performed voluntarily by individual companies. Many major tech companies have adopted terms of service which outline allowed content on their platform, often banning hate speech. In a notable step for this, on 31 May 2016, Facebook, Google, Microsoft, and Twitter, jointly agreed to a European Union code of conduct obligating them to review \"[the] majority of valid notifications for removal of illegal hate speech\" posted on their services within 24 hours. Techniques employed by these companies to regulate hate speech include user reporting, Artificial Intelligence flagging, and manual review of content by employees. Major search engines like Google Search also tweak their algorithms to try and suppress hateful content from appearing in their results. However, despite these efforts hate speech remains a persistent problem online. According to a 2021 study by the Anti-Defamation League 33% of Americans were the target of identity based harassment in the preceding year, a statistic which has not noticeably shifted downwards despite increasing self regulation by companies.\nState-sanctioned hate speech.\nA few states, including Saudi Arabia, Iran, Rwanda Hutu factions, actors in the Yugoslav Wars and Ethiopia have been described as spreading official hate speech or incitement to genocide.\nHate speech laws.\nAfter World War II, Germany criminalized \"Volksverhetzung\" (\"incitement of popular hatred\") to prevent resurgence of Nazism. Hate speech on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity also is banned in Germany. Most European countries have likewise implemented various laws and regulations regarding hate speech, and the European Union's Framework Decision 2008/913/JHA requires member states to criminalize hate crimes and speech (though individual implementation and interpretation of this framework varies by state).\nInternational human rights laws from the United Nations Human Rights Committee have been protecting freedom of expression, and one of the most fundamental documents is the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) drafted by the U.N. General Assembly in 1948. Article 19 of the UDHR states that \"Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers.\"\nWhile there are fundamental laws in place designed to protect freedom of expression, there are also multiple international laws that expand on the UDHR and pose limitations and restrictions, specifically concerning the safety and protection of individuals.\nMost developed democracies have laws that restrict hate speech, including Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, India, Ireland, South Africa, Sweden, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. The United States does not have hate speech laws, because the U.S. Supreme Court has repeatedly ruled that they violate the guarantee to freedom of speech contained in the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.\nLaws against hate speech can be divided into two types: those intended to preserve public order and those intended to protect human dignity. The laws designed to protect public order require that a higher threshold be violated, so they are not often enforced. For example, a 1992 study found that only one person was prosecuted in Northern Ireland in the preceding 21 years for violating a law against incitement to religious violence. The laws meant to protect human dignity have a much lower threshold for violation, so those in Canada, Denmark, France, Germany and the Netherlands tend to be more frequently enforced.\nCriticism.\nSeveral activists and scholars have criticized the practice of limiting hate speech. Kim Holmes, Vice President of the conservative Heritage Foundation and a critic of hate speech theory, has argued that it \"assumes bad faith on the part of people regardless of their stated intentions\" and that it \"obliterates the ethical responsibility of the individual\". Rebecca Ruth Gould, a professor of Islamic and Comparative Literature at the University of Birmingham, argues that laws against hate speech constitute viewpoint discrimination (which is prohibited by the First Amendment in the United States) as the legal system punishes some viewpoints but not others. Other scholars, such as Gideon Elford, argue instead that \"insofar as hate speech regulation targets the consequences of speech that are contingently connected with the substance of what is expressed then it is viewpoint discriminatory in only an indirect sense.\" John Bennett argues that restricting hate speech relies on questionable conceptual and empirical foundations and is reminiscent of efforts by totalitarian regimes to control the thoughts of their citizens.\nCivil libertarians say that hate speech laws have been used, in both developing and developed nations, to persecute minority viewpoints and critics of the government. Former ACLU president Nadine Strossen says that, while efforts to censor hate speech have the goal of protecting the most vulnerable, they are ineffective and may have the opposite effect: disadvantaged and ethnic minorities being charged with violating laws against hate speech. Journalist Glenn Greenwald says that hate speech laws in Europe have been used to censor left-wing views as much as they have been used to combat hate speech.\nMiisa Kreandner and Eriz Henze argue that hate speech laws are arbitrary, as they only protect some categories of people but not others. Henze argues the only way to resolve this problem without abolishing hate speech laws would be to extend them to all possible conceivable categories, which Henze argues would amount to totalitarian control over speech.\nMichael Conklin argues that there are benefits to hate speech that are often overlooked. He contends that allowing hate speech provides a more accurate view of the human condition, provides opportunities to change people's minds, and identifies certain people that may need to be avoided in certain circumstances. According to one psychological research study, a high degree of psychopathy is \"a significant predictor\" for involvement in online hate activity, while none of the other 7 potential factors examined were found to have a statistically significant predictive power.\nPolitical philosopher Jeffrey W. Howard considers the popular framing of hate speech as \"free speech vs. other political values\" as a mischaracterization. He refers to this as the \"balancing model\", and says it seeks to weigh the benefit of free speech against other values such as dignity and equality for historically marginalized groups. Instead, he believes that the crux of debate should be whether or not freedom of expression is inclusive of hate speech. Research indicates that when people support censoring hate speech, they are motivated more by concerns about the effects the speech has on others than they are about its effects on themselves. Women are somewhat more likely than men to support censoring hate speech due to greater perceived harm of hate speech, which some researchers believe may be due to gender differences in empathy towards targets of hate speech.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14235", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14235", "title": "Hypercard", "text": ""}
{"id": "14236", "revid": "17706726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14236", "title": "Henrik Ibsen", "text": "Norwegian playwright (1828\u20131906)\nHenrik Johan Ibsen (; ; 20 March 1828 \u2013 23 May 1906) was a Norwegian playwright. He is considered one of the world's pre-eminent writers of the 19th century and is often referred to as \"the father of modern drama.\" He pioneered theatrical realism but also wrote lyrical epic works. His major works include \"Brand\", \"Peer Gynt\", \"Emperor and Galilean\", \"A Doll's House\", \"Ghosts\", \"An Enemy of the People\", \"The Wild Duck\", \"Rosmersholm\", \"Hedda Gabler\", \"The Master Builder\", and \"When We Dead Awaken\". Ibsen is the most frequently performed dramatist in the world after Shakespeare. \"Store norske leksikon\" describes him as \"the center of the Norwegian literary canon.\"\nIbsen was born into the merchant elite of the port town of Skien and had strong family ties to the Paus family and other families who had held power and wealth in Telemark since the mid-1500s. He established himself as a theater director in Norway during the 1850s and gained international recognition as a playwright with the plays \"Brand\" and \"Peer Gynt\" in the 1860s. From 1864, he lived for 27 years in Italy and Germany, primarily in Rome, Dresden, and Munich, making only brief visits to Norway, before moving to Christiania (Oslo) in 1891. Most of Ibsen's plays are set in Norway, often in bourgeois environments and places reminiscent of Skien, and he frequently drew inspiration from family members. Ibsen's early verse play \"Peer Gynt\" has strong surreal elements. After \"Peer Gynt\" Ibsen abandoned verse and wrote in realistic prose. Several of his later dramas were considered scandalous to many of his era, when European theatre was expected to model strict morals of family life and propriety. Ibsen's later work examined the realities that lay behind the fa\u00e7ades, revealing much that was disquieting to a number of his contemporaries. He had a critical eye and conducted a free inquiry into the conditions of life and issues of morality. Critics frequently rate \"The Wild Duck\" and \"Rosmersholm\" as Ibsen's best works; the playwright himself regarded \"Emperor and Galilean\" as his masterpiece.\nIbsen is considered one of the most important playwrights in the history of world literature and is widely regarded as the foremost playwright of the nineteenth century. Sigmund Freud considered him on par with Shakespeare and Sophocles, while George Bernard Shaw argued that Ibsen had surpassed Shakespeare as the world's pre-eminent dramatist. Ibsen influenced other playwrights and novelists such as George Bernard Shaw, Oscar Wilde, and James Joyce. Considered a profound poetic dramatist, he is widely regarded as the most important playwright since Shakespeare. Ibsen is commonly described as the most famous Norwegian internationally. Ibsen wrote his plays in Dano-Norwegian, and they were published by the Danish publisher Gyldendal. He was the father of Prime Minister Sigurd Ibsen and a relative of the singer Ole Paus.\nEarly life and background.\nHenrik Johan Ibsen was born on 20 March 1828 into an affluent merchant family in the prosperous port town of Skien in the county of Bratsberg (Telemark). He was the son of the merchant Knud Plesner Ibsen (1797\u20131877) and Marichen Cornelia Martine Altenburg (1799\u20131869), and he grew up as a member of the extended Paus family, which consisted of the siblings Ole and Hedevig Paus and their tightly knit families. Ibsen's ancestors were primarily merchants and shipowners in cities such as Skien and Bergen, or members of the \"aristocracy of officials\" of Upper Telemark, the region's civil servant elite. J\u00f8rgen Haave writes that Ibsen \"had strong family ties to the families who had held power and wealth in Telemark since the mid-1500s.\" Henrik Ibsen himself wrote that \"my parents were members on both sides of the most respected families in Skien\", and that he was closely related to \"just about all the patrician families who then dominated the place and its surroundings.\" He was baptised at home in the Lutheran state church\u2014membership of which was mandatory\u2014on 28 March and the baptism was confirmed in Christian's Church on 19 June. When Ibsen was born, Skien had for centuries been one of Norway's most important and internationally oriented cities, and a centre of seafaring, timber exports and early industrialization that had made Norway the developed and prosperous part of Denmark\u2013Norway.\nThe Paus family of Rising and Altenburg House.\nIbsen's parents, Knud and Marichen, grew up as close relatives, sometimes referred to as \"near-siblings,\" and both belonged to the tightly intertwined Paus family of Rising and Altenburg House \u2013 that is, the extended family of the sibling pair Ole Paus (1766\u20131855) and Hedevig Paus (1763\u20131848).\nAfter Knud's father Henrich Johan Ibsen (1765\u20131797) died at sea when Knud was a newborn, his mother Johanne Plesner (1770\u20131847) married captain Ole Paus (1766\u20131855) the following year. Like Henrich Johan Ibsen before him, Paus thus became the brother-in-law of Skien's wealthiest man, Diderik von Cappelen. In 1799, Ole Paus sold the Ibsen House in Skien's L\u00f8vestr\u00e6det (Lion's Street), which he had inherited from his wife's first husband, and bought the estate Rising outside Skien from a sister of his brother-in-law von Cappelen. Knud grew up at Rising with most of his many half-siblings, among them the later governor Christian Cornelius Paus and the shipowner Christopher Blom Paus. In the 1801 census the Paus family of Rising had seven servants.\nMarichen grew up in the stately Altenburg House in the center of Skien with her parents Hedevig Paus and Johan Andreas Altenburg. Altenburg was a shipowner, timber merchant, and owned a large liquor distillery at Lundetangen and a farm outside of town, and after his death, Hedevig took over the business in 1824.\nThe siblings Ole and Hedevig Paus were born in L\u00e5rdal in Upper Telemark, where the Paus family belonged to the region's elite, the \"aristocracy of officials,\" and had moved to Skien at a young age with their oldest sister, joining Skien's merchant elite with the support of their relatives in the family Blom. The children from Ole's and Hedevig's homes maintained close contact throughout Knud's and Marichen's childhood; notably, Ole's oldest son, Knud's half-brother Henrik Johan Paus, was raised in Hedevig's home. The Paus family reflects a meritocratic elite defined by education, priesthood, and public office.\nKnud Ibsen's marriage to Marichen Altenburg.\nIn 1825, Henrik's father Knud acquired the burghership of Skien and established an independent business as a timber and luxury goods merchant there, with his younger brother, Christopher Blom Paus, then aged 15, as his apprentice. The two brothers moved into the Stockmanng\u00e5rden building, where they rented a part of the building and lived with a maid. On the first floor the brothers sold foreign wines and a variety of luxury items, while also engaging in wholesale export of timber in cooperation with their first cousin Diderik von Cappelen (1795\u20131866). On 1 December 1825, Knud married his stepfather's niece Marichen, who then moved in with them. Henrik was born there in 1828. In 1830, Marichen's mother Hedevig left Altenburgg\u00e5rden and her properties and business ventures to her son-in-law Knud, and the Ibsen family moved to Marichen's childhood home in 1831. During the 1820s and 1830s, Knud was a wealthy young merchant in Skien, and he was the city's 16th largest taxpayer in 1833.\nOlder Ibsen scholars have claimed that Henrik Ibsen was fascinated by his parents' \"strange, almost incestuous marriage\", and he would treat the subject of incestuous relationships in several plays, notably in his masterpiece \"Rosmersholm\". On the other hand, J\u00f8rgen Haave points out that his parents' close relationship was not that unusual among the Skien elite.\nChildhood.\nIn his unfinished biography \"From Skien to Rome,\" Henrik Ibsen wrote about the Skien of his childhood:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In my childhood, Skien was an extremely joyful and festive town, quite the opposite of what it would later become. Many highly cultured, prosperous families at that time lived partly in the city itself, partly on large farms in the area. Close or more remote kinship connected most of these families amongst themselves, and balls, dinner parties, and musical soir\u00e9es came one after another in rapid succession both during winters and summers. [...] Visits from strangers were almost a constant occurrence at our spacious farmhouse and especially around Christmastime and the market days, our townhouse was full and the table was set from morning to nightfall.\u2014\u200a\nHaave writes that the sources who knew Henrik in childhood described him as \"a boy who was pampered by his father, who enjoyed being creative in solitude, and who provoked peers with his superiority and arrogance.\" Henrik engaged in model theater, which was particularly popular among boys from bourgeois homes in Europe in the early 1800s. In contrast to his father, who was described as sociable and playful with a cheerful and friendly demeanor, Henrik was depicted as a more introverted personality. This trait was said to be shared with several relatives in the Paus family, and later with his own son, Sigurd. Johan Kielland Bergwitz claimed that \"it is with the Paus family that Henrik Ibsen has the most pronounced temperament traits in common.\" Referring to the Paus side of the family, Hedvig Ibsen remarked, \"we belong to a silent family,\" playfully echoing the similarity between \"taus\" (silent) and \"Paus.\" One of the Cudrio sisters from the neighboring farm, who knew Henrik Ibsen in childhood, said, \"he was immensely cunning and malicious, and he even beat us. But when he grew up, he became incredibly handsome, yet no one liked him because he was so malicious. No one wanted to be with him.\"\nWhen Henrik Ibsen was around seven years old, his father's fortunes took a turn for the worse, and in 1835 the family was forced to sell Altenburgg\u00e5rden. The following year they moved to their stately summer home and farm, Venst\u00f8p, outside of the city. They were still relatively affluent, had four servants, and socialised with other members of the Skien elite, e.g. through lavish parties; their closest neighbours on Southern Venst\u00f8p were former shipowner and mayor of Skien Ulrich Frederik Cudrio and his family, who also had been forced to sell their townhouse. In 1843, after Henrik left home, the Ibsen family moved to a townhouse at Snipetorp, owned by Knud Ibsen's half-brother and former apprentice Christopher Blom Paus, who had established himself as an independent merchant in Skien in 1836 and who eventually became one of the city's leading shipowners. Knud continued to struggle to maintain his business and had some success in the 1840s, but in the 1850s his business ventures and professional activities came to an end, and he became reliant on support from his successful younger half-brothers.\nRomanticization and reassessment.\nHistorically, Ibsen's background was romanticized or dramatized to align with the narrative of the self-made genius. Early biographical accounts, like Henrik J\u00e6ger\u2019s seminal biography, often emphasized a narrative of adversity: a descent from privilege into hardship, culminating in Ibsen\u2019s artistic triumph. This interpretation positioned Ibsen\u2019s works as expressions of personal struggle against societal and familial constraints, resonating with his broader critique of bourgeois morality. The depiction of Ibsen\u2019s father as a failed merchant and tyrannical figure who fell into alcoholism, combined with the narrative of the family's social decline, provided a lens through which many early scholars interpreted themes in Ibsen\u2019s plays, such as financial ruin, family dysfunction, and hidden moral conflicts.\nModern scholarship frames Henrik Ibsen not as a self-made artist rising from hardship, but as a product of Norway's patrician elite whose critique of society reflected his privileged yet transitional upbringing. Ibsen scholar Ellen Rees notes that historical and biographical research into Ibsen's life in the 21st century has been marked by a \"revolution\" that has debunked numerous tales previously taken for granted. Older Ibsen historiography has often claimed that Knud Ibsen experienced financial ruin and became an alcoholic tyrant, that the family lost contact with the elite it had belonged to, and that this had a strong influence on Henrik Ibsen's biography and work. Newer Ibsen scholarship\u2014in particular Jon Nygaard's book on Ibsen's wider social milieu and ancestry and J\u00f8rgen Haave's book \"The Ibsen Family\" (\"Familien Ibsen\")\u2014has refuted such claims, and Haave has pointed out that older biographical works have uncritically repeated numerous unfounded tales about both of Ibsen's parents, and about the playwright's childhood and background in general.\nHaave points out that Knud Ibsen's economic problems in the 1830s were mainly the result of the difficult times and something the Ibsen family had in common with most members of the bourgeoisie; Haave further argues that Henrik Ibsen had a happy and comfortable childhood as a member of the upper class, even after the family moved to Venst\u00f8p, and that they were able to maintain their lifestyle and patrician identity with the help of their extended family and accumulated cultural capital. Contrary to the incorrect claims that Ibsen had been born in a small or remote town, Haave points out that Skien had been Eastern Norway's leading commercial city for centuries, and a centre of seafaring, timber exports, and early industrialization that had made Norway the developed and prosperous part of Denmark\u2013Norway.\nRees characterizes Ibsen's family as upper class rather than middle class, and part of \"the closest thing Norway had to an aristocracy, albeit one that lost most of its power during his lifetime.\" Ibsen scholar Jon Nygaard stated that Ibsen has an \"exceptional upper-class background\" and is a result of Norway being a wealthy country for a very long time. Haave points out that virtually all of Ibsen's ancestors had been wealthy burghers and higher government officials, and members of the local and regional elites in the areas they lived, often of continental European ancestry. He argues that \"the Ibsen family belonged to an elite that distanced itself strongly from the common farmer population, and considered itself part of an educated European culture\" and that \"it was this patrician class that formed his cultural identity and upbringing.\" Haave points to many examples of both Henrik Ibsen and other members of his family having a condescending attitude towards common Norwegian farmers, viewing them as \"some sort of primitive indigenous population,\" and being very conscious of their own identity as members of the sophisticated upper class. Haave points out that Ibsen's most immediate family\u2014Knud, Marichen and Henrik's siblings\u2014disintegrated financially and socially in the 1850s, but that it happened after Henrik had left home, at a time when he was establishing himself as a successful man of theatre, while his extended family, such as his uncles Henrik Johan Paus, Christian Cornelius Paus and Christopher Blom Paus, were firmly established in Skien's elite as lawyers, government officials and wealthy shipowners. Haave argues that the story of the Ibsen family is the story of the slow collapse of a patrician merchant family amid the emergence of a new democratic society in the 19th century, and that Henrik Ibsen, like others of his class, had to find new opportunities to maintain his social position. Nygaard summarized the revolution in the understanding of Ibsen's childhood and background as all the popular notions about Ibsen being wrong.\nLiterary influence of his childhood.\nMany Ibsen scholars have compared characters and themes in his plays to his family and upbringing; his themes often deal with issues of financial difficulty as well as moral conflicts stemming from dark secrets hidden from society. Ibsen himself confirmed that he both modeled and named characters in his plays after his own family. Works such as \"Peer Gynt\", \"The Wild Duck\", \"Rosmersholm\", \"Hedda Gabler\", \"An Enemy of the People,\" and \"Ghosts\" include numerous references to Ibsen's relatives, family history, and childhood memories. However, despite Ibsen's use of his family as an inspiration for his plays, Haave criticizes the uncritical use of Ibsen's dramas as biographical sources and the \"naive\" readings of them as literal representations of his family members, in particular his father.\nCareer.\n1846\u20131859: Grimstad years.\nAt fifteen, Ibsen left school. He moved to the small town of Grimstad to become an apprentice pharmacist. At that time he began writing plays. In 1846, when Ibsen was 18, he had a liaison with Else Sophie Jensdatter Birkedalen which produced a son, Hans Jacob Hendrichsen Birkdalen, whose upbringing Ibsen paid for until the boy was fourteen, though Ibsen never saw the child. Ibsen went to Christiania (later spelled Kristiania and then renamed Oslo) intending to matriculate at the university. He soon rejected the idea (his earlier attempts at entering university were blocked as he did not pass all his entrance exams), preferring to commit himself to writing. His first play, the tragedy \"Catilina\" (1850), was published under the pseudonym \"Brynjolf Bjarme\", when he was only 22, but it was not performed. His first play to be staged, \"The Burial Mound\" (1850), received little attention. Still, Ibsen was determined to be a playwright, although the numerous plays he wrote in the following years remained unsuccessful. Ibsen's main inspiration in the early period, right up to \"Peer Gynt\", was apparently the Norwegian author Henrik Wergeland and the Norwegian folk tales as collected by Peter Christen Asbj\u00f8rnsen and J\u00f8rgen Moe. In Ibsen's youth, Wergeland was the most acclaimed, and by far the most read, Norwegian poet and playwright.\nIbsen spent the next several years employed at Det norske Theater (Bergen), where he was involved in the production of more than 145 plays as a writer, director, and producer. During this period, he published five new\u2014though largely unremarkable\u2014plays. Despite Ibsen's failure to achieve success as a playwright, he gained a great deal of practical experience at the Norwegian Theater, experience that was to prove valuable when he continued writing. Ibsen returned to Christiania in 1858 to become the creative director of the Christiania Theatre. He married Suzannah Thoresen on 18 June 1858 and she gave birth to their only child Sigurd on 23 December 1859. The couple lived in difficult financial circumstances and Ibsen became very disenchanted with life in Norway.\n1864\u20131883: Established work and acclaim.\nIn 1864, he left Christiania and went to Sorrento in Italy in self-imposed exile. He spent the next 27 years in Italy and Germany and only visited Norway a few times during those years. His next play, \"Brand\" (1865), brought him the critical acclaim he sought, along with a measure of financial success, as did the following play, \"Peer Gynt\" (1867), to which Edvard Grieg composed incidental music and songs. Although Ibsen read excerpts of the Danish philosopher S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard and traces of the latter's influence are evident in \"Brand\", it was not until after \"Brand\" that Ibsen came to take Kierkegaard seriously. Initially annoyed with his friend Georg Brandes for comparing Brand to Kierkegaard, Ibsen nevertheless read \"Either/Or\" and \"Fear and Trembling\". Ibsen's next play \"Peer Gynt\" was consciously informed by Kierkegaard. With success, Ibsen became more confident and began to introduce more and more of his own beliefs and judgements into the drama, exploring what he termed the \"drama of ideas\". His next series of plays are often considered his Golden Age, when he entered the height of his power and influence, becoming the center of dramatic controversy across Europe.\nIbsen moved from Italy to Dresden, Germany, in 1868, where he spent years writing the play he regarded as his main work, \"Emperor and Galilean\" (1873), dramatizing the life and times of the Roman emperor Julian the Apostate. Although Ibsen himself always looked back on this play as the cornerstone of his entire works, very few shared his opinion, and his next works would be much more acclaimed. Ibsen moved to Munich in 1875 and began work on his first contemporary realist drama \"The Pillars of Society\", first published and performed in 1877. \"A Doll's House\" followed in 1879. This play is a scathing criticism of the marital roles accepted by men and women which characterized Ibsen's society. Ibsen was already in his fifties when \"A Doll's House\" was published. He himself saw his latter plays as a series. At the end of his career, he described them as \"that series of dramas which began with \"A Doll's House\" and which is now completed with \"When We Dead Awaken\"\". Furthermore, it was the reception of \"A Doll's House\" which brought Ibsen international acclaim.\n\"Ghosts\" followed in 1881, another scathing commentary on the morality of Ibsen's society, in which a widow reveals to her pastor that she had hidden the evils of her marriage for its duration. The pastor had advised her to marry her fianc\u00e9 despite his philandering, and she did so in the belief that her love would reform him. But his philandering continued right up until his death, and his vices are passed on to their son in the form of syphilis. The mention of venereal disease alone was scandalous, but to show how it could poison a respectable family was considered intolerable.\nIn \"An Enemy of the People\" (1882), Ibsen went even further. In earlier plays, controversial elements were important and even pivotal components of the action, but they were on the small scale of individual households. In \"An Enemy\", controversy became the primary focus, and the antagonist was the entire community. One primary message of the play is that the individual, who stands alone, is more often \"right\" than the mass of people, who are portrayed as ignorant and sheeplike. Contemporary society's belief was that the community was a noble institution that could be trusted, a notion Ibsen challenged. In \"An Enemy of the People\", Ibsen chastised not only the conservatism of society, but also the liberalism of the time. He illustrated how people on both sides of the social spectrum could be equally self-serving. \"An Enemy of the People\" was written as a response to the people who had rejected his previous work, \"Ghosts\". The plot of the play is a veiled look at the way people reacted to the plot of \"Ghosts\". The protagonist is a physician in a vacation spot whose primary draw is a public bath. The doctor discovers that the water is contaminated by the local tannery. He expects to be acclaimed for saving the town from the nightmare of infecting visitors with disease, but instead he is declared an 'enemy of the people' by the locals, who band against him and even throw stones through his windows. The play ends with his complete ostracism. It is obvious to the reader that disaster is in store for the town as well as for the doctor.\nAs audiences by now expected, Ibsen's next play again attacked entrenched beliefs and assumptions; but this time, his attack was not against society's mores, but against overeager reformers and their idealism. Always an iconoclast, Ibsen saw himself as an objective observer of society, \"like a lone franc tireur in the outposts\", playing a lone hand, as he put it. Ibsen, perhaps more than any of his contemporaries, relied upon immediate sources such as newspapers and second-hand report for his contact with intellectual thought. He claimed to be ignorant of books, leaving them to his wife and son, but, as Georg Brandes described, \"he seemed to stand in some mysterious correspondence with the fermenting, germinating ideas of the day.\"\n1884\u20131896: Later work.\n\"The Wild Duck\" (1884) is by many considered Ibsen's finest work, and it is certainly one of the most complex, alongside \"Rosmersholm\". When working on the play, Ibsen received his only visit from a relative during his decades in exile, when 21-year old (Count) Christopher Paus paid an extended visit to him in Rome. J\u00f8rgen Haave notes that Ibsen \"had not been this close to his own family since he left his hometown over 30 years ago,\" and he was eager to hear news from his family and hometown. Shortly after the visit Ibsen declared that he had overcome a writer's block. \"The Wild Duck\" draws inspiration from Ibsen's family and tells the story of Gregers Werle \u2013 described by Ibsen scholar Jon Nygaard as representing the spirit of the Paus family \u2013 a young man who returns to his hometown after an extended exile, and who is reunited with his boyhood friend Hjalmar Ekdal. Over the course of the play, the many secrets that lie behind the Ekdals' apparently happy home are revealed to Gregers, who insists on pursuing the absolute truth, or the \"Summons of the Ideal\". Among these truths: Gregers' father impregnated his servant Gina, then married her off to Hjalmar to legitimize the child. Another man has been disgraced and imprisoned for a crime the elder Werle committed. Furthermore, while Hjalmar spends his days working on a wholly imaginary \"invention\", his wife is earning the household income.\nLate in his career, Ibsen turned to a more introspective drama that had much less to do with denunciations of society's moral values and more to do with the problems of individuals. In such later plays as \"Hedda Gabler\" (1890) and \"The Master Builder\" (1892), Ibsen explored psychological conflicts that transcended a simple rejection of current conventions. \"Hedda Gabler\" and \"A Doll's House\" are regularly cited as Ibsen's most popular and influential plays, with the title role of Hedda regarded as one of the most challenging and rewarding for an actress even in the present day.\nIbsen intentionally obscured his influences. However, asked later what he had read when he wrote \"Catiline\", Ibsen replied that he had read only the Danish Norse saga-inspired Romantic tragedian Adam Oehlenschl\u00e4ger and Ludvig Holberg, \"the Scandinavian Moli\u00e8re\".\nInfluences.\nA major influence on Ibsen were Danish writers, such as Me\u00efr Aron Goldschmidt and Georg Brandes, as well as his collaboration and friendship with the early Realist Swedish poet Carl Snoilsky.\nDeath and legacy.\nOn 23 May 1906, Ibsen died in his home at Arbins gade 1 in Kristiania (now Oslo) after a series of strokes in March 1900. When, on 22 May, his nurse assured a visitor that he was a little better, Ibsen spluttered his last words \"On the contrary\" (\"Tvertimod!\"). He died the following day at 2:30\u00a0pm. Ibsen was buried in V\u00e5r Frelsers gravlund (\"The Graveyard of Our Savior\") in central Oslo.\nThe 100th anniversary of Ibsen's death in 2006 was commemorated with an \"Ibsen year\" in Norway and other countries. In 2006, the homebuilding company Selvaag also opened \"Peer Gynt\" Sculpture Park in Oslo, Norway, in Henrik Ibsen's honour, making it possible to follow the dramatic play \"Peer Gynt\" scene by scene. Will Eno's adaptation of Ibsen's \"Peer Gynt\", titled \"Gnit\", had its world premiere at the 37th Humana Festival of New American Plays in March 2013. On 23 May 2006, The Ibsen Museum in Oslo re-opened to the public, with the house, where Ibsen had spent his last eleven years, completely restored with the original interior, colours, and decor.\nIvo de Figueiredo argues that \"today, Ibsen belongs to the world. But it is impossible to understand [Ibsen's] path out there without knowing the Danish cultural sphere from which he sprang, from which he liberated himself and which he ended up shaping. Ibsen developed as a person and artist in a dialogue with Danish theater and literature that was anything but smooth.\" On the occasion of the 100th anniversary of Ibsen's death in 2006, the Norwegian government organised the Ibsen Year, which included celebrations around the world. The NRK produced a miniseries on Ibsen's childhood and youth in 2006, \"An Immortal Man\". Several prizes are awarded in his name, among them the International Ibsen Award, the Norwegian Ibsen Award, and the Ibsen Centennial Commemoration Award.\nEvery year, since 2008, the annual \"Delhi Ibsen Festival\", is held in Delhi, India, organized by the Dramatic Art and Design Academy (DADA) in collaboration with The Royal Norwegian Embassy in India. It features plays by Ibsen, performed by artists from various parts of the world in varied languages and styles. The Ibsen Society of America (ISA) was founded in 1978 at the close of the Ibsen Sesquicentennial Symposium held in New York City to mark the 150th anniversary of Henrik Ibsen's birth. Distinguished Ibsen translator and critic Rolf Fjelde, Professor of Literature at Pratt Institute and the chief organizer of the Symposium, was elected Founding President. In December 1979, the ISA was certified as a non-profit corporation under the laws of the State of New York. Its purpose is to foster through lectures, readings, performances, conferences, and publications an understanding of Ibsen's works as they are interpreted as texts and produced on stage and in film and other media. An annual newsletter, \"Ibsen News and Comment,\" is distributed to all members.\nCritical reception.\nAt the time when Ibsen was writing, literature was emerging as a formidable force in 19th century society. With the vast increase in literacy towards the end of the century, the possibilities of literature being used for subversion struck horror into the heart of the Establishment. Ibsen's plays, from \"A Doll's House\" onwards, caused an uproar\u2014not just in Norway, but throughout Europe, and even across the Atlantic in America. No other artist, apart from Richard Wagner, had such an effect internationally, inspiring almost blasphemous adoration and hysterical abuse.\nAfter the publication of \"Ghosts\", he wrote: \"while the storm lasted, I have made many studies and observations and I shall not hesitate to exploit them in my future writings.\" Indeed, his next play, \"An Enemy of the People,\" was initially regarded by the critics to be simply his response to the violent criticism which had greeted \"Ghosts\". Ibsen expected criticism; as he wrote to his publisher: \"\"Ghosts\" will probably cause alarm in some circles, but it can't be helped. If it did not, there would have been no necessity for me to have written it.\"\nIbsen not only read critical reactions to his plays but also actively corresponded with critics, publishers, theatre directors, and newspaper editors on the subject. The interpretation of his work, both by critics and directors, concerned him greatly. He often advised directors on which actor or actress would be suitable for a particular role. An example of this is a letter he wrote to Hans Schroder in November 1884, with detailed instructions for the production of \"The Wild Duck\".\nIbsen's plays initially reached a far wider audience as read plays rather than in performance. It was 20 years, for instance, before the authorities would allow \"Ghosts\" to be performed in Norway. Each new play that Ibsen wrote, from 1879 onwards, had an explosive effect on intellectual circles. This was greatest for \"A Doll's House\" and \"Ghosts\", and it did lessen with the later plays, but the translation of Ibsen's works into German, French, and English during the decade following the initial publication of each play\u2014as well as frequent new productions as and when permission was granted\u2014meant that Ibsen remained a topic of lively conversation throughout the latter decades of the 19th century. When \"A Doll's House\" was published, it had an explosive effect: it was the centre of every conversation at every social gathering in Christiania. One hostess even wrote on the invitations to her soir\u00e9e, \"You are politely requested not to mention Mr Ibsen's new play\".\nEarlier critics portrayed Ibsen as an embattled avant-gardist misunderstood by a hostile public, but Ibsen scholars Narve Fuls\u00e5s and Tore Rem reject this view: \"Such evidence does not conform to the picture of hostility and isolation, quite the contrary.\" They argue that in Norway, \u201cIbsen's home market soon provided him with an astonishingly wide and attentive audience, both as book and theatre author,\" and by the late 1870s \"Ibsen had already left the professors behind in terms of income. He was closer to a member of the cabinet and clearly a well-established author, financially as in other respects.\" Politically, he kept distance from both wings of the new Left. During the 1880s controversies, \"Ibsen had little sympathy with his persecuted colleagues\" such as Hans J\u00e6ger and Christian Krohg, writing that J\u00e6ger's \"Fra Kristiania-Boh\u00eamen\" was \"crude\" and that \"our people are still not even near to being ready for the ideas of freedom.\" He \"did not join either side\" in the split between radicals and moderates, regarding the illusions of the Left with detached irony: \"They imagined that a leader of the Opposition would and could remain the same after he got into power.\" By the end of the 1880s, even conservatives celebrated him. Aftenposten's special issue for his sixtieth anniversary \"represents a strong exercise in canonisation. Aftenposten even made more out of the celebrations than the liberal newspapers, who now confidently considered Ibsen their own.\" The paper's critic Bredo Morgenstierne affirmed that Ibsen had \"met with critical approval right from his debut,\" and the author gratefully replied that he felt \"most at home\u201d among such readers.\" As Fuls\u00e5s and Rem conclude, \"Ibsen\u2019s literary mastery was generally beyond question and he commanded an unprecedented respect.\" His name itself had become symbolic capital: \"It was rather a question of defending \u2018Ibsen\u2019 from Ibsen.\"\nIbsen was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1902, 1903, and 1904.\nIbsen was also a key figure in Japanese drama and greatly influenced the Shingeki movement; Kunio Yanagita established the Ipusen-kai, an Ibsen Society in 1903, and shortly before Ibsen's death, Hogetsu Shimamura declared an \"Age of Ibsen\" in Japan. Ibsen's \"Borkman\" was a particularly well received play with several contemporary translations, including one by Mori \u014cgai. Amidst different schools of thought between \u014cgai and Tsubouchi Sh\u014dy\u014d over if respectively, Ibsen or Shakespeare would be best to bridge differences between Japanese and European theatre, the scholarly consensus has been that, \"Ibsen marked the birth of modern drama in Japan.\"\nPersonal life.\nAncestry.\nIbsen's ancestry has been a much studied subject, due to both his perceived foreignness and the influence of his biography and family on his plays. Ibsen often made references to his family in his plays, sometimes by name, or by modelling characters after them.\nThe oldest documented member of the Ibsen family was ship's captain Rasmus Ibsen (1632\u20131703) from Stege, Denmark. His son, ship's captain Peder Ibsen, became a burgher of Bergen in Norway in 1726. Henrik Ibsen had Danish, German, Norwegian, and some distant Scottish ancestry. Most of his ancestors belonged to the merchant class of original Danish and German extraction, and many of his ancestors were ship's captains.\nIbsen's biographer Henrik J\u00e6ger famously wrote in 1888 that Ibsen did not have a drop of Norwegian blood in his veins, stating that \"the ancestral Ibsen was a Dane\". This, however, is not completely accurate; notably through his grandmother Hedevig Paus, Ibsen was descended from the Paus family, often considered one of the oldest families in Norway. Ibsen's ancestors had mostly lived in Norway for several generations, even though many had foreign ancestry.\nThe name Ibsen is originally a patronymic, meaning \"son of Ib\" (Ib is a Danish variant of Jacob). The patronymic became \"frozen\", i.e. it became a permanent family name, in the 17th century. The phenomenon of patronymics becoming frozen started in the 17th century in bourgeois families in Denmark, and the practice was only widely adopted in Norway from around 1900.\nDescendants.\nFrom his marriage with Suzannah Thoresen, Ibsen had one son, lawyer, government minister, and Norwegian Prime Minister Sigurd Ibsen. Sigurd Ibsen married Bergljot Bj\u00f8rnson, the daughter of Bj\u00f8rnstjerne Bj\u00f8rnson. Their son was Tancred Ibsen, who became a film director and was married to Lillebil Ibsen; their only child was diplomat Tancred Ibsen, Jr. His male line together with the male-descended lines of the wider Ibsen family he belonged to will end with the deaths of Tancred Jr.'s two daughters. Sigurd Ibsen's daughter, Irene Ibsen, married Josias Bille, a member of the Danish ancient noble Bille family; their son was Danish actor Joen Bille. Ibsen had an illegitimate child early in his life, not entitled to the family name or inheritance. This line ended with his biological grandchildren.\nPolitical views.\nIn a letter to George Brandes shortly before the Paris Commune, Ibsen expressed anarchist views that Brandes later positively related to the Paris Commune. Ibsen wrote that the state \"is the curse of the individual.\u2026 The state must be abolished.\" Brandes related that Ibsen \"presented to me as political ideals, conditions and ideas whose nature did not seem to me quite clear, but which were unquestionably akin to those that were proclaimed precisely one month later, in an extremely distorted form, by the Parisian commune.\" And in another letter shortly before the Commune came to an end, Ibsen expressed a disappointment with the Commune, insofar as it did not go far enough in its anarchism in its rejection of the state and private property. Ibsen wrote, \"Is it not impudent of the commune in Paris to go and destroy my admirable state theory, or rather no state theory? The idea is now ruined for a long time to come, and I cannot even set it forth in verse with any propriety.\" However, Ibsen nevertheless expressed an optimism, asserting that his \"no state theory\" bears \"within itself a healthy core\" and that some day \"it will be practised without any caricature.\"\nWorks.\nPlays.\nPlays entirely or partly in verse are marked v.\nEnglish translations.\nMajor translation projects include:\nAccolades and honours.\nIbsen was decorated Knight in 1873, Commander in 1892, and with the Grand Cross of the Order of St. Olav in 1893. He received the Grand Cross of the Danish Order of the Dannebrog, and the Grand Cross of the Swedish Order of the Polar Star, and was Knight, First Class of the Order of Vasa.\nWell known stage directors in Austria and Germany such as Theodor Lobe (1833\u20131905), Paul Barnay (1884\u20131960), Max Burckhard (1854\u20131912), Otto Brahm (1856\u20131912), Carl Heine (1861\u20131927), Paul Albert Glaeser-Wilken (1874\u20131942), Victor Barnowsky (1875\u20131952), Eugen Robert (1877\u20131944), Leopold Jessner (1878\u20131945), Ludwig Barnay (1884\u20131960), Alfred Rotter (1886\u20131933), Fritz Rotter (1888\u20131939), Paul Rose (1900\u20131973) and Peter Zadek (1926\u20132009), all directed productions of Ibsen's work.\nIn 2011 H\u00e5kon Anton Fager\u00e5s made two busts in bronze of Ibsen\u2014one for Parco Ibsen in Sorrento, Italy, and one in Skien kommune. In 2012, H\u00e5kon Anton Fager\u00e5s sculpted a statue in marble of Ibsen for the Ibsen Museum in Oslo.\nSome other things named after Ibsen include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14238", "revid": "934251375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14238", "title": "Histories of religion", "text": ""}
{"id": "14240", "revid": "50256051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14240", "title": "Hawaiian language", "text": "Endangered Polynesian language of Hawaii\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nHawaiian (\"\", ) is a critically endangered Polynesian language of the Austronesian language family, originating in and native to the Hawaiian Islands. It is the historic native language of the Hawaiian people. Hawaiian, along with English, is an official language of the U.S. state of Hawai\u02bbi. King Kamehameha III established the first Hawaiian-language constitution in 1839 and 1840.\nIn 1896, the Republic of Hawaii passed Act 57, an English-only law which subsequently banned Hawaiian language as the medium of instruction in publicly funded schools and promoted strict physical punishment for children caught speaking the Hawaiian language in schools. The Hawaiian language was not again allowed to be used as a medium of instruction in Hawaii's public schools until 1987, a span of 91 years. The number of native speakers of Hawaiian gradually decreased during the period from the 1830s to the 1950s. English essentially displaced Hawaiian on six of seven inhabited islands. In 2001, native speakers of Hawaiian amounted to less than 0.1% of the statewide population. \nNevertheless, from around 1949 to the present day, there has been a gradual increase in attention to and promotion of the language. Public Hawaiian-language immersion preschools called P\u016bnana Leo were established in 1984; other immersion schools followed soon after that. Most of the first students to start in immersion preschool have since graduated from college, and many are fluent Hawaiian speakers. However, the language is still classified as critically endangered by UNESCO.\nA creole language, Hawaiian Pidgin (also called Hawaii Creole English, or HCE), is more commonly spoken in Hawai\u2018i than Hawaiian.\nName.\nThe Hawaiian language takes its name from the largest island in the Hawaiian archipelago, Hawaii (\"\" in the Hawaiian language). The island name was first written in English in 1778 by British explorer James Cook and his crew members. They wrote it as \"Owhyhee\" or \"Owhyee\". It is written \"Oh-Why-hee\" on the first map of Sandwich Islands engraved by Tobias Conrad Lotter in 1781. Explorers Mortimer (1791) and Otto von Kotzebue (1821) used that spelling.\nThe initial \"O\" in the name \"Oh-Why-hee\" is a reflection of the fact that Hawaiian predicates unique identity by using a copula form, \"\u02bbo\", immediately before a proper noun. Thus, in Hawaiian, the name of the island is expressed by saying \"\", which means \"[This] is Hawai\u02bbi.\" The Cook expedition also wrote \"Otaheite\" rather than \"Tahiti\".\nThe spelling \"why\" in the name reflects the pronunciation of \"wh\" in 18th-century English (still used in parts of the English-speaking world). \"Why\" was pronounced . The spelling \"hee\" or \"ee\" in the name represents the sounds , or .\nPutting the parts together, \"O-why-(h)ee\" reflects , a reasonable approximation of the native pronunciation, .\nAmerican missionaries bound for Hawai\u02bbi used the phrases \"Owhihe Language\" and \"Owhyhee language\" in Boston prior to their departure in October 1819 and during their five-month voyage to Hawai\u02bbi. They still used such phrases as late as March 1822. However, by July 1823, they had begun using the phrase \"Hawaiian Language\".\nIn Hawaiian, the language is called \"\", since adjectives follow nouns.\nLanguage family and origin.\nHawaiian is a Polynesian member of the Austronesian language family. It is closely related to other Polynesian languages, such as Samoan, Marquesan, Tahitian, M\u0101ori, Rapa Nui (the language of Easter Island) and Tongan.\nAccording to Sch\u00fctz (1994), the Marquesans colonized the archipelago in roughly 300\u00a0CE, followed by later waves of immigration from the Society Islands and Samoa-Tonga. Their languages, over time, became the Hawaiian language within the Hawaiian Islands. Kimura and Wilson (1983) also state: Linguists agree that Hawaiian is closely related to Eastern Polynesian, with a particularly strong link in the Southern Marquesas, and a secondary link in Tahiti, which may be explained by voyaging between the Hawaiian and Society Islands.\nMutual intelligibility.\nJack H. Ward (1962) conducted a study using basic words and short utterances to determine the level of comprehension between different Polynesian languages. The mutual intelligibility of Hawaiian was found to be 41.2% with Marquesan, 37.5% with Tahitian, 25.5% with Samoan and 6.4% with Tongan. Hawaiian newspapers recorded that Ernest Ka\u02bbai and his Royal Hawaiians band conversed easily with M\u0101ori while they were on tour across New Zealand in 1911.\nHistory.\nFirst European contact.\nIn 1778, British explorer James Cook made Europe's initial, recorded first contact with Hawai\u02bbi, beginning a new phase in the development of Hawaiian. During the next forty years, the sounds of Spanish (1789), Russian (1804), French (1816), and German (1816) arrived in Hawai\u02bbi via other explorers and businessmen. Hawaiian began to be written for the first time, largely restricted to isolated names and words, and word lists collected by explorers and travelers.\nThe early explorers and merchants who first brought European languages to the Hawaiian islands also took on a few native crew members who brought the Hawaiian language into new territory. Hawaiians took these nautical jobs because their traditional way of life changed due to plantations, and although there were not enough of these Hawaiian-speaking explorers to establish any viable speech communities abroad, they still had a noticeable presence. One of them, a boy in his teens known as Obookiah (), had a major impact on the future of the language. He sailed to New England, where he eventually became a student at the Foreign Mission School in Cornwall, Connecticut. He inspired New Englanders to support a Christian mission to Hawai\u02bbi, and provided information on the Hawaiian language to the American missionaries there prior to their departure for Hawai\u02bbi in 1819. Adelbert von Chamisso too might have consulted with a native speaker of Hawaiian in Berlin, Germany, before publishing his grammar of Hawaiian (\"\") in 1837. Lorrin Andrews wrote the first Hawaiian dictionary, called \"A Dictionary of the Hawaiian Language\".\nFolk tales.\nLike all natural spoken languages, the Hawaiian language was originally an oral language. The native people of the Hawaiian language relayed religion, traditions, history, and views of their world through stories that were handed down from generation to generation. One form of storytelling most commonly associated with the Hawaiian islands is hula. Nathaniel B. Emerson notes that \"It kept the communal imagination in living touch with the nation's legendary past\".\nThe islanders' connection with their stories is argued to be one reason why Captain James Cook received a pleasant welcome. Marshall Sahlins has observed that Hawaiian folktales began bearing similar content to those of the Western world in the eighteenth century. He argues this was caused by the timing of Captain Cook's arrival, which was coincidentally when the indigenous Hawaiians were celebrating the Makahiki festival, which is the annual celebration of the harvest in honor of the god Lono. The celebration lasts for the entirety of the rainy season. It is a time of peace with much emphasis on amusements, food, games, and dancing. The islanders' story foretold of the god Lono's return at the time of the Makahiki festival.\nWritten Hawaiian.\nIn 1820, Protestant missionaries from New England arrived in Hawai\u02bbi, and in a few years converted the chiefs to Congregational Protestantism, who in turn converted their subjects. To the missionaries, the thorough Christianization of the kingdom necessitated a complete translation of the Bible to Hawaiian, a previously unwritten language, and therefore the creation of a standard spelling that should be as easy to master as possible. The orthography created by the missionaries was so straightforward that literacy spread very quickly among the adult population; at the same time, the Mission set more and more schools for children.\nIn 1834, the first Hawaiian-language newspapers were published by missionaries working with locals. The missionaries also played a significant role in publishing a vocabulary (1836), grammar (1854), and dictionary (1865) of Hawaiian. The Hawaiian Bible was fully completed in 1839; by then, the Mission had such a wide-reaching school network that, when in 1840 it handed it over to the Hawaiian government, the Hawaiian Legislature mandated compulsory state-funded education for all children under 14 years of age, including girls, twelve years before any similar compulsory education law was enacted for the first time in any of the United States. King Kamehameha III established the first Hawaiian-language constitution in 1839 and 1840.\nLiteracy in Hawaiian was so widespread that in 1842 a law mandated that people born after 1819 had to be literate to be allowed to marry. In his \"Report to the Legislature\" for the year 1853 Richard Armstrong, the minister of Public Instruction, bragged that 75% of the adult population could read. Use of the language among the general population might have peaked around 1881. Even so, some people worried, as early as 1854, that the language was \"soon destined to extinction.\"\nWhen Hawaiian King David Kal\u0101kaua took a trip around the world, he brought his native language with him. When his wife, Queen Kapi\u02bbolani, and his sister, Princess (later Queen) Lili\u02bbuokalani, took a trip across North America and on to the British Isles, in 1887, Lili\u02bbuokalani's composition \"Aloha \u02bbOe\" was already a famous song in the U.S.\nSuppression of Hawaiian.\nThe decline of the Hawaiian language was accelerated by the coup that overthrew the Hawaiian monarchy and dethroned the last Hawaiian queen. Thereafter, a law was instituted that required English as the main language of school instruction. The law cited is identified as Act 57, sec. 30 of the 1896 Laws of the Republic of Hawai\u02bbi:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The English Language shall be the medium and basis of instruction in all public and private schools, provided that where it is desired that another language shall be taught in addition to the English language, such instruction may be authorized by the Department, either by its rules, the curriculum of the school, or by direct order in any particular instance. Any schools that shall not conform to the provisions of this section shall not be recognized by the Department.\u2014\u200a\nThis law established English as the medium of instruction for the government-recognized schools both \"public and private\". While it did not ban or make illegal the Hawaiian language in other contexts, its implementation in the schools had far-reaching effects. Those who had been pushing for English-only schools took this law as licence to extinguish the native language at the early education level. While the law did not make Hawaiian illegal (it was still commonly spoken at the time), many children who spoke Hawaiian at school, including on the playground, were disciplined. This included corporal punishment and going to the home of the offending child to advise them strongly to stop speaking it in their home. Moreover, the law specifically provided for teaching languages \"in addition to the English language\", reducing Hawaiian to the status of an extra language, subject to approval by the department. Hawaiian was not taught initially in any school, including the all-Hawaiian Kamehameha Schools. This is largely because when these schools were founded, like Kamehameha Schools founded in 1887 (nine years before this law), Hawaiian was being spoken in the home. Once this law was enacted, individuals at these institutions took it upon themselves to enforce a ban on Hawaiian. Beginning in 1900, Mary Kawena Pukui, who was later the co-author of the Hawaiian\u2013English Dictionary, was punished for speaking Hawaiian by being rapped on the forehead, allowed to eat only bread and water for lunch, and denied home visits on holidays. Winona Beamer was expelled from Kamehameha Schools in 1937 for chanting Hawaiian. Due in part to this systemic suppression of the language after the overthrow, Hawaiian is still considered a critically endangered language.\nHowever, informal coercion to drop Hawaiian would not have worked by itself. Just as important was the fact that, in the same period, native Hawaiians were becoming a minority in their own land on account of the growing influx of foreign labourers and their children. Whereas in 1890 pure Hawaiian students made 56% of school enrollment, in 1900 their numbers were down to 32% and, in 1910, to 16.9%. At the same time, Hawaiians were very prone to intermarriage: the number of \"Part-Hawaiian\" students (i.e., children of mixed White-Hawaiian marriages) grew from 1573 in 1890 to 3718 in 1910. In such mixed households, the low prestige of Hawaiian led to the adoption of English as the family language. Moreover, Hawaiians lived mostly in the cities or scattered across the countryside, in direct contact with other ethnic groups and without any stronghold (with the exception of Ni\u02bbihau). Thus, even pure Hawaiian children would converse daily with their schoolmates of diverse mother tongues in English, which was now not just the teachers' language but also the common language needed for everyday communication among friends and neighbours out of school as well. In only a generation English (or rather Pidgin) would become the primary and dominant language of all children, despite the efforts of Hawaiian and immigrant parents to maintain their ancestral languages within the family.\n1949 to present.\nIn 1949, the legislature of the Territory of Hawai\u02bbi commissioned Mary Kawena Pukui and Samuel Hoyt Elbert to write a new dictionary of Hawaiian, either revising the Andrews-Parker work or starting from scratch. Pukui and Elbert took a middle course, using what they could from the Andrews dictionary, but making certain improvements and additions that were more significant than a minor revision. The dictionary they produced, in 1957, introduced an era of gradual increase in attention to the language and culture.\nLanguage revitalization and Hawaiian culture has seen a major revival since the Hawaiian renaissance in the 1970s. Forming in 1983, the \u02bbAha P\u016bnana Leo, meaning \"language nest\" in Hawaiian, opened its first center in 1984. It was a privately funded Hawaiian preschool program that invited native Hawaiian elders to speak to children in Hawaiian every day.\nEfforts to promote the language have increased in recent decades. Hawaiian-language \"immersion\" schools are now open to children whose families want to reintroduce the Hawaiian language for future generations. The \u02bbAha P\u016bnana Leo's Hawaiian language preschools in Hilo, Hawaii, have received international recognition. The local National Public Radio station features a short segment titled \"Hawaiian word of the day\" and a Hawaiian language news broadcast. Honolulu television station KGMB ran a weekly Hawaiian language program, \"\u02bb\u0100ha\u02bbi \u02bb\u014clelo Ola\", as recently as 2010. Additionally, the Sunday editions of the \"Honolulu Star-Advertiser\", the largest newspaper in Hawaii, feature a brief article called \"Kauakukalahale\" written entirely in Hawaiian by teachers, students, and community members.\nToday, the number of native speakers of Hawaiian, which was under 0.1% of the statewide population in 1997, has risen to 2,000, out of 24,000 total who are fluent in the language, according to the US 2011 census. On six of the seven permanently inhabited islands, Hawaiian has been largely displaced by English, but on Ni\u02bbihau, native speakers of Hawaiian have remained fairly isolated and have continued to use Hawaiian almost exclusively. A 2016 state government estimate states that only 18,000 residents of the state claim to speak Hawaiian at home.\nNi\u02bbihau.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ni\u02bbihau is the only area in the world where Hawaiian is the first language and English is a foreign language.\u2014\u200a\nThe isolated island of Ni\u02bbihau, located off the southwest coast of Kauai, is the one island where Hawaiian (more specifically a local dialect of Hawaiian known as Niihau dialect) is still spoken as the language of daily life. \n states that \"[v]ariations in Hawaiian dialects have not been systematically studied\", and that \"[t]he dialect of Ni\u02bbihau is the most aberrant and the one most in need of study\". They recognized that Ni\u02bbihauans can speak Hawaiian in substantially different ways. Their statements are based in part on some specific observations made by . (See Hawaiian phonological processes)\nFriction has developed between those on Ni\u02bbihau that speak Hawaiian as a first language, and those who speak Hawaiian as a second language, especially those educated by the College of Hawaiian Language at the University of Hawai\u02bbi at Hilo. The university sponsors a Hawaiian Language Lexicon Committee () which coins words for concepts that historically have not existed in the language, like \"computer\" and \"cell phone\". These words are generally not incorporated into the Ni\u02bbihau dialect, which often coins its own words organically. Some new words are Hawaiianized versions of English words, and some are composed of Hawaiian roots.\nHawaiian in schools.\nHawaiian medium schools.\nThe Hawaiian medium education system is a combination of charter, public, and private schools. K\u20136 schools operate under coordinated governance of the Department of Education and the charter school, while the pre-K\u201312 laboratory system is governed by the Department of Education, the \u02bbAha P\u016bnana Leo, and the charter school. Over 80% of graduates from these laboratory schools attend college, some of which include Ivy-League schools. Hawaiian is now an authorized course in the Department of Education language curriculum, though not all schools offer the language.\nThere are two kinds of Hawaiian-immersion medium schools: K\u201312 total Hawaiian-immersion schools, and grades 7\u201312 partial Hawaiian immersion schools, the latter having some classes are taught in English and others are taught in Hawaiian. One of the main focuses of Hawaiian-medium schools is to teach the form and structure of the Hawaiian language by modeling sentences as a \"pepeke\", meaning squid in Hawaiian. In this case the pepeke is a metaphor that features the body of a squid with the three essential parts: the po\u02bbo (head), the \u02bbawe (tentacles) and the piko (where the po\u02bbo and \u02bbawe meet) representing how a sentence is structured. The po\u02bbo represents the predicate, the piko representing the subject and the \u02bbawe representing the object. Hawaiian immersion schools teach content that both adheres to state standards and stresses Hawaiian culture and values. The existence of immersion schools in Hawai\u02bbi has developed the opportunity for intergenerational transmission of Hawaiian at home.\nHigher education.\nThe Ka Haka \u02bbUla O Ke\u02bbelik\u014dlani College of Hawaiian Language is a college at the University of Hawaii at Hilo dedicated to providing courses and programs entirely in Hawaiian. It educates and provides training for teachers and school administrators of Hawaiian medium schools. It is the only college in the United States of America that offers a master's and doctorate's degree in an Indigenous language. Programs offered at The Ka Haka \u02bbUla O Ke\u02bbelik\u014dlani College of Hawaiian Language are known collectively as the \"Hilo model\" and has been imitated by the Cherokee immersion program and several other Indigenous revitalization programs.\nSince 1921, the University of Hawai\u02bbi at Manoa and all of the University of Hawai\u02bbi Community Colleges also offer Hawaiian language courses to students for credit. The university now also offers free online courses not for credit, along with a few other websites and apps such as Duolingo.\nOrthography.\nHawaiians had no written language prior to Western contact, except for petroglyph symbols.\nThe modern Hawaiian alphabet, \"ka p\u012b\u02bb\u0101p\u0101 Hawai\u02bbi\", is based on the Latin script. Hawaiian words end \"only\" in vowels, and every consonant must be followed by a vowel. The Hawaiian alphabetical order has all of the vowels before the consonants, as in the following chart.\nOrigin.\nThis writing system was developed by American Protestant missionaries during 1820\u20131826. It was the first thing they ever printed in Hawaii, on January 7, 1822, and it originally included the consonants \"B, D, R, T,\" and \"V,\" in addition to the current ones (\"H, K, L, M, N, P, W\"), and it had \"F, G, S, Y\" and \"Z\" for \"spelling foreign words\". The initial printing also showed the five vowel letters (\"A, E, I, O, U\") and seven of the short diphthongs (\"AE, AI, AO, AU, EI, EU, OU\").\nIn 1826, the developers voted to eliminate some of the letters which represented functionally redundant allophones (called \"interchangeable letters\"), enabling the Hawaiian alphabet to approach the ideal state of one-symbol-one-phoneme, and thereby optimizing the ease with which people could teach and learn the reading and writing of Hawaiian. For example, instead of spelling one and the same word as \"pule, bule, pure,\" and \"bure\" (because of interchangeable \"p/b\" and \"l/r\"), the word is spelled only as \"pule\".\nHowever, hundreds of words were very rapidly borrowed into Hawaiian from English, Greek, Hebrew, Latin, and Syriac. Although these loan words were necessarily Hawaiianized, they often retained some of their \"non-Hawaiian letters\" in their published forms. For example, \"Brazil\" fully Hawaiianized is \"Palakila\", but retaining \"foreign letters\" it is \"Barazila\". Another example is \"Gibraltar\", written as \"Kipalaleka\" or \"Gibaraleta\". While and are not regarded as Hawaiian sounds, , , and were represented in the original alphabet, so the letters (\"b\", \"r\", and \"t\") for the latter are not truly \"non-Hawaiian\" or \"foreign\", even though their post-1826 use in published matter generally marked words of foreign origin.\nGlottal stop.\n\"\u02bbOkina\" (\"\u02bboki\" 'cut' + \"-na\" '-ing') is the modern Hawaiian name for the symbol (a letter) that represents the glottal stop. It was formerly known as \"\u02bbu\u02bbina\" (\"snap\").\nFor examples of the \u02bbokina, consider the Hawaiian words \"Hawai\u02bbi\" and \"O\u02bbahu\" (often simply \"Hawaii\" and \"Oahu\" in English orthography). In Hawaiian, these words are pronounced and , and are written with an \u02bbokina where the glottal stop is pronounced.\nElbert &amp; Pukui's \"Hawaiian Grammar\" says \"The glottal stop, codice_1, is made by closing the glottis or space between the vocal cords, the result being something like the hiatus in English \"oh-oh\".\"\nHistory.\nAs early as 1823, the missionaries made some limited use of the apostrophe to represent the glottal stop, but they did not make it a letter of the alphabet. In publishing the Hawaiian Bible, they used it to distinguish \"ko\u02bbu\" ('my') from \"kou\" ('your'). In 1864, William DeWitt Alexander published a grammar of Hawaiian in which he made it clear that the glottal stop (calling it \"guttural break\") is definitely a true consonant of the Hawaiian language. He wrote it using an apostrophe. In 1922, the Andrews-Parker dictionary of Hawaiian made limited use of the opening single quote symbol, then called \"reversed apostrophe\" or \"inverse comma\", to represent the glottal stop. Subsequent dictionaries and written material associated with the Hawaiian language revitalization have preferred to use this symbol, the \"\u02bbokina\", to better represent spoken Hawaiian. Nonetheless, excluding the \"\u02bbokina\" may facilitate interface with English-oriented media, or even be preferred stylistically by some Hawaiian speakers, in homage to 19th century written texts. So there is variation today in the use of this symbol.\nElectronic encoding.\nThe \u02bbokina is written in various ways for electronic uses:\nBecause many people who want to write the \u02bbokina are not familiar with these specific characters and/or do not have access to the appropriate fonts and input and display systems, it is sometimes written with more familiar and readily available characters:\nMacron.\nA modern Hawaiian name for the macron symbol is \"kahak\u014d\" (\"kaha\" 'mark' + \"k\u014d\" 'long'). It was formerly known as \"mekona\" (Hawaiianization of \"macron\"). It can be written as a diacritical mark which looks like a hyphen or dash written above a vowel, i.e., \"\u0101 \u0113 \u012b \u014d \u016b\" and \"\u0100 \u0112 \u012a \u014c \u016a\". It is used to show that the marked vowel is a \"double\", or \"geminate\", or \"long\" vowel, in phonological terms. (See: Vowel length)\nAs early as 1821, at least one of the missionaries, Hiram Bingham, was using macrons (and breves) in making handwritten transcriptions of Hawaiian vowels. The missionaries specifically requested their sponsor in Boston to send them some type (fonts) with accented vowel characters, including vowels with macrons, but the sponsor made only one response and sent the wrong font size (pica instead of small pica). Thus, they could not print \u0101, \u0113, \u012b, \u014d, nor \u016b (at the right size), even though they wanted to.\nPronunciation.\nOwing to extensive allophony, Hawaiian has more than 13 phones. Although vowel length is phonemic, long vowels are not always pronounced as such, even though under the rules for assigning stress in Hawaiian, a long vowel will always receive stress.\nPhonology.\nConsonants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHawaiian is known for having very few consonant phonemes\u00a0\u2013 eight: . It is notable that Hawaiian has allophonic variation of with , with , and (in some dialects) with . The \u2013 variation is quite unusual among the world's languages, and is likely a product both of the small number of consonants in Hawaiian, and the recent shift of historical *t to modern \u2013, after historical *k had shifted to . In some dialects, remains as in some words. These variations are largely free, though there are conditioning factors. tends to , as with \"\u02bbele\u02bbele\" or \"\u02bbene\u02bbene\" \"black\", especially in words with both and , as in the island name \"L\u0101na\u02bbi\" (\u2013). The allophone is almost universal at the beginnings of words, whereas is most common before the vowel . is the norm after and , whereas is usual after and . After and initially, however, and are in free variation.\nVowels.\nHawaiian has five short and five long vowels, plus diphthongs.\nMonophthongs.\nHawaiian has five pure vowels. The short vowels are , and the long vowels, if they are considered separate phonemes rather than simply sequences of like vowels, are . When stressed, short and have been described as becoming and , while when unstressed they are and . Parker Jones (2017), however, did not find a reduction of /a/ to outside of function words in the phonetic analysis of a young speaker from Hilo, Hawai\u02bbi, who had been raised within the Hawaiian language revitalisation movement; so there is at least some variation in how /a/ is realised. also tends to become next to , , and another , as in \"Pele\" . Some grammatical particles vary between short and long vowels. These include \"a\" and \"o\" \"of\", \"ma\" \"at\", \"na\" and \"no\" \"for\". Between a back vowel or and a following non-back vowel (), there is an epenthetic , which is generally not written. Between a front vowel or and a following non-front vowel (), there is an epenthetic (a \"y\" sound), which is never written.\nDiphthongs.\nThe short-vowel diphthongs are . In all except perhaps , these are falling diphthongs. However, they are not as tightly bound as the diphthongs of English, and may be considered vowel sequences. (The second vowel in such sequences may receive the stress, but in such cases it is not counted as a diphthong.) In fast speech, tends to and tends to , conflating these diphthongs with and .\nThere are only a limited number of vowels which may follow long vowels, and some authors treat these sequences as diphthongs as well: .\nPhonotactics.\nHawaiian syllable structure is (C)V. All CV syllables occur except for \"w\u016b\"; \"wu\" occurs only in two words borrowed from English. As shown by Sch\u00fctz, Hawaiian word-stress is predictable in words of one to three moras, but not in words of five or more syllables. Hawaiian phonological processes include palatalization and deletion of consonants, as well as raising, diphthongization, deletion, and compensatory lengthening of vowels.\nHistorical development.\nHistorically, glottal stop developed from *k. Loss of intervocalic consonant phonemes has resulted in Hawaiian long vowels and diphthongs.\nGrammar.\nHawaiian is an analytic language with verb\u2013subject\u2013object word order. While there is no use of inflection for verbs, in Hawaiian, like other Austronesian personal pronouns, declension is found in the differentiation between a- and o-class genitive case personal pronouns in order to indicate inalienable possession in a binary possessive class system. Also like many Austronesian languages, Hawaiian pronouns employ separate words for inclusive and exclusive we (clusivity), and distinguish singular, dual, and plural. The grammatical function of verbs is marked by adjacent particles (short words) and by their relative positions, that indicate tense\u2013aspect\u2013mood.\nSome examples of verb phrase patterns:\nNouns can be marked with articles:\n\"ka\" and \"ke\" are singular definite articles. \"ke\" is used before words beginning with a-, e-, o- and k-, and with some words beginning \u02bb- and p-. \"ka\" is used in all other cases. \"n\u0101\" is the plural definite article.\nTo show part of a group, the word \"kekahi\" is used. To show a bigger part, \"mau\" is inserted to pluralize the subject.\nExamples:\nSemantic domains.\nHawaiian has thousands of words for elements of the natural world. According to the Hawaiian Electronic Library, there are thousands of names for different types of wind, rain, parts of the sea, peaks of mountains, and sky formations, demonstrating the importance of the natural world to Hawaiian culture. For example, \"Ho\u02bbomalumalu\" means \"sheltering cloud\" and \"Ho\u02bboweliweli\" means \"threatening cloud\".\nVarieties and debates.\nThere is a marked difference between varieties of the Hawaiian language spoken by most native Hawaiian elders and the Hawaiian Language taught in education, sometimes regarded as \"University Hawaiian\" or \"College Hawaiian\". \"University Hawaiian\" is often so different from the language spoken by elders that Native Hawaiian children may feel scared or ashamed to speak Hawaiian at home, limiting the language's domains to academia. Language varieties spoken by elders often includes Pidgin Hawaiian, Hawaiian Pidgin, Hawaiian-infused English, or another variety of Hawaiian that is much different from the \"University Hawaiian\" that was standardized and documented by colonists in the 19th century.\nThe divide between \"University Hawaiian\" and varieties spoken by elders has created debate over which variety of Hawaiian should be considered \"real\" or \"authentic\", as neither \"University Hawaiian\" nor other varieties spoken by elders are free from foreign interference. Hawaiian cultural beliefs of divine intervention as the driving force of language formation expedites distrust in what might be seen as the mechanical nature of colonial linguistic paradigms of language and its role in the standardized variety of \"University Hawaiian\". Hawaiian's authenticity debate could have major implications for revitalization efforts as language attitudes and trends in existing language domains are both UNESCO factors in assessing a language's level of endangerment.\nLanguage learning resources.\nHawaiian can be learnt on the online platforms of Duolingo and Memrise.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14245", "revid": "50464812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14245", "title": "Second Polish Republic", "text": "Country in Central and Eastern Europe (1918\u20131939)\nThe Second Polish Republic, officially known at the time as the Republic of Poland, was a country in Central and Eastern Europe that existed between 7 October 1918 and 6 October 1939 after being established in the final stage of World War I. The Second Republic was taken over in 1939, after it was invaded by Nazi Germany, the Soviet Union, and the Slovak Republic, marking the beginning of the European theatre of the Second World War. The Polish government-in-exile was established in Paris and later London after the fall of France in 1940.\nWhen, after several regional conflicts, most importantly the victorious Polish-Soviet war, the borders of the state were finalized in 1922, Poland's neighbours were Czechoslovakia, Germany, the Free City of Danzig, Lithuania, Latvia, Romania, and the Soviet Union. It had access to the Baltic Sea via a short strip of coastline known as the Polish Corridor on either side of the city of Gdynia. Between March and August 1939, Poland also shared a border with the then-Hungarian governorate of Subcarpathia. In 1938, the Second Republic was the sixth largest country in Europe. According to the 1921 census, the number of inhabitants was 25.7 million. By 1939, just before the outbreak of World War II, this had grown to an estimated 35.1 million. Almost a third of the population came from minority groups: 13.9% Ukrainians; 10% Ashkenazi Jews; 3.1% Belarusians; 2.3% Germans and 3.4% Czechs and Lithuanians. At the same time, a significant number of ethnic Poles lived outside the country's borders.\nThe Second Republic maintained moderate economic development. The cultural hubs of interwar Poland\u00a0\u2013 Warsaw, Krak\u00f3w, Pozna\u0144, Wilno, and Lw\u00f3w\u00a0\u2013 became major European cities and the sites of internationally acclaimed universities and other institutions of higher education. Although Polish Jews were some of the biggest supporters of Second Republic leader J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski, even after he returned to politics and staged a coup in 1926, after his death in 1935 the Pilsudskites ruling the Republic began to openly discriminate against its Jewish (and, to a lesser extent, its Ukrainian and Belarusian) citizens, restricting Jewish entry into professions and placing limitations on Jewish businesses.\nName.\nThe official name of the state was the \"Republic of Poland\". In the Polish language, it was referred to as \"Rzeczpospolita Polska\" (abbr. \"RP\"), with the term \"Rzeczpospolita\" being a traditional name for the \"republic\" when referring to various Polish states, including the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth (considered to be the First Polish Republic, \"Pierwsza Rzeczpospolita\"), and later, the current Third Polish Republic. In other regionally-used official languages, the state was referred to as: \"Republik Polen\" in German, \"\u041f\u043e\u043b\u044c\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430 \u0420\u0435\u0441\u043f\u0443\u0431\u043b\u0456\u043a\u0430\" (transcription: \"Pol\u02b9s\u02b9ka Respublika\") in Ukrainian, \"\u041f\u043e\u043b\u044c\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f \u0420\u044d\u0441\u043f\u0443\u0431\u043b\u0456\u043a\u0430\" (transcription: \"Po\u013askaja Respublika\") in Belarusian, and \"Lenkijos Respublika\", in Lithuanian.\nBetween 14 November 1918 and 13 March 1919, the state was referred to in Polish as \"Republika Polska\", instead of \"Rzeczpospolita Polska\". Both terms mean the \"Republic\"; however, \"republika\" is a general term, while \"Rzeczpospolita\" traditionally refers exclusively to Polish states. Additionally, between 8 November 1918 and 16 August 1919, the \"Journal of Laws of the State of Poland\" referred to the country as the \"State of Poland\" (Polish: \"Pa\u0144stwo Polskie\").\nFollowing the end of the Second World War, and the establishment of the later states of the Polish People's Republic and the Third Polish Republic, the historical state is referred to as the \"Second Polish Republic\". In the Polish language, the country is traditionally referred to as \"II Rzeczpospolita\" (\"Druga Rzeczpospolita\"), which means the \"Second Republic\".\nBackground.\nAfter more than a century of partitions between the Austrian, the Prussian, and the Russian imperial powers, Poland re-emerged as a sovereign state at the end of the First World War in Europe in 1917\u20131918. The victorious Allies of the First World War confirmed the rebirth of Poland in the Treaty of Versailles of June 1919. It was one of the great stories of the 1919 Paris Peace Conference. Poland solidified its independence in a series of border wars fought by the newly formed Polish Army from 1918 to 1921. The extent of the eastern half of the interwar territory of Poland was settled diplomatically in 1922 and internationally recognised by the League of Nations.\nEnd of the First World War.\nOver the course of the First World War (1914\u20131918), the German Empire gradually dominated the Eastern Front as the Imperial Russian Army fell back. German and Austro-Hungarian armies seized the Russian-ruled part of what became Poland. In a failed attempt to resolve the Polish question as quickly as possible, Berlin set up the puppet Kingdom of Poland on 14 January 1917, with a governing Provisional Council of State and (from 15 October 1917) a Regency Council (\"Rada Regencyjna Kr\u00f3lestwa Polskiego\"). The Council administered the country under German auspices (see also Mitteleuropa), pending the election of a king. More than a month before Germany surrendered on 11 November 1918 and the war ended, the Regency Council had dissolved the Provisional Council of State and announced its intention to restore Polish independence (7 October 1918). With the notable exception of the Marxist-oriented Social Democratic Party of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania (\"SDKPiL\"), most Polish political parties supported this move. On 23 October the Regency Council appointed a new government under J\u00f3zef \u015awie\u017cy\u0144ski and began conscription into the Polish Army.\nFormation of the Republic.\nIn 1918\u20131919, over 100 workers' councils sprang up on Polish territories; on 5 November 1918, in Lublin, the first Soviet of Delegates was established. On 6 November socialists proclaimed the Republic of Tarnobrzeg at Tarnobrzeg in Austrian Galicia. The same day the Socialist, Ignacy Daszy\u0144ski, set up a Provisional People's Government of the Republic of Poland (\"Tymczasowy Rz\u0105d Ludowy Republiki Polskiej\") in Lublin. On Sunday, 10 November at 7 a.m., J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski, newly freed from 16 months in a German prison in Magdeburg, returned by train to Warsaw. Pi\u0142sudski, together with Colonel Kazimierz Sosnkowski, was greeted at Warsaw's railway station by Regent Zdzis\u0142aw Lubomirski and by Colonel Adam Koc. Next day, due to his popularity and support from most political parties, the Regency Council appointed Pi\u0142sudski as Commander in Chief of the Polish Armed Forces. On 14 November, the Council dissolved itself and transferred all its authority to Pi\u0142sudski as Chief of State (\"Naczelnik Pa\u0144stwa\"). After consultation with Pi\u0142sudski, Daszy\u0144ski's government dissolved itself and a new government formed under J\u0119drzej Moraczewski. In 1918, the Kingdom of Italy became the first country in Europe to recognise Poland's renewed sovereignty.\nCentres of government that formed at that time in Galicia (formerly Austrian-ruled southern Poland) included the National Council of the Principality of Cieszyn (established in November 1918), the Republic of Zakopane and the Polish Liquidation Committee (28 October). Soon afterward, the Polish\u2013Ukrainian War broke out in Lw\u00f3w (1 November 1918) between forces of the Military Committee of Ukrainians and the Polish irregular units made up of students known as the Lw\u00f3w Eaglets, who were later supported by the Polish Army (see Battle of Lw\u00f3w (1918), Battle of Przemy\u015bl (1918)). Meanwhile, in western Poland, another war of national liberation began under the banner of the Greater Poland uprising (1918\u20131919). In January 1919, Czechoslovak forces attacked Polish units in the area of Trans-Olza (see Polish\u2013Czechoslovak War). Soon afterwards, the Polish\u2013Lithuanian War (ca 1919\u20131920) began, and, in August 1919, Polish-speaking residents of Upper Silesia initiated a series of three Silesian Uprisings. The most critical military conflict of that period, however, the Polish\u2013Soviet War (1919-1921), ended in a decisive Polish victory.\nPolitics and government.\nThe Second Polish Republic was a parliamentary democracy from 1919 (see Small Constitution of 1919) to 1926, with the President having limited powers. The Parliament elected him, and he could appoint the Prime Minister as well as the government with the \"Sejm\"'s (lower house's) approval, but he could only dissolve the \"Sejm\" with the Senate's consent. Moreover, his power to pass decrees was limited by the requirement that the Prime Minister and the appropriate other Minister had to verify his decrees with their signatures. Poland was one of the first countries in the world to recognise women's suffrage. Women in Poland were granted the right to vote on 28 November 1918 by a decree of General J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski.\nThe major political parties at this time were the Polish Socialist Party, National Democrats, various Peasant Parties, Christian Democrats, and political groups of ethnic minorities (German: German Social Democratic Party of Poland, Jewish: General Jewish Labour Bund in Poland, United Jewish Socialist Workers Party, and Ukrainian: Ukrainian National Democratic Alliance). Frequently changing governments (see 1919 Polish legislative election, 1922 Polish legislative election) and other negative publicity the politicians received (such as accusations of corruption or the 1919 Polish coup attempt), made them increasingly unpopular. Major politicians at this time, in addition to General Pi\u0142sudski, included peasant activist Wincenty Witos (Prime Minister three times) and right-wing leader Roman Dmowski. Ethnic minorities were represented in the \"Sejm\"; e.g. in 1928 \u2013 1930 there was the Ukrainian-Belarusian Club, with 26 Ukrainian and 4 Belarusian members.\nAfter the Polish\u2013Soviet War, Marshal Pi\u0142sudski led an intentionally modest life, writing historical books for a living. After he took power through a military coup in May 1926, he emphasised that he wanted to heal Polish society and politics of excessive partisan politics. His regime, accordingly, was called \"Sanacja\" in Polish. The 1928 parliamentary elections were still considered free and fair, although the pro-Pi\u0142sudski Nonpartisan Bloc for Cooperation with the Government won them. The following three parliamentary elections (in 1930, 1935 and 1938) were manipulated, with opposition activists sent to Bereza Kartuska prison (see also Brest trials). As a result, the pro-government party Camp of National Unity won huge majorities in them. Pi\u0142sudski died just after an authoritarian constitution was approved in the spring of 1935. During the last four years of the Second Polish Republic, the major politicians included President Ignacy Mo\u015bcicki, Foreign Minister J\u00f3zef Beck and the Commander-in-Chief of the Polish Army, Marshal Edward Rydz-\u015amig\u0142y. The country was divided into 104 electoral districts, and those politicians who were forced to leave Poland founded Front Morges in 1936. The government that ruled the Second Polish Republic in its final years is frequently referred to as Pi\u0142sudski's colonels.\nMilitary.\nPoland had military conscription requiring all citizens upon becoming 21 years old to serve in the military under the 1921 constitution regardless of one's religious views. Interwar Poland had an army of 270,000 soldiers on active duty: in 37 infantry divisions, 11 cavalry brigades, and two armored brigades, plus artillery units. Another 700,000 served in the reserves. At the outbreak of the war, the Polish Army was able to put in the field almost one million soldiers, 4,300 guns, around 1,000 armored vehicles including in between 200 and 300 tanks (the majority of the armored vehicles were outclassed tankettes) and 745 aircraft (however, only around 450 of them were bombers and fighters available to fight as of 1 September 1939).\nArmy.\nThe training of the Polish Army was thorough. The non-commissioned officers were a competent body of men with expert knowledge and high ideals. The officers, both senior and junior, constantly refreshed their training in the field and in the lecture hall, where modern technical achievement and the lessons of contemporary wars were demonstrated and discussed. The equipment of the Polish Army was less developed technically than that of Nazi Germany and its rearmament was slowed by confidence in Western European military support and by budget difficulties. The Polish command system at the level of the entire Polish military and the armies was obsolete. The generals in command of armies had to ask permission from the high command. The Polish military attempted to organize fronts made of army groups only when it was already too late during the Polish Defensive War in 1939.\nAir Force.\nPoland began building up an air force starting in the Polish-Soviet War. The Polish were not able to sustain this as they did not have a satisfactory amount of airfields along with an industrial base of sorts. Starting in the mid-1930s modernization attempts were done which led to the number of planes in the air force shrinking and in 1936 there was 417 planes. The Polish attempted to acquire planes from the French but were largely unsuccessful. In 1939 Poland had \"no more than 511 aircraft\".\nNavy.\nPoland created its own navy upon becoming independent which mostly consisted of river boats but later diversified. Poland would later include in its navy: torpedo boats, destroyers, submarines and cruisers. By the time of Second World War in 1939 it had 18 ships in its navy. As naval vessels were prohibited from docking in Gda\u0144sk, the Polish opted to use Gdynia and Hel instead (Hel would be exclusively for military purposes) with Gdynia being where the navy was based out of.\nEconomy.\nAfter regaining its independence, Poland was faced with major economic difficulties. In addition to the devastation brought by the First World War, the exploitation of the Polish economy by the German and Russian occupying powers, and the sabotage performed by retreating armies, the new republic was faced with the task of economically unifying disparate economic regions, which had previously been part of different countries and different empires. Within the borders of the Republic were the remnants of three different economic systems, with five different currencies (the German mark, the Imperial Russian rouble, the Austrian krone, the Polish marka and the Ostrubel) and with little or no direct infrastructural links. The situation was so bad that neighbouring industrial centres, as well as major cities, lacked direct railway links because they had been parts of different jurisdictions and different empires. For example, there was no direct railway connection between Warsaw and Krak\u00f3w until 1934. This situation was described by Melchior Wa\u0144kowicz in his book \"Sztafeta\".\nIn addition to this was the massive destruction left after both the First World War and the Polish\u2013Soviet War. There was also a great economic disparity between the eastern (commonly called \"Poland B\") and western (called \"Poland A\") parts of the country, with the western half, especially areas that had belonged to Prussia and the German Empire, being much more developed and prosperous. Frequent border closures and a customs war with Germany also had negative economic impacts on Poland. In 1924, Prime Minister W\u0142adys\u0142aw Grabski, who was also the Economic Minister, introduced the \"z\u0142oty\" as a single common currency for Poland (replacing the marka), which remained a stable currency. The currency helped Poland to control the massive hyperinflation. It was the only country in Europe able to do this without foreign loans or aid. The average annual growth rate (GDP per capita) was 5.24% in 1920\u201329 and 0.34% in 1929\u201338.\nHostile relations with neighbours were a major problem for the economy of interbellum Poland. In the year 1937, foreign trade with all neighbours amounted to only 21% of Poland's total. Trade with Germany, Poland's most important neighbour, accounted for 14.3% of Polish exchange. Foreign trade with the Soviet Union (0.8%) was virtually nonexistent. Czechoslovakia accounted for 3.9%, Latvia for 0.3%, and Romania for 0.8%. By mid-1938, after the \"Anschluss\" with Austria, Greater Germany was responsible for as much as 23% of Polish foreign trade.\nPi\u0142sudski's regime followed the conservative free-market economic tradition of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth throughout its existence. Poland had one of the lowest taxation rates in Europe, with 9.3% of taxes as a distribution of national income. Pi\u0142sudski's regime was also heavily dependent on foreign investments and economies, with 45.4% of Polish equity capital controlled by foreign corporations. After the Great Depression, the Polish economy crumbled and failed to recover until Ignacy Mo\u015bcicki's government introduced economic reforms with more government interventions with an increase in tax revenues and public spending after Pi\u0142sudski's death. These interventionist policies saw Poland's economy recover from the recession.\nThe basis of Poland's gradual recovery after the Great Depression was the mass economic development plans of the new government (see Four Year Plan) under economist Eugeniusz Kwiatkowski, which oversaw the building of three key infrastructural elements. The first was the establishment of the Gdynia seaport, which allowed Poland to completely bypass Gda\u0144sk (which was under heavy German pressure to boycott Polish coal exports). The second was construction of the 500-kilometre rail connection between Upper Silesia and Gdynia, called the Polish Coal Trunk-Line, which served freight trains with coal. The third was the creation of a central industrial district named COP \u2013 \"Centralny Okr\u0119g Przemys\u0142owy\" (English: Central Industrial Region). Unfortunately, these developments were interrupted and largely destroyed by the German and Soviet invasion and the start of the Second World War. Other achievements of interbellum Poland included Stalowa Wola (a brand new city, built in a forest around a steel mill), Mo\u015bcice (now a district of Tarn\u00f3w, with a large nitrate factory), and the creation of the central bank Bank Polski SA. There were several trade fairs, with the most popular being Pozna\u0144 International Fair, Lw\u00f3w's \"Targi Wschodnie\", and Wilno's \"Targi P\u00f3\u0142nocne\". Polish Radio had ten stations (see Radio stations in interwar Poland), with the eleventh one planned to be opened in the autumn of 1939. Furthermore, in 1935, Polish engineers began working on TV services. By early 1939, experts of the Polish Radio built four TV sets. The first movie broadcast by experimental Polish TV was \"Barbara Radziwi\u0142\u0142\u00f3wna\", and by 1940, a regular TV service was scheduled to begin operation.\nInterbellum Poland was also a country with numerous social problems. Unemployment was high, and poverty in the countryside was widespread, which resulted in several cases of social unrest, such as the 1923 Krak\u00f3w riot, and 1937 peasant strike in Poland. There were conflicts with national minorities, such as the Pacification of Ukrainians in Eastern Galicia (1930), relations with Polish neighbours were sometimes complicated (see Soviet raid on Sto\u0142pce, Polish\u2013Czechoslovak border conflicts, and the 1938 Polish ultimatum to Lithuania). On top of this, there were natural disasters, such as the 1934 flood in Poland.\nMajor industrial centres.\nInterbellum Poland was unofficially divided into two parts \u2013 better developed \"Poland A\" in the west, and underdeveloped \"Poland B\" in the east. Polish industry was concentrated in the west, mostly in Polish Upper Silesia, and the adjacent Lesser Poland's province of Zag\u0142\u0119bie D\u0105browskie, where the bulk of coal mines and steel plants was located. Furthermore, heavy industry plants were located in Cz\u0119stochowa (\"Huta Cz\u0119stochowa\", founded in 1896), Ostrowiec \u015awi\u0119tokrzyski (\"Huta Ostrowiec\", founded in 1837\u20131839), Stalowa Wola (brand new industrial city, which was built from scratch in 1937 \u2013 1938), Chrzan\u00f3w (\"Fablok\", founded in 1919), Jaworzno, Trzebinia (oil refinery, opened in 1895), \u0141\u00f3d\u017a (the seat of Polish textile industry), Pozna\u0144 (H. Cegielski \u2013 Pozna\u0144), Krak\u00f3w and Warsaw (Ursus Factory). Further east, in Kresy, industrial centres included two major cities of the region \u2013 Lw\u00f3w and Wilno (Elektrit).\nBesides coal mining, Poland also had deposits of oil in Borys\u0142aw, Drohobycz, Jas\u0142o and Gorlice (see Polmin), potassium salt (TESP), and basalt (Janowa Dolina). Apart from already-existing industrial areas, in the mid-1930s an ambitious, state-sponsored project called the Central Industrial Region was started under Minister Eugeniusz Kwiatkowski. One of the characteristic features of the Polish economy in the interbellum was the gradual nationalisation of major plants. This was the case for the Ursus Factory (see Pa\u0144stwowe Zak\u0142ady In\u017cynieryjne) and several steelworks, such as \"Huta Pok\u00f3j\" in Ruda \u015al\u0105ska \u2013 Nowy Bytom, \"Huta Kr\u00f3lewska\" in Chorz\u00f3w \u2013 Kr\u00f3lewska Huta, \"Huta Laura\" in Siemianowice \u015al\u0105skie, as well as \"Scheibler and Grohman Works\" in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a.\nTransport.\nAccording to the 1939 \"Statistical Yearbook of Poland\", the total length of the railways in Poland (as of 31 December 1937) was . Rail density was per . Railways were very dense in the western part of the country, while in the east, especially Polesie, rail was non-existent in some counties. During the interbellum period, the Polish Government constructed several new lines, mainly in the central part of the country (see also Polish State Railroads Summer 1939). Construction of the extensive Warszawa G\u0142\u00f3wna railway station was never finished due to the war, while Polish railways were famous for their punctuality (see Luxtorpeda, Strza\u0142a Ba\u0142tyku, Lataj\u0105cy Wilnianin).\nIn the interbellum, the road network of Poland was dense, but the quality of the roads was very poor \u2013 only 7% of all roads were paved and ready for automobile use, and none of the major cities were connected with each other by a good-quality highway. In 1939 the Poles built only one highway: 28\u00a0km of straight concrete road connecting the villages of Warlubie and Osiek (mid-northern Poland). It was designed by Italian engineer Piero Puricelli.\nIn the mid-1930s, Poland had of roads, but only 58,000 had a hard surface (gravel, cobblestone or sett), and 2,500 were modern, with an asphalt or concrete surface. In different parts of the country, there were sections of paved roads, which suddenly ended, and were followed by dirt roads. The poor condition of the roads was the result of both long-lasting foreign dominance and inadequate funding. On 29 January 1931, the Polish Parliament created the State Road Fund, the purpose of which was to collect money for the construction and conservation of roads. The government drafted a 10-year plan, with road priorities: a highway from Wilno, through Warsaw and Krak\u00f3w, to Zakopane (called Marshal Pi\u0142sudski Highway), asphalt highways from Warsaw to Pozna\u0144 and \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, as well as a Warsaw ring road. However, the plan turned out to be too ambitious, with insufficient money in the national budget to pay for it. In January 1938, the Polish Road Congress estimated that Poland would need to spend three times as much money on roads to keep up with Western Europe.\nIn 1939, before the outbreak of the war, LOT Polish Airlines, which was established in 1929, had its hub at Warsaw Ok\u0119cie Airport. At that time, LOT maintained several services, both domestic and international. Warsaw had regular domestic connections with Gdynia-Rumia, Danzig-Langfuhr, Katowice-Muchowiec, Krak\u00f3w-Rakowice-Czy\u017cyny, Lw\u00f3w-Skni\u0142\u00f3w, Pozna\u0144-\u0141awica, and Wilno-Porubanek. Furthermore, in cooperation with Air France, LARES, Lufthansa, and Malert, international connections were maintained with Athens, Beirut, Berlin, Bucharest, Budapest, Helsinki, Kaunas, London, Paris, Prague, Riga, Rome, Tallinn, and Zagreb.\nAgriculture.\nStatistically, the majority of citizens of the Second Polish Republic lived in the countryside (75% in 1921). Farmers made up 65% of the population. In 1929, agricultural production made up 65% of Poland's GNP. After 123 years of partitions, regions of the country were very unevenly developed. The lands of the former German Empire were the most advanced; in Greater Poland, Upper Silesia and Pomerelia, farming and crops were on a Western European level. The situation was much worse in parts of Congress Poland, the Eastern Borderlands, and what was formerly Galicia, where agriculture was quite backward and primitive, with a large number of small farms, unable to succeed in either the domestic or international market. Another problem was the overpopulation of the countryside, which resulted in chronic unemployment. Living conditions were so bad in several eastern regions, such as the counties inhabited by the Hutsul minority, that there was permanent starvation. Farmers rebelled against the government (see: 1937 peasant strike in Poland), and the situation began to change in the late 1930s, due to the construction of several factories for the Central Industrial Region, which gave employment to thousands of rural and small town residents.\nGerman trade.\nBeginning in June 1925, there was a customs' war, with the revanchist Weimar Republic imposing a trade embargo against Poland for nearly a decade; it involved tariffs and broad economic restrictions. After 1933 the trade war ended. The new agreements regulated and promoted trade. Germany became Poland's largest trading partner, followed by Britain. In October 1938, Germany granted a credit of 60,000,000 RM to Poland (120,000,000 \"zloty\", or \u00a34,800,000) which was never realised, due to the outbreak of war. Germany would deliver factory equipment and machinery in return for Polish timber and agricultural produce. This new trade was to be \"in addition\" to the existing German-Polish trade agreements.\nEducation and culture.\nIn 1919, the Polish government introduced compulsory education for all children aged 7 to 14, in an effort to limit illiteracy, which was widespread, especially in the former Russian Partition and the Austrian Partition of eastern Poland. In 1921, one-third of citizens of Poland remained illiterate (38% in the countryside). The process was slow, but by 1931 the illiteracy level had dropped to 23% overall (27% in the countryside) and further down to 18% in 1937. By 1939, over 90% of children attended school. In 1932, Janusz J\u0119drzejewicz, the Minister for Religion and Education, carried out a major reform which introduced two main levels of education: \"common school\" (\"szko\u0142a powszechna\"), with three levels \u2013 4 grades + 2 grades + 1 grade; and \"middle school\" (\"szko\u0142a \u015brednia\"), with two levels \u2013 4 grades of comprehensive middle school and 2 grades of specified high school (classical, humanistic, natural and mathematical). A graduate of middle school received a \"small matura\", while a graduate of high school received a \"big matura\", which enabled them to seek university-level education.\nBefore 1918, Poland had three universities: Jagiellonian University, the University of Warsaw and Lw\u00f3w University. The Catholic University of Lublin was established in 1918; Adam Mickiewicz University, Pozna\u0144, in 1919; and finally, in 1922, after the annexation of the Republic of Central Lithuania, Wilno University became the Republic's sixth university. There were also three technical colleges: the Warsaw University of Technology, Lw\u00f3w Polytechnic and the AGH University of Science and Technology in Krak\u00f3w, established in 1919. Warsaw University of Life Sciences was an agricultural institute. By 1939, there were around 50,000 students enrolled in further education. 28% of students at universities were women, which was the second highest share in Europe.\nPolish science in the interbellum was renowned for its mathematicians gathered around the Lw\u00f3w School of Mathematics, the Krak\u00f3w School of Mathematics, as well as the Warsaw School of Mathematics. There were world-class philosophers in the Lw\u00f3w\u2013Warsaw school of logic and philosophy. Florian Znaniecki founded Polish sociological studies. Rudolf Weigl invented a vaccine against typhus. Bronis\u0142aw Malinowski counted among the most important anthropologists of the 20th century.\nIn Polish literature, the 1920s were marked by the domination of poetry. Polish poets were divided into two groups \u2013 the Skamanderites (Jan Lecho\u0144, Julian Tuwim, Antoni S\u0142onimski and Jaros\u0142aw Iwaszkiewicz) and the Futurists (Anatol Stern, Bruno Jasie\u0144ski, Aleksander Wat, Julian Przybo\u015b). Apart from well-established novelists (Stefan \u017beromski, W\u0142adys\u0142aw Reymont), new names appeared in the interbellum \u2013 Zofia Na\u0142kowska, Maria D\u0105browska, Jaros\u0142aw Iwaszkiewicz, Jan Parandowski, Bruno Schultz, Stanis\u0142aw Ignacy Witkiewicz, Witold Gombrowicz. Among other notable artists there were sculptor Xawery Dunikowski, painters Julian Fa\u0142at, Wojciech Kossak and Jacek Malczewski, composers Karol Szymanowski, Feliks Nowowiejski, and Artur Rubinstein, singer Jan Kiepura.\nTheatre was immensely popular in the interbellum, with three main centres in the cities of Warsaw, Wilno and Lw\u00f3w. Altogether, there were 103 theatres in Poland and a number of other theatrical institutions (including 100 folk theatres). In 1936, different shows were seen by 5 million people, and main figures of Polish theatre of the time were Juliusz Osterwa, Stefan Jaracz, and Leon Schiller. Also, before the outbreak of the war, there were approximately one million radios (see Radio stations in interwar Poland).\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe administrative division of the Second Republic was based on a three-tier system, referring to the administrative division of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. On the lowest rung were the \"gminy\", local town and village governments akin to districts or parishes. These were then grouped together into \"powiaty\" (akin to counties), which, in turn, were grouped as \"wojew\u00f3dztwa\" (voivodeships, akin to provinces). This administrative system passed into the modern Third Polish Republic.\nDemographics.\nHistorically, Poland was almost always a multiethnic country. This was especially true for the Second Republic, when independence was once again achieved in the wake of the First World War and the subsequent Polish\u2013Soviet War, the latter war being officially ended by the Peace of Riga. The census of 1921 shows 30.8% of the population consisted of ethnic minorities, compared with a share of 1.6% (solely identifying with a non-Polish ethnic group) or 3.8% (including those identifying with both the Polish ethnicity and with another ethnic group) in 2011. The first spontaneous flight of about 500,000 Poles from the Soviet Union occurred during the reconstitution of sovereign Poland. In the second wave, between November 1919 and June 1924, some 1,200,000 people left the territory of the USSR for Poland. It is estimated that some 460,000 of them spoke Polish as the first language. According to the 1931 Polish Census: 69% of the population was Polish, 14% were Ukrainian, around 10% Jewish, 3% Belarusian, 2% German and 3% other, including Lithuanian, Czech, Armenian, Russian, and Romani. The situation of minorities was a complex subject and changed during the period.\nPoland was also a nation of many religions. In 1921, 16,057,229 Poles (approx. 62.5%) were Roman (Latin) Catholics, 3,031,057 citizens of Poland (approx. 11.8%) were Eastern Rite Catholics (mostly Ukrainian Greek Catholics and Armenian Rite Catholics), 2,815,817 (approx. 10.95%) were Orthodox, 2,771,949 (approx. 10.8%) were Jewish, and 940,232 (approx. 3.7%) were Protestants (mostly Lutheran).\nBy 1931, Poland had the second largest Jewish population in the world, with one-fifth of all the world's Jews residing within its borders (approx. 3,136,000). The urban population of interbellum Poland was rising steadily; in 1921, only 24% of Poles lived in the cities, in the late 1930s, that proportion grew to 30%. In more than a decade, the population of Warsaw grew by 200,000, \u0141\u00f3d\u017a by 150,000, and Pozna\u0144 \u2013 by 100,000. This was due not only to internal migration, but also to an extremely high birth rate.\nStatus of ethnic minorities.\nJews.\nFrom the 1920s, the Polish government excluded Jews from receiving government bank loans, public sector employment, and obtaining business licenses. From the 1930s, measures were taken against Jewish shops, Jewish export firms, \"Shechita\" as well as limitations being placed on Jewish admission to the medical and legal professions, Jews in business associations and the enrollment of Jews into universities. The political movement National Democracy (\"Endecja\", from the abbreviation \"ND\") often organised anti-Jewish business boycotts. Following the death of Marshal J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski in 1935, the \"Endecja\" intensified their efforts, which triggered violence in extreme cases in smaller towns across the country. In 1937, the National Democracy movement passed resolutions that \"its main aim and duty must be to remove the Jews from all spheres of social, economic, and cultural life in Poland\". The government in response organised the Camp of National Unity (OZON), which in 1938 took control of the \"Sejm\" and subsequently drafted anti-Semitic legislation similar to the Anti-Jewish laws in Germany, Hungary, and Romania. OZON advocated mass emigration of Jews from Poland, numerus clausus (see also Ghetto benches), and other limitations on Jewish rights. According to William W. Hagen, by 1939, prior to the war, Polish Jews were threatened with conditions similar to those in Nazi Germany.\nUkrainians.\nIn Galicia, unlike in Volhynia, the government was less amenable to integrating the Ukrainian minority. Opposition to the Polish state and resistance to integration by Ukrainian nationalists was also stronger. The pre-war government restricted the rights of people who declared Ukrainian nationality, belonged to the Eastern Orthodox Church and inhabited the Eastern Borderlands of the Second Polish Republic. Poland refused to grant the Ukrainian minority a territorial autonomy. Ukrainian was restricted in every field possible, especially in governmental institutions, and the term \"Ruthenian\" was enforced in an attempt to ban the use of the term \"Ukrainian\". Ukrainians were categorised as uneducated second-class peasants or third world people, and rarely settled outside the Eastern Borderland region due to the prevailing Ukrainophobia and restrictions imposed. Numerous attempts at restoring the Ukrainian state were suppressed and any existent violence or terrorism initiated by the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists was emphasised to create the image of a \"brutal Eastern savage\". After 1935, Polish policy towards Ukrainians shifted its focus from state consolidation to the ethnic assimilation of part of the Ukrainian population through Polonization and conversion to Roman Catholicism.\nGeography.\nThe Second Polish Republic was mainly flat with an average elevation of above sea level, except for the southernmost Carpathian Mountains (after the Second World War and its border changes, the average elevation of Poland decreased to ). Only 13% of territory, along the southern border, was higher than . The highest elevation in the country was Mount Rysy, which rises in the Tatra Range of the Carpathians, approximately south of Krak\u00f3w. Between October 1938 and September 1939, the highest elevation was Lodowy Szczyt (known in Slovak as \"\u013dadov\u00fd \u0161t\u00edt\"), which rises above sea level. The largest lake was Lake Narach.\nThe country's total area, after the annexation of Trans-Olza, was . It extended from north to south and from east to west. On 1 January 1938, total length of boundaries was , including: of coastline (out of which were made by the Hel Peninsula), the with Soviet Union, 948 kilometers with Czechoslovakia (until 1938), with Germany (together with East Prussia), and with other countries (Lithuania, Romania, Latvia, Danzig). The warmest yearly average temperature was in Krak\u00f3w among major cities of the Second Polish Republic, at in 1938; and the coldest in Wilno ( in 1938). Extreme geographical points of Poland included Prze\u015bwiata River in Somino to the north (located in the Braslaw county of the Wilno Voivodeship); Manczin River to the south (located in the Kos\u00f3w county of the Stanis\u0142aw\u00f3w Voivodeship); Spasibiorki near railway to Po\u0142ock to the east (located in the Dzisna county of the Wilno Voivodeship); and Mukocinek near Warta River and Meszyn Lake to the west (located in the Mi\u0119dzych\u00f3d county of the Pozna\u0144 Voivodeship).\nWaters.\nAlmost 75% of the territory of interbellum Poland was drained northward into the Baltic Sea by the Vistula (total area of drainage basin of the Vistula within boundaries of the Second Polish Republic was , the Niemen (), the Oder () and the Daugava (). The remaining part of the country was drained southward, into the Black Sea, by the rivers that drain into the Dnieper (Pripyat, Horyn and Styr, all together ) as well as Dniester ()\nInvasion of Poland in 1939.\nThe beginning of the Second World War in September 1939 ended the sovereign Second Polish Republic. The German invasion of Poland began on 1 September 1939, one week after Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union signed the secret Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact. On that day, Germany and Slovakia attacked Poland, and on 17 September the Soviets attacked eastern Poland. Warsaw fell to the Nazis on 28 September after a twenty-day siege. Open organised Polish resistance ended on 6 October 1939 after the Battle of Kock, with Germany and the Soviet Union occupying most of the country. Lithuania annexed the area of Wilno, and Slovakia seized areas along Poland's southern border \u2013 including G\u00f3rna Orawa and Tatransk\u00e1 Javorina - which Poland had annexed from Czechoslovakia in October 1938. Poland did not surrender to the invaders, but continued fighting under the auspices of the Polish government-in-exile and of the Polish Underground State. After the signing of the German\u2013Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Demarcation on 28 September 1939, Polish areas occupied by Nazi Germany either became directly incorporated into Nazi Germany, or became part of the General Government. The Soviet Union, following Elections to the People's Assemblies of Western Ukraine and Western Belarus (22 October 1939), annexed eastern Poland partly to the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, and partly to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic (November 1939).\nPolish war plans (Plan West and Plan East) failed as soon as Germany invaded in 1939. The Polish losses in combat against Germans (killed and missing in action) amounted to ca. 70,000 men. Some 420,000 of them were taken prisoners. Losses against the Red Army (which invaded Poland on 17 September) added up to 6,000 to 7,000 of casualties and MIA, 250,000 were taken prisoners. Although the Polish Army \u2013 considering the inactivity of the Allies \u2013 was in an unfavourable position \u2013 it managed to inflict serious losses to the enemies: 20,000 German soldiers were killed or MIA, 674 tanks and 319 armored vehicles destroyed or badly damaged, 230 aircraft shot down; the Red Army lost (killed and MIA) about 2,500 soldiers, 150 combat vehicles and 20 aircraft. The Soviet invasion of Poland, and lack of promised aid from the Western Allies, contributed to the Polish forces defeat by 6 October 1939.\nA popular myth is that Polish cavalry armed with lances charged German tanks during the September 1939 campaign. This often repeated account, first reported by Italian journalists as German propaganda, concerned an action by the Polish 18th Lancer Regiment near Chojnice. This arose from misreporting of a single clash on 1 September 1939 near Krojanty, when two squadrons of the Polish 18th Lancers armed with sabers surprised and wiped out a German infantry formation with a mounted saber charge. Shortly after midnight the 2nd (Motorized) Division was compelled to withdraw by Polish cavalry, before the Poles were caught in the open by German armored cars. The story arose because some German armored cars appeared and gunned down 20 troopers as the cavalry escaped. Even this failed to persuade everyone to reexamine their beliefs\u2014there were some who thought Polish cavalry had been improperly employed in 1939.\nBetween 1945 and 1990, the Polish government-in-exile operated in London, presenting itself as the only legal and legitimate representative of the Polish nation and challenging the legitimacy of the communist government in Warsaw. In 1990, the last president in exile, Ryszard Kaczorowski, handed the presidential insignia to the newly elected President, Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa, signifying continuity between the Second and Third republics.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14246", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14246", "title": "Hedwig", "text": "Hedwig may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "14248", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14248", "title": "Hooligans", "text": ""}
{"id": "14251", "revid": "26830857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14251", "title": "HMS Resolution", "text": "Several ships of the Royal Navy have borne the name HMS \"Resolution\":\nBattle honours.\nShips named \"Resolution\" of the Royal Navy have earned the following battle honours:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "14254", "revid": "6575218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14254", "title": "Helen Keller", "text": "American author and activist (1880\u20131968)\nHelen Adams Keller (June 27, 1880\u00a0\u2013 June 1, 1968) was an American author, disability rights advocate, political activist and lecturer. Born in West Tuscumbia, Alabama, she lost her sight and her hearing after a bout of illness when she was 19 months old. She then communicated primarily using home signs until the age of seven, when she met her first teacher and life-long companion Anne Sullivan. Sullivan taught Keller language, including reading and writing. After an education at both specialist and mainstream schools, Keller attended Radcliffe College of Harvard University and became the first deafblind person in the United States to earn a Bachelor of Arts degree.\nKeller was also a prolific author, writing 14 books and hundreds of speeches and essays on topics ranging from animals to Mahatma Gandhi. Keller campaigned for those with disabilities and for women's suffrage, labor rights, and world peace. In 1909, she joined the Socialist Party of America (SPA). She was a founding member of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU).\nKeller's autobiography, \"The Story of My Life\" (1903), publicized her education and life with Sullivan. It was adapted as a play by William Gibson, later adapted as a film under the same title, \"The Miracle Worker\". Her birthplace has been designated and preserved as a National Historic Landmark. Since 1954, it has been operated as a house museum and sponsors an annual \"Helen Keller Day\".\nEarly childhood and illness.\nKeller was born Helen Adams Keller on June 27, 1880, in Tuscumbia, Alabama, the daughter of Arthur Henley Keller (1836\u20131896), and Catherine Everett (n\u00e9e Adams) Keller (1856\u20131921), known as \"Kate\". The Keller family lived on a homestead, Ivy Green, which her paternal grandfather had built decades earlier. She had four siblings: two full siblings, Mildred Campbell (n\u00e9e Keller) Tyson and Phillip Brooks Keller; and two older half-brothers from her father's first marriage, James McDonald Keller and William Simpson Keller.\nKeller's father worked for many years as an editor of the Tuscumbia \"North Alabamian\". He had served as a captain in the Confederate Army. The family was part of the slaveholding elite before the American Civil War, but lost status later. Her mother was the daughter of Charles W. Adams, a Confederate general. Keller's paternal lineage was traced to Casper Keller, a native of Switzerland. One of Helen's Swiss ancestors was the first teacher for the deaf in Z\u00fcrich. Keller reflected on this fact in her first autobiography, asserting that \"there is no king who has not had a slave among his ancestors, and no slave who has not had a king among his\".\nAt 19 months old, Keller contracted an unknown illness described by doctors as \"an acute congestion of the stomach and the brain\". Contemporary doctors believe it may have been meningitis, caused by the bacterium \"Neisseria meningitidis\" (meningococcus), or possibly \"Haemophilus influenzae\", which can cause the same symptoms but is less likely because of its 97% juvenile mortality rate at that time. She was able to recover from her illness, but was left permanently blind and deaf, as she recalled in her autobiography, \"at sea in a dense fog\". At that time, Keller was able to communicate somewhat with Martha Washington, who was two years older and the daughter of the family cook, and understood the girl's signs;by the age of seven, Keller had more than 60 home signs to communicate with her family, and could distinguish people by the vibration of their footsteps.\nIn 1886, Keller's mother, inspired by an account in Charles Dickens' \"American Notes\" of the successful education of Laura Bridgman, a deaf and blind woman, dispatched the young Keller and her father to consult physician J. Julian Chisholm, an eye, ear, nose and throat specialist in Baltimore, for advice. Chisholm referred the Kellers to Alexander Graham Bell, who was working with deaf children at the time. Bell advised them to contact the Perkins Institute for the Blind, the school where Bridgman had been educated. It was then located in South Boston. Michael Anagnos, the school's director, asked Anne Sullivan, a 20-year-old alumna of the school who was visually impaired, to become Keller's instructor. It was the beginning of a nearly 50-year-long relationship Sullivan developed with Keller as her governess and later her companion.\nSullivan arrived at Keller's house on March 5, 1887, a day Keller would forever remember as \"my soul's birthday\". Sullivan immediately began to teach Helen to communicate by spelling words into her hand, beginning with \"d-o-l-l\" for the doll that she had brought Keller as a present. Keller initially struggled with lessons since she could not comprehend that every object had a word identifying it. When Sullivan was trying to teach Keller the word for \"mug\", Keller became so frustrated she broke the mug. Keller remembered how she soon began imitating Sullivan's hand gestures: \"I did not know that I was spelling a word or even that words existed. I was simply making my fingers go in monkey-like imitation.\"\nThe next month, Keller made a breakthrough, when she realized that the motions her teacher was making on the palm of her hand, while running cool water over her other hand, symbolized the idea of \"water\". Writing in her autobiography, \"The Story of My Life\", Keller recalled the moment:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nKeller quickly demanded that Sullivan sign the names of all the other familiar objects in her world.\nFormal education.\nIn May 1888, Keller started attending the Perkins Institute for the Blind. In 1893, Keller, along with Sullivan, attended William Wade House and Finishing School. In 1894, Keller and Sullivan moved to New York to attend the Wright-Humason School for the Deaf, and to learn from Sarah Fuller at the Horace Mann School for the Deaf. In 1896, they returned to Massachusetts, and Keller entered The Cambridge School for Young Ladies before gaining admittance, in 1900, to Radcliffe College of Harvard University, where she lived in Briggs Hall, South House. Her admirer, Mark Twain, had introduced her to Standard Oil magnate Henry Huttleston Rogers, who, with his wife Abbie, paid for her education. In 1904, at the age of 24, Keller graduated from Radcliffe as a member of Phi Beta Kappa, becoming the first deafblind person to earn a Bachelor of Arts degree. She maintained a correspondence with the Austrian pedagogue and philosopher Wilhelm Jerusalem, who was one of the first to discover her literary talent.\nDetermined to communicate with others as conventionally as possible, Keller learned to speak and spent much of her life giving speeches and lectures on aspects of her life. She learned to \"hear\" people's speech using the Tadoma method, which means using her fingers to feel the lips and throat of the speaker. She became proficient at using braille, and also used fingerspelling to communicate. Shortly before World War I, with the assistance of the Zoellner Quartet, she determined that by placing her fingertips on a resonant tabletop she could experience music played close by.\nCompanions.\nAnne Sullivan stayed as a companion to Keller long after she taught her. Sullivan married John Macy in 1905, and her health started failing around 1914. Polly Thomson (February 20, 1885 \u2013 March 21, 1960) was hired to keep house. She was a young woman from Scotland who had no experience with deaf or blind people. She progressed to working as a secretary as well, and eventually became a constant companion to Keller.\nKeller moved to Forest Hills, Queens, together with Sullivan and Macy, and used the house as a base for her efforts on behalf of the American Foundation for the Blind. While in her 30s, Keller had a love affair and became secretly engaged; she also defied her teacher and family by attempting an elopement with the man she loved, Peter Fagan, who was known as \"the fingerspelling socialist\", and was a young \"Boston Herald\" reporter sent to Keller's home to act as her private secretary when Sullivan fell ill. At the time, her father had died and Sullivan was recovering in Lake Placid and Puerto Rico. Keller had moved with her mother to Montgomery, Alabama.\nSullivan died in 1936, with Keller holding her hand, after falling into a coma as a result of coronary thrombosis. Keller and Thomson moved to Connecticut. They traveled worldwide and raised funds for the blind. Thomson had a stroke in 1957 from which she never fully recovered and died in 1960. Winnie Corbally, a nurse originally hired to care for Thomson in 1957, stayed on after Thomson's death and was Keller's companion for the rest of her life.\nAkita dogs.\nKeller was very fond of Akita dogs. She visited Akita Prefecture in June 1937 and asked about Hachik\u014d, a loyal dog who searched for his deceased master for about 10 years. She began keeping Akitas as pets and introduced them to America. In 1948 she touched the re-made statue of Hachik\u014d at Shibuya Station. The first Akita given to her was \"Kamikaze-Go\", who was the first Akita to travel overseas from Japan and the first Akita in America. He died of an infection two months after arriving in America and Keller was given \"Kamikaze-Go\"'s brother, \"Kenzan-Go\". Keller nicknamed the dog Go-Go and they were great companions from day one. Go-Go even spent his first night at Keller's home sleeping at the foot of her bed.\nCareer, writing and political activities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe few own the many because they possess the means of livelihood of all\u00a0... The country is governed for the richest, for the corporations, the bankers, the land speculators, and for the exploiters of labor. The majority of mankind are working people. So long as their fair demands\u2014the ownership and control of their livelihoods\u2014are set at naught, we can have neither men's rights nor women's rights. The majority of mankind is ground down by industrial oppression in order that the small remnant may live in ease.\n\u2014Helen Keller, 1911\nOn January 22, 1916, Keller and Sullivan traveled to the small town of Menomonie in western Wisconsin to deliver a lecture at the Mabel Tainter Memorial Building. Details of her talk were provided in the weekly \"Dunn County News\" on January 22, 1916:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nKeller became a world-famous speaker and author. She was an advocate for people with disabilities, amid numerous other causes. She traveled to twenty-five different countries giving motivational speeches about deaf people's conditions. She was a suffragist, pacifist, Christian socialist, birth control supporter, and opponent of Woodrow Wilson. In 1915, she and George A. Kessler founded the Helen Keller International (HKI) organization. This organization is devoted to research in vision, health, and nutrition. In 1916, she sent money to the NAACP, as she was ashamed of the Southern un-Christian treatment of \"colored people\".\nIn 1920, Keller helped to found the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU). She traveled to over 40 countries with Sullivan, making several trips to Japan and becoming a favorite of the Japanese people. Keller met every U.S. president from Grover Cleveland to Lyndon B. Johnson and was friends with many famous figures, including Alexander Graham Bell, Charlie Chaplin, and Mark Twain. Keller and Twain were both considered political radicals allied with leftist politics.\nKeller, who believed that the poor were \"ground down by industrial oppression\", wanted children born into poor families to have the same opportunities to succeed that she had enjoyed. She wrote, \"I owed my success partly to the advantages of my birth and environment. I have learned that the power to rise is not within the reach of everyone.\"\nIn 1909, Keller became a member of the Socialist Party of America (SPA); she actively campaigned and wrote in support of the working class from 1909 to 1921. Many of her speeches and writings were about women's right to vote and the effects of war; in addition, she supported causes that opposed military intervention. She had speech therapy to have her voice understood better by the public. When the Rockefeller-owned press refused to print her articles, she protested until her work was finally published.\nKeller supported the SPA candidate Eugene V. Debs in each of his campaigns for the presidency. Before reading \"Progress and Poverty\" by Henry George, she was already a socialist who believed that Georgism was a good step in the right direction. She later wrote of finding \"in Henry George's philosophy a rare beauty and power of inspiration, and a splendid faith in the essential nobility of human nature\". Keller stated that newspaper columnists who had praised her courage and intelligence before she expressed her socialist views now called attention to her disabilities. The editor of the \"Brooklyn Eagle\" wrote that her \"mistakes sprung out of the manifest limitations of her development\". Keller responded to that editor, referring to having met him before he knew of her political views:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At that time the compliments he paid me were so generous that I blush to remember them. But now that I have come out for socialism he reminds me and the public that I am blind and deaf and especially liable to error. I must have shrunk in intelligence during the years since I met him.\u00a0... Oh, ridiculous \"Brooklyn Eagle\"! Socially blind and deaf, it defends an intolerable system, a system that is the cause of much of the physical blindness and deafness which we are trying to prevent.\nIn 1912, Keller joined the Industrial Workers of the World (the IWW, known as the Wobblies), saying that parliamentary socialism was \"sinking in the political bog\". She wrote for the IWW between 1916 and 1918. In \"Why I Became an IWW\", Keller explained that her motivation for activism came in part from her concern about blindness and other disabilities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe last sentence refers to prostitution and syphilis, the former a \"life of shame\" that women used to support themselves, which contributed to their contracting syphilis. Untreated, it was a leading cause of blindness. In the same interview, Keller also cited the 1912 strike of textile workers in Lawrence, Massachusetts, for instigating her support of socialism. As a result of her advocacy, she was placed on the FBI's watchlist; the FBI wrote on July 1, 1953, that although they have not \"conducted an investigation with regard to Helen Adams Keller\", their files of Keller \"reflect the following pertinent information concerning this individual\".\nKeller supported eugenics, which had become popular with both new understandings and misapprehensions of principles of biological inheritance. In 1915, she wrote in favor of refusing life-saving medical procedures to infants with severe mental impairments or physical deformities, saying that their lives were not worthwhile and they would likely become criminals. Keller also expressed concerns about human overpopulation. From 1946 to 1957, Keller visited 35 countries. In 1948, she went to New Zealand and visited deaf schools in Christchurch and Auckland. She met Deaf Society of Canterbury Life Member Patty Still in Christchurch.\nWorks.\nKeller wrote a total of 12 published books and several articles. One of her earliest pieces of writing, at age 11, was \"The Frost King\" (1891). There were allegations that this story had been plagiarized from \"The Frost Fairies\" by Margaret Canby. An investigation into the matter revealed that Keller may have experienced a case of cryptomnesia, which was that she had Canby's story read to her but forgot about it, while the memory remained in her subconscious.\nAt age 22, with help from Sullivan and Sullivan's husband John Macy, Keller published her autobiography, \"The Story of My Life\" (1903). It recounts the story of her life up to age 21 and was written during her time in college. In an article Keller wrote in 1907, she brought to public attention the fact that many cases of childhood blindness could be prevented by washing the eyes of every newborn baby with a disinfectant solution. At the time, only a fraction of doctors and midwives were doing this. Thanks to Keller's advocacy, this commonsense public health measure was swiftly and widely adopted.\nKeller wrote \"The World I Live In\" in 1908, giving readers an insight into how she felt about the world. \"Out of the Dark\", a series of essays on socialism, was published in 1913. When Keller was young, Anne Sullivan introduced her to Phillips Brooks, who introduced her to Christianity, Keller famously saying: \"I always knew He was there, but I didn't know His name!\"\nHer spiritual autobiography, \"My Religion\", was published in 1927 and then in 1994 extensively revised by Ray Silverman, and re-issued under the title \"Light in My Darkness\". It advocates the teachings of Emanuel Swedenborg, the Christian theologian and mystic who gave a spiritual interpretation of the teachings of the Bible and who claimed that the Second Coming of Jesus Christ had already taken place. Keller described the core of her belief in these words:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But in Swedenborg's teaching it [Divine Providence] is shown to be the government of God's Love and Wisdom and the creation of uses. Since His Life cannot be less in one being than another, or His Love manifested less fully in one thing than another, His Providence must needs be universal\u00a0... He has provided religion of some kind everywhere, and it does not matter to what race or creed anyone belongs if he is faithful to his ideals of right living.\nArchival material.\nThe Helen Keller Archives in New York are owned by the American Foundation for the Blind. Archival material of Keller stored in New York was lost when the Twin Towers were destroyed in the September 11 attacks.\nLater life and death.\nKeller had a series of strokes in 1961 and spent the last years of her life at her home. On September 14, 1964, President Lyndon B. Johnson awarded her the Presidential Medal of Freedom, one of the United States' two highest civilian honors. In 1965, she was elected to the National Women's Hall of Fame at the New York World's Fair. Keller devoted much of her later life to raising funds for the American Foundation for the Blind. She died in her sleep on June 1, 1968, at her home, Arcan Ridge, located in Easton, Connecticut, at the age of 87. A service was held at the Washington National Cathedral in Washington, D.C., and her body was cremated in Bridgeport, Connecticut. Her ashes were buried at the Washington National Cathedral next to her constant companions, Anne Sullivan and Polly Thomson.\nPortrayals.\nKeller's life has been interpreted many times. She and her companion Anne Sullivan appeared in a silent film, \"Deliverance\" (1919), which told her story in a melodramatic, allegorical style. She was also the subject of the Academy Award-winning 1954 documentary \"Helen Keller in Her Story\", narrated by her friend and noted theatrical actress Katharine Cornell; in 2023, the film was added to the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress for being deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". She was also profiled in \"The Story of Helen Keller\", part of the Famous Americans series produced by Hearst Entertainment. In the 1950s, when she was considered by many worldwide the greatest woman alive, Hearst reporter Adela Rogers St. Johns told friends that she did not plan to include Keller in the book she was writing about the most famous women of the United States.\n\"The Miracle Worker\" is a literature cycle of dramatic works ultimately derived from her autobiography, \"The Story of My Life\". The various dramas each describe the relationship between Keller and Sullivan, depicting how the teacher led her from a state of almost feral wildness into education, activism, and intellectual celebrity. The common title of the cycle echoes Mark Twain's description of Sullivan as a \"miracle worker\". Its first realization, starring Patty McCormack as Keller and Teresa Wright as Sullivan, was the 1957 \"Playhouse 90\" teleplay of that title by William Gibson. When Keller heard about it, she was enthusiastic, saying: \"Never did I dream a drama could be devised out of the story of my life.\" Within the cultural context of the early civil rights movement, Gibson adapted it for a Broadway production in 1959, which was praised by critics as a contemporary classic, and an Oscar-winning feature film in 1962, starring Anne Bancroft and Patty Duke. It was remade for television in 1979, and then again in 2000.\nAn anime movie called \"The Story of Helen Keller: Angel of Love and Light\" was made in 1981. In 1984, Keller's life story was made into a TV movie called \"The Miracle Continues\". This film, a semi-sequel to \"The Miracle Worker\", recounts her college years and her early adult life. None of the early movies hint at the social activism that would become the hallmark of Keller's later life, although a Disney version produced in 2000 states in the credits that she became an activist for social equality. The Bollywood movie \"Black\" (2005) was largely based on Keller's story from her childhood to her graduation.\nA documentary called \"Shining Soul: Helen Keller's Spiritual Life and Legacy\" was produced by the Swedenborg Foundation in 2005. The film focuses on the role played by Emanuel Swedenborg's spiritual theology in her life and how it inspired Keller's triumph over her triple disabilities of blindness, deafness, and a severe speech impediment. On March 6, 2008, the New England Historic Genealogical Society announced that a staff member had discovered a rare 1888 photograph showing Helen and Anne, which, although previously published, had escaped widespread attention. Depicting Helen holding one of her many dolls, it is believed to be the earliest surviving photograph of Anne Sullivan Macy. Video footage showing Keller speaking also exists.\nA biography of Keller was written by the German Jewish author H. J. Kaeser. \nA painting titled \"The Advocate: Tribute to Helen Keller\" was created by three artists from Kerala, India, as a tribute to Keller. The painting, which depicts the major events of Keller's life and is one of the biggest paintings done based on her life, was created in association with a non-profit organization ArtD'Hope Foundation, artists groups Palette People, and XakBoX Design &amp; Art Studio. This painting was created for a fundraising event to help blind students in India, and was inaugurated by M. G. Rajamanickam, IAS (District Collector Ernakulam) on Helen Keller day (June 27, 2016). \nIn 2020, the documentary essay \"Her Socialist Smile\" by John Gianvito evolves around Keller's first public talk in 1913 before a general audience, when she started speaking out on behalf of progressive causes.\nPosthumous honors.\nIn 1999, Keller was listed fifth (at 30 percent) in Gallup's Most Widely Admired People of the 20th century. That same year, Keller was also named one of \"Time\" magazine's 100 Most Important People of the 20th Century. In 2003, Alabama honored its native daughter on its state quarter. The Alabama state quarter is the only circulating U.S. coin to feature braille. The Helen Keller Hospital in Sheffield, Alabama, is dedicated to her. Streets are named after Keller in Zurich, Switzerland; in Alabama and New York in the United States; in Getafe, Spain; in Vienna, Austria; in Lod, Israel; in Lisbon, Portugal; in Caen, France; and in S\u00e3o Paulo, Brazil. A preschool for the deaf and hard of hearing in Mysore, India, was originally named after Keller by its founder, K. K. Srinivasan. In 1973, Keller was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame.\nA stamp was issued in 1980 (pictured) by the United States Postal Service, depicting Keller and Sullivan, to mark the centennial of Keller's birth. That year, her birth was also recognized by a presidential proclamation from U.S. President Jimmy Carter. Pennsylvania annually commemorates her June 27 birthday as Helen Keller Day. On October 7, 2009, the State of Alabama donated a bronze statue of Keller to the National Statuary Hall Collection, as a replacement for its 1908 statue of education reformer Jabez Lamar Monroe Curry. Keller was posthumously inducted into the Alabama Women's Hall of Fame in 1971. She was one of twelve inaugural inductees to the Alabama Writers Hall of Fame on June 8, 2015.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14256", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14256", "title": "History of Poland -- World War II 1939-1945", "text": ""}
{"id": "14257", "revid": "50452705", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14257", "title": "Haddocks' Eyes", "text": "Nickname of the name of a song\n\"Haddocks' Eyes\" is the nickname of the name of a song sung by The White Knight from Lewis Carroll's 1871 novel \"Through the Looking-Glass\", .\n\"Haddocks' Eyes\" is an example used to elaborate on the symbolic status of the concept of \"name\": a name as identification marker may be assigned to anything, including another name, thus introducing different levels of symbolization. It has been discussed in several works on logic and philosophy.\nHaddocks' Eyes.\nThe White Knight explains to Alice a confusing nomenclature for the song.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTo summarize:\nThe complicated terminology distinguishing between 'the song, what the song is called, the name of the song, and what the name of the song is called' both uses and mentions the use\u2013mention distinction.\nThe song.\nThe White Knight sings the song to a tune he claims as his own invention, but which Alice recognises as \"I give thee all, I can no more\". By the time Alice heard it, she was already tired of poetry.\nThe song parodies the plot, but not the style or metre, of \"Resolution and Independence\" by William Wordsworth.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUpon the Lonely Moor.\nLike \"Jabberwocky\", another poem published in \"Through the Looking Glass\", \"Haddocks' Eyes\" appears to have been revised over the course of many years. In 1856, Carroll published the following poem anonymously under the name \"Upon the Lonely Moor\". It bears an obvious resemblance to \"Haddocks' Eyes\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14258", "revid": "191757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14258", "title": "Hannukah", "text": ""}
{"id": "14259", "revid": "1313667366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14259", "title": "Chanukah", "text": ""}
{"id": "14260", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14260", "title": "Hoosier", "text": "Official word describing a resident of the U.S. state of Indiana\nHoosier is the official demonym for the people of the U.S. state of Indiana. The origin of the term remains a matter of debate; however, \"Hoosier\" was in general use by the 1840s, having been popularized by Richmond resident John Finley's 1833 poem \"The Hoosier's Nest\". Indiana adopted the nickname \"The Hoosier State\" more than 150 years ago.\n\"Hoosier\" is used in the names of numerous Indiana-based businesses and organizations. \"Hoosiers\" is also the name of the Indiana University athletic teams. As there is no accepted embodiment of a Hoosier, the IU schools are represented through their letters and colors alone. The term is universally accepted by residents of Indiana and, as of 2017, is also the official demonym used by the U.S. Government Publishing Office (GPO), making it the only GPO-recommended demonym of any US state that is not directly formed from the state's name. Before 2017, the GPO-recommended demonym for the state was \"Indianian\".\nOrigin.\nIn addition to \"The Hoosier's Nest\", the term also appeared in the \"Indianapolis Journal\"'s \"Carrier's Address\" on January 1, 1833. There are many suggestions for the derivation of the word but none is universally accepted. In 1833, the Pittsburgh \"Statesman\" said the term had been in use for \"some time past\" and suggested it originated from census workers calling \"Who's here?\". Also in 1833, former Indiana Governor James B. Ray began publishing a newspaper titled \"The Hoosier\".\nScholarship.\nIn 1900, Meredith Nicholson wrote \"The Hoosiers\", an early attempt to study the etymology of the word as applied to Indiana residents. Jacob Piatt Dunn, longtime secretary of the Indiana Historical Society, published \"The Word Hoosier\", a similar attempt, in 1907. Both chronicled some of the popular and satirical etymologies circulating at the time and focused much of their attention on the use of the word in the Upland South to refer to woodsmen, yokels, and rough people. Dunn traced the word back to the Cumbrian , meaning anything unusually large, derived from the Old English \"hoo\" (as at Sutton Hoo), meaning \"high\" and \"hill\". The importance of immigrants from northern England and southern Scotland was reflected in numerous placenames including the Cumberland Mountains, the Cumberland River, and the Cumberland Gap. Nicholson defended the people of Indiana against such an association, while Dunn concluded that the early settlers had adopted the nickname self-mockingly and that it had lost its negative associations by the time of Finley's poem.\nJohnathan Clark Smith subsequently showed that Nicholson and Dunn's earliest sources within Indiana were mistaken. A letter by James Curtis cited by Dunn and others as the earliest known use of the term was actually written in 1846, not 1826. Similarly, the use of the term in an 1859 newspaper item quoting an 1827 diary entry by Sandford Cox was more likely an editorial comment and not from the original diary. Smith's earliest sources led him to argue that the word originated as a term along the Ohio River for flatboatmen from Indiana and did not acquire its pejorative meanings until 1836, \"after\" Finley's poem.\nWilliam Piersen, a history professor at Fisk University, argued for a connection to the Methodist minister Rev. Harry Hosier (c.\u20091750\u2013May 1806), who evangelized the American frontier at the beginning of the 19th century as part of the Second Great Awakening. \"Black Harry\" had been born a slave in North Carolina and sold north to Baltimore, Maryland, before gaining his freedom and beginning his ministry around the end of the American Revolution. He was a close associate and personal friend of Bishop Francis Asbury, the \"Father of the American Methodist Church\". Benjamin Rush said of him that \"making allowances for his illiteracy, he was the greatest orator in America\". His sermons called on Methodists to reject slavery and to champion the common working man. Piersen proposed that Methodist communities inspired by his example took or were given a variant spelling of his name (possibly influenced by the \"yokel\" slang) during the decades after his ministry.\nAccording to Washington County newspaper reports of the time, Abraham Stover was Colonel of the Indiana Militia. He was a colorful figure in early Washington County history. Along with his son-in-law, John B. Brough, he was considered one of the two strongest men in Washington County. He was always being challenged to prove his might, and seems to have won several fights over men half his age. After whipping six or eight men in a fist fight in Louisville, Kentucky, he cracked his fists and said, \"Ain't I a husher\", which was changed in the news to \"Hoosier\", and thus originated the name of Hoosier in connection with Indiana men.\nJorge Santander Serrano, a PhD student from Indiana University, has also suggested that \"Hoosier\" might come from the French words for 'redness', , or 'red-faced', . According to this hypothesis, the early pejorative use of the word \"Hoosier\" may have a link to the color red (\"rouge\" in French) which is associated with indigenous peoples, pejoratively called \"red men\" or \"red-skins\", and also with poor white people by calling them \"red-necks\".\nFolk etymologies.\n\"Who'sh 'ere?\".\nHumorous folk etymologies for the term \"hoosier\" have a long history, as recounted by Dunn in \"The Word Hoosier\".\nOne account traces the word to the necessary caution of approaching houses on the frontier. In order to avoid being shot, a traveler would call out from afar to let themselves be known. The inhabitants of the cabin would then reply \"Who's here?\" which \u2013 in the Appalachian English of the early settlers \u2013 slurred into \"Who'sh 'ere?\" and thence into \"Hoosier?\" A variant of this account had the Indiana pioneers calling out \"Who'sh 'ere?\" as a general greeting and warning when hearing someone in the bushes and tall grass, to avoid shooting a relative or friend in error.\nThe poet James Whitcomb Riley facetiously suggested that the fierce brawling that took place in Indiana involved enough biting that the expression \"Whose ear?\" became notable. This arose from or inspired the story of two 19th-century French immigrants brawling in a tavern in the foothills of southern Indiana. One was cut and a third Frenchman walked in to see an ear on the dirt floor of the tavern, prompting him to slur out \"Whosh ear?\"\nMr. Hoosier's men.\nTwo related stories trace the origin of the term to gangs of workers from Indiana under the direction of a Mr. Hoosier.\nThe account related by Dunn is that a Louisville contractor named Samuel Hoosier preferred to hire workers from communities on the Indiana side of the Ohio River like New Albany rather than Kentuckians. During the excavation of the first canal around the Falls of the Ohio from 1826 to 1833, his employees became known as \"Hoosier's men\" and then simply \"Hoosiers\". The usage spread from these hard-working laborers to all of the Indiana boatmen in the area and then spread north with the settlement of the state. The story was told to Dunn in 1901 by a man who had heard it from a Hoosier relative while traveling in southern Tennessee. Dunn could not find any family of the given name in any directory in the region or anyone else in southern Tennessee who had heard the story and accounted himself dubious. This version was subsequently retold by Gov.\u2009Evan Bayh and Sen.\u2009Vance Hartke, who introduced the story into the \"Congressional Record\" in 1975, and matches the timing and location of Smith's subsequent research. However, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has been unable to find any record of a Hoosier or Hosier in surviving canal company records.\nOther uses.\nThe word \"hoosier\" has been used in Greater St. Louis as a pejorative for an unintelligent or uncultured person. The word is also encountered in sea shanties. In the book \"Shanties from the Seven Seas\" by Stan Hugill, in reference to its former use to denote cotton-stowers, who would move bales of cotton to and from the holds of ships and force them in tightly by means of jackscrews.\nA Hoosier cabinet, often shortened to \"hoosier\", is a type of free-standing kitchen cabinet popular in the early decades of the twentieth century. Almost all of these cabinets were produced by companies located in Indiana and the name derives from the largest of them, the Hoosier Manufacturing Co. of New Castle, Indiana. Other Indiana businesses include Hoosier Racing Tire and the Hoosier Bat Company, manufacturer of wooden baseball bats.\nThe RCA Dome, former home of the Indianapolis Colts, was known as the \"Hoosier Dome\" before RCA purchased the naming rights in 1994. The RCA Dome was replaced by Lucas Oil Stadium in 2008.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14261", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14261", "title": "Hilberts second problem", "text": ""}
{"id": "14262", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14262", "title": "History of M.O.S. Technologies", "text": ""}
{"id": "14263", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14263", "title": "Horner's method", "text": "Algorithm for polynomial evaluation\nIn mathematics and computer science, Horner's method (or Horner's scheme) is an algorithm for polynomial evaluation. Although named after William George Horner, this method is much older, as it has been attributed to Joseph-Louis Lagrange by Horner himself, and can be traced back many hundreds of years to Chinese and Persian mathematicians. After the introduction of computers, this algorithm became fundamental for computing efficiently with polynomials.\nThe algorithm is based on Horner's rule, in which a polynomial is written in \"nested form\":\nformula_1\nThis allows the evaluation of a polynomial of degree n with only formula_2 multiplications and formula_2 additions. This is optimal, since there are polynomials of degree n that cannot be evaluated with fewer arithmetic operations.\nAlternatively, Horner's method and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Horner\u2013Ruffini method also refers to a method for approximating the roots of polynomials, described by Horner in 1819. It is a variant of the Newton\u2013Raphson method made more efficient for hand calculation by application of Horner's rule. It was widely used until computers came into general use around 1970.\nPolynomial evaluation and long division.\nGiven the polynomial\nformula_4\nwhere formula_5 are constant coefficients, the problem is to evaluate the polynomial at a specific value formula_6 of formula_7\nFor this, a new sequence of constants is defined recursively as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThen formula_8 is the value of formula_9.\nTo see why this works, the polynomial can be written in the form\nformula_10\nThus, by iteratively substituting the formula_11 into the expression,\nformula_12\nSimilarly, it can be shown that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSuggesting a convenient procedure for determining the result of the polynomial division\nformula_13\nwith formula_8 (which is equal to formula_9) being the division's remainder. If formula_6 is a root of formula_17, then formula_18 (meaning the remainder is formula_19) and formula_20 a factor of formula_17. \nExamples.\nEvaluate formula_22 for formula_23.\nWe use synthetic division as follows:\n \"x\"0\u2502 \"x\"3 \"x\"2 \"x\"1 \"x\"0\n 3 \u2502 2 \u22126 2 \u22121\n \u2502 6 0 6\n 2 0 2 5\nThe entries in the third row are the sum of those in the first two. Each entry in the second row is the product of the x-value ( in this example) with the third-row entry immediately to the left. The entries in the first row are the coefficients of the polynomial to be evaluated. Then the remainder of formula_24 on division by formula_25 is .\nBut by the polynomial remainder theorem, we know that the remainder is formula_26. Thus, formula_27.\nIn this example, if formula_28 we can see that formula_29, the entries in the third row. So, synthetic division (which was actually invented and published by Ruffini 10 years before Horner's publication) is easier to use; it can be shown to be equivalent to Horner's method.\nAs a consequence of the polynomial remainder theorem, the entries in the third row are the coefficients of the second-degree polynomial, the quotient of formula_24 on division by formula_31. \nThe remainder is . This makes Horner's method useful for polynomial long division.\nDivide formula_32 by formula_33:\n 2 \u2502 1 \u22126 11 \u22126\n \u2502 2 \u22128 6\n 1 \u22124 3 0\nThe quotient is formula_34.\nLet formula_35 and formula_36. Divide formula_37 by formula_38 using Horner's method.\n 0.5 \u2502 4 \u22126 0 3 \u22125\n \u2502 2 \u22122 \u22121 1\n 2 \u22122 \u22121 1 \u22124\nThe third row is the sum of the first two rows, divided by . Each entry in the second row is the product of with the third-row entry to the left. The answer is\nformula_39\nEfficiency.\nEvaluation using the monomial form of a degree formula_2 polynomial requires at most formula_2 additions and formula_42 multiplications, if powers are calculated by repeated multiplication and each monomial is evaluated individually. The cost can be reduced to formula_2 additions and formula_44 multiplications by evaluating the powers of formula_45 by iteration. \nIf numerical data are represented in terms of digits (or bits), then the naive algorithm also entails storing approximately formula_46 times the number of bits of formula_45: the evaluated polynomial has approximate magnitude formula_48, and one must also store formula_48 itself. By contrast, Horner's method requires only formula_2 additions and formula_2 multiplications, and its storage requirements are only formula_2 times the number of bits of formula_45. Alternatively, Horner's method can be computed with formula_2 fused multiply\u2013adds. Horner's method can also be extended to evaluate the first formula_55 derivatives of the polynomial with formula_56 additions and multiplications.\nHorner's method is optimal, in the sense that any algorithm to evaluate an arbitrary polynomial must use at least as many operations. Alexander Ostrowski proved in 1954 that the number of additions required is minimal. Victor Pan proved in 1966 that the number of multiplications is minimal. However, when formula_45 is a matrix, Horner's method is not optimal.\nThis assumes that the polynomial is evaluated in monomial form and no preconditioning of the representation is allowed, which makes sense if the polynomial is evaluated only once. However, if preconditioning is allowed and the polynomial is to be evaluated many times, then faster algorithms are possible. They involve a transformation of the representation of the polynomial. In general, a degree-formula_2 polynomial can be evaluated using only \u230a\"n\"/2\u230b+2 multiplications and formula_2 additions.\nParallel evaluation.\nA disadvantage of Horner's rule is that all of the operations are sequentially dependent, so it is not possible to take advantage of instruction level parallelism on modern computers. In most applications where the efficiency of polynomial evaluation matters, many low-order polynomials are evaluated simultaneously (for each pixel or polygon in computer graphics, or for each grid square in a numerical simulation), so it is not necessary to find parallelism within a single polynomial evaluation.\nIf, however, one is evaluating a single polynomial of very high order, it may be useful to break it up as follows:\nformula_60\nMore generally, the summation can be broken into \"k\" parts:\nformula_61\nwhere the inner summations may be evaluated using separate parallel instances of Horner's method. This requires slightly more operations than the basic Horner's method, but allows \"k\"-way SIMD execution of most of them. Modern compilers generally evaluate polynomials this way when advantageous, although for floating-point calculations this requires enabling (unsafe) reassociative math. Another use of breaking a polynomial down this way is to calculate steps of the inner summations in an alternating fashion to take advantage of instruction-level parallelism.\nApplication to floating-point multiplication and division.\nHorner's method is a fast, code-efficient method for multiplication and division of binary numbers on a microcontroller with no hardware multiplier. One of the binary numbers to be multiplied is represented as a trivial polynomial, where (using the above notation) formula_62, and formula_63. Then, \"x\" (or \"x\" to some power) is repeatedly factored out. In this binary numeral system (base 2), formula_63, so powers of 2 are repeatedly factored out.\nExample.\nFor example, to find the product of two numbers (0.15625) and \"m\":\nformula_65\nMethod.\nTo find the product of two binary numbers \"d\" and \"m\":\nDerivation.\nIn general, for a binary number with bit values (formula_66) the product is\nformula_67\nAt this stage in the algorithm, it is required that terms with zero-valued coefficients are dropped, so that only binary coefficients equal to one are counted, thus the problem of multiplication or division by zero is not an issue, despite this implication in the factored equation:\nformula_68\nThe denominators all equal one (or the term is absent), so this reduces to\nformula_69\nor equivalently (as consistent with the \"method\" described above)\nformula_70\nIn binary (base-2) math, multiplication by a power of 2 is merely a register shift operation. Thus, multiplying by 2 is calculated in base-2 by an arithmetic shift. The factor (2\u22121) is a right arithmetic shift, a (0) results in no operation (since 20 = 1 is the multiplicative identity element), and a (21) results in a left arithmetic shift.\nThe multiplication product can now be quickly calculated using only arithmetic shift operations, addition and subtraction.\nThe method is particularly fast on processors supporting a single-instruction shift-and-addition-accumulate. Compared to a C floating-point library, Horner's method sacrifices some accuracy, however it is nominally 13 times faster (16 times faster when the \"canonical signed digit\" (CSD) form is used) and uses only 20% of the code space.\nOther applications.\nHorner's method can be used to convert between different positional numeral systems \u2013 in which case \"x\" is the base of the number system, and the \"a\"\"i\" coefficients are the digits of the base-\"x\" representation of a given number \u2013 and can also be used if \"x\" is a matrix, in which case the gain in computational efficiency is even greater. However, for such cases faster methods are known.\nPolynomial root finding.\nUsing the long division algorithm in combination with Newton's method, it is possible to approximate the real roots of a polynomial. The algorithm works as follows. Given a polynomial formula_71 of degree formula_2 with zeros formula_73 make some initial guess formula_74 such that formula_75. Now iterate the following two steps:\nThese two steps are repeated until all real zeros are found for the polynomial. If the approximated zeros are not precise enough, the obtained values can be used as initial guesses for Newton's method but using the full polynomial rather than the reduced polynomials.\nExample.\nConsider the polynomial\nformula_83\nwhich can be expanded to\nformula_84\nFrom the above we know that the largest root of this polynomial is 7 so we are able to make an initial guess of 8. Using Newton's method the first zero of 7 is found as shown in black in the figure to the right. Next formula_17 is divided by formula_86 to obtain\nformula_87\nwhich is drawn in red in the figure to the right. Newton's method is used to find the largest zero of this polynomial with an initial guess of 7. The largest zero of this polynomial which corresponds to the second largest zero of the original polynomial is found at 3 and is circled in red. The degree 5 polynomial is now divided by formula_88 to obtain\nformula_89\nwhich is shown in yellow. The zero for this polynomial is found at 2 again using Newton's method and is circled in yellow. Horner's method is now used to obtain\nformula_90\nwhich is shown in green and found to have a zero at\u00a0\u22123. This polynomial is further reduced to\nformula_91\nwhich is shown in blue and yields a zero of\u00a0\u22125. The final root of the original polynomial may be found by either using the final zero as an initial guess for Newton's method, or by reducing formula_92 and solving the linear equation. As can be seen, the expected roots of \u22128, \u22125, \u22123, 2, 3, and 7 were found.\nDivided difference of a polynomial.\nHorner's method can be modified to compute the divided difference formula_93 Given the polynomial (as before)\nformula_4\nproceed as follows\nformula_95\nAt completion, we have\nformula_96\nThis computation of the divided difference is subject to less round-off error than evaluating formula_17 and formula_98 separately, particularly when formula_99.\nDerivative of a polynomial.\nSubstituting formula_100 in this method gives formula_101, the derivative of formula_17. Evaluating a polynomial and its derivative at a point is useful for root-finding via Newton's method.\nHistory.\nHorner's paper, titled \"A new method of solving numerical equations of all orders, by continuous approximation\", was http:// before the Royal Society of London, at its meeting on July 1, 1819, with a sequel in 1823. Horner's paper in Part II of \"Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London\" for 1819 was warmly and expansively welcomed by a http:// in the issue of \"The Monthly Review: or, Literary Journal\" for April, 1820; in comparison, a technical paper by Charles Babbage is dismissed curtly in this review. The sequence of reviews in \"The Monthly Review\" for September, 1821, concludes that Holdred was the first person to discover a direct and general practical solution of numerical equations. Fuller showed that the method in Horner's 1819 paper differs from what afterwards became known as \"Horner's method\" and that in consequence the priority for this method should go to Holdred (1820).\nUnlike his English contemporaries, Horner drew on the Continental literature, notably the work of Arbogast. Horner is also known to have made a close reading of John Bonneycastle's book on algebra, though he neglected the work of Paolo Ruffini.\nAlthough Horner is credited with making the method accessible and practical, it was known long before Horner. In reverse chronological order, Horner's method was already known to:\nQin Jiushao, in his \"Shu Shu Jiu Zhang\" (\"Mathematical Treatise in Nine Sections\"; 1247), presents a portfolio of methods of Horner-type for solving polynomial equations, which was based on earlier works of the 11th century Song dynasty mathematician Jia Xian; for example, one method is specifically suited to bi-quintics, of which Qin gives an instance, in keeping with the then Chinese custom of case studies. Yoshio Mikami in \"Development of Mathematics in China and Japan\" (Leipzig 1913) wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"...\u00a0who can deny the fact of Horner's illustrious process being used in China at least nearly six long centuries earlier than in Europe\u00a0... We of course don't intend in any way to ascribe Horner's invention to a Chinese origin, but the lapse of time sufficiently makes it not altogether impossible that the Europeans could have known of the Chinese method in a direct or indirect way.\"\nUlrich Libbrecht concluded: \"It is obvious that this procedure is a Chinese invention\u00a0... the method was not known in India\". He said, Fibonacci probably learned of it from Arabs, who perhaps borrowed from the Chinese. The extraction of square and cube roots along similar lines is already discussed by Liu Hui in connection with Problems IV.16 and 22 in \"Jiu Zhang Suan Shu\", while Wang Xiaotong in the 7th century supposes his readers can solve cubics by an approximation method described in his book Jigu Suanjing.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
