{"id": "18964", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18964", "title": "Madagascar", "text": "African island country in the Indian Ocean\nMadagascar, officially the Republic of Madagascar, is an island country in the Indian Ocean that includes the island of Madagascar and numerous smaller peripheral islands. Lying off the southeastern coast of Africa, it is the world's fourth-largest island, the second-largest island country, and the 46th-largest country overall. Its capital and largest city is Antananarivo.\nFollowing the prehistoric breakup of the supercontinent Gondwana, Madagascar split from Africa during the Early Jurassic period, around 180 million years ago, and separated from the Indian subcontinent approximately 90\u00a0million years ago. This isolation allowed native plants and animals to evolve in relative seclusion; as a result, Madagascar is a biodiversity hotspot and one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries, with over 90% of its wildlife being endemic. The island has a subtropical to tropical maritime climate. Madagascar was first permanently settled during or before the mid-first millennium CE (roughly 500 to 700) by Austronesian peoples, presumably arriving on outrigger canoes from present-day Indonesia. These were joined around the ninth century by Bantu groups crossing the Mozambique Channel from East Africa. Other groups continued to settle on Madagascar over time, each one making lasting contributions to Malagasy cultural life. Consequently, there are 18 or more classified peoples of Madagascar, the most numerous being the Merina of the central highlands.\nUntil the late 18th century, the island of Madagascar was ruled by a fragmented assortment of shifting sociopolitical alliances. Beginning in the early 19th century, most of it was united and ruled as the Kingdom of Madagascar by a series of Merina nobles. The monarchy was ended in 1897 by the annexation by France, from which Madagascar gained independence in 1960. The country has since undergone four major constitutional periods, termed republics, and has been governed as a constitutional democracy since 1992. Following a political crisis and military coup in 2009, Madagascar underwent a protracted transition towards its fourth and current republic, with constitutional governance being restored in January 2014. In 2025, a series of mass protests resulted in a military coup and the installation of Michael Randrianirina as president of an interim government.\nMadagascar is a member of the United Nations (UN), the African Union (AU), the Southern African Development Community (SADC), and the . Malagasy and French are both official languages of the state. Christianity is the country's predominant religion, with a significant minority still practicing traditional faiths. Madagascar is classified as a least developed country by the UN. Ecotourism and agriculture, paired with greater investments in education, health and private enterprise, are key elements of its development strategy. Despite substantial economic growth since the early 2000s, income disparities have widened, and quality of life remains low for the majority of the population. As of 2021, 68.4% of the population was considered to be multidimensionally poor.\nEtymology.\nIn the Malagasy language, the island of Madagascar is called \"Madagasikara\" () and its people are referred to as \"Malagasy\". The origin of the name is uncertain, and is likely foreign, having been propagated in the Middle Ages by Europeans. If this is the case, it is unknown when the name was adopted by the inhabitants of the island. No single Malagasy-language name predating \"Madagasikara\" appears to have been used by the local population to refer to the island, although some communities had their name for part or all of the lands they inhabited.\nOne hypothesis relates \"Madagascar\" to the word \"Malay\", referring to the Austronesian origin of the Malagasy people in modern-day Indonesia. In a map by Muhammad al-Idrisi dating from the year 1154, the island is named \"Gesira Malai\", or \"Malay island\" in Arabic. The inversion of this name to \"Malai Gesira\", as it was known by the Greeks, is thought to be the precursor of the modern name of the island. The name \"Malay island\" was later rendered in Latin as \"Malichu\", an abbreviated form of \"Malai Insula\", in the medieval Hereford Mappa Mundi as the name of Madagascar.\nAnother hypothesis is that \"Madagascar\" is a corrupted transliteration of Mogadishu, the capital of Somalia and an important medieval Indian Ocean port. This would have resulted from 13th-century Venetian explorer Marco Polo confusing the two locations in his memoirs, in which he mentions the land of \"Madageiscar\" to the south of Socotra. This name would then have been popularized on Renaissance maps by Europeans. One of the first documents written that might explain why Marco Polo called it \"Madagascar\" is in a 1609 book on Madagascar by Jerome Megizer. Jerome Megizer describes an event in which the kings of Mogadishu and Adal traveled to Madagascar with a fleet of around 25,000 men in order to invade the wealthy islands of Taprobane and Sumatra. However, a tempest threw them off course and they landed on the coasts of Madagascar, conquering the island and signing a treaty with its inhabitants. They remained for eight months and erected at different points of the island eight pillars on which they engraved \"Magadoxo\", a name which later, by corruption became Madagascar. Jan Huyghen van Linschoten, a Dutch traveler who copied Portuguese works and maps, confirmed this event by saying \"Madagascar has its name from 'makdishu' (Mogadishu)\" whose \"shayk\" invaded it.\nThe name \"Malagasikara\", or \"Malagascar\", is also historically attested. An English state paper in 1699 records the arrival of 80 to 90 passengers from \"Malagaskar\" to what eventually became New York City. An 1882 edition of the British newspaper \"The Graphic\" referred to \"Malagascar\" as the name of the island, stating that it is etymologically a word of Malay origin, and may be related to the name of Malacca. In 1891, Saleh bin Osman, a Zanzibari traveler, refers to the island as \"Malagaskar\" when recounting his journeys, including as part of the Emin Pasha Relief Expedition. In 1905, Charles Basset wrote in his doctoral thesis that \"Malagasikara\" was the way the island is referred to by its natives, who emphasized that they were \"Malagasy\", and not \"Madagasy\".\nHistory.\nEarly period.\nTraditionally, archaeologists have estimated that the earliest settlers arrived in successive waves in outrigger canoes from South Borneo, possibly throughout the period between 350\u00a0BCE and 550\u00a0CE, while others are cautious about dates earlier than 250 CE. In either case, these dates make Madagascar one of the most recent major landmasses on Earth to be settled by humans, predating the settlement of Iceland and New Zealand. It has been proposed that Ma'anyan people were brought as laborers and slaves by Javan and Sumatran-Malays in their trading fleets to Madagascar. Dates of settlement of the island earlier than the mid-first millennium CE are not strongly supported. However, there is scattered evidence for much earlier human visits and presence.\nUpon arrival, early settlers practiced slash-and-burn agriculture to clear the coastal rainforests for cultivation. The first settlers encountered Madagascar's abundance of megafauna, including 17 species of giant lemurs, the large flightless elephant birds (including possibly the largest bird to ever exist, \"Aepyornis maximus\"), the giant fossa, and several species of Malagasy hippopotamus, which have since become extinct because of hunting and habitat destruction. According to the \"General History of Africa\", these first settlers, the \"tompontany\" (masters of the soil/land), are thought to have been the Kimosy in south-central Madagascar, the Antevinany in the southeast, the Antankoala and Kajemby in the northwest, and the Rasikajy in the northeast. Newer arrivals formed marriage alliances with the \"tompontany\", facilitating their gradual assimilation.900 By 600\u00a0CE, groups of these early settlers had begun clearing the forests of the Central Highlands. According to the \"General History of Africa\", by the 8th century the Vazimba (a 'way of life' rather than ethnic group)71 had absorbed or violently displaced the first settlers, and had come to refer to themselves as \"tompontany\".900 Though Malagasy popular belief regards the Vazimba as the island's first inhabitants.\nArab traders first reached the island between the 7th and 9th centuries, and introduced Islam and the Arabic script (adapted as \"sorabe\" for the Malagasy language). Indian Ocean trade along the northwestern coast of Madagascar came to be controlled by the Antalaotra, Muslim Swahili-speakers who had migrated to the region around the 10th century and intermarried with the locals, forming city-states such as Mahilaka and Irodo.900 A wave of Bantu-speaking migrants from southeastern Africa arrived around the year 1000. Around this time, zebu from South India were first brought, intermingling with sanga found in East Africa. By 1100, all regions of Madagascar were inhabited, although the total population remained small.48 Societies organized at the behest of \"hasina\" (which later evolved to embody kingship) and competed with one another over the island's estuaries and bridgeheads, with oral histories describing bloody clashes and earlier settlers often pushed along the coast or inland. An Arab geographer wrote in 1224 that the island consisted of a great many towns and kingdoms, with kings making war on each other. Assisted by climate change, the peoples gradually transformed the island from dense forest to grassland for cultivation and zebu pastoralism.\nRise of early kingdoms and contact with Europeans.\nThe period from 1500 to 1800 saw Madagascar's populations go from being mobile and unsettled to having organized largely into states.70 On the northern coast, Mahilaka was abandoned and replaced by Vohemar in the 15th century as one of the island's main trading ports, accompanied by Mazalagem Nova in the late-16th century. Portuguese navigators reached Madagascar around 1500, and sacked the port city of Sada (part of the Guingemaro kingdom) in 1506. Over the following centuries the slave trade grew in importance as slaves were traded for firearms.102 In the late-17th century, Madagascar saw an influx of pirates who had been expelled from the Caribbean, some of whom participated in local wars and married local women, though they were routed by the British navy in the 1720s.105864\nThe origin of the Maroserana, the dynasty of the Sakalava empire, is uncertain, with Sakalava traditions holding that they originated from overseas and migrated to southwest Madagascar.164 The proto-Sakalava are thought to have originated from Sadia (located at the mouth of the Manambolo River).857, 869 Historian Solofo Randrianja considers the Maroserana to have lived in south-central Madagascar,94 while Raymond Kent thought that they originated in the southwest and first came to power among the Mahafaly.26 Mahafaly tradition has Olembetsitoto as their first Maroserana sacred ruler in the 16th century, who was protected by an \"ombiasy\" (priest). Prior to 1600, only the north of the island was integrated into Indian Ocean trade; in the mid-to late-16th century, European merchants (\"vazaha\"; \"foreigners\") began using the newly-named St. Augustine Bay in the southwest as a stopping-point and traded with the communities there. The British attempted to found a colony at the Bay in 1645 but were expelled by the Malagasy.\nKent considered the Maroserana to have migrated and met the proto-Sakalava near the Mangoky River, who all traditions agree were skilled warriors.869 Sakalava traditions detail how a kingdom was founded along the Morondava River before 1600, called \"Menabe\" (\"very red\") after the red soil. In the late-16th or early-17th century, Andriamandazoala centralized the Kingdom of Menabe. Andriandahifotsy expanded the state and monopolized coastal trade. After initial hostility, he established relations with European merchants. Around 1685, a succession dispute saw Andriamanetriarivo come to power in Menabe as he expelled his brother Andriamandisoarivo. Andriamandisoarivo took this opportunity to expand north with his followers, and conquered port cities along the coast. He captured Mazalagem Nova and killed the Antalaotra sultan, establishing his commercial capital at Majunga in the early-18th century and founding the Kingdom of Boina. How the Sakalava acquired territory in the south is disputed; Jane Hooper considers another expelled brother to have expanded south and founded Toliara in the Fiherenana Valley as an Andrevola tributary, while Randrianja thought the Maroserana to have come to rule there during their initial migration.100 Kent considered a brother, Andriamandresy, to have migrated east and founded the Antesaka kingdom on the southeast coast in accordance with Antesaka tradition.884 Hooper writes that Andriandahifotsy re-established relations with his brothers as the Sakalava came to control Madagascar's west coast and dominate trade.\nIn the southwest and south, conflict between the Mahafaly and Antandroy kingdoms in the mid-17th century caused the death of two Antandroy kings and saw Mahafaly split in two: Menarandra and Sakatovo, with Menarandra soon splitting further to produce Linta. In the early-18th century, a Menarandra king expanded east to conquer the western Antandroy, though yet another split produced Onilahy. On the east coast, when the Antemoro settled their lands they found Muslim settlers, the Zafiraminia, already there since around 1500. A conflict between the two broke out, and the Zafiraminia had come to rule the Antemoro kingdom by the mid-16th century. In the southeast the French founded Fort Dauphin in 1642. They intervened in local conflicts and raided for cattle, provoking insecurity. The Antanosy attacked the colony, though were defeated by Flacourt's forces. Another attack destroyed the colony and resulted in the killing of French settlers who remained in 1674.\nIn the Central Highlands, Merina traditions hold that they encountered the Vazimba when gradually settling the highlands from the southeast, thought to have been completed by the 15th century.70 After peacefully coexisting for several generations, Alasora king Andriamanelo, son of a Vazimba queen and Merina man, launched a campaign to conquer the Vazimba.142 Of his successors, Ralambo founded the Merina Kingdom, and Andrianjaka completed the expulsion and assimilation of the Vazimba by the early-17th century.876 Traditions attribute the conquest of the Vazimba to the need to acquire more land for rice cultivation, with archaeological research putting the beginning of this expansion in the 14th century. In the mid-17th century a Mahafaly king invaded Bara territory and appointed his relatives, the Zafimanely, as rulers, who gained independence of various kinglets after his death.880 Betsileo kingdoms such as Arindrano and Isandra were likely founded in the mid-17th century, and the Betsileo derive their name from King Besilau who repelled a Sakalava-Menabe invasion in the 1670s. By the 18th century the Betsileo were the island's most proficient cultivators of rice.\nBy 1720, Sakalava-Boina king Toakafo is considered to have been the most powerful ruler in Madagascar, and possibly ruled the entire northern third of the island. In the 18th century, the French established various trading posts along the east coast in order to supply the Mascarenes. On the northeast coast, the Tsikoa tribe coalesced under a single ruler and invaded the \"Antavaratra\" (Northerners) c. 1710, intent on capturing their lucrative ports. Ratsimilaho, a son of an English pirate and Malagasy woman who had been Toakafo's chief minister,106 managed to unite the \"Antavaratra\", repel the Tsikoa, and drive them south. Ratsimilaho founded the Betsimisaraka Confederation, and by the 1730s was one of the most powerful kings in Madagascar, though the state disintegrated soon after his death in 1754. The French attempted to set up trading posts on the northwest coast, resulting in conflict with the Sakalava in the 1770s that ended inconclusively. Merina king Andriamasinavalona expanded the kingdom further, and ruled much of the Central Highlands during his reign, though in the early-18th century he abdicated and divided the state between four of his sons. A fierce civil war ensued characterized by slave-raiding and -trading, and it wasn't until the 1790s that the kingdom was reunited via conquest and diplomacy by Andrianampoinimerina.877204\n19th century and the Kingdom of Madagascar.\nAfter reuniting Imerina, and now seated at the Rova of Antananarivo, Andrianampoinimerina rapidly expanded his rule over neighboring principalities. He used ports' reliance on the supply of slaves from the highlands to gain control over trade on the eastern coast.165 Andrianampoinimerina's ambition to bring the entire island under his control was largely achieved by his son and successor, King Radama I (r.1810\u201328). The 18th century had seen rivalry between the French and the British over the wider Indian Ocean trade, of which Malagasy trade had proved decisive during the Carnatic Wars. Radama expanded east to control Toamasina on the coast,416 and concluded a treaty in 1817 with the British governor of Mauritius to abolish the lucrative slave trade in return for British military and financial assistance, and recognition as the \"King of Madagascar\". Artisan missionary envoys from the London Missionary Society began arriving in 1818 who established schools, transcribed the Malagasy language using the Roman alphabet, and translated the Bible. In response, the Sakalava and French found themselves as natural allies. Radama embarked on successive campaigns to conquer the island, subduing the east coast, dismantling Iboina and expelling its ruler, and achieving Menabe's nominal submission. By 1828 he controlled two-thirds of the island (excepting the Bara, Mahafaly, and Antandroy), though Merina rule was far from secure and widespread resistance continued.\nRadama's successor, Queen Ranavalona I (1828\u201361), responded to increasing political and cultural encroachment on the part of Britain and France by issuing a royal edict prohibiting the practice of Christianity in Madagascar and pressuring most foreigners to leave the territory. The Queen made heavy use of the traditional practice of \"fanompoana\" (forced labor as tax payment) to complete public works projects and develop a standing army of between 20,000 and 30,000 Merina soldiers, whom she deployed to pacify outlying regions of the island and further expand the Kingdom of Merina to encompass most of Madagascar. Residents of Madagascar could accuse one another of various crimes, including theft, Christianity and especially witchcraft, for which the ordeal of \"tangena\" was routinely obligatory. Between 1828 and 1861, the \"tangena\" ordeal caused about 3,000 deaths annually. The combination of regular warfare, disease, difficult forced labor, and harsh measures of justice resulted in a high mortality rate among soldiers and civilians alike during her 33-year reign; the population of Madagascar is estimated to have declined from around 5\u00a0million to 2.5\u00a0million between 1833 and 1839. In 1839, Boina queen Tsiomeko, having fled to the island of Nosy Be, requested French assistance against Merina attacks. In accordance with France's conditions, she signed Nosy Be and part of the mainland to them, which the French then declared as its protectorate.\nAmong those who continued to reside in Imerina were Jean Laborde, an entrepreneur who developed munitions and other industries on behalf of the monarchy, and Joseph-Fran\u00e7ois Lambert, a French adventurer and slave trader, with whom then-Prince Radama II signed a controversial trade agreement termed the Lambert Charter. Succeeding his mother, Radama II attempted to relax the queen's stringent policies but was overthrown two years later by Prime Minister Rainivoninahitriniony and an alliance of \"Andriana\" (noble) and \"Hova\" (commoner) courtiers, who sought to end the absolute power of the monarch.\nFollowing the coup, the courtiers offered Radama's queen, Rasoherina, the opportunity to rule, if she would accept a power-sharing arrangement with the Prime Minister: a new social contract that would be sealed by a political marriage between them. Queen Rasoherina accepted, first marrying Rainivoninahitriniony, then later deposing him and marrying his brother, Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony, who would go on to marry Queen Ranavalona II and Queen Ranavalona III in succession.\nOver the course of Rainilaiarivony's 31-year tenure as prime minister, numerous policies were adopted to modernize and consolidate the power of the central government. Schools were constructed throughout the island and attendance was made mandatory. Army organization was improved and British consultants were employed to train and professionalize soldiers. Polygamy was outlawed and Christianity declared the official religion of the court in 1869, was adopted alongside traditional beliefs among a growing portion of the populace. Legal codes were reformed on the basis of British common law and three European-style courts were established in the capital city. In his joint role as Commander-in-Chief, Rainilaiarivony also successfully ensured the defense of Madagascar against several French colonial incursions. The French devised plans in 1842 and the 1860s to land troops in Madagascar and assist the Sakalava, who continued to resist, in a war against Imerina, however they didn't come to fruition.252\nFrench colonization and the colonial period.\nPrimarily on the basis that the Lambert Charter had not been respected, France invaded Madagascar in 1883 in what became known as the first Franco-Hova War. At the end of the war, Madagascar ceded the northern port town of Antsiranana (Diego Suarez) to France and paid 560,000 francs to Lambert's heirs. In 1890, the British accepted the full formal imposition of a French protectorate on the island, but French authority was not acknowledged by the government of Madagascar. To force capitulation, the French bombarded and occupied the harbor of Toamasina on the east coast, and Mahajanga on the west coast, in December 1894 and January 1895 respectively.\nA French military flying column then marched toward Antananarivo, losing many men to malaria and other diseases. Reinforcements came from Algeria and Sub-Saharan Africa. Upon reaching the city in September 1895, the column bombarded the royal palace with heavy artillery, causing heavy casualties and leading Queen Ranavalona III to surrender. Popular resistance to the French capture of Antananarivo\u2014known as the Menalamba rebellion\u2014broke out in December 1895, and was not suppressed until the end of 1897. France annexed Madagascar in 1896 and declared the island a colony the following year, dissolving the Merina monarchy and sending the royal family into exile on R\u00e9union Island and to Algeria.\nThe conquest was followed by ten years of civil war, due to the Menalamba insurrection. The \"pacification\" carried out by the French administration lasted more than fifteen years, in response to the rural guerrillas scattered throughout the country. The French campaign against Menabe began with the Ambiky massacre in 1897 and ended in 1902. The Antandroy and Mahafaly continued to oppose colonial rule, though yielded in 1904. In total, the repression of this resistance to colonial conquest caused several tens of thousands of Malagasy victims.\nUnder colonial rule, plantations were established for the production of a variety of export crops. Slavery was abolished in 1896 and approximately 500,000 slaves were freed; many remained in their former masters' homes as servants or as sharecroppers; in many parts of the island strong discriminatory views against slave descendants are still held today. Wide paved boulevards and gathering places were constructed in the capital city of Antananarivo and the Rova palace compound was turned into a museum. Additional schools were built, particularly in rural and coastal areas where the schools of the Merina had not reached. Education became mandatory between the ages of 6 and 13 and focused primarily on the French language and practical skills.\nHuge mining and forestry concessions were granted to large companies. Native chiefs loyal to the French administration were also granted part of the land. Forced labor was introduced in favor of the French companies and peasants were encouraged, through taxation, to work for wages (especially in the colonial concessions) to the detriment of small individual farms. However, the colonial period was accompanied by movements fighting for independence: the Menalamba, the Vy Vato Sakelika, the Democratic Movement for Malagasy Renovation (MDRM). In 1927, major demonstrations were organized in Antananarivo, notably on the initiative of the communist activist Fran\u00e7ois Vittori, who was imprisoned as a result. The 1930s saw the Malagasy anti-colonial movement gain further momentum. Malagasy trade unionism began to appear underground and the Communist Party of the Madagascar region was formed. But in 1939, all the organizations were dissolved by the administration of the colony, which opted for the Vichy regime. The MDRM was accused by the colonial regime of being at the origin of the 1947 insurrection and was pursued by violent repression.\nThe Merina royal tradition of taxes paid in the form of labor was continued under the French and used to construct a railway and roads linking key coastal cities to Antananarivo. Malagasy troops fought for France in World War I. In the 1930s, Nazi political thinkers developed the Madagascar Plan that had identified the island as a potential site for the deportation of Europe's Jews. During the Second World War, the island was the site of the Battle of Madagascar between the Vichy French and an Allied expeditionary force.\nThe occupation of France during the Second World War tarnished the prestige of the colonial administration in Madagascar and galvanized the growing independence movement, leading to the Malagasy Uprising of 1947. This movement led the French to establish reformed institutions in 1956 under the \"Loi Cadre\" (Overseas Reform Act), and Madagascar moved peacefully towards independence. The Malagasy Republic was proclaimed on 14 October 1958, as an autonomous state within the French Community. A period of provisional government ended with the adoption of a constitution in 1959 and full independence on 26 June 1960.\nIndependent state.\nSince regaining independence, Madagascar has transitioned through four republics with corresponding revisions to its constitution. The First Republic (1960\u201372), under the leadership of French-appointed President Philibert Tsiranana, was characterized by a continuation of strong economic and political ties to France. Many high-level technical positions were filled by French expatriates, and French teachers, textbooks and curricula continued to be used in schools around the country. Popular resentment over Tsiranana's tolerance for this \"neo-colonial\" arrangement inspired a series of farmer and student protests that overturned his administration in 1972.\nGabriel Ramanantsoa, a major general in the army, was appointed interim president and prime minister that same year, but low public approval forced him to step down in 1975. Colonel Richard Ratsimandrava, appointed to succeed him, was assassinated six days into his tenure. General Gilles Andriamahazo ruled after Ratsimandrava for four months before being replaced by another military appointee: Vice Admiral Didier Ratsiraka, who ushered in the Marxist\u2013Leninist Second Republic that ran under his tenure from 1975 to 1993.\nThis period saw a political alignment with the Eastern Bloc countries and a shift toward economic insularity. These policies, coupled with economic pressures stemming from the 1973 oil crisis, resulted in the rapid collapse of Madagascar's economy and a sharp decline in living standards, and the country had become completely bankrupt by 1979. The Ratsiraka administration accepted the conditions of transparency, anti-corruption measures and free market policies imposed by the International Monetary Fund, World Bank and various bilateral donors in exchange for their bailout of the nation's broken economy.\nRatsiraka's dwindling popularity in the late 1980s reached a critical point in 1991 when presidential guards opened fire on unarmed protesters during a rally. Within two months, a transitional government had been established under the leadership of Albert Zafy (1993\u201396), who went on to win the 1992 presidential elections and inaugurate the Third Republic (1992\u20132010). The new Madagascar constitution established a multi-party democracy and a separation of powers that placed significant control in the hands of the National Assembly. The new constitution also emphasized human rights, social and political freedoms, and free trade. Zafy's term, however, was marred by economic decline, allegations of corruption, and his introduction of legislation to give himself greater powers. He was consequently impeached in 1996, and an interim president, Norbert Ratsirahonana, was appointed for the three months prior to the next presidential election. Ratsiraka was then voted back into power on a platform of decentralization and economic reforms for a second term which lasted from 1996 to 2001.\nThe contested 2001 presidential elections in which then-mayor of Antananarivo, Marc Ravalomanana, eventually emerged victorious, caused a seven-month standoff in 2002 between supporters of Ravalomanana and Ratsiraka. The negative economic impact of the political crisis was gradually overcome by Ravalomanana's progressive economic and political policies, which encouraged investments in education and ecotourism, facilitated foreign direct investment, and cultivated trading partnerships both regionally and internationally. National GDP grew at an average rate of 7\u00a0percent per year under his administration. In the latter half of his second term, Ravalomanana was criticized by domestic and international observers who accused him of increasing authoritarianism and corruption.\nOpposition leader and then-mayor of Antananarivo, Andry Rajoelina, led a movement in early 2009 in which Ravalomanana was pushed from power in an unconstitutional process widely condemned as a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\". In March 2009, Rajoelina was declared by the Supreme Court as the President of the High Transitional Authority, an interim governing body responsible for moving the country toward presidential elections. In 2010, a new constitution was adopted by referendum, establishing a Fourth Republic, which sustained the democratic, multi-party structure established in the previous constitution. Hery Rajaonarimampianina was declared the winner of the 2013 presidential election, which the international community deemed fair and transparent.\nIn 2018 the first round of the presidential election was held on 7 November and the second round was held on 10 December. Three former presidents and the most recent president were the main candidates of the elections. Rajoelina won the second round of the elections. Ravalomana lost the second round and he did not accept the results because of allegations of fraud. Rajaonarimampianina received very modest support in the first round. In January 2019 the High Constitutional Court declared Rajoelina as the winner of the elections and the new president. In June 2019 parliamentary elections the Rajoelina's won absolute majority of the seats of the National Assembly. It received 84 seats and the supporters of former president Ravalomana got only 16 seats of 151 seats of the National Assembly. 51 seats of deputies were independent or represented small parties. Rajoelina could rule as a strongman.\nMid-2021 marked the beginning of the 2021\u20132022 Madagascar famine which, due to a severe drought, caused hundreds of thousands of people to face food insecurity and over one million people were on the verge of a famine.\nIn November 2023, Rajoelina was re-elected to another term with 58.95% of the vote in the first round of the election amidst an opposition boycott and a controversy about his acquisition of French citizenship and subsequent eligibility. Turnout was 46.36%, the lowest in a presidential election in the country's history. Power and water cuts, and general distrust of Rajoelina's administration, sparked a series of protests in 2025 that culiminated in his flight and impeachment with the miltary taking control of the country.\nGeography.\nAt , Madagascar is the world's 46th-largest country, the second-largest island country and the fourth-largest island. The country lies mostly between latitudes 12\u00b0S and 26\u00b0S, and longitudes 43\u00b0E and 51\u00b0E. Neighboring islands include the French territory of R\u00e9union and the country of Mauritius to the east, as well as the state of Comoros and the French territory of Mayotte to the northwest. The nearest mainland state is Mozambique, located to the west.\nThe prehistoric breakup of the supercontinent Gondwana resulted in the separation of East Gondwana (comprising Madagascar, Antarctica, Australia and the Indian subcontinent) and West Gondwana (Africa and South America) during the Jurassic period, around 185\u00a0million years ago. The Indo-Madagascar landmass separated from Antarctica and Australia around 125 million years ago and Madagascar separated from the Indian landmass about 84\u201392\u00a0million years ago during the Late Cretaceous. This long history of separation from other continents has allowed plants and animals on the island to evolve in relative isolation. Along the length of the eastern coast runs a narrow and steep escarpment containing much of the island's remaining tropical lowland forest. To the west of this ridge lies a plateau in the center of the island ranging in altitude from above sea level. These central highlands, traditionally the homeland of the Merina people and the location of their historic capital at Antananarivo, are the most densely populated part of the island and are characterized by terraced, rice-growing valleys lying between grassy hills and patches of the subhumid forests that formerly covered the highland region. To the west of the highlands, the increasingly arid terrain gradually slopes down to the Mozambique Channel and mangrove swamps along the coast.\nMadagascar's highest peaks rise from three prominent highland massifs: Maromokotro in the Tsaratanana Massif is the island's highest point, followed by Boby Peak in the Andringitra Massif, and Tsiafajavona in the Ankaratra Massif. To the east, the \"Canal des Pangalanes\" is a chain of human-made and natural lakes connected by canals built by the French just inland from the east coast and running parallel to it for some .\nThe western and southern sides, which lie in the rain shadow of the central highlands, are home to dry deciduous forests, spiny forests, and deserts and xeric shrublands. Due to their lower population densities, Madagascar's dry deciduous forests have been better preserved than the eastern rain forests or the original woodlands of the central plateau. The western coast features many protected harbors, but silting is a major problem caused by sediment from the high levels of inland erosion carried by rivers crossing the broad western plains.\nClimate.\nThe combination of southeastern trade winds and northwestern monsoons produces a hot rainy season (November\u2013April) with frequently destructive cyclones, and a relatively cooler dry season (May\u2013October). Rain clouds originating over the Indian Ocean discharge much of their moisture over the island's eastern coast; the heavy precipitation supports the area's rainforest ecosystem. The central highlands are both drier and cooler while the west is drier still, and a semi-arid climate prevails in the southwest and southern interior of the island.\nTropical cyclones cause damage to infrastructure and local economies as well as loss of life. In 2004, Cyclone Gafilo became the strongest cyclone ever recorded to hit Madagascar. The storm killed 172 people, left 214,260 homeless and caused more than US$250\u00a0million in damage. In February 2022, Cyclone Batsirai killed 121 people, weeks after Cyclone Ana killed 55 and displaced 130,000 people on the island.\nA 2022 analysis found that Madagascar, to adapt to and avert the environmental consequences of climate change, is going to have to spend 15% of its GDP.\nBiodiversity and conservation.\nAs a result of the island's long isolation from neighboring continents, Madagascar is home to various endemic plants and animals found nowhere else on Earth. Approximately 90% of all plant and animal species found in Madagascar are endemic. This distinctive ecology has led some ecologists to refer to Madagascar as the \"eighth continent\", and the island has been classified by Conservation International as a biodiversity hotspot. Madagascar is classed as one of 17 megadiverse countries. The country is home to seven terrestrial ecoregions: lowland forests, subhumid forests, dry deciduous forests, ericoid thickets, spiny forests, succulent woodlands, and mangroves.\nMore than 80% of Madagascar's 14,883 plant species are found nowhere else in the world, including five plant families. The family \"Didiereaceae\", composed of four genera and 11 species, is limited to the spiny forests of southwestern Madagascar. Four-fifths of the world's \"Pachypodium\" species are endemic to the island. Three-fourths of Madagascar's 860 Orchid species are found here alone, as are six of the world's nine baobab species. The island is home to around 170 palm species, three times as many as on all of mainland Africa; 165 of them are endemic. Many native plant species are used as herbal remedies for a variety of afflictions. The drugs vinblastine and vincristine are \"vinca\" alkaloids, used to treat Hodgkin lymphoma, leukemia, and other cancers, were derived from the Madagascar periwinkle. The traveler's palm, known locally as \"Ravenala\" and endemic to the eastern rainforests, is highly iconic of Madagascar and is featured in the national emblem as well as the Madagascar Airlines logo.\nLike its flora, Madagascar's fauna is diverse and exhibits a high rate of endemism. Lemurs have been characterized as \"Madagascar's flagship mammal species\" by Conservation International. In the absence of monkeys and other competitors, these primates have adapted to a wide range of habitats and diversified into numerous species. As of 2012[ [update]], there were officially 103 species and subspecies of lemur, 39 of which were described by zoologists between 2000 and 2008. They are almost all classified as rare, vulnerable, or endangered. At least 17 species of lemur have become extinct since humans arrived on Madagascar, all of which were larger than the surviving lemur species.\nA number of other mammals, including the catlike fossa, are endemic to Madagascar. Over 300 species of birds have been recorded on the island, of which over 60% (including four families and 42 genera) are endemic. The few families and genera of reptiles that have reached Madagascar have diversified into more than 260 species, with over 90% of these being endemic (including one endemic family). The island is home to two-thirds of the world's chameleon species, including the smallest known.\nEndemic fish of Madagascar include two families, 15 genera and over 100 species, primarily inhabiting the island's freshwater lakes and rivers. Although invertebrates remain poorly studied in Madagascar, researchers have found high rates of endemism among the known species. All 651 species of terrestrial snail are endemic, as are a majority of the island's butterflies, scarab beetles, lacewings, spiders, and dragonflies.\nMadagascar's varied fauna and flora are endangered by human activity. Since the arrival of humans around 2,350\u00a0years ago, Madagascar has lost more than 90% of its original forest. This forest loss is largely fueled by \"tavy\" (\"fat\"), a traditional slash-and-burn agricultural practice imported to Madagascar by the earliest settlers. Malagasy farmers embrace and perpetuate the practice not only for its practical benefits as an agricultural technique, but for its cultural associations with prosperity, health and venerated ancestral custom (\"fomba malagasy\"). As human population density rose on the island, deforestation accelerated beginning around 1,400 years ago. By the 16th century, the central highlands had been largely cleared of their original forests. More recent contributors to the loss of forest cover include the growth in cattle herd size since their introduction around 1,000 years ago, a continued reliance on charcoal as a fuel for cooking, and the increased prominence of coffee as a cash crop over the past century.\nAccording to a conservative estimate, about 40% of the island's original forest cover was lost from the 1950s to 2000, with a thinning of remaining forest areas by 80%. In addition to traditional agricultural practice, wildlife conservation is challenged by the illicit harvesting of protected forests, as well as the state-sanctioned harvesting of precious woods within national parks. Although banned by then-President Marc Ravalomanana from 2000 to 2009, the collection of small quantities of precious timber from national parks was re-authorized in January 2009 and dramatically intensified under the administration of Andry Rajoelina as a key source of state revenues to offset cuts in donor support following Ravalomanana's ousting.\nInvasive species have likewise been introduced by human populations. Following the 2014 discovery in Madagascar of the Asian common toad, a relative of a toad species that has severely harmed wildlife in Australia since the 1930s, researchers warned the toad could \"wreak havoc on the country's unique fauna.\" Habitat destruction and hunting have threatened many of Madagascar's endemic species or driven them to extinction. The island's elephant birds, a family of endemic giant ratites, became extinct in the 17th century or earlier, most probably because of human hunting of adult birds and poaching of their large eggs for food. Numerous giant lemur species vanished with the arrival of human settlers to the island, while others became extinct over the course of the centuries as a growing human population put greater pressures on lemur habitats and, among some populations, increased the rate of lemur hunting for food. A July 2012 assessment found that the exploitation of natural resources since 2009 has had dire consequences for the island's wildlife: 90% of lemur species were found to be threatened with extinction, the highest proportion of any mammalian group. Of these, 23 species were classified as critically endangered. A 2023 study published in \"Nature Communications\" found that 120 of the 219 mammal species only found on Madagascar are threatened with extinction.\nIn 2003, Ravalomanana announced the Durban Vision, an initiative to more than triple the island's protected natural areas to over or 10% of Madagascar's land surface. As of 2011[ [update]], areas protected by the state included five Strict Nature Reserves (\"R\u00e9serves Naturelles Int\u00e9grales\"), 21 Wildlife Reserves (\"R\u00e9serves Sp\u00e9ciales\") and 21 National Parks (\"Parcs Nationaux\"). In 2007 six of the national parks were declared a joint World Heritage Site under the name Rainforests of the Atsinanana. These parks are Marojejy, Masoala, Ranomafana, Zahamena, Andohahela and Andringitra. Local timber merchants are harvesting scarce species of rosewood trees from protected rainforests within Marojejy National Park and exporting the wood to China for the production of luxury furniture and musical instruments.\nGovernment.\nStructure.\nMadagascar is a semi-presidential representative democratic multi-party republic, wherein the popularly elected president is the head of state and selects a prime minister, who recommends candidates to the president to form his cabinet of ministers. According to the constitution, executive power is exercised by the government while legislative power is vested in the ministerial cabinet, the Senate and the National Assembly, although in reality these two latter bodies have very little power or legislative role. The constitution establishes independent executive, legislative and judicial branches and mandates a popularly elected president limited to three five-year terms.\nThe public directly elects the president and the 151 members of the National Assembly to five-year terms. All 18 members of the Senate serve six-year terms, with 12 senators elected by local officials and 6 appointed by the president.\nAt the local level, the island's 23 regions are administered by a governor and regional council. Provinces are further subdivided into regions and communes. The judiciary is modeled on the French system, with a High Constitutional Court, High Court of Justice, Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, criminal tribunals, and tribunals of first instance. The courts, which adhere to civil law, lack the capacity to quickly and transparently try the cases in the judicial system, often forcing defendants to pass lengthy pretrial detentions in unsanitary and overcrowded prisons.\nAntananarivo is the administrative capital and largest city of Madagascar. It is located in the highlands region, near the geographic center of the island. King Andrianjaka founded Antananarivo as the capital of his Imerina Kingdom around 1610 or 1625 upon the site of a captured Vazimba capital on the hilltop of Analamanga. As Merina dominance expanded over neighboring Malagasy peoples in the early 19th century to establish the Kingdom of Madagascar, Antananarivo became the center of administration for virtually the entire island. In 1896 the French colonizers of Madagascar adopted the Merina capital as their center of colonial administration. The city remained the capital of Madagascar after regaining independence in 1960. In 2017, the capital's population was estimated at 1,391,433 inhabitants. The next largest cities are Antsirabe (500,000), Toamasina (450,000) and Mahajanga (400,000).\nPolitics.\nSince Madagascar gained independence from France in 1960, the island's political transitions have been marked by numerous popular protests, several disputed elections, an impeachment, two military coups and one assassination. The island's recurrent political crises are often prolonged, with detrimental effects on the local economy, international relations and Malagasy living standards. The eight-month standoff between incumbent Ratsiraka and challenger Marc Ravalomanana following the 2001 presidential elections cost Madagascar millions of dollars in lost tourism and trade revenue as well as damage to infrastructure, such as bombed bridges and buildings damaged by arson. A series of protests led by Andry Rajoelina against Ravalomanana in early 2009 became violent, with more than 170 people killed. Modern politics in Madagascar are colored by the history of Merina subjugation of coastal communities under their rule in the 19th century. The consequent tension between the highland and coastal populations has periodically flared up into isolated events of violence.\nMadagascar has historically been perceived as being on the margin of mainstream African affairs despite being a founding member of the Organization of African Unity, which was established in 1963 and dissolved in 2002 to be replaced by the African Union. Madagascar was not permitted to attend the first African Union summit because of a dispute over the results of the 2001 presidential election, but rejoined the African Union in July 2003 after a 14-month hiatus. Madagascar was again suspended by the African Union in March 2009 following the unconstitutional transfer of executive power to Rajoelina. Madagascar is a member of the International Criminal Court with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the United States military. 11 countries have established embassies in Madagascar, including France, the United Kingdom, the United States, China and India, while Madagascar has embassies in 16 other countries.\nHuman rights in Madagascar are protected under the constitution and the state is a signatory to numerous international agreements including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Religious, ethnic and sexual minorities are protected under the law. Freedom of association and assembly are also guaranteed under the law, although in practice the denial of permits for public assembly has occasionally been used to impede political demonstrations. Torture by security forces is rare and state repression is low relative to other countries with comparably few legal safeguards, although arbitrary arrests and the corruption of military and police officers remain problems. Ravalomanana's 2004 creation of BIANCO, an anti-corruption bureau, resulted in reduced corruption among Antananarivo's lower-level bureaucrats in particular, although high-level officials have not been prosecuted by the bureau. Accusations of media censorship have risen due to the alleged restrictions on the coverage of government opposition. Some journalists have been arrested for allegedly spreading fake news.\nMilitary and law enforcement.\nThe rise of centralized kingdoms among the Sakalava, Merina and other ethnic groups produced the island's first standing armies by the 16th century, initially equipped with spears but later with muskets, cannons and other firearms. By the early 19th century, the Merina sovereigns of the Kingdom of Madagascar had brought much of the island under their control by mobilizing an army of trained and armed soldiers numbering as high as 30,000. French attacks on coastal towns in the later part of the century prompted then-Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony to solicit British assistance to provide training to the Merina monarchy's army. Despite the training and leadership provided by British military advisers, the Malagasy army was unable to withstand French weaponry and was forced to surrender following an attack on the royal palace at Antananarivo. Madagascar was declared a colony of France in 1897.\nThe political independence and sovereignty of the Malagasy armed forces, which comprises an army, navy and air force, was restored with independence from France in 1960. Since this time the Malagasy military has never engaged in armed conflict with another state or within its own borders, but has occasionally intervened to restore order during periods of political unrest. Under the socialist Second Republic, Admiral Didier Ratsiraka instated mandatory national armed or civil service for all young citizens regardless of sex, a policy that remained in effect from 1976 to 1991. The armed forces are under the direction of the Minister of Defense and have remained largely neutral during times of political crisis, as during the protracted standoff between incumbent Ratsiraka and challenger Marc Ravalomanana in the disputed 2001 presidential elections, when the military refused to intervene in favor of either candidate. This tradition was broken in 2009, when a segment of the army defected to the side of Andry Rajoelina, then-mayor of Antananarivo, in support of his attempt to force President Ravalomanana from power.\nThe Minister of Interior is responsible for the national police force, paramilitary force (\"gendarmerie\") and the secret police. The police and gendarmerie are stationed and administered at the local level. However, in 2009 fewer than a third of all communes had access to the services of these security forces, with most lacking local-level headquarters for either corps. Traditional community tribunals, called \"dina\", are presided over by elders and other respected figures and remain a key means by which justice is served in rural areas where state presence is weak. Historically, security has been relatively high across the island. Violent crime rates are low, and criminal activities are predominantly crimes of opportunity such as pickpocketing and petty theft, although child prostitution, human trafficking and the production and sale of marijuana and other illegal drugs are increasing. Budget cuts since 2009 have severely impacted the national police force, producing a steep increase in criminal activity in recent years.\nAdministrative divisions.\nMadagascar is subdivided into 23 regions (\"faritra\"). The regions are further subdivided into 119 districts, 1,579 communes, and 17,485 \"fokontany\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnited Nations involvement.\nMadagascar became a member state of the United Nations on 20 September 1960, shortly after gaining its independence on 26 June 1960. As of January 2017, 34 police officers from Madagascar are deployed in Haiti as part of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. Starting in 2015, under the direction of and with assistance from the UN, the World Food Programme started the Madagascar Country Programme with the two main goals of long-term development and reconstruction efforts, and addressing the food insecurity issues in the southern regions of Madagascar. These goals plan to be accomplished by providing meals for specific schools in rural and urban priority areas and by developing national school feeding policies to increase consistency of nourishment throughout the country. Small and local farmers have also been assisted in increasing both the quantity and quality of their production, as well as improving their crop yield in unfavorable weather conditions. In 2017, Madagascar signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.\nEconomy.\nMadagascar's GDP in 2015 was estimated at US$9.98\u00a0billion, with a per capita GDP of $411.82. Approximately 69% of the population lives below the national poverty line threshold of one dollar per day. According to the United Nations Development Programme, as of 2021, 68.4% of the population is multidimensionally poor. During 2011\u201315, the average growth rate was 2.6% but was expected to have reached 4.1% in 2016, due to public works programs and a growth of the service sector. The agriculture sector constituted 29% of Malagasy GDP in 2011, while manufacturing formed 15% of GDP. Madagascar's other sources of growth are tourism, agriculture and the extractive industries. The fishing sector represents US$800M or 6% of GNP with 200,000 direct jobs.\nTourism focuses on the niche eco-tourism market, capitalizing on Madagascar's unique biodiversity, unspoiled natural habitats, national parks and lemur species. An estimated 365,000 tourists visited Madagascar in 2008, but the sector declined during the political crisis with 180,000 tourists visiting in 2010. However, the sector has been growing steadily for a few years. In 2016, 293,000 tourists landed in the African island with an increase of 20% compared to 2015. For 2017 the country has the goal of reaching 366,000 visitors, while for 2018 government estimates are expected to reach 500,000 annual tourists.\nThe island is still a very poor country in 2018; structural brakes remain in the development of the economy: corruption and the shackles of the public administration, lack of legal certainty, and backwardness of land legislation. The economy, however, has been growing since 2011, with GDP growth exceeding 4% per year; almost all economic indicators are growing, the GDP per capita was around $1600 (PPP) for 2017, one of the lowest in the world, although growing since 2012; unemployment was also cut, which in 2016 was equal to 2.1% with a work force of 13.4\u00a0million as of 2017. The main economic resources of Madagascar are tourism, textiles, agriculture, and mining.\nIn 2017, poverty affected 92% of Madagascar's population. The country ranked fourth globally in terms of chronic malnutrition, with nearly one in two children under the age of five experiencing stunted growth. Additionally, Madagascar was among the five countries where access to clean water was most limited. According to the NGO WaterAid, approximately 12 million people lacked access to safe drinking water.\nAs of 2025, poverty affects approximately 80% of Madagascar's population, based on a daily income threshold of $2.15 (2017 PPP). Nearly 1.94 million people are projected to experience high levels of acute food insecurity during the lean season. Access to clean water remains a critical issue. Madagascar remains a water-stressed country, with climate shocks and infrastructure gaps exacerbating the crisis.\nNatural resources and trade.\nMadagascar's natural resources include a variety of agricultural and mineral products. Agriculture (including the growing of raffia), mining, fishing and forestry are mainstays of the economy. In 2017 the top exports were vanilla (US$894M), nickel metal (US$414M), cloves (US$288M), knitted sweaters (US$184M) and cobalt (US$143M).\nMadagascar is the world's principal supplier of vanilla, cloves and ylang-ylang. The island supplies 80% of the world's natural vanilla. Other key agricultural resources include coffee, lychees and shrimp. Key mineral resources include various types of precious and semi-precious stones, and it currently provides half of the world's supply of sapphires, which were discovered near Ilakaka in the late 1990s.\nMadagascar has one of the world's largest reserves of ilmenite (titanium ore), as well as important reserves of chromite, coal, iron, cobalt, copper and nickel. Several major projects are underway in the mining, oil and gas sectors that are anticipated to give a significant boost to the Malagasy economy. These include such projects as ilmenite and zircon mining at the Mandena mine by Rio Tinto, extraction of nickel by the Ambatovy mine near Moramanga and its processing near Toamasina by Sherritt International, and the development of the giant onshore heavy oil deposits at Tsimiroro and Bemolanga by Madagascar Oil.\nExports formed 28% of GDP in 2009. Most of the country's export revenue is derived from the textiles industry, fish and shellfish, vanilla, cloves and other foodstuffs. France is the nation's main trading partner, although the United States, Japan and Germany also have strong economic ties. High-value cash crops for export such as lychees are more recent growth areas, with 18,000 tons sold abroad in 2023, of which 16,000 tons were exported to Europe.\nThe Madagascar-US Business Council was formed in May 2003, as a collaboration between USAID and Malagasy artisan producers to support the export of local handicrafts to foreign markets. Imports of such items as foodstuffs, fuel, capital goods, vehicles, consumer goods and electronics consume an estimated 52% of GDP. The main sources of Madagascar's imports include China, France, Iran, Mauritius and Hong Kong.\nInfrastructure and media.\nIn 2010, Madagascar had approximately of paved roads, of railways and of navigable waterways. The majority of roads in Madagascar are unpaved, with many becoming impassable in the rainy season. Largely paved national routes connect the six largest regional towns to Antananarivo, with minor paved and unpaved routes providing access to other population centers in each district. Construction of the Antananarivo\u2013Toamasina toll highway, the country's first toll highway, began in December 2022. The approximately infrastructure project, which will connect Madagascar's capital to its largest seaport, is expected to take four years to complete. Another project meant to create of roads and create better connections costs \u20ac235.5 million. This includes a \u20ac116 million grant from the European Union, a \u20ac110 million loan from the European Investment Bank, and \u20ac4.8 million in finance from the Republic of Madagascar. Since 2016, \u20ac100.4 million has been paid to the Republic of Madagascar through this project.\nThere are several rail lines in Madagascar. Antananarivo is connected to Toamasina, Ambatondrazaka and Antsirabe by rail, and another rail line connects Fianarantsoa to Manakara. The most important seaport in Madagascar is located on the east coast at Toamasina. Ports at Mahajanga and Antsiranana are significantly less used because of their remoteness. Madagascar's government hopes to expand the ports of Antsiranana in the north and Taolagnaro in the south, connecting them to improved road networks, since many imports are every day necessities and Madagascar also relies on export money. The island's newest port at Ehoala, constructed in 2008 and privately managed by Rio Tinto, will come under state control upon completion of the company's mining project near T\u00f4lanaro around 2038. Madagascar Airlines services the island's many small regional airports, which offer the only practical means of access to many of the more remote regions during rainy season road washouts.\nRunning water and electricity are supplied at the national level by a government service provider, Jirama, which is unable to service the entire population. As of 2009[ [update]], only 6.8% of Madagascar's \"fokontany\" had access to water provided by Jirama, while 9.5% had access to its electricity services. 56% of Madagascar's power is provided by hydroelectric power plants, with the remaining 44% provided by diesel engine generators. Mobile telephone and internet access are widespread in urban areas but remain limited in rural parts of the island. Approximately 30% of the districts are able to access the nations' several private telecommunications networks via mobile telephones or land lines. The World Bank estimates that 17 million people in Madagascar's rural areas live more than 2 kilometers away from an all-season road. In Madagascar, 11% of the rural population has access to power.\nRadio broadcasts remain the principal means by which the Malagasy population access international, national, and local news. Only state radio broadcasts are transmitted across the entire island. Hundreds of public and private stations with local or regional range provide alternatives to state broadcasting. In addition to the state television channel, a variety of privately owned television stations broadcast local and international programming throughout Madagascar. Several media outlets are owned by political partisans or politicians themselves, including the media groups MBS (owned by Ravalomanana) and Viva (owned by Rajoelina), contributing to political polarization in reporting.\nThe media have historically come under varying degrees of pressure to censor their criticism of the government. Reporters are occasionally threatened or harassed, and media outlets are periodically forced to close. Accusations of media censorship have increased since 2009 because of the alleged intensification of restrictions on political criticism. Access to the internet has grown dramatically in the 21st century; in December 2011, an estimated 352,000 residents of Madagascar accessed the internet from home or in one of the nation's many internet caf\u00e9s . By January 2022, 22.3% of the population (6.43 million people) had internet access, mostly through mobile phones.\nDemographics.\nAgriculture has long influenced settlement on the island. Almost 60% of the nation's population live in rural areas.\nIn 2024, the population of Madagascar was estimated at 32 million, up from 2.2 million in 1900. The annual population growth rate in Madagascar was approximately 2.4% in 2024.\nApproximately 39.3% of the population is younger than 15 years of age, while 57.3% are between the ages of 15 and 64. Those aged 65 and older form 3.4% of the total population. Only two general censuses, in 1975 and 1993, have been carried out after independence. The most densely populated regions of the island are the eastern highlands and the eastern coast, contrasting most dramatically with the sparsely populated western plains.\nEthnic groups.\nThe Malagasy ethnic group forms over 90% of Madagascar's population and is typically divided into 18 ethnic subgroups. Recent DNA research revealed that the genetic makeup of the average Malagasy person constitutes an approximately equal blend of Southeast Asian and East African genes, although the genetics of some communities show a predominance of Southeast Asian or East African origins or some Arab, Indian, or European ancestry.\nSoutheast Asian features \u2013 specifically from the southern part of Borneo \u2013 are most predominant among the Merina of the central highlands, who form the largest Malagasy ethnic subgroup at approximately 26% of the population, while certain communities among the western coastal peoples (collectively called \"c\u00f4tiers\") have relatively stronger East African features. The largest coastal ethnic subgroups are the Betsimisaraka (14.9%) and the Tsimihety and Sakalava (6% each). Peoples along the east and southeastern coasts often have a roughly equal blend of Austronesian and Bantu ancestry; coastal peoples also usually show the largest genetic influence from the centuries of Arab, Somali, Gujarati, and Tamil traders and merchants of the area, compared to the inland highlander peoples.\nChinese, Indian and Comoran minorities are present in Madagascar, as well as a small European (primarily French) populace. Emigration in the late 20th century has reduced these minority populations, occasionally in abrupt waves, such as the exodus of Comorans in 1976, following anti-Comoran riots in Mahajanga. By comparison, there has been no significant emigration of Malagasy peoples. The number of Europeans has declined since independence, reduced from 68,430 in 1958 to 17,000 three decades later. There were an estimated 25,000\u00a0Comorans, 18,000\u00a0Indians, and 9,000\u00a0Chinese living in Madagascar in the mid-1980s.\nLargest cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLanguages.\nThe Constitution of 2007 recognized three official languages: Malagasy, French, and English. A fourth Constitution, adopted in 2010 following a referendum, recognized only Malagasy and French.\nThe Malagasy language is of Malayo-Polynesian origin and is generally spoken throughout the island. The numerous dialects of Malagasy, which are generally mutually intelligible, can be clustered under three subgroups: Central-Eastern Malagasic, Northern Malagasic and Southern Malagasic.\nThe Malagasy language derives from the Southeast Barito languages, with the Ma\u02bcanyan language being its closest relative, incorporating numerous Malay and Javanese loanwords.\nFrench became the official language during the colonial period, when Madagascar came under the authority of France. In the first national Constitution of 1958, Malagasy and French were named the official languages of the Malagasy Republic. Madagascar is a francophone country, and French is mostly spoken as a second language among the educated population and used for international communication. Among the upper class in large cities, French is spoken as a native language.\nReligion.\nChristianity is the most widely professed religion in Madagascar. According to the most recent national census completed in 1993, a majority of the population (52%) adhered to indigenous beliefs, with Christianity being the largest single religion at 41%, followed by Islam at 7%. However, according to the Pew Research Center in 2020, 85% of the population identified as Christian, while just 4.5% exclusively practiced folk religions; Protestants comprise a plurality of Christians, followed by Catholics. In contrast, a 2020 study conducted by the Association of Religion Data Archives found 58.1% of the population was Christian, 2.1% Muslim, 39.2% practiced traditional faiths, and 0.6% was nonreligious or adhered to other faiths.\nThe inconsistency in religious data reflects the common practice of alternating between religious identities or syncretizing different faith traditions. Christians integrate and combine their religious beliefs with the deeply rooted practice of honoring ancestors. For instance, they may bless their dead at church before proceeding with traditional burial rites or invite a Christian minister to consecrate a \"famadihana\" reburial. Christianity is predominant in the highlands. The Malagasy Council of Churches comprises the four oldest and most prominent Christian denominations of Madagascar (Catholic, Church of Jesus Christ in Madagascar, Lutheran, and Anglican) and has been influential in Malagasy politics.\nThe veneration of ancestors has led to the widespread tradition of tomb building, as well as the highlands practice of the \"famadihana\", whereby a deceased family member's remains are exhumed and re-wrapped in fresh silk shrouds, before being replaced in the tomb. The \"famadihana\" is an occasion to celebrate the beloved ancestor's memory, reunite with family and community, and enjoy a festive atmosphere. Residents of surrounding villages are often invited to attend the party, where food and rum are typically served, and a \"hiragasy\" troupe or other musical entertainment is commonly present. Consideration for ancestors is also demonstrated through adherence to \"fady\", taboos that are respected during and after the lifetime of the person who establishes them. It is widely believed that by showing respect for ancestors in these ways, they may intervene on behalf of the living. Conversely, misfortunes are often attributed to ancestors whose memory or wishes have been neglected. The sacrifice of zebu is a traditional method used to appease or honor the ancestors. In addition, the Malagasy traditionally believe in a creator god, called Zanahary or Andriamanitra.\nIslam was first brought to Madagascar in the Middle Ages by Arab and Somali Muslim traders, who established several Islamic schools along the eastern coast. While the use of Arabic script and loan words, and the adoption of Islamic astrology, would spread across the island, Islam took hold in only a handful of southeastern coastal communities. In 2020, Muslims constituted 2% of the population of Madagascar. They are largely concentrated in the northwestern provinces of Mahajanga and Antsiranana. Muslims are divided between ethnic Malagasy and Indians, Pakistanis and Comorans.\nHinduism was introduced to Madagascar through Gujarati people immigrating from the Saurashtra region of India in the late 19th century. Most Hindus in Madagascar speak Gujarati or Hindi at home, reflecting the faiths concentration among those of Indian ancestry.\nRabbinic Judaism emerged on the island in the 21st century, as the common belief in a myth of Jewish origin for the Malagasy peoples inspired Messianic Jews in Antananarivo to begin researching Judaism and studying the Torah. In 2016, 121 members of the Malagasy Jewish community were formally converted to Orthodox Judaism.\nHealth.\nMedical centers, dispensaries, and hospitals are found throughout the island, although they are concentrated in urban areas and particularly in Antananarivo. Access to medical care remains beyond the reach of many Malagasy, especially in the rural areas, and many recourse to traditional healers. In addition to the high expense of medical care relative to the average Malagasy income, the prevalence of trained medical professionals remains extremely low. In 2010, Madagascar had an average of three hospital beds per 10,000 people and a total of 3,150 doctors, 5,661 nurses, 385 community health workers, 175 pharmacists, and 57 dentists for a population of 22\u00a0million. 15% of government spending in 2008 was directed toward the health sector. Approximately 70% of spending on health was contributed by the government, while 30% originated with international donors and other private sources. The government provides at least one basic health center per commune. Private health centers are concentrated within urban areas and particularly those of the central highlands.\nDespite these barriers to access, health services have shown a trend toward improvement over the past 20 years. Child immunizations against such diseases as hepatitis B, diphtheria, and measles increased an average of 60% in this period, indicating low but increasing availability of basic medical services and treatments. The Malagasy fertility rate in 2009 was 4.6 children per woman, declining from 6.3 in 1990. Teen pregnancy rates of 14.8% in 2011, much higher than the African average, are a contributing factor to rapid population growth. In 2010, the maternal mortality rate was 440 per 100,000 births, compared to 373.1 in 2008 and 484.4 in 1990, indicating a decline in perinatal care following the 2009 coup. The infant mortality rate in 2011 was 41 per 1,000 births, with an under-five mortality rate at 61 per 1,000 births. Schistosomiasis, malaria, and sexually transmitted diseases are common in Madagascar, although as of 2011 the HIV infection rate remained low relative to many countries in mainland Africa, at 0.2% of the adult population. The malaria mortality rate is also among the lowest in Africa at 8.5 deaths per 100,000 people, in part because of the highest frequency use of insecticide treated nets in Africa. Adult life expectancy in 2009 was 63 years for men and 67 years for women.\nMadagascar had outbreaks of the bubonic plague and pneumonic plague in 2017 (2575 cases, 221 deaths) and 2014 (263 confirmed cases, 71 deaths). In 2019, Madagascar had a measles outbreak, resulting in 118,000 cases and 1,688 deaths. In 2020, Madagascar was also affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Undernourishment and hunger rates were at 42% in 2018. According to the United Nations, more than one million people in southern Madagascar are struggling to get enough to eat, due to what could become the first famine caused by climate change.\nEducation.\nPrior to the 19th century, all education in Madagascar was informal and typically served to teach practical skills as well as social and cultural values, including respect for ancestors and elders. The first formal European-style school was established in 1818 at Toamasina by members of the London Missionary Society (LMS). The LMS was invited by King Radama I to expand its schools throughout Imerina to teach basic literacy and numeracy to aristocratic children. The schools were closed by Ranavalona I in 1835, but reopened and expanded in the decades after her death.\nBy the end of the 19th century, Madagascar had the most developed and modern school system in pre-colonial Sub-Saharan Africa. Access to schooling was expanded in coastal areas during the colonial period, with French language and basic work skills becoming the focus of the curriculum. During the post-colonial First Republic, a continued reliance on French nationals as teachers, and French as the language of instruction, displeased those desiring a complete separation from the former colonial power. Consequently, under the socialist Second Republic, French instructors and other nationals were expelled, Malagasy was declared the language of instruction, and a large cadre of young Malagasy were rapidly trained to teach at remote rural schools under the mandatory two-year national service policy.\nThis policy, known as \"malgachization\", coincided with a severe economic downturn and a dramatic decline in the quality of education. Those schooled during this period generally failed to master the French language or many other subjects and struggled to find employment, forcing many to take low-paying jobs in the informal or black market that mired them in deepening poverty. Excepting the brief presidency of Albert Zafy, from 1992 to 1996, Ratsiraka remained in power from 1975 to 2001 and failed to achieve significant improvements in education throughout his tenure.\nEducation was prioritized under the Ravalomanana administration (2002\u201309), and is currently free and compulsory from ages 6 to 13. The primary schooling cycle is five years, followed by four years at the lower secondary level and three years at the upper secondary level. During Ravalomanana's first term, thousands of new primary schools and additional classrooms were constructed, older buildings were renovated, and tens of thousands of new primary teachers were recruited and trained. Primary school fees were eliminated, and kits containing basic school supplies were distributed to primary students.\nGovernment school construction initiatives have ensured at least one primary school per \"fokontany\" and one lower secondary school within each commune. At least one upper secondary school is located in each of the larger urban centers. The three branches of the national public university are located at Antananarivo, Mahajanga, and Fianarantsoa. These are complemented by public teacher-training colleges and several private universities and technical colleges.\nAs a result of increased educational access, enrollment rates more than doubled between 1996 and 2006. However, education quality is weak, producing high rates of grade repetition and dropout. Education policy in Ravalomanana's second term focused on quality issues, including an increase in minimum education standards for the recruitment of primary teachers from a middle school leaving certificate (BEPC) to a high school leaving certificate (BAC), and a reformed teacher training program to support the transition from traditional didactic instruction to student-centered teaching methods to boost student learning and participation in the classroom. Public expenditure on education was 2.8% of GDP in 2014. The literacy rate is estimated at 64.7%.\nCulture.\nEach of the many ethnic subgroups in Madagascar adhere to their own set of beliefs, practices and ways of life that have historically contributed to their unique identities. However, there are a number of core cultural features that are common throughout the island, creating a strongly unified Malagasy cultural identity. In addition to a common language and shared traditional religious beliefs around a creator god and veneration of the ancestors, the traditional Malagasy worldview is shaped by values that emphasize \"fihavanana\" (solidarity), \"vintana\" (destiny), \"tody\" (karma), and \"hasina\", a sacred life force that traditional communities believe imbues and thereby legitimates authority figures within the community or family. Other cultural elements commonly found throughout the island include the practice of male circumcision; strong kinship ties; a widespread belief in the power of magic, diviners, astrology and witch doctors; and a traditional division of social classes into nobles, commoners, and slaves.\nAlthough social castes are no longer legally recognized, ancestral caste affiliation often continues to affect social status, economic opportunity, and roles within the community. Malagasy people traditionally consult \"Mpanandro\" (\"Makers of the Days\") to identify the most auspicious days for important events such as weddings or \"famadihana\", according to a traditional astrological system introduced by Arabs. Similarly, the nobles of many Malagasy communities in the pre-colonial period would commonly employ advisers known as the \"ombiasy\" (from \"olona-be-hasina\", \"man of much virtue\") of the southeastern Antemoro ethnic group, who trace their ancestry back to early Somali settlers.\nThe diverse origins of Malagasy culture are evident in its tangible expressions. The most emblematic instrument of Madagascar, the \"valiha\", is a bamboo tube zither carried to Madagascar by early settlers from southern Borneo, and is very similar in form to those found in Indonesia and the Philippines today. Traditional houses in Madagascar are likewise similar to those of southern Borneo in terms of symbolism and construction, featuring a rectangular layout with a peaked roof and central support pillar. Reflecting a widespread veneration of the ancestors, tombs are culturally significant in many regions and tend to be built of more durable material, typically stone, and display more elaborate decoration than the houses of the living. The production and weaving of silk can be traced back to the island's earliest settlers, and Madagascar's national dress, the woven \"lamba\", has evolved into a varied and refined art.\nThe Southeast Asian cultural influence is also evident in Malagasy cuisine, in which rice is consumed at every meal, typically accompanied by one of a variety of flavorful vegetable or meat dishes. African influence is reflected in the sacred importance of zebu cattle and their embodiment of their owner's wealth, traditions originating on the African mainland. Cattle rustling, originally a rite of passage for young men in the plains areas of Madagascar where the largest herds of cattle are kept, has become a dangerous and sometimes deadly criminal enterprise as herdsmen in the southwest attempt to defend their cattle with traditional spears against increasingly armed professional rustlers.\nArts.\nA wide variety of oral and written literature has developed in Madagascar. One of the island's foremost artistic traditions is its oratory, as expressed in the forms of \"hainteny\" (poetry), \"kabary\" (public discourse) and \"ohabolana\" (proverbs). An epic poem exemplifying these traditions, the \"Ibonia\", has been handed down over the centuries in several different forms across the island, and offers insight into the diverse mythologies and beliefs of traditional Malagasy communities. This tradition was continued in the 20th century by such artists as Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo, who is considered Africa's first modern poet, and Elie Rajaonarison, an exemplar of the new wave of Malagasy poetry. Madagascar has also developed a rich musical heritage, embodied in dozens of regional musical genres such as the coastal \"salegy\" or highland \"hiragasy\" that enliven village gatherings, local dance floors and national airwaves. Madagascar also has a growing culture of classical music fostered through youth academies, organizations and orchestras that promote youth involvement in classical music.\nThe plastic arts are also widespread throughout the island. In addition to the tradition of silk weaving and lamba production, the weaving of raffia and other local plant materials has been used to create a wide array of practical items such as floor mats, baskets, purses and hats. Wood carving is a highly developed art form, with distinct regional styles evident in the decoration of balcony railings and other architectural elements. Sculptors create a variety of furniture and household goods, \"aloalo\" funerary posts, and wooden sculptures, many of which are produced for the tourist market. The decorative and functional woodworking traditions of the Zafimaniry people of the central highlands was inscribed on UNESCO's list of Intangible Cultural Heritage in 2008.\nAmong the Antaimoro people, the production of paper embedded with flowers and other decorative natural materials is a long-established tradition that the community has begun to market to eco-tourists. Embroidery and drawn thread work are done by hand to produce clothing, as well as tablecloths and other home textiles for sale in local crafts markets. Malagasy artists such as Madame Zo have incorporated textile traditions of Madagascar directly into their work. A small but growing number of fine art galleries in Antananarivo, and several other urban areas, offer paintings by local artists, and annual art events, such as the Hosotra open-air exhibition in the capital, contribute to the continuing development of fine arts in Madagascar.\nSport.\nA number of traditional pastimes have emerged in Madagascar. \"Moraingy\", a type of hand-to-hand combat, is a popular spectator sport in coastal regions. It is traditionally practiced by men, but women have recently begun to participate. The wrestling of zebu cattle, which is named savika or \"tolon-omby\", is also practiced in many regions. In addition to sports, a wide variety of games are played. Among the most emblematic is \"fanorona\", a board game widespread throughout the Highland regions. According to folk legend, the succession of King Andrianjaka after his father Ralambo was partially the result of the obsession that Andrianjaka's older brother may have had with playing \"fanorona\" to the detriment of his other responsibilities.\nWestern recreational activities were introduced to Madagascar over the past two centuries. Rugby union is considered the national sport of Madagascar. Soccer is also popular. Madagascar has produced a world champion in p\u00e9tanque, a French game similar to lawn bowling, which is widely played in urban areas and throughout the Highlands. School athletics programs typically include soccer, track and field, judo, boxing, women's basketball and women's tennis. Madagascar sent its first competitors to the Olympic Games in 1964, and has also competed in the African Games. Scouting is represented in Madagascar by its own local federation of three scouting clubs. Membership in 2011 was estimated at 14,905.\nBecause of its advanced sports facilities, Antananarivo gained the hosting rights for several of Africa's top international basketball events, including the 2011 FIBA Africa Championship, the 2009 FIBA Africa Championship for Women, the 2014 FIBA Africa Under-18 Championship, the 2013 FIBA Africa Under-16 Championship, and the 2015 FIBA Africa Under-16 Championship for Women. Madagascar's national 3x3 basketball team won the gold medal at the 2019 African Games.\nCuisine.\nMalagasy cuisine reflects the diverse influences of Southeast Asian, African, Oceania, Indian, Chinese, and European culinary traditions. The complexity of Malagasy meals can range from the simple, traditional preparations introduced by the earliest settlers, to the refined festival dishes prepared for the island's 19th-century monarchs. Throughout almost the entire island, the contemporary cuisine of Madagascar typically consists of a base of rice (\"vary\") served with an accompaniment (\"laoka\"). The many varieties of \"laoka\" may be vegetarian or include animal proteins, and typically feature a sauce flavored with such ingredients as ginger, onion, garlic, tomato, vanilla, coconut milk, salt, curry powder, green peppercorns, or less commonly, other spices or herbs. In parts of the arid south and west, pastoral families may replace rice with maize, cassava, or curds made from fermented zebu milk. A wide variety of sweet and savory fritters as well as other street foods are available across the island, as are diverse tropical and temperate-climate fruits. Locally produced beverages include fruit juices, coffee, herbal teas, and alcoholic drinks such as rum, wine, and beer. Three Horses Beer is the most popular beer on the island and is considered emblematic of Madagascar.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18967", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18967", "title": "Flowering plant", "text": "Clade of seed plants that produce flowers\nFlowering plants are plants that bear flowers and fruits, and form the clade Angiospermae (). The term angiosperm is derived from the Greek words (; 'container, vessel') and (; 'seed'), meaning that the seeds are enclosed within a fruit. The group was formerly called Magnoliophyta.\nAngiosperms are by far the most diverse group of land plants with 64 orders, 416 families, approximately 13,000 known genera and 300,000 known species. They include all forbs (flowering plants without a woody stem), grasses and grass-like plants, a vast majority of broad-leaved trees, shrubs and vines, and most aquatic plants. Angiosperms are distinguished from the other major seed plant clade, the gymnosperms, by having flowers, xylem consisting of vessel elements instead of tracheids, endosperm within their seeds, and fruits that completely envelop the seeds. The ancestors of flowering plants diverged from the common ancestor of all living gymnosperms before the end of the Carboniferous, over 300 million years ago. In the Cretaceous, angiosperms diversified explosively, becoming the dominant group of plants across the planet.\nAgriculture is almost entirely dependent on angiosperms, and a small number of flowering plant families supply nearly all plant-based food and livestock feed. Rice, maize and wheat provide half of the world's staple calorie intake, and all three plants are cereals from the Poaceae family (colloquially known as grasses). Other families provide important industrial plant products such as wood, paper and cotton, and supply numerous ingredients for drinks, sugar production, traditional medicine and modern pharmaceuticals. Flowering plants are also commonly grown for decorative purposes, with certain flowers playing significant cultural roles in many societies.\nOut of the \"Big Five\" extinction events in Earth's history, only the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event occurred while angiosperms dominated plant life on the planet. Today, the Holocene extinction affects all kingdoms of complex life on Earth, and conservation measures are necessary to protect plants in their habitats in the wild (\"in situ\"), or failing that, \"ex situ\" in seed banks or artificial habitats like botanic gardens. Otherwise, around 40% of plant species may become extinct due to human actions such as habitat destruction, introduction of invasive species, unsustainable logging, land clearing and overharvesting of medicinal or ornamental plants. Further, climate change is starting to impact plants and is likely to cause many species to become extinct by 2100.\nDistinguishing features.\nAngiosperms are terrestrial vascular plants; like the gymnosperms, they have roots, stems, leaves, and seeds. They differ from other seed plants in several ways.\nDiversity.\nEcological diversity.\nThe largest angiosperms are \"Eucalyptus\" gum trees of Australia, and \"Shorea faguetiana\", dipterocarp rainforest trees of Southeast Asia, both of which can reach almost in height. The smallest are \"Wolffia\" duckweeds which float on freshwater, each plant less than across.\nConsidering their method of obtaining energy, some 99% of flowering plants are photosynthetic autotrophs, deriving their energy from sunlight and using it to create molecules such as sugars. The remainder are parasitic, whether on fungi (myco-heterotrophic, formerly thought to be saprophytic) like the orchids for part or all of their life-cycle, or on other plants, either wholly like the broomrapes, \"Orobanche\", or partially like the witchweeds, \"Striga\".\nIn terms of their environment, flowering plants are cosmopolitan, occupying a wide range of habitats on land, in fresh water and in the sea. On land, they are the dominant plant group in every habitat except for frigid moss-lichen tundra and coniferous forest. The seagrasses in the Alismatales grow in marine environments, spreading with rhizomes that grow through the mud in sheltered coastal waters.\nSome specialised angiosperms are able to flourish in extremely acid or alkaline habitats. The sundews, many of which live in nutrient-poor acid bogs, are carnivorous plants, able to derive nutrients such as nitrate from the bodies of trapped insects. Other flowers such as \"Gentiana verna\", the spring gentian, are adapted to the alkaline conditions found on calcium-rich chalk and limestone, which give rise to often dry topographies such as limestone pavement.\nAs for their growth habit, the flowering plants range from small, soft herbaceous plants, often living as annuals or biennials that set seed and die after one or two growing seasons, to large perennial woody trees that may live for many centuries and grow to many metres in height. Some species grow tall without being self-supporting like trees by climbing on other plants in the manner of vines or lianas.\nTaxonomic diversity.\nThe number of species of flowering plants is estimated to be in the range of 250,000 to 400,000. This compares to around 12,000 species of moss and 11,000 species of pteridophytes. The APG system seeks to determine the number of families, mostly by molecular phylogenetics. In the 2009 APG III there were 415 families. The 2016 APG IV added five new orders (Boraginales, Dilleniales, Icacinales, Metteniusales and Vahliales), along with some new families, for a total of 64 angiosperm orders and 416 families.\nThe diversity of flowering plants is not evenly distributed. Nearly all species belong to the eudicot (75%), monocot (23%), and magnoliid (2%) clades. The remaining five clades contain a little over 250 species in total; i.e. less than 0.1% of flowering plant diversity, divided among nine families. The 25 most species-rich of 443 families, containing over 166,000 species between them in their APG circumscriptions, are:\nEvolution.\nHistory of classification.\nThe botanical term \"angiosperm\", from Greek words ( 'bottle, vessel') and ( 'seed'), was coined in the form \"Angiospermae\" by Paul Hermann in 1690, including only flowering plants whose seeds were enclosed in capsules. The term angiosperm fundamentally changed in meaning in 1827 with Robert Brown, when angiosperm came to mean a seed plant with enclosed ovules. In 1851, with Wilhelm Hofmeister's work on embryo-sacs, Angiosperm came to have its modern meaning of all the flowering plants including Dicotyledons and Monocotyledons. The APG system treats the flowering plants as an unranked clade without a formal Latin name (angiosperms). A formal classification was published alongside the 2009 revision in which the flowering plants rank as the subclass Magnoliidae. From 1998, the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG) has reclassified the angiosperms, with updates in the APG II system in 2003, the APG III system in 2009, and the APG IV system in 2016.\nPhylogeny.\nExternal.\nIn 2019, a molecular phylogeny of plants placed the flowering plants in their evolutionary context:\nInternal.\nThe main groups of living angiosperms are:\nIn 2024, Alexandre R. Zuntini and colleagues constructed a tree of some 6,000 flowering plant genera, representing some 60% of the existing genera, on the basis of analysis of 353 nuclear genes in each specimen. Much of the existing phylogeny is confirmed; the rosid phylogeny is revised.\nFossil history.\nFossilised spores suggest that land plants (embryophytes) have existed for at least 475\u00a0million years. However, angiosperms appear suddenly and in great diversity in the fossil record in the Early Cretaceous (~130 mya). Claimed records of flowering plants prior to this are not widely accepted, as all supposed pre-Cretaceous \"flowers\" can be explained through being misidentifications of other seed plants. Furthermore, almost all of these controversial fossils are described in papers co-authored by the researcher Xin Wang, such as the particularly debated \"Nanjinganthus\". Molecular evidence suggests that the ancestors of angiosperms diverged from the gymnosperms during the late Devonian, about 365 million years ago. The origin time of the crown group of flowering plants remains contentious. By the Late Cretaceous, angiosperms appear to have dominated environments formerly occupied by ferns and gymnosperms. Large canopy-forming trees replaced conifers as the dominant trees close to the end of the Cretaceous, 66 million years ago. The radiation of herbaceous angiosperms occurred much later.\nReproduction.\nFlowers.\nThe characteristic feature of angiosperms is the flower. Its function is to ensure fertilization of the ovule and development of fruit containing seeds. It may arise terminally on a shoot or from the axil of a leaf. The flower-bearing part of the plant is usually sharply distinguished from the leaf-bearing part, and forms a branch-system called an inflorescence.\nFlowers produce two kinds of reproductive cells. Microspores, which divide to become pollen grains, are the male cells; they are borne in the stamens. The female cells, megaspores, divide to become the egg cell. They are contained in the ovule and enclosed in the carpel; one or more carpels form the pistil.\nThe flower may consist only of these parts, as in wind-pollinated plants like the willow, where each flower comprises only a few stamens or two carpels. In insect- or bird-pollinated plants, other structures protect the sporophylls and attract pollinators. The individual members of these surrounding structures are known as sepals and petals (or tepals in flowers such as \"Magnolia\" where sepals and petals are not distinguishable from each other). The outer series (calyx of sepals) is usually green and leaf-like, and functions to protect the rest of the flower, especially the bud. The inner series (corolla of petals) is, in general, white or brightly colored, is more delicate in structure, and attracts pollinators by colour, scent, and nectar.\nMost flowers are hermaphroditic, producing both pollen and ovules in the same flower, but some use other devices to reduce self-fertilization. Heteromorphic flowers have carpels and stamens of differing lengths, so animal pollinators cannot easily transfer pollen between them. Homomorphic flowers may use a biochemical self-incompatibility to discriminate between self and non-self pollen grains. Dioecious plants such as holly have male and female flowers on separate plants. Monoecious plants have separate male and female flowers on the same plant; these are often wind-pollinated, as in maize, but include some insect-pollinated plants such as \"Cucurbita\" squashes.\nFertilisation and embryogenesis.\nDouble fertilization requires two sperm cells to fertilise cells in the ovule. A pollen grain sticks to the stigma at the top of the pistil, germinates, and grows a long pollen tube. A haploid generative cell travels down the tube behind the tube nucleus. The generative cell divides by mitosis to produce two haploid (\"n\") sperm cells. The pollen tube grows from the stigma, down the style and into the ovary. When it reaches the micropyle of the ovule, it digests its way into one of the synergids, releasing its contents including the sperm cells. The synergid that the cells were released into degenerates; one sperm makes its way to fertilise the egg cell, producing a diploid (2\"n\") zygote. The second sperm cell fuses with both central cell nuclei, producing a triploid (3\"n\") cell. The zygote develops into an embryo; the triploid cell develops into the endosperm, the embryo's food supply. The ovary develops into a fruit and each ovule into a seed.\nFruit and seed.\nAs the embryo and endosperm develop, the wall of the embryo sac enlarges and combines with the nucellus and integument to form the \"seed coat\". The ovary wall develops to form the fruit or pericarp, whose form is closely associated with type of seed dispersal system.\nOther parts of the flower often contribute to forming the fruit. For example, in the apple, the hypanthium forms the edible flesh, surrounding the ovaries which form the tough cases around the seeds.\nApomixis, setting seed without fertilization, is found naturally in about 2.2% of angiosperm genera. Some angiosperms, including many citrus varieties, are able to produce fruits through a type of apomixis called nucellar embryony.\nAdaptive function of flowers.\nCharles Darwin in his 1878 book The Effects of Cross and Self-Fertilization in the Vegetable Kingdom in the initial paragraph of chapter XII noted \"The first and most important of the conclusions which may be drawn from the observations given in this volume, is that generally cross-fertilisation is beneficial and self-fertilisation often injurious, at least with the plants on which I experimented.\" Flowers emerged in plant evolution as an adaptation for the promotion of cross-fertilisation (outcrossing), a process that allows the masking of deleterious mutations in the genome of progeny. The masking effect is known as genetic complementation. Meiosis in flowering plants provides a direct mechanism for repairing DNA through genetic recombination in reproductive tissues. Sexual reproduction appears to be required for maintaining long-term genomic integrity and only infrequent combinations of extrinsic and intrinsic factors permit shifts to asexuality. Thus the two fundamental aspects of sexual reproduction in flowering plants, cross-fertilization (outcrossing) and meiosis appear to be maintained respectively by the advantages of genetic complementation and recombinational repair.\nHuman uses.\nPractical uses.\nAgriculture is almost entirely dependent on angiosperms, which provide virtually all plant-based food and fodder for livestock. Much of this food derives from a small number of flowering plant families. For instance, half of the world's calorie intake is supplied by just three members of the grass family \u2013 wheat, rice and maize.\nFlowering plants provide a diverse range of materials in the form of wood, paper, fibers such as cotton, flax, and hemp, medicines such as digoxin and opioids, and decorative and landscaping plants. Coffee and hot chocolate are beverages from flowering plants (in the Rubiaceae and Malvaceae respectively).\nCultural uses.\nBoth real and fictitious plants play a wide variety of roles in literature and film. Flowers are the subjects of many poems by poets such as William Blake, Robert Frost, and Rabindranath Tagore. Bird-and-flower painting () is a kind of Chinese painting that celebrates the beauty of flowering plants. Flowers have been used in literature to convey meaning by authors including William Shakespeare. \nFlowers are used in a variety of art forms which arrange cut or living plants, such as bonsai, ikebana, and flower arranging. Ornamental plants have sometimes changed the course of history, as in tulipomania. Many countries and regions have floral emblems; a survey of 70 of these found that the most popular flowering plant family for such emblems is Orchidaceae at 15.7% (11 emblems), followed by Fabaceae at 10% (7 emblems), and Asparagaceae, Asteraceae, and Rosaceae all at 5.7% (4 emblems each).\nConservation.\nHuman impact on the environment has driven a range of species extinct and is threatening even more today. Multiple organizations such as IUCN and Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew suggest that around 40% of plant species are threatened with extinction. The majority are threatened by habitat loss, but activities such as logging of wild timber trees and collection of medicinal plants, or the introduction of non-native invasive species, also play a role.\nRelatively few plant diversity assessments currently consider climate change, yet it is starting to impact plants as well. About 3% of flowering plants are very likely to be driven extinct within a century at of global warming, and 10% at . In worst-case scenarios, half of all tree species may be driven extinct by climate change over that timeframe.\nConservation in this context is the attempt to prevent extinction, whether \"in situ\" by protecting plants and their habitats in the wild, or \"ex situ\" in seed banks or as living plants. Some 3000 botanic gardens around the world maintain living plants, including over 40% of the species known to be threatened, as an \"insurance policy against extinction in the wild.\" The United Nations' Global Strategy for Plant Conservation asserts that \"without plants, there is no life\". It aims to \"halt the continuing loss of plant diversity\" throughout the world.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nArticles, books and chapters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWebsites.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18968", "revid": "11688364", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18968", "title": "Malvales", "text": "Order of flowering plants\nThe Malvales are an order of flowering plants. As circumscribed by APG II-system, the order includes about 6000 species within nine families. The order is placed in the eurosids II, which are part of the eudicots.\nThe plants are mostly shrubs and trees; most of its families have a cosmopolitan distribution in the tropics and subtropics, with limited expansion into temperate regions. An interesting distribution occurs in Madagascar, where three endemic families of Malvales (Sphaerosepalaceae, Sarcolaenaceae and Diegodendraceae) occur.\nMany species of Malvaceae, \"sensu lato\" (in the broad sense), are valued for their wood, with that of \"Ochroma\" (balsa) being known for its lightness, and that of \"Tilia\" (lime, linden, or basswood) as a popular wood for carving. Fruit of the cacao tree (\"Theobroma cacao\") are used as an ingredient for chocolate. Kola nuts (genus \"Cola\") are notable for their high caffeine content and were commonly used in the past in preparation of various cola drinks. They are still in use as a stimulant, particularly in West Africa where they are chewed for this effect. Other well-known members of Malvales in the APG II sense are daphnes, hibiscus, hollyhocks, okra, jute, baobab trees, cotton, kapok (which mostly comes from \"Ceiba pentandra\", but also from other \"Kapok trees\" also of Malvales, such as \"Bombax ceiba\"), and durian.\nDescription.\nThe morphology of Malvales is diverse, with few common characteristics. Among those most commonly encountered are leaf shapes in palmate form, sepals which are connate, and a specific structure and chemical composition of the seeds. The cortex is often fibrous, built of soft phloem layers.\nTaxonomy.\nEarly classifications such as that of Dahlgren placed the Malvales in the superorder Malviflorae (also called Malvanae). Family boundaries and circumscriptions of the \"core\" Malvales families, Malvaceae, Bombacaceae, Tiliaceae, and Sterculiaceae, have long been problematic. A close relationship among these families, and particularly Malvaceae and Bombacaceae, has generally been recognized, although until recently most classification systems have maintained them as separate families. With numerous molecular phylogenies showing Sterculiaceae, Bombacaceae, and Tiliaceae as traditionally defined are either paraphyletic or polyphyletic, a consensus has been emerging for a trend to expand Malvaceae to include these three families. This expanded circumscription of Malvaceae has been recognized in the most recent version of the Thorne system, by the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group, and in the most recent comprehensive treatment of vascular plant families and genera, the Kubitzki system.\nThe dominant family in the APG II-system is the extended Malvaceae (Malvaceae \"sensu lato\") with over 4225 species, followed by Thymelaeaceae with 898 species. This expanded circumscription of Malvaceae is taken to include the families Bombacaceae, Sterculiaceae and Tiliaceae. Under the older Cronquist system the order contained these four \"core Malvales\" families plus the Elaeocarpaceae and was placed among the Dilleniidae. Some of the currently included families were placed by Cronquist in the Violales.\nPhylogeny.\nThe APG IV gives the following cladogram for Malvales phylogeny.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18969", "revid": "1276440762", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18969", "title": "Myrtales", "text": "Order of flowering plants\nThe Myrtales are an order of flowering plants in the malvid clade of the rosid group of dicotyledons. Well-known members of Myrtales include: myrtle, p\u014dhutukawa, bay rum tree, clove, guava, acca (feijoa), allspice, eucalyptus, crape myrtles, henna tree, pomegranate, water caltrop, loosestrifes, cupheas (cigar plants), evening primroses, fuchsias, willowherbs, white mangrove, leadwood tree, African birch, Koster's curse, and velvet tree.\nTaxonomy.\nMyrtales include the following nine families, according to the APG III system of classification:\nThe APG III system places the order within the eurosids; this is corroborated by the placement of the Myrtales in the Malvid clade by the \"One Thousand Plant Transcriptomes\" Initiative. \nMyrtales are placed as a sister to the eurosids II clade as of the publishing of the \"Eucalyptus grandis\" genome in June 2014.\nThe Cronquist system gives essentially the same composition, except the Vochysiaceae are removed to the order Polygalales, and the Thymelaeaceae are included. The families Sonneratiaceae, Trapaceae, and Punicaceae are removed from the Lythraceae. In the classification system of Dahlgren the Myrtales were in the superorder Myrtiflorae (also called Myrtanae). The APGIII system agrees with the older Cronquist circumscriptions of treating Psiloxylaceae and Heteropyxidaceae within Myrtaceae, and Memecyclaceae within Melastomataceae.\nEllagitannins are reported in dicotyledoneous angiosperms, and notably in species in the order Myrtales.\nOrigins.\nMyrtales is dated to around 89\u201399 million years ago (mya) in Australasia; however, there is some contention as to that date, which was obtained using nuclear DNA. When looking at chloroplast DNA, the myrtales' ancestor is, instead, considered to have evolved during the mid-Cretaceous period (100mya) in Southeast Africa, rather than in Australasia. Although the APG system classifies myrtales as within the eurosids, the recently published genome of \"Eucalyptus grandis\" places the order myrtales as a sister to the eurosids rather than inside them. The discrepancy is thought to have arisen due to the difference between using numerous taxa versus using various genes for constructing a phylogeny.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Data related to at Wikispecies"}
{"id": "18970", "revid": "49599614", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18970", "title": "Malpighiales", "text": "Eudicot order of flowering plants\nThe Malpighiales comprise one of the largest orders of flowering plants. The order is very diverse, with well-known members including willows, violets, poplars, corpse flower, coca plant, cassava, rubber tree, castor bean, spurges, flaxseed, Saint John's wort, passionfruit, mangosteen, and manchineel tree.\nThe order is not part of any of the classification systems based only on plant morphology and the relationships of its diverse members can be hard to recognize except with molecular phylogenetic evidence. Molecular clock calculations estimate the origin of stem group Malpighiales at around 100 million years ago (Mya) and the origin of crown group Malpighiales at about 90 Mya.\nThe Malpighiales contain about 36 families and more than species, about 7.8% of the eudicots.\nTaxonomy.\nThe Malpighiales include the following 36 families, according to the APG IV system of classification:\nIn the APG III system, 35 families were recognized. Medusagynaceae, Quiinaceae, Peraceae, Malesherbiaceae, Turneraceae, Samydaceae, and Scyphostegiaceae were consolidated into other families. The largest family, by far, is the Euphorbiaceae, with about 7500 species in about 300 genera. Changes made in the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG) classification of 2016 (APG IV) were the inclusion of Irvingiaceae, Peraceae, Euphorbiaceae and Ixonanthaceae, together with the transfer of the COM clade from the fabids (rosid I) to the malvids (rosid II).\nPhylogeny.\nThe phylogenetic tree shown below is from Xi \"et al.\" (2012). The study presented a more resolved phylogenetic tree than previous studies through the use of data from a large number of genes. They included analyses of 82 plastid genes from 58 species (ignoring the problematic Rafflesiaceae), using partitions identified a posteriori by applying a Bayesian mixture model. Xi \"et al.\" identified 12 additional clades and three major, basal clades.\n2009 (Older).\nThe older phylogenetic tree shown below is from Wurdack and Davis (2009). The DNA sequences of 13 genes, 42 families were placed into 16 groups, ranging in size from one to 10 families. The relationships among these 16 groups were poorly resolved. The statistical support for each branch is 100% bootstrap percentage and 100% posterior probability, except where labeled, with bootstrap percentage followed by posterior probability.\nCircumscription.\nMalpighiales is monophyletic and in molecular phylogenetic studies, it receives strong statistical support. Since the APG II system was published in 2003, minor changes to the circumscription of the order have been made. The family Peridiscaceae has been expanded from two genera to three, and then to four, and transferred to Saxifragales.\nThe genera \"Cyrillopsis\" (Ixonanthaceae), \"Centroplacus\" (Centroplacaceae), \"Bhesa\" (Centroplacaceae), \"Aneulophus\" (Erythroxylaceae), \"Ploiarium\" (Bonnetiaceae), \"Trichostephanus\" (Samydaceae), \"Sapria\" (Rafflesiaceae), \"Rhizanthes\" (Rafflesiaceae), and \"Rafflesia\" (Rafflesiaceae) had been either added or confirmed as members of Malpighiales by the end of 2009.\nSome family delimitations within the order have changed, as well, most notably, the segregation of Calophyllaceae from Clusiaceae \"sensu lato\" when it was shown that the latter is paraphyletic. Some differences of opinion on family delimitation exist, as well. For example, Samydaceae and Scyphostegiaceae may be recognized as families or included in a large version of Salicaceae.\nThe group is difficult to characterize phenotypically, due to sheer morphological diversity, ranging from tropical holoparasites with giant flowers, such as \"Rafflesia\", to temperate trees and herbs with tiny, simple flowers, such as Salix. Members often have dentate leaves, with the teeth having a single vein running into a congested and often deciduous apex (i.e., violoid, salicoid, or theoid). Also, zeylanol has recently been discovered in \"Balanops\" and \"Dichapetalum\" which are in the balanops clade (so-called Chrysobalanaceae s. l.). The so-called parietal suborder (the clusioid clade and Ochnaceae s. l. were also part of Parietales) corresponds with the traditional Violales as 8 (Achariaceae, Violaceae, Flacourtiaceae, Lacistemataceae, Scyphostegiaceae, Turneraceae, Malesherbiaceae, and Passifloraceae) of the order's 10 families along with Salicaceae, which have usually been assigned as a related order or suborder, are in this most derived malpighian suborder, so that eight of the 10 families of this suborder are Violales. The family Flacourtiaceae has proven to be polyphyletic as the cyanogenic members have been placed in Achariaceae and the ones with salicoid teeth were transferred to Salicaceae. Scyphostegiaceae, consisting of the single genus \"Scyphostegia\" has been merged into Salicaceae.\nAffinities.\nMalpighiales is a member of a supraordinal group called the COM clade, which consists of the orders Celastrales, Oxalidales, and Malpighiales. Some describe it as containing a fourth order, Huales, separating the family Huaceae into its own order, separate from Oxalidales.\nSome recent studies have placed Malpighiales as sister to Oxalidales \"sensu lato\" (including Huaceae), while others have found a different topology for the COM clade.\nThe COM clade is part of an unranked group known as malvids (rosid II), though formally placed in Fabidae (rosid I). These in turn are part of a group that has long been recognized, namely, the rosids.\nHistory.\nThe French botanist Charles Plumier named the genus \"Malpighia\" in honor of Marcello Malpighi's work on plants; \"Malpighia\" is the type genus for the Malpighiaceae, a family of tropical and subtropical flowering plants.\nThe family Malpighiaceae was the type family for one of the orders created by Jussieu in his 1789 work \"Genera Plantarum\". Friedrich von Berchtold and Jan Presl described such an order in 1820. Unlike modern taxonomists, these authors did not use the suffix \"ales\" in naming their orders. The name \"Malpighiales\" is attributed by some to Carl von Martius. In the 20th century, it was usually associated with John Hutchinson, who used it in all three editions of his book, \"The Families of Flowering Plants\". The name was not used by those who wrote later, in the 1970s, '80s, and '90s.\nThe taxon was largely presaged by Hans Hallier in 1912 in an article in the \"Archiv. N\u00e9erl. Sci. Exact. Nat.\" titled \"L'Origine et le syst\u00e8me phyl\u00e9tique des angiospermes\", in which his Passionales and Polygalinae were derived from Linaceae (in Guttales), with Passionales containing seven (of eight) families that also appear in the current Malpighiales, namely Passifloraceae, Salicaceae, Euphorbiaceae, Achariaceae, Flacourtiaceae, Malesherbiaceae, and Turneraceae, and Polygalinae containing four (of 10) families that also appear in the current Malpighiales, namely Malpighiaceae, Violaceae, Dichapetalaceae, and Trigoniaceae.\nThe molecular phylogenetic revolution led to a major restructuring of the order. The first semblance of Malpighiales as now known came from a phylogeny of seed plants published in 1993 and based upon DNA sequences of the gene \"rbcL\". This study recovered a group of rosids unlike any group found in any previous system of plant classification. To make a clear break with classification systems being used at that time, the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group resurrected Hutchinson's name, though his concept of Malpighiales included much of what is now in Celastrales and Oxalidales.\nGallery of type genera.\n\"Litoh family\" is a common name for Ctenolophonaceae, and \"koteb family\" for Lophopyxidaceae.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18972", "revid": "25852912", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18972", "title": "Miranda warning", "text": "Notification given by U.S. police to criminal suspects on their rights while in custody\nIn the United States, the Miranda\" warning is a type of notification customarily given by police to criminal suspects in police custody (or in a custodial interrogation) advising them of their right to silence and, in effect, protection from self-incrimination; that is, their right to refuse to answer questions or provide information to law enforcement or other officials. Named for the U.S. Supreme Court's 1966 decision \"Miranda v. Arizona\", these rights are often referred to as Miranda\" rights. The purpose of such notification is to preserve the admissibility of their statements made during custodial interrogation in later criminal proceedings. The idea came from law professor Yale Kamisar, who subsequently was dubbed \"the father of \"Miranda\".\"\nThe language used in \"Miranda\" warnings derives from the Supreme Court's opinion in its \"Miranda\" decision. But the specific language used in the warnings varies between jurisdictions, and the warning is deemed adequate as long as the defendant's rights are properly disclosed such that any waiver of those rights by the defendant is knowing, voluntary, and intelligent. For example, the warning may be phrased as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You have the right to remain silent. Anything you say can and will be used against you in a court of law. You have the right to talk to a lawyer for advice before we ask you any questions. You have the right to have a lawyer with you during questioning. If you cannot afford a lawyer, one will be appointed for you before any questioning if you wish. If you decide to answer questions now without a lawyer present, you have the right to stop answering at any time.\nThe \"Miranda\" warning is part of a preventive criminal procedure rule that law enforcement are required to administer to protect an individual who is in custody and subject to direct questioning or its functional equivalent from a violation of their Fifth Amendment right against compelled self-incrimination. In \"Miranda v. Arizona\", the Supreme Court held that the admission of an elicited incriminating statement by a suspect not informed of these rights violates the Fifth Amendment and the Sixth Amendment right to counsel, through the incorporation of these rights into state law. Thus, if law enforcement officials decline to offer a \"Miranda\" warning to an individual in their custody, they may interrogate that person and act upon the knowledge gained, but may not ordinarily use that person's statements as evidence against them in a criminal trial.\nOrigin and development of \"Miranda\" rights.\nThe concept of \"\"Miranda\" rights\" was enshrined in U.S. law following the 1966 \"Miranda v. Arizona\" Supreme Court decision, which found that the Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights of Ernesto Arturo Miranda had been violated during his arrest and trial for armed robbery, kidnapping, and rape of an 18-year-old woman.\nMiranda was subsequently retried and convicted, based primarily on his estranged ex-partner, who had been tracked down by the original arresting officer via Miranda's own parents, suddenly claiming that Miranda had confessed to her when she had visited him in jail. Miranda's lawyer later confessed that he 'goofed' the case by focusing too much on the constitutional issues (and losing sight of the jury and guilt or innocence).\nThe circumstances triggering the \"Miranda\" safeguards, i.e. \"Miranda\" rights, are \"custody\" and \"interrogation\". Custody means formal arrest or the deprivation of freedom to an extent associated with formal arrest. Interrogation means explicit questioning or actions that are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response. The Supreme Court did not specify the exact wording to use when informing a suspect of their rights. However, the Court did create a set of guidelines that must be followed. The ruling states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To summarize, we hold that, when an individual is taken into custody or otherwise deprived of his freedom by the authorities in any significant way and is subjected to questioning, the privilege against self-incrimination is jeopardized. Procedural safeguards must be employed to protect the privilege, and unless other fully effective means are adopted to notify the person of his right of silence and to assure that the exercise of the right will be scrupulously honored, the following measures are required. He must be warned prior to any questioning that he has the right to remain silent, that anything he says can be used against him in a court of law, that he has the right to the presence of an attorney, and that, if he cannot afford an attorney one will be appointed for him prior to any questioning if he so desires. Opportunity to exercise these rights must be afforded to him throughout the interrogation. After such warnings have been given, and such opportunity afforded him, the individual may knowingly and intelligently waive these rights and agree to answer questions or make a statement. But unless and until such warnings and waiver are demonstrated by the prosecution at trial, no evidence obtained as a result of interrogation can be used against him.\nFrom \"Miranda rights\", American English developed the verb \"Mirandize\", meaning \"read the \"Miranda\" rights to\".\nIn \"Berkemer v. McCarty\" (1984), the Supreme Court decided that a person subjected to custodial interrogation is entitled to the benefit of the procedural safeguards enunciated in \"Miranda\", regardless of the nature or severity of the offense of which they are suspected or for which they were arrested.\nNotably, the \"Miranda\" rights need not be read in any particular order, and they need not precisely match the language of the \"Miranda\" case as long as they are adequately and fully conveyed (\"California v. Prysock\", 453 U.S. https:// (1981)).\nIn \"Berghuis v. Thompkins\" (2010), the Supreme Court held that unless a suspect expressly states that they are invoking this right, subsequent voluntary statements made to an officer can be used against them in court, and police can continue to interact with (or question) the alleged criminal.\nIn \"Vega v. Tekoh\" (2022), the Supreme Court held that police may not be sued for failing to administer \"Miranda\" warnings, and that the remedy for such a failure is the exclusion of the acquired statements at trial.\nThe warnings.\nEvery U.S. jurisdiction has its own regulations regarding what, precisely, must be said to a person arrested or placed in a custodial situation. The typical warning states:\nThe courts have since ruled that the warning must be \"meaningful\", so it is usually required that the suspect be asked if they understand their rights. Sometimes, firm answers of \"yes\" are required. Some departments and jurisdictions require that an officer ask \"do you understand?\" after every sentence in the warning. An arrestee's silence is not a waiver, but in Berghuis v. Thompkins (2010), the Supreme Court ruled 5\u20134 that police are allowed to interrogate suspects who have invoked or waived their rights ambiguously, and any statement given during questioning prior to invocation or waiving is admissible as evidence. Evidence has in some cases been ruled inadmissible because of an arrestee's poor knowledge of English and the failure of arresting officers to provide the warning in the arrestee's language.\nWhile the exact language above is not required by \"Miranda\", the police must advise the suspect that:\nThere is no precise language that must be used in advising a suspect of their \"Miranda\" rights. The point is that whatever language is used the substance of the rights outlined above must be communicated to the suspect. The suspect may be advised of their rights orally or in writing. Also, officers must make sure the suspect understands what the officer is saying, taking into account potential education levels. It may be necessary to \"translate\" to the suspect's level of understanding. Courts have ruled this admissible as long as the original waiver is said and the \"translation\" is recorded either on paper or on tape.\nThe Supreme Court has resisted efforts to require officers to more fully advise suspects of their rights. For example, the police are not required to advise the suspect that they can stop the interrogation at any time, that the decision to exercise the right cannot be used against the suspect, or that they have a right to talk to a lawyer before being asked any questions. Nor have the courts required to explain the rights. For example, the standard \"Miranda\" right to counsel states \"You have a right to have an attorney present during the questioning\". Police are not required to explain that this right is not merely a right to have a lawyer present while the suspect is being questioned. The right to counsel includes:\nCircumstances triggering the \"Miranda\" requisites.\nThe circumstances triggering the \"Miranda\" safeguards, i.e. \"Miranda\" warnings, are \"custody\" and \"interrogation\". Custody means formal arrest or the deprivation of freedom to an extent associated with formal arrest. Interrogation means explicit questioning or actions that are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response. Suspects in \"custody\" who are about to be interrogated must be properly advised of their \"Miranda\" rights\u2014namely, the Fifth Amendment right against compelled self incrimination (and, in furtherance of this right, the right to counsel while in custody). The Sixth Amendment right to counsel means that the suspect has the right to consult with an attorney before questioning begins and have an attorney present during the interrogation. The Fifth Amendment right against compelled self incrimination is the right to remain silent\u2014the right to refuse to answer questions or to otherwise communicate information.\nThe duty to warn only arises when police officers conduct custodial interrogations. The Constitution does not require that a defendant be advised of the \"Miranda\" rights as part of the arrest procedure, or once an officer has probable cause to arrest, or if the defendant has become a suspect of the focus of an investigation. Custody and interrogation are the events that trigger the duty to warn.\nUse in various U.S. state jurisdictions.\nSome jurisdictions provide the right of a juvenile to remain silent if their parent or guardian is not present. Some departments in New Jersey, Nevada, Oklahoma, and Alaska modify the \"providing an attorney\" clause as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We have no way of giving you a lawyer, but one will be appointed for you, if you wish, if and when you go to court.\nEven though this sentence may be somewhat ambiguous to some laypersons, who can, and who \"have\" actually interpreted it as meaning that they will not get a lawyer until they confess and are arraigned in court, the U.S. Supreme Court has approved of it as an accurate description of the procedure in those states.\nIn Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California\u2014the four states that border Mexico\u2014suspects who are not United States citizens are given an additional warning:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If you are not a United States citizen, you may contact your country's consulate prior to any questioning.\nAfter issuance of Miranda warnings, the police may ask waiver questions. Common waiver questions, which may be included on a written warning card or document, are,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Question 1: Do you understand each of these rights I have explained to you?\nQuestion 2: Having these rights in mind, do you wish to talk to us now?\nAn affirmative answer to both of the above questions waives the rights. If the suspect responds \"no\" to the first question, the officer is required to re-read the \"Miranda\" warning, while saying \"no\" to the second question invokes the right at that moment; in either case the interviewing officer or officers cannot question the suspect until the rights are waived.\nGenerally, when defendants invoke their Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination and refuse to testify or submit to cross-examination at trial, the prosecutor cannot indirectly punish them for the exercise of a constitutional right by commenting on their silence and insinuating that it is an implicit admission of guilt. Since \"Miranda\" rights are simply a judicial gloss upon the Fifth Amendment which protects against coercive interrogations, the same rule also prevents prosecutors from commenting about the post-arrest silence of suspects who invoke their \"Miranda\" rights immediately after arrest. However, neither the Fifth Amendment nor \"Miranda\" extend to \"pre-arrest\" silence, which means that if a defendant takes the witness stand at trial (meaning he just waived his Fifth Amendment right to remain silent), the prosecutor can attack his credibility with his pre-arrest silence (based on his failure to immediately turn himself in and confess to the things he voluntarily testified about at trial).\nUnder the Uniform Code of Military Justice, Article 31 provides for the right against compelled self-incrimination. Interrogation subjects under Army jurisdiction must first be given Department of the Army Form 3881, which informs them of the charges and their rights, and the subjects must sign the form. The United States Navy and United States Marine Corps require that all arrested personnel be read the \"rights of the accused\" and must sign a form waiving those rights if they so desire; a verbal waiver is not sufficient.\nIt is unclear whether a \"Miranda\" warning\u2014if spoken or in writing\u2014could be appropriately given to disabled persons. For example, \"the right to remain silent\" means little to a deaf individual and the word \"constitutional\" may not be understood by people with only an elementary education. In one case, a deaf murder suspect was kept at a therapy station until he was able to understand the meaning of the \"Miranda\" warning and other judicial proceedings.\nThe six rules.\nThe \"Miranda\" rule applies to the use of testimonial evidence in criminal proceedings that is the product of custodial police interrogation. The \"Miranda\" right to counsel and right to remain silent are derived from the self-incrimination clause of the Fifth Amendment. Therefore, for the \"Miranda\" to apply, six requirements must be fulfilled:\n If the suspect did not make a statement during the interrogation the fact that he was not advised of his \"Miranda\" rights is of no importance. Nor can the state offer evidence that the defendant asserted his rights\u2014that he refused to talk.\n \"Miranda\" applies only to \"testimonial\" evidence as that term is defined under the Fifth Amendment. For purposes of the Fifth Amendment, testimonial statements mean communications that explicitly or implicitly relate a factual assertion [an assertion of fact or belief] or disclose information. The \"Miranda\" rule does not prohibit compelling a person to engage in non-assertive conduct that is incriminating or may produce incriminating evidence. Thus, requiring a suspect to participate in identification procedures such as giving handwriting or voice exemplars, fingerprints, DNA samples, hair samples, and dental impressions is not within the Miranda rule. Such physical or real evidence is non-testimonial and not protected by the Fifth Amendment self-incrimination clause. On the other hand, certain non-verbal conduct may be testimonial. For example, if the suspect nodded their head up and down in response to the question \"did you kill the victim\", the conduct is testimonial; it is the same as saying \"yes I did\", and Miranda would apply.\n The evidence must have been obtained while the suspect was in custody. This limitation follows from the fact that \"Miranda\"'s purpose is to protect suspects from the compulsion inherent in the police-dominated atmosphere attendant to arrest. Custody means either that the suspect was under arrest or that his freedom of movement was restrained to an extent \"associated with a formal arrest\". A formal arrest occurs when an officer, with the intent to make an arrest, takes a person into custody by the use of physical force or the person submits to the control of an officer who has indicated his intention to arrest the person. Telling a person he is \"under arrest\" is sufficient to satisfy this requirement even though the person may not be otherwise physically restrained. Absent a formal arrest, the issue is whether a reasonable person in the suspect's position would have believed that he was under \"full custodial\" arrest. Applying this objective test, the Court has held Miranda does not apply to roadside questioning of a stopped motorist or to questioning of a person briefly detained on the street\u2014a Terry stop. Even though neither the motorist nor the pedestrian is free to leave, this interference with the freedom of action is not considered actual arrest or its functional equivalent for purposes of the Fifth Amendment. The court has similarly held that a person who voluntarily comes to the police station for purposes of questioning is not in custody and thus not entitled to Miranda warnings particularly when the police advise the suspect that he is not under arrest and free to leave.\n The evidence must have been the product of interrogation. A defendant who seeks to challenge the admissibility of a statement under \"Miranda\" must show that the statement was \"prompted by police conduct that constituted 'interrogation'\". A volunteered statement by a person in custody does not implicate \"Miranda\". In \"Rhode Island v. Innis\", the Supreme Court defined interrogation as express questioning and \"any words or actions on the part of the police (other than those normally attendant to arrest and custody) that the police should know are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the suspect\". Thus, a practice that the police \"should know is reasonably likely to evoke an incriminating response from a suspect ... amounts to interrogation\". For example, confronting the suspect with incriminating evidence may be sufficiently evocative to amount to interrogation because the police are implicitly communicating a question: \"How do you explain this?\" On the other hand, \"unforeseeable results of police words or actions\" do not constitute interrogation. Under this definition, routine statements made during the administration of sobriety tests would not implicate Miranda. For example, a police officer arrests a person for impaired driving and takes him to the police station to administer an intoxilyzer test. While at the station the officer also asks the defendant to perform certain psycho-physical tests such as the walk and turn, one leg stand or finger to nose test. It is standard practice to instruct the arrestee on how to perform the test and to demonstrate the test. (The police \"will not\" tell the person that they have the right to refuse to perform the test, and the refusal cannot be used in evidence against them, nor can they be in any way punished for refusing to perform it, same as the police will not tell someone that they may refuse to perform a roadside sobriety test without penalty). An incriminating statement made by an arrestee during the instruction, \"I couldn't do that even if I were sober\", would not be the product of interrogation. Similarly, incriminating statements made in response to requests for consent to search a vehicle or other property are not considered to be the product of interrogation.\n To establish a violation of the defendant's Fifth Amendment rights, the defendant must show state action, so the interrogation must have been conducted by state-agents. If the interrogation was conducted by a person known by the suspect to be a law enforcement officer the state action requirement is unquestionably met. On the other hand, where a private citizen obtains a statement there is no state action regardless of the custodial circumstances surrounding the statement. A confession obtained through the interrogation by an undercover police officer or a paid informant does not violate \"Miranda\" because there is no coercion, no police dominated atmosphere if the suspect does not know that they are being questioned by the police. Private security guards and \"private\" police present special problems. They are generally not regarded as state-agents. However, an interrogation conducted by a police officer moonlighting as a security guard may well trigger \"Miranda\"'s safeguards since an officer is considered to be \"on duty\" at all times.\n The evidence is being offered during a criminal proceeding. Under the exclusionary rule, a \"Miranda\"-defective statement cannot be used by the prosecution as substantive evidence of guilt. However, the Fifth Amendment exclusionary rule applies only to criminal proceedings. In determining whether a particular proceeding is criminal, the courts look at the punitive nature of the sanctions that could be imposed. Labels are irrelevant. The question is whether the consequences of an outcome adverse to the defendant could be characterized as punishment. Clearly a criminal trial is a criminal proceeding since if convicted the defendant could be fined or imprisoned. However, the possibility of loss of liberty does not make the proceeding criminal in nature. For example, commitment proceedings are not criminal proceedings even though they can result in long confinement because the confinement is considered rehabilitative in nature and not punishment. Similarly, \"Miranda\" does not apply directly to probation revocation proceedings because the evidence is not being used as a basis for imposing additional punishment.\nApplication of the prerequisites.\nAssuming that the six requirements are present and \"Miranda\" applies, the statement will be subject to suppression unless the prosecution can demonstrate:\nThe defendant may also be able to challenge the admissibility of the statement under provisions of state constitutions and state criminal procedure statutes.\nImmigrants who live in the United States illegally are also protected and should receive their \"Miranda\" warnings as well when being interrogated or placed under arrest. \"Aliens receive constitutional protections when they have come within the territory of the United States and [have] developed substantial connections with this country\".\nThe Fifth Amendment right to counsel, a component of the \"Miranda\" Rule, is different from the Sixth Amendment right to counsel. In the context of the law of confessions the Sixth Amendment right to counsel is defined by the Massiah Doctrine.\nWaiver.\nSimply advising the suspect of their rights does not fully comply with the \"Miranda\" rule. The suspect must also voluntarily waive their \"Miranda\" rights before questioning can proceed. An express waiver is not necessary. However, most law enforcement agencies use written waiver forms. These include questions designed to establish that the suspect expressly waived their rights. Typical waiver questions are\nand\nThe waiver must be \"knowing and intelligent\" and it must be \"voluntary\". These are separate requirements. To satisfy the first requirement the state must show that the suspect generally understood their rights (right to remain silent and right to counsel) and the consequences of forgoing those rights (that anything they said could be used against them in court). To show that the waiver was \"voluntary\" the state must show that the decision to waive the rights was not the product of police coercion. If police coercion is shown or evident, then the court proceeds to determine the voluntariness of the waiver under the totality of circumstances test focusing on the personal characteristics of the accused and the particulars of the coercive nature of the police conduct. The ultimate issue is whether the coercive police conduct was sufficient to overcome the will of a person under the totality of the circumstances. Courts traditionally focused on two categories of factors in making this determination: (1) the personal characteristics of the suspect and (2) the circumstances attendant to the waiver. However, the Supreme Court significantly altered the voluntariness standard in the case of \"Colorado v. Connelly\". In \"Connelly\", the Court held that \"Coercive police activity is a necessary predicate to a finding that a confession is not 'voluntary' within the meaning of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.\" The Court has applied this same standard of voluntariness in determining whether a waiver of a suspect's Fifth Amendment \"Miranda\" rights was voluntary. Thus, a waiver of \"Miranda\" rights is voluntary unless the defendant can show that their decision to waive their rights and speak to the police was the product of police misconduct and coercion that overcame the defendant's free will. After \"Connelly\", the traditional totality of circumstances analysis is not even reached unless the defendant can first show such coercion by the police. Under \"Connelly\", a suspect's decisions need not be the product of rational deliberations. In addition to showing that the waiver was \"voluntary\", the prosecution must also show that the waiver was \"knowing\" and \"intelligent\". Essentially this means the prosecution must prove that the suspect had a basic understanding of their rights and an appreciation of the consequences of forgoing those rights. The focus of the analysis is directly on the personal characteristics of the suspect. If the suspect was under the influence of alcohol or other drugs, or suffered from an emotional or mental condition that substantially impaired their capacity to make rational decisions, the courts may well decide that the suspect's waiver was not knowing and intelligent.\nA waiver must also be clear and unequivocal. An equivocal statement is ineffective as a waiver and the police may not proceed with the interrogation until the suspect's intentions are made clear. The requirement that a waiver be unequivocal must be distinguished from situations in which the suspect made an equivocal assertion of their \"Miranda\" rights after the interrogation began. Any post-waiver assertion of a suspect's \"Miranda\" rights must be clear and unequivocal. Any ambiguity or equivocation will be ineffective. If the suspect's assertion is ambiguous, the interrogating officers are permitted to ask questions to clarify the suspect's intentions, although they are not required to. In other words, if a suspect's assertion is ambiguous, the police may either attempt to clarify the suspect's intentions or they may simply ignore the ineffective assertion and continue with the interrogation. The timing of the assertion is significant. Requesting an attorney prior to arrest is of no consequence because \"Miranda\" applies only to custodial interrogations. The police may simply ignore the request and continue with the questioning; however, the suspect is also free to leave.\nAssertion.\nIf the defendant asserts his right to remain silent, all interrogation must immediately stop and the police may not resume the interrogation unless they have \"scrupulously honored\" the defendant's assertion and subsequently obtained a valid waiver before resuming the interrogation. In determining whether the police \"scrupulously honored\" the assertion the courts apply a totality of the circumstances test. The most important factors are the length of time between termination of the original interrogation and the commencement of the second, and issuing a new set of \"Miranda\" warnings before resumption of interrogation.\nThe consequences of assertion of the right to counsel are stricter. The police must immediately cease all interrogation and the police cannot reinitiate interrogation unless counsel is present (merely consulting with counsel is insufficient) or the defendant of his own volition contacts the police. If the defendant does reinitiate contact, a valid waiver must be obtained before interrogation may resume.\nIn \"Berghuis v. Thompkins\" (2010), the Supreme Court declared in a 5\u20134 decision that criminal defendants who have been read their \"Miranda\" rights (and who have indicated they understand them and have not already waived them), must explicitly state during or before an interrogation begins that they wish to be silent and not speak to police for that protection against self-incrimination to apply. If they speak to police about the incident before invoking the \"Miranda\" right to remain silent, or afterwards at any point during the interrogation or detention, the words they speak may be used against them if they have not stated they do not want to speak to police. Those who oppose the ruling contend that the requirement that the defendant must speak to indicate his intention to remain silent further erodes the ability of the defendant to stay completely silent about the case. This opposition must be put in context with the second option offered by the majority opinion, which allowed that the defendant had the option of remaining silent, saying: \"Had he wanted to remain silent, he could have said nothing in response or unambiguously invoked his Miranda rights, ending the interrogation.\" Thus, having been \"\"Mirand\"ized\", a suspect may avow explicitly the invocation of these rights, or, alternatively, simply remain silent. Absent the former, \"anything [said] can and will be used against [the defendant] in a court of law\".\nExceptions.\nAssuming that the six factors are present, the \"Miranda\" rule would apply unless the prosecution can establish that the statement falls within an exception to the \"Miranda\" rule. The three exceptions are:\nQuestions that are routinely asked as part of the administrative process of arrest and custodial commitment are not considered \"interrogation\" under \"Miranda\" because they are not intended or likely to produce incriminating responses. The jail house informant exception applies to situations where the suspect does not know that he is speaking to a state-agent; either a police officer posing as a fellow inmate, a cellmate working as an agent for the state or a family member or friend who has agreed to cooperate with the state in obtaining incriminating information.\nPublic safety exception.\nThe \"public safety\" exception is a limited and case-specific exception, allowing certain unadvised statements (given without \"Miranda\" warnings) to be admissible into evidence at trial when they were elicited in circumstances where there was great danger to public safety; thus, the \"Miranda\" rule provides some elasticity.\nThe public safety exception derives from \"New York v. Quarles\" (1984), a case in which the Supreme Court considered the admissibility of a statement elicited by a police officer who apprehended a rape suspect who was thought to be carrying a firearm. The arrest took place during the middle of the night in a supermarket that was open to the public but apparently deserted except for the clerks at the checkout counter. When the officer arrested the suspect, he found an empty shoulder holster, handcuffed the suspect, and asked him where the gun was. The suspect nodded in the direction of the gun (which was near some empty cartons) and said, \"The gun is over there.\" The Supreme Court found that such an unadvised statement was admissible in evidence because \"[i]n a kaleidoscopic situation such as the one confronting these officers, where spontaneity rather than adherence to a police manual is necessarily the order of the day, the application of the exception we recognize today should not be made to depend on \"post hoc\" findings at a suppression hearing concerning the subjective motivation of the police officer.\" Thus, the jurisprudential rule of \"Miranda\" must yield in \"a situation where concern for public safety must be paramount to adherence to the literal language of the prophylactic rules enunciated in \"Miranda\".\"\nUnder this exception, to be admissible in the government's direct case at a trial, the questioning must not be \"actually compelled by police conduct which overcame his will to resist,\" and must be focused and limited, involving a situation \"in which police officers ask questions reasonably prompted by a concern for the public safety.\"\nIn 2010, the Federal Bureau of Investigation encouraged agents to use a broad interpretation of public safety-related questions in terrorism cases, stating that the \"magnitude and complexity\" of terrorist threats justified \"a significantly more extensive public safety interrogation without \"Miranda\" warnings than would be permissible in an ordinary criminal case,\" continuing to list such examples as: \"questions about possible impending or coordinated terrorist attacks; the location, nature and threat posed by weapons that might pose an imminent danger to the public; and the identities, locations, and activities or intentions of accomplices who may be plotting additional imminent attacks.\" A Department of Justice spokesman described this position as not altering the constitutional right, but as clarifying existing flexibility in the rule.\nAfter the Boston Marathon bombing, prosecutors initially argued that Tsarnaev's pre-\"Miranda\" statements should be admissible under this exception. However, the exception was not considered by the court because the prosecutors later decided not to use any of that evidence in their case against Tsarnaev.\nThe New York Court of Appeals upheld the exception in a 2013 murder case, \"People v Doll\", where a man with blood on his clothes was detained and questioned.\nThe window of opportunity for the exception is small. Once the suspect is formally charged, the Sixth Amendment right to counsel would attach and surreptitious interrogation would be prohibited. The public safety exception applies where circumstances present a clear and present danger to the public's safety and the officers have reason to believe that the suspect has information that can end the emergency.\nConsequences of violation.\nAssuming that a \"Miranda\" violation occurred\u2014the six factors are present and no exception applies\u2014the statement will be subject to suppression under the \"Miranda\" exclusionary rule. That is, if the defendant objects or files a motion to suppress, the exclusionary rule would prohibit the prosecution from offering the statement as proof of guilt. However, the statement can be used to impeach the defendant's testimony. Further, the fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine does not apply to Miranda violations. Therefore, the exclusionary rule exceptions, attenuation, independent source and inevitable discovery, do not come into play, and derivative evidence would be fully admissible. For example, suppose the police continue with a custodial interrogation after the suspect has asserted his right to silence. During his post-assertion statement the suspect tells the police the location of the gun he used in the murder. Using this information the police find the gun. Forensic testing identifies the gun as the murder weapon, and fingerprints lifted from the gun match the suspect's. The contents of the Miranda-defective statement could not be offered by the prosecution as substantive evidence, but the gun itself and all related forensic evidence could be used as evidence at trial.\nProcedural requirements.\nAlthough the rules vary by jurisdiction, generally a person who wishes to contest the admissibility of evidence on the grounds that it was obtained in violation of his constitutional rights must comply with the following procedural requirements:\nFailure to comply with a procedural requirement may result in summary dismissal of the motion. If the defendant meets the procedural requirement, the motion will normally be considered by the judge outside the presence of the jury. The judge hears evidence, determines the facts, makes conclusions of law and enters an order allowing or denying the motion.\nRelated doctrines.\nIn addition to \"Miranda\", confession may be challenged under the \"Massiah\" Doctrine, the voluntariness standard, provisions of federal and state rules of criminal procedure and state constitutional provisions.\n\"Massiah\" Doctrine.\nThe \"Massiah\" Doctrine (established by \"Massiah v. United States\") prohibits the admission of a confession obtained in violation of the defendant's Sixth Amendment right to counsel. Specifically, the \"Massiah\" rule applies to the use of testimonial evidence in criminal proceedings deliberately elicited by the police from a defendant after formal charges have been filed. The events that trigger the Sixth Amendment safeguards under \"Massiah\" are (1) the commencement of adversarial criminal proceedings and (2) deliberate elicitation of information from the defendant by governmental agents.\nThe Sixth Amendment guarantees a defendant a right to counsel in all criminal prosecutions. The purposes of the Sixth Amendment right to counsel are to protect a defendant's right to a fair trial and to assure that the adversarial system of justice functions properly by providing competent counsel as an advocate for the defendant in his contest against the \"prosecutorial forces\" of the state.\nCommencement of adversarial criminal proceedings.\nThe Sixth Amendment right \"attaches\" once the government has committed itself to the prosecution of the case by the initiation of adversarial judicial proceedings \"by way of formal charge, preliminary hearing, indictment, information or arraignment\". Determining whether a particular event or proceeding constitutes the commencement of adversarial criminal proceedings requires both an examination of the rules of criminal procedure for the jurisdiction in which the crime is charged and the Supreme Court cases dealing with the issue of when formal prosecution begins. Once adversarial criminal proceedings commence the right to counsel applies to all critical stages of the prosecution and investigation. A critical stage is \"any stage of the prosecution, formal or informal, in court or out, where counsel's absence might derogate from the accused's right to a fair trial\".\nGovernment attempts to obtain incriminating statement related to the offense charged from the defendant by overt interrogation or surreptitious means is a critical stage and any information thus obtained is subject to suppression unless the government can show that an attorney was present or the defendant knowingly, voluntarily and intelligently waived his right to counsel.\nDeliberate elicitation of information from the defendant by governmental agents.\nDeliberate elicitation is defined as the intentional creation of circumstances by government agents that are likely to produce incriminating information from the defendant. Clearly express questioning (interrogation) would qualify but the concept also extends to surreptitious attempts to acquire information from the defendant through the use of undercover agents or paid informants.\nThe definition of \"deliberate elicitation\" is not the same as the definition of \"interrogation\" under the \"Miranda\" rule. \"Miranda\" interrogation includes express questioning and any actions or statements that an officer would reasonably foresee as likely to cause an incriminating response. \"Massiah\" applies to express questioning and any attempt to deliberately and intentionally obtain incriminating information from the defendant regarding the crime charged. The difference is purposeful creation of an environment likely to produce incriminating information (\"Massiah\") and action likely to induce an incriminating response even if that was not the officer's purpose or intent (\"Miranda\").\nThe Sixth Amendment right to counsel is offense-specific\u00a0\u2013 the right only applies to post-commencement attempts to obtain information relating to the crime charged. The right does not extend to uncharged offenses if factually related to the charged crime.\nInformation obtained in violation of the defendant's Sixth Amendment right to counsel is subject to suppression unless the government can establish that the defendant waived his right to counsel. The waiver must be knowing, intelligent and voluntary. A valid \"Miranda\" waiver operates as a waiver of Sixth Amendment right.\nThe voluntariness standard.\nThe voluntariness standard applies to all police interrogations regardless of the custodial status of the suspect and regardless of whether the suspect has been formally charged. The remedy for a violation of the standard is complete suppression of the statement and any evidence derived from the statement. The statement cannot be used as either substantive evidence of guilt or to impeach the defendant's testimony. The reason for the strictness is the common law's aversion to the use of coerced confessions because of their inherent unreliability. Further the rights to be free from coerced confession cannot be waived nor is it necessary that the victim of coercive police conduct assert his right. In considering the voluntariness standard one must consider the Supreme Court's decision in \"Colorado v. Connelly\". Although federal courts' application of the \"Connelly\" rule has been inconsistent and state courts have often failed to appreciate the consequences of the case, \"Connelly\" clearly marked a significant change in the application of the voluntariness standard. Before \"Connelly,\" the test was whether the confession was voluntary considering the totality of the circumstances. \"Voluntary\" carried its everyday meaning: the confession had to be a product of the exercise of the defendant's free will rather than police coercion. After \"Connelly,\" the totality of circumstances test is not even triggered unless the defendant can show coercive police conduct. Questions of free will and rational decision making are irrelevant to a due process claim unless police misconduct existed and a causal connection can be shown between the misconduct and the confession.\nState constitutional challenges.\nEvery state constitution has articles and provision guaranteeing individual rights. In most cases the subject matter is similar to the federal bill of rights. Most state courts interpretation of their constitution is consistent with the interpretation federal court's of analogous provisions of the federal constitution. With regard to \"Miranda\" issues, state courts have exhibited significant resistance to incorporating into their state jurisprudence some of the limitations on the \"Miranda\" rule that have been created by the federal courts. As a consequence a defendant may be able to circumvent the federal limitation on the \"Miranda\" rule and successfully challenge the admissibility under state constitutional provisions. Practically every aspect of the \"Miranda\" rule has drawn state court criticism. However the primary point of contention involve the following limitations on the scope of the \"Miranda\" rule: (1) the \"Harris\" exception (2) the \"Burbine\" rule and (3) the \"Fare\" rule.\nState statutory challenges.\nIn addition to constitutionally based challenge, states permit a defendant to challenge the admissibility of a confession on the grounds that the confession was obtained in violation of a defendant's statutory rights. For example, North Carolina Criminal Procedure Act permits a defendant to move to suppress evidence obtained as a result of a \"substantial\" violation of the provision of the North Carolina Rules of Criminal Procedure.\nConfusion regarding use.\nDue to the prevalence of American television programs and motion pictures in which the police characters frequently read suspects their rights, it has become an expected element of arrest procedure\u2014in the 2000 \"Dickerson\" decision, Chief Justice William Rehnquist wrote that \"Miranda\" warnings had \"become embedded in routine police practice to the point where the warnings have become part of our national culture\".\nWhile arrests and interrogations can legally occur without the \"Miranda\" warning being given, this procedure would generally make the arrestee's pre-\"Miranda\" statements inadmissible at trial. (However, pursuant to the plurality opinion in \"United States v. Patane\", physical evidence obtained as a result of pre-\"Miranda\" statements may still be admitted. There was no majority opinion of the Court in that case.)\nIn some jurisdictions, a \"detention\" differs at law from an \"arrest\", and police are not required to give the \"Miranda\" warning until the person is arrested for a crime. In those situations, a person's statements made to police are generally admissible even though the person was not advised of their rights. Similarly, statements made while an arrest is in progress before the \"Miranda\" warning was given or completed are also generally admissible.\nBecause \"Miranda\" applies only to custodial interrogations, it does not protect detainees from standard booking questions such as name and address. Because it is a protective measure intended to safeguard the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination, it does not prevent the police from taking blood without a warrant from persons suspected of driving under the influence of alcohol. (Such evidence may be self-incriminatory, but are not considered statements of self-incrimination.)\nIf an inmate is in jail and invoked \"Miranda\" on one case, it is unclear whether this extends to any other cases that they may be charged with while in custody. For example, a subject is arrested, charged with cattle raiding, and is held in county jail awaiting trial. He invokes his \"Miranda\" rights on the cattle case. While in custody, he is involved in a fight where a staff member loses his ability to walk. He speaks to the custodial staff regarding the fight without first invoking \"Miranda\". It is unclear if this statement is admissible because of the original \"Miranda\" statement.\nMany police departments give special training to interrogators with regard to the \"Miranda\" warning; specifically, how to influence a suspect's decision to waive the right. For instance, the officer may be required to specifically ask if the rights are understood and if the suspect wishes to talk. The officer is allowed, before asking the suspect a question, to speak at length about evidence collected, witness statements, etc. The officer will \"then\" ask if the suspect wishes to talk, and the suspect is then more likely to talk in an attempt to refute the evidence presented. Another tactic commonly taught is never to ask a question; the officer may simply sit the suspect down in an interrogation room, sit across from him and do paperwork, and wait for the suspect to begin talking. These tactics are intended to mitigate the restrictions placed on law officers against compelling a suspect to give evidence, and have stood up in court as valid lawful tactics. Nevertheless, such tactics are condemned by legal rights groups as deceptive.\nExemption for interrogations conducted by undercover agents.\nIn \"Illinois v. Perkins\", 496 U.S. 292 (1990), the United States Supreme Court held that undercover officers are not required to give suspects a \"Miranda\" warning prior to asking questions that may elicit incriminating responses. In this case, an undercover agent posed as an inmate and carried on a 35-minute conversation with another inmate that he suspected of committing a murder that was being investigated. During this conversation, the suspect implicated himself in the murder that the undercover agent was investigating.\nThe Supreme Court came to this conclusion despite the government's admission that a custodial interrogation had been conducted by a government agent.\nReport of warnings being given to detainees in Afghanistan.\nBeginning in 2009, some detainees captured in Afghanistan have been read their \"Miranda\" rights by the FBI, according to Congressman Michael Rogers of Michigan, who claims to have witnessed this himself. According to the Justice Department, \"There has been no policy change nor blanket instruction for FBI agents to \"Mirandize\" detainees overseas. While there have been specific cases in which FBI agents have \"Mirandized\" suspects overseas at both Bagram and in other situations, in order to preserve the quality of evidence obtained, there has been no overall policy change with respect to detainees.\"\nEquivalent rights in other countries.\nWhether arising from their constitutions, common law, or statute, many nations recognize a defendant's right to silence.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18973", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18973", "title": "Moot", "text": "Moot may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18974", "revid": "37664675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18974", "title": "Mississippian (geology)", "text": "First subperiod of the Carboniferous Period\nThe Mississippian ( ), also known as Lower Carboniferous or Early Carboniferous, is a subperiod in the geologic timescale or a subsystem of the geologic record. It is the earlier of two subperiods of the Carboniferous period lasting from roughly 358.86 to 323.4 million years ago. As with most other geochronologic units, the rock beds that define the Mississippian are well identified, but the exact start and end dates are uncertain by a few million years. The Mississippian is so named because rocks with this age are exposed in the Mississippi Valley.\nThe Mississippian was a period of marine transgression in the Northern Hemisphere: the sea level was so high that only the Fennoscandian Shield and the Laurentian Shield were dry land. The cratons were surrounded by extensive delta systems and lagoons, and carbonate sedimentation on the surrounding continental platforms, covered by shallow seas.\nIn North America, where the interval consists primarily of marine limestones, it is treated as a geologic period between the Devonian and the Pennsylvanian. During the Mississippian an important phase of orogeny occurred in the Appalachian Mountains. The United States Geological Survey (USGS) geologic time scale shows its relation to other periods.\nIn Europe, the Mississippian and Pennsylvanian are grouped together as the Carboniferous system, and traditionally referred to as the \"Upper Carboniferous\" and \"Lower Carboniferous\" instead.\nSubdivisions.\nIn the international geologic timescale, the Mississippian is subdivided into three stages:\nThe lower two come from European stratigraphy, the top from Russian stratigraphy. Besides Europe and Russia, there are many local subdivisions that are used as alternatives for the international timescale. In the North American system, the Mississippian is subdivided into four stages:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18976", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18976", "title": "Meiosis", "text": "Cell division producing haploid gametes\nMeiosis () is a special type of cell division of germ cells in sexually-reproducing organisms that produces the gametes, the sperm or egg cells. It involves two rounds of division that ultimately result in four cells, each with only one copy of each chromosome (haploid). Additionally, prior to the division, genetic material from the paternal and maternal copies of each chromosome is crossed over, creating new combinations of code on each chromosome. Later on, during fertilisation, the haploid cells produced by meiosis from a male and a female will fuse to create a zygote, a cell with two copies of each chromosome.\nErrors in meiosis resulting in aneuploidy (an abnormal number of chromosomes) are the leading known cause of miscarriage and the most frequent genetic cause of developmental disabilities.\nIn meiosis, DNA replication is followed by two rounds of cell division to produce four daughter cells, each with half the number of chromosomes as the original parent cell. The two meiotic divisions are known as meiosis I and meiosis II. Before meiosis begins, during S phase of the cell cycle, the DNA of each chromosome is replicated so that it consists of two identical sister chromatids, which remain held together through sister chromatid cohesion. This S-phase can be referred to as \"premeiotic S-phase\" or \"meiotic S-phase\". Immediately following DNA replication, meiotic cells enter a prolonged G2-like stage known as meiotic prophase. During this time, homologous chromosomes pair with each other and undergo genetic recombination, a programmed process in which DNA may be cut and then repaired, which allows them to exchange some of their genetic information. A subset of recombination events results in crossovers, which create physical links known as chiasmata (singular: chiasma, for the Greek letter Chi, \u03a7) between the homologous chromosomes. In most organisms, these links can help direct each pair of homologous chromosomes to segregate away from each other during meiosis I, resulting in two haploid cells that have half the number of chromosomes as the parent cell.\nDuring meiosis II, the cohesion between sister chromatids is released and they segregate from one another, as during mitosis. In some cases, all four of the meiotic products form gametes such as sperm, spores or pollen. In female animals, three of the four meiotic products are typically eliminated by extrusion into polar bodies, and only one cell develops to produce an ovum. Because the number of chromosomes is halved during meiosis, gametes can fuse (i.e. fertilization) to form a diploid zygote that contains two copies of each chromosome, one from each parent. Thus, alternating cycles of meiosis and fertilization enable sexual reproduction, with successive generations maintaining the same number of chromosomes. For example, diploid human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes including 1 pair of sex chromosomes (46 total), half of maternal origin and half of paternal origin. Meiosis produces haploid gametes (ova or sperm) that contain one set of 23 chromosomes. When two gametes (an egg and a sperm) fuse, the resulting zygote is once again diploid, with the mother and father each contributing 23 chromosomes. This same pattern, but not the same number of chromosomes, occurs in all organisms that utilize meiosis.\nMeiosis occurs in all sexually reproducing single-celled and multicellular organisms (which are all eukaryotes), including animals, plants, and fungi. It is an essential process for oogenesis and spermatogenesis.\nOverview.\nAlthough the process of meiosis is related to the more general cell division process of mitosis, it differs in two important respects:\nMeiosis begins with a diploid cell, which contains two copies of each chromosome, termed homologs. First, the cell undergoes DNA replication, so each homolog now consists of two identical sister chromatids. Then each set of homologs pair with each other and exchange genetic information by homologous recombination often leading to physical connections (crossovers) between the homologs. In the first meiotic division, the homologs are segregated to separate daughter cells by the spindle apparatus. The cells then proceed to a second division without an intervening round of DNA replication. The sister chromatids are segregated to separate daughter cells to produce a total of four haploid cells. Female animals employ a slight variation on this pattern and produce one large ovum and three small polar bodies. Because of recombination, an individual chromatid can consist of a new combination of maternal and paternal genetic information, resulting in offspring that are genetically distinct from either parent. Furthermore, an individual gamete can include an assortment of maternal, paternal, and recombinant chromatids. This genetic diversity resulting from sexual reproduction contributes to the variation in traits upon which natural selection can act.\nMeiosis uses many of the same mechanisms as mitosis, the type of cell division used by eukaryotes to divide one cell into two identical daughter cells. In some plants, fungi, and protists meiosis results in the formation of spores: haploid cells that can divide vegetatively without undergoing fertilization. Some eukaryotes, like bdelloid rotifers, do not have the ability to carry out meiosis and have acquired the ability to reproduce by parthenogenesis.\nMeiosis does not occur in archaea or bacteria, which generally reproduce asexually via binary fission. However, a \"sexual\" process known as horizontal gene transfer involves the transfer of DNA from one bacterium or archaeon to another and recombination of these DNA molecules of different parental origin.\nHistory.\nMeiosis was discovered and described for the first time in sea urchin eggs in 1876 by the German biologist Oscar Hertwig. It was described again in 1883, at the level of chromosomes, by the Belgian zoologist Edouard Van Beneden, in \"Ascaris\" roundworm eggs. The significance of meiosis for reproduction and inheritance, however, was described only in 1890 by German biologist August Weismann, who noted that two cell divisions were necessary to transform one diploid cell into four haploid cells if the number of chromosomes had to be maintained. In 1911, the American geneticist Thomas Hunt Morgan detected crossovers in meiosis in the fruit fly \"Drosophila melanogaster\", which helped to establish that genetic traits are transmitted on chromosomes.\nThe term \"meiosis\" is derived from the Greek word , meaning 'lessening'. It was introduced to biology by J.B. Farmer and J.E.S. Moore in 1905, using the idiosyncratic rendering \"maiosis\":\n\"We propose to apply the terms Maiosis or Maiotic phase to cover the whole series of nuclear changes included in the two divisions that were designated as Heterotype and Homotype by Flemming\".\nThe spelling was changed to \"meiosis\" by Koernicke (1905) and by Pantel and De Sinety (1906) to follow the usual conventions for transliterating Greek.\nPhases.\nMeiosis is divided into meiosis I and meiosis II which are further divided into Karyokinesis I, Cytokinesis I, Karyokinesis II, and Cytokinesis II, respectively. The preparatory steps that lead up to meiosis are identical in pattern and name to interphase of the mitotic cell cycle. Interphase is divided into three phases:\nInterphase is followed by meiosis I and then meiosis II. Meiosis I separates replicated homologous chromosomes, each still made up of two sister chromatids, into two daughter cells, thus reducing the chromosome number by half. During meiosis II, sister chromatids decouple, and the resultant daughter chromosomes are segregated into four daughter cells. For diploid organisms, the daughter cells resulting from meiosis are haploid and contain only one copy of each chromosome. In some species, cells enter a resting phase known as interkinesis between meiosis I and meiosis II.\nMeiosis I and II are each divided into prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase stages, similar in purpose to their analogous subphases in the mitotic cell cycle. Therefore, meiosis includes the stages of meiosis I (prophase I, metaphase I, anaphase I, telophase I) and meiosis II (prophase II, metaphase II, anaphase II, telophase II).\nDuring meiosis, specific genes are more highly transcribed. In addition to strong meiotic stage-specific expression of mRNA, there are also pervasive translational controls (e.g. selective usage of preformed mRNA), regulating the ultimate meiotic stage-specific protein expression of genes during meiosis. Thus, both transcriptional and translational controls determine the broad restructuring of meiotic cells needed to carry out meiosis.\nMeiosis I.\nMeiosis I segregates homologous chromosomes, which are joined as tetrads (2n, 4c), producing two haploid cells (n chromosomes, 23 in humans) which each contain chromatid pairs (1n, 2c). Because the ploidy is reduced from diploid to haploid, meiosis I is referred to as a \"reductional division\". Meiosis II is an \"equational division\" analogous to mitosis, in which the sister chromatids are segregated, creating four haploid daughter cells (1n, 1c).\nProphase I.\nProphase I is by far the longest phase of meiosis (lasting 13 out of 14 days in mice). During prophase I, homologous maternal and paternal chromosomes pair, synapse, and exchange genetic information (by homologous recombination), forming at least one crossover per chromosome. These crossovers become visible as chiasmata (plural; singular chiasma). This process facilitates stable pairing between homologous chromosomes and hence enables accurate segregation of the chromosomes at the first meiotic division. The paired and replicated chromosomes are called bivalents (two chromosomes) or tetrads (four chromatids), with one chromosome coming from each parent. Prophase I is divided into a series of substages which are named according to the appearance of chromosomes.\nLeptotene.\nThe first stage of prophase I is the \"leptotene\" stage, also known as \"leptonema\", from Greek words meaning \"thin threads\". In this stage of prophase I, individual chromosomes\u2014each consisting of two replicated sister chromatids\u2014become \"individualized\" to form visible strands within the nucleus. The chromosomes each form a linear array of loops mediated by cohesin, and the lateral elements of the synaptonemal complex assemble forming an \"axial element\" from which the loops emanate. Recombination is initiated in this stage by the enzyme SPO11 which creates programmed double strand breaks (around 300 per meiosis in mice). This process generates single stranded DNA filaments coated by RAD51 and DMC1 which invade the homologous chromosomes, forming inter-axis bridges, and resulting in the pairing/co-alignment of homologues (to a distance of ~400\u00a0nm in mice).\nZygotene.\nLeptotene is followed by the \"zygotene\" stage, also known as \"zygonema\", from Greek words meaning \"paired threads\", which in some organisms is also called the bouquet stage because of the way the telomeres cluster at one end of the nucleus. In this stage the homologous chromosomes become much more closely (~100\u00a0nm) and stably paired (a process called synapsis) mediated by the installation of the transverse and central elements of the synaptonemal complex. Synapsis is thought to occur in a zipper-like fashion starting from a recombination nodule. The paired chromosomes are called bivalent or tetrad chromosomes.\nPachytene.\nThe \"pachytene\" stage ( ), also known as \"pachynema\", from Greek words meaning \"thick threads\". is the stage at which all autosomal chromosomes have synapsed. In this stage homologous recombination, including chromosomal crossover (crossing over), is completed through the repair of the double strand breaks formed in leptotene. Most breaks are repaired without forming crossovers resulting in gene conversion. However, a subset of breaks (at least one per chromosome) form crossovers between non-sister (homologous) chromosomes resulting in the exchange of genetic information. The exchange of information between the homologous chromatids results in a recombination of information; each chromosome has the complete set of information it had before, and there are no gaps formed as a result of the process. Because the chromosomes cannot be distinguished in the synaptonemal complex, the actual act of crossing over is not perceivable through an ordinary light microscope, and chiasmata are not visible until the next stage.\nDiplotene.\nDuring the \"diplotene\" stage, also known as \"diplonema\", from Greek words meaning \"two threads\", the synaptonemal complex disassembles and homologous chromosomes separate from one another a little. However, the homologous chromosomes of each bivalent remain tightly bound at chiasmata, the regions where crossing-over occurred. The chiasmata remain on the chromosomes until they are severed at the transition to anaphase I to allow homologous chromosomes to move to opposite poles of the cell.\nIn human fetal oogenesis, all developing oocytes develop to this stage and are arrested in prophase I before birth. This suspended state is referred to as the \"dictyotene stage\" or dictyate. It lasts until meiosis is resumed to prepare the oocyte for ovulation, which happens at puberty or even later.\nDiakinesis.\nChromosomes condense further during the \"diakinesis\" stage, from Greek words meaning \"moving through\". This is the first point in meiosis where the four parts of the tetrads are actually visible. Sites of crossing over entangle together, effectively overlapping, making chiasmata clearly visible. Other than this observation, the rest of the stage closely resembles prometaphase of mitosis; the nucleoli disappear, the nuclear membrane disintegrates into vesicles, and the meiotic spindle begins to form.\nMeiotic spindle formation.\nUnlike mitotic cells, human and mouse oocytes do not have centrosomes to produce the meiotic spindle. In mice, approximately 80 MicroTubule Organizing Centers (MTOCs) form a sphere in the ooplasm and begin to nucleate microtubules that reach out towards chromosomes, attaching to the chromosomes at the kinetochore. Over time, the MTOCs merge until two poles have formed, generating a barrel shaped spindle. In human oocytes spindle microtubule nucleation begins on the chromosomes, forming an aster that eventually expands to surround the chromosomes. Chromosomes then slide along the microtubules towards the equator of the spindle, at which point the chromosome kinetochores form end-on attachments to microtubules.\nMetaphase I.\nHomologous pairs move together along the metaphase plate: As kinetochore microtubules from both spindle poles attach to their respective kinetochores, the paired homologous chromosomes align along an equatorial plane that bisects the spindle, due to continuous counterbalancing forces exerted on the bivalents by the microtubules emanating from the two kinetochores of homologous chromosomes. This attachment is referred to as a bipolar attachment. The physical basis of the independent assortment of chromosomes is the random orientation of each bivalent along with the metaphase plate, with respect to the orientation of the other bivalents along the same equatorial line. The protein complex cohesin holds sister chromatids together from the time of their replication until anaphase I. In mitosis, the force of kinetochore microtubules pulling in opposite directions creates tension. The cell senses this tension and does not progress with anaphase until all the chromosomes are properly bi-oriented. In meiosis, establishing tension ordinarily requires at least one crossover per chromosome pair in addition to cohesin between sister chromatids. \"(see Chromosome segregation)\"\nAnaphase I.\nKinetochore microtubules shorten, pulling homologous chromosomes (which each consist of a pair of sister chromatids) to opposite poles. Non-kinetochore microtubules lengthen, pushing the centrosomes farther apart. The cell elongates in preparation for division down the center. Unlike in mitosis, only the cohesin from the chromosome arms is degraded while the cohesin surrounding the centromere remains protected by a protein named Shugoshin (Japanese for \"guardian spirit\"), which prevents the sister chromatids from separating. This allows the sister chromatids to remain together while homologs are segregated.\nTelophase I.\nThe first meiotic division effectively ends when the chromosomes arrive at the poles. Each daughter cell now has half the number of chromosomes but each chromosome consists of a pair of chromatids. The microtubules that make up the spindle network disappear, and a new nuclear membrane surrounds each haploid set. Cytokinesis, the pinching of the cell membrane in animal cells or the formation of the cell wall in plant cells, occurs, completing the creation of two daughter cells. However, cytokinesis does not fully complete resulting in \"cytoplasmic bridges\" which enable the cytoplasm to be shared between daughter cells until the end of meiosis II. Sister chromatids remain attached during telophase I.\nCells may enter a period of rest known as interkinesis or interphase II. No DNA replication occurs during this stage.\nMeiosis II.\nMeiosis II is the second meiotic division, and usually involves equational segregation, or separation of sister chromatids. Mechanically, the process is similar to mitosis, though its genetic results are fundamentally different. The result is the production of four haploid cells (n chromosomes; 23 in humans) from the two haploid cells (with n chromosomes, each consisting of two sister chromatids) produced in meiosis I. The four main steps of meiosis II are: prophase II, metaphase II, anaphase II, and telophase II.\nIn prophase II, the disappearance of the nucleoli and the nuclear envelope is seen again as well as the shortening and thickening of the chromatids. Centrosomes move to the polar regions and arrange spindle fibers for the second meiotic division.\nIn metaphase II, the centromeres contain two kinetochores that attach to spindle fibers from the centrosomes at opposite poles. The new equatorial metaphase plate is rotated by 90 degrees when compared to meiosis I, perpendicular to the previous plate.\nThis is followed by anaphase II, in which the remaining centromeric cohesin, not protected by Shugoshin anymore, is cleaved, allowing the sister chromatids to segregate. The sister chromatids by convention are now called sister chromosomes as they move toward opposing poles.\nThe process ends with telophase II, which is similar to telophase I, and is marked by decondensation and lengthening of the chromosomes and the disassembly of the spindle. Nuclear envelopes re-form and cleavage or cell plate formation eventually produces a total of four daughter cells, each with a haploid set of chromosomes.\nMeiosis is now complete and ends up with four new daughter cells.\nOrigin and function.\nOrigin of meiosis.\nMeiosis appears to be a fundamental characteristic of eukaryotic organisms and to have been present early in eukaryotic evolution. Eukaryotes that were once thought to lack meiotic sex have recently been shown to likely have, or once have had, this capability. As one example, \"Giardia intestinalis\", a common intestinal parasite, was previously considered to have descended from a lineage that predated the emergence of meiosis and sex. However, \"G. intestinalis\" has now been found to possess a core set of meiotic genes, including five meiosis specific genes. Also evidence for meiotic recombination, indicative of sexual reproduction, was found in \"G. intestinalis\". Another example of organisms previously thought to be asexual are parasitic protozoa of the genus \"Leishmania\", which cause human disease. However, these organisms were shown to have a sexual cycle consistent with a meiotic process. Although amoeba were once generally regarded as asexual, evidence has been presented that most lineages are anciently sexual and that the majority of asexual groups probably arose recently and independently. Dacks and Rogers proposed, based on a phylogenetic analysis, that facultative sex was likely present in the common ancestor of eukaryotes.\nGenetic variation.\nThe new combinations of DNA created during meiosis are a significant source of genetic variation alongside mutation, resulting in new combinations of alleles, which may be beneficial. Meiosis generates gamete genetic diversity in two ways: (1) Law of Independent Assortment. The independent orientation of homologous chromosome pairs along the metaphase plate during metaphase I and orientation of sister chromatids in metaphase II, this is the subsequent separation of homologs and sister chromatids during anaphase I and II, it allows a random and independent distribution of chromosomes to each daughter cell (and ultimately to gametes); and (2) Crossing Over. The physical exchange of homologous chromosomal regions by homologous recombination during prophase I results in new combinations of genetic information within chromosomes. However, such physical exchange does not always occur during meiosis. In the oocytes of the silkworm \"Bombyx mori\", meiosis is completely achiasmate (lacking crossovers). Although synaptonemal complexes are present during the pachytene stage of meiosis in \"B. mori\", crossing-over homologous recombination is absent between the paired chromosomes.\nProphase I arrest.\nFemale mammals and birds are born possessing all the oocytes needed for future ovulations, and these oocytes are arrested at the prophase I stage of meiosis. In humans, as an example, oocytes are formed between three and four months of gestation within the fetus and are therefore present at birth. During this prophase I arrested stage (dictyate), which may last for decades, four copies of the genome are present in the oocytes. The arrest of ooctyes at the four genome copy stage was proposed to provide the informational redundancy needed to repair damage in the DNA of the germline. The repair process used appears to involve homologous recombinational repair Prophase I arrested oocytes have a high capability for efficient repair of DNA damage, particularly exogenously induced double-strand breaks. DNA repair capability appears to be a key quality control mechanism in the female germ line and a critical determinant of fertility.\nMeiosis as an adaptation for repairing germline DNA.\nGenetic recombination can be viewed as fundamentally a DNA repair process, and that when it occurs during meiosis it is an adaptation for repairing the genomic DNA that is passed on to progeny. Experimental findings indicate that a substantial benefit of meiosis is recombinational repair of DNA damage in the germline, as indicated by the following examples. Hydrogen peroxide is an agent that causes oxidative stress leading to oxidative DNA damage. Treatment of the yeast \"Schizosaccharomyces pombe\" with hydrogen peroxide increased the frequency of mating and the formation of meiotic spores by 4 to 18-fold. \"Volvox carteri\", a haploid multicellular, facultatively sexual green algae, can be induced by heat shock to reproduce by meiotic sex. This induction can be inhibited by antioxidants indicating that the induction of meiotic sex by heat shock is likely mediated by oxidative stress leading to increased DNA damage.\nOccurrence.\nIn life cycles.\nMeiosis occurs in eukaryotic life cycles involving sexual reproduction, consisting of the cyclical process of growth and development by mitotic cell division, production of gametes by meiosis and fertilization. At certain stages of the life cycle, germ cells produce gametes. Somatic cells make up the body of the organism and are not involved in gamete production.\nCycling meiosis and fertilization events results in alternation between haploid and diploid states. The organism phase of the life cycle can occur either during the diploid state (\"diplontic\" life cycle), during the haploid state (\"haplontic\" life cycle), or both (\"haplodiplontic\" life cycle), in which there are two distinct organism phases, one with haploid cells and the other with diploid cells.\nIn the \"diplontic life cycle\" (with pre-gametic meiosis), as in humans, the organism is multicellular and diploid, grown by mitosis from a diploid cell called the zygote. The organism's diploid germ-line stem cells undergo meiosis to make haploid gametes (the spermatozoa in males and ova in females), which fertilize to form the zygote. The diploid zygote undergoes repeated cellular division by mitosis to grow into the organism.\nIn the \"haplontic life cycle\" (with post-zygotic meiosis), the organism is haploid, by the proliferation and differentiation of a single haploid cell called the gamete. Two organisms of opposing sex contribute their haploid gametes to form a diploid zygote. The zygote undergoes meiosis immediately, creating four haploid cells. These cells undergo mitosis to create the organism. Many fungi and many protozoa utilize the haplontic life cycle. \nIn the \"haplodiplontic life cycle\" (with sporic or intermediate meiosis), the living organism alternates between haploid and diploid states. Consequently, this cycle is also known as the alternation of generations. The diploid organism's germ-line cells undergo meiosis to produce spores. The spores proliferate by mitosis, growing into a haploid organism. The haploid organism's gamete then combines with another haploid organism's gamete, creating the zygote. The zygote undergoes repeated mitosis and differentiation to produce a new diploid organism. The haplodiplontic life cycle can be considered a fusion of the diplontic and haplontic life cycles.\nIn plants and animals.\nMeiosis occurs in all animals and plants. The result, the production of gametes with half the number of chromosomes as the parent cell, is the same, but the detailed process is different. In animals, meiosis produces gametes directly. In land plants and some algae, there is an alternation of generations such that meiosis in the diploid sporophyte generation produces haploid spores instead of gametes. When they germinate, these spores undergo repeated cell division by mitosis, developing into a multicellular haploid gametophyte generation, which then produces gametes directly (i.e. without further meiosis).\nIn both animals and plants, the final stage is for the gametes to fuse to form a zygote in which the original number of chromosomes is restored.\nIn mammals.\nIn females, meiosis occurs in cells known as oocytes (singular: oocyte). Each primary oocyte divides twice in meiosis, unequally in each case. The first division produces a daughter cell, and a much smaller polar body which may or may not undergo a second division. In meiosis II, division of the daughter cell produces a second polar body, and a single haploid cell, which enlarges to become an ovum. Therefore, in females each primary oocyte that undergoes meiosis results in one mature ovum and two or three polar bodies.\nThere are pauses during meiosis in females. Maturing oocytes are arrested in prophase I of meiosis I and lie dormant within a protective shell of somatic cells called the follicle. At this stage, the oocyte nucleus is called the germinal vesicle. At the beginning of each menstrual cycle, FSH secretion from the anterior pituitary stimulates a few follicles to mature in a process known as folliculogenesis. During this process, the maturing oocytes resume meiosis and continue until metaphase II of meiosis II, where they are again arrested just before ovulation. The breakdown of the germinal vesicle, condensation of chromosomes, and assembly of the bipolar metaphase I spindle are all clear indications that meiosis has resumed. If these oocytes are fertilized by sperm, they will resume and complete meiosis. During folliculogenesis in humans, usually one follicle becomes dominant while the others undergo atresia. The process of meiosis in females occurs during oogenesis, and differs from the typical meiosis in that it features a long period of meiotic arrest known as the dictyate stage and lacks the assistance of centrosomes.\nIn males, meiosis occurs during spermatogenesis in the seminiferous tubules of the testicles. Meiosis during spermatogenesis is specific to a type of cell called spermatocytes, which will later mature to become spermatozoa. Meiosis of primordial germ cells happens at the time of puberty, much later than in females. Tissues of the male testis suppress meiosis by degrading retinoic acid, proposed to be a stimulator of meiosis. This is overcome at puberty when cells within seminiferous tubules called Sertoli cells start making their own retinoic acid. Sensitivity to retinoic acid is also adjusted by proteins called nanos and DAZL. Genetic loss-of-function studies on retinoic acid-generating enzymes have shown that retinoic acid is required postnatally to stimulate spermatogonia differentiation which results several days later in spermatocytes undergoing meiosis, however retinoic acid is not required during the time when meiosis initiates.\nIn female mammals, meiosis begins immediately after primordial germ cells migrate to the ovary in the embryo. Some studies suggest that retinoic acid derived from the primitive kidney (mesonephros) stimulates meiosis in embryonic ovarian oogonia and that tissues of the embryonic male testis suppress meiosis by degrading retinoic acid. However, genetic loss-of-function studies on retinoic acid-generating enzymes have shown that retinoic acid is not required for initiation of either female meiosis which occurs during embryogenesis or male meiosis which initiates postnatally.\nFlagellates.\nWhile the majority of eukaryotes have a two-divisional meiosis (though sometimes achiasmatic), a very rare form, one-divisional meiosis, occurs in some flagellates (parabasalids and oxymonads) from the gut of the wood-feeding cockroach \"Cryptocercus\".\nRole in human genetics and disease.\nRecombination among the 23 pairs of human chromosomes is responsible for redistributing not just the actual chromosomes, but also pieces of each of them. There is also an estimated 1.6-fold more recombination in females relative to males. In addition, average, female recombination is higher at the centromeres and male recombination is higher at the telomeres. On average, 1 million bp (1 Mb) correspond to 1 cMorgan (cm = 1% recombination frequency). The frequency of cross-overs remain uncertain. In yeast, mouse and human, it has been estimated that \u2265200 double-strand breaks (DSBs) are formed per meiotic cell. However, only a subset of DSBs (~5\u201330% depending on the organism), go on to produce crossovers, which would result in only 1-2 cross-overs per human chromosome.\nIn humans, recombination rates differ between maternal and paternal DNA:\nNondisjunction.\nErrors during meiosis, particularly nondisjunction, can result in gametes with an abnormal number of chromosomes, potentially leading to chromosomal disorders.\nThe normal separation of chromosomes in meiosis I or sister chromatids in meiosis II is termed \"disjunction\". When the segregation is not normal, it is called \"nondisjunction\". This results in the production of gametes which have either too many or too few of a particular chromosome, and is a common mechanism for trisomy or monosomy. Nondisjunction can occur in the meiosis I or meiosis II, phases of cellular reproduction, or during mitosis.\nMost monosomic and trisomic human embryos are not viable, but some aneuploidies can be tolerated, such as trisomy for the smallest chromosome, chromosome 21. Phenotypes of these aneuploidies range from severe developmental disorders to asymptomatic. Medical conditions include but are not limited to:\nThe probability of nondisjunction in human oocytes increases with increasing maternal age, presumably due to loss of cohesin over time.\nComparison to mitosis.\nIn order to understand meiosis, a comparison to mitosis is helpful. The table below shows the differences between meiosis and mitosis.\nMolecular regulation.\nMaturation promoting factor (MPF) seems to have a role in meiosis based on experiments with \"Xenopus laevis\" oocytes. Mammalian oocyte MPF induced germinal vesicle breakdown (GVB) in starfish and \"Xenopus laevis\" oocytes. MPF is active prior to GVB but falls off toward the end of meiosis I. CDK1 and cyclin B levels are correlated with oocyte GVB competence and are likely under translational rather than transcriptional control. In meiosis II, MPF reappears ahead of metaphase II, and its activity remains high up to fertilization.\nIn mammals, meiotic arrest begins with natriuretic peptide type C (NPPC) from mural granulosa cells, which activates production of cyclic guanosine 3\u2032,5\u2032-monophosphate (cGMP) in concert with natriuretic peptide receptor 2 (NPR2) on cumulus cells. cGMP diffuses into oocytes and halts meiosis by inhibiting phosphodiesterase 3A (PDE3A) and cyclic adenosine 3\u2032,5\u2032-monophosphate (cAMP) hydrolysis. In the oocyte, G-protein-coupled receptor GPR3/12 activates adenylyl cyclase to generate cAMP. cAMP stimulates protein kinase A (PKA) to activate the nuclear kinase WEE2 by phosphorylation. PKA also assists in phosphorylation of the CDK1 phosphatase CDC25B to keep it in the cytoplasm; in its unphosphorylated form, CDC25B migrates to the nucleus. Protein kinase C (PKC) may also have a role in inhibiting meiotic progression to metaphase II. Overall, CDK1 activity is suppressed to prevent resumption of meiosis. Oocytes further promote expression of NPR2 and inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (and thereby the production of cGMP) in cumulus cells. Follicle-stimulating hormone and estradiol likewise promote expression of NPPC and NPR2. Hypoxanthine, a purine apparently originating in the follicle, also inhibits in vitro oocyte meiosis. A spike in luteinizing hormone (LH) spurs oocyte maturation, in which oocytes are released from meiotic arrest and progress from prophase I through metaphase II. LH-induced epidermal growth factor-like factors like amphiregulin and epiregulin synthesized in mural granulosa cells reduce levels of cGMP in oocytes by restricting cGMP transport through cumulus cell-oocyte gap junctions and lowering NPPC levels and NPR2 activity. In fact, LH-induced epidermal growth factor-like factors may cause the destabilization and breakdown of gap junctions altogether. LH-induced epidermal growth factor-like factors may trigger production of additional oocyte maturation factors like steroids and follicular fluid-derived meiosis-activating sterol (FF-MAS) in cumulus cells. FF-MAS promotes progression from metaphase I to metaphase II, and it may help stabilize metaphase II arrest. Meiosis resumption is reinforced by the exit of WEE2 from the nucleus due to CDK1 activation. Phosphodiesterases (PDEs) metabolize cAMP and may be temporarily activated by PKA-mediated phosphorylation. Longer-term regulation of phosphodiesterases may require modulation of protein expression. For example, hypoxanthine is a PDE inhibitor that may stymie cAMP metabolism. Kinases like protein kinase B, Aurora kinase A, and polo-like kinase 1 contribute to the resumption of meiosis. There are similarities between the mechanisms of meiotic prophase I arrest and resumption and the mitotic G2 DNA damage checkpoint: CDC14B-based activation of APC-CDH1 in arrest and CDC25B-based resumption. Meiotic arrest requires inhibitory phosphorylation of CDK1 at amino acid residues Thr-14 and Tyr-15 by MYT1 and WEE1 as well as regulation of cyclin B levels facilitated by the anaphase-promoting complex (APC). CDK1 is regulated by cyclin B, whose synthesis peaks at the end of meiosis I. At anaphase I, cyclin B is degraded by an ubiquitin-dependent pathway. Cyclin B synthesis and CDK1 activation prompt oocytes to enter metaphase, while entry into anaphase follows ubiquitin-mediated cyclin B degradation, which brings down CDK1 activity. Proteolysis of adhesion proteins between homologous chromosomes is involved in anaphase I, while proteolysis of adhesion proteins between sister chromatids is involved in anaphase II. Meiosis II arrest is effected by cytostatic factor (CSF), whose elements include the MOS protein, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MAPKK/MEK1), and MAPK. The protein kinase p90 (RSK) is one critical target of MAPK and may help block entry into S-phase between meiosis I and II by reactivating CDK1. There's evidence that RSK aids entry into meiosis I by inhibiting MYT1, which activates CDK1. CSF arrest might take place through regulation of the APC as part of the spindle assembly checkpoint.\nIn the budding yeast \"S. cerevisiae\", Clb1 is the main meiotic regulatory cyclin, though Clb3 and Clb4 are also expressed during meiosis and activate a p34cdc28-associated kinase immediately prior to the first meiotic division. The IME1 transcription factor drives entry into meiotic S-phase and is regulated according to inputs like nutrition. a1/\u03b12 represses a repressor of \"IME1\", initiating meiosis. Numerous \"S. cerevisiae\" meiotic regulatory genes have been identified. A few are presented here. \"IME1\" enables sporulation of non-a/\u03b1 diploids. \"IME2\"/\"SME1\" enables sporulation when nitrogen is present, supports recombination in a/\u03b1 cells expressing \"RME1\", an inhibitor of meiosis, and encodes a protein kinase homolog. \"MCK1\" (meiosis and centromere regulatory kinase) also supports recombination in a/\u03b1 cells expressing \"RME1\" and encodes a protein kinase homolog. \"SME2\" enables sporulation when ammonia or glucose are present. \"UME1-5\" enable expression of certain early meiotic genes in vegetative, non-a/\u03b1 cells.\nIn the fission yeast \"S. pombe\", the Cdc2 kinase and Cig2 cyclin together initiate the premeiotic S phase, while cyclin Cdc13 and the CDK activator Cdc25 are necessary for both meiotic divisions. However, the Pat1-Mei2 system is at the heart of \"S. pombe\" meiotic regulation. Mei2 is the major meiotic regulator. It moves between the nucleus and cytoplasm and works with meiRNA to promote meiosis I. Moreover, Mei2 is implicated in exit from mitosis and induction of premeiotic S phase. Mei2 may inactivate the DSR-Mmi1 system through sequestration of Mmi1 to stabilize meiosis-specific transcript expression. Mei2 may stall growth and bring about G1 arrest. Pat1 is a Ser/Thr protein kinase that phosphorylates Mei2, an RNA-binding protein, on residues Ser438 and Thr527. This phosphorylation may decrease the half-life of Mei2 by making it more likely to be destroyed by a proteasome working with E2 Ubc2 and E3 Ubr1. The Mei4 transcription factor is necessary to transcriptionally activate \"cdc25\" in meiosis, and the \"mei4\" mutant experiences cell cycle arrest. Mes1 inhibits the APC/C activator Slp1 such that the Cdc2-Cdc13 MPF activity can drive the second meiotic division.\nIt has been suggested that Yeast CEP1 gene product, that binds centromeric region CDE1, may play a role in chromosome pairing during meiosis-I.\nMeiotic recombination is mediated through double stranded break, which is catalyzed by Spo11 protein. Also Mre11, Sae2 and Exo1 play role in breakage and recombination. After the breakage happen, recombination take place which is typically homologous. The recombination may go through either a double Holliday junction (dHJ) pathway or synthesis-dependent strand annealing (SDSA). (The second one gives to noncrossover product).\nSeemingly there are checkpoints for meiotic cell division too. In S. pombe, Rad proteins, S. pombe Mek1 (with FHA kinase domain), Cdc25, Cdc2 and unknown factor is thought to form a checkpoint.\nIn vertebrate oogenesis, maintained by cytostatic factor (CSF) has role in switching into meiosis-II.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18977", "revid": "2885250", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18977", "title": "Minix", "text": "Unix-like operating system\nMINIX is a Unix-like operating system based on a microkernel architecture, first released in 1987 and written by American-Dutch computer scientist Andrew S. Tanenbaum. It was designed as a clone of the Unix operating system and one that could run on affordable, Intel 8086-based home computers; MINIX was targeted for use in classrooms by computer science students at universities.\nIts name comes from \"mini-Unix\". MINIX was initially proprietary source-available, but was relicensed under the BSD 3-Clause to become free and open-source in 2000. MINIX was ported to various additional platforms in the 1990s, and version 2.0 was released in 1997 and was the first to be POSIX compliant. Starting with MINIX 3, released in 2005, the primary aim of development shifted from education to the creation of a highly reliable and self-healing microkernel OS.\nImplementation.\nMINIX 1.0.\nAndrew S. Tanenbaum created MINIX at Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam to exemplify the principles conveyed in his textbook, \"\" (1987). (Despite sharing a name, it has no relation to the older MINIX from Digital Systems House, Inc. based on AT&amp;T Unix code.)\nAn abridged 12,010 lines of the C source code of the kernel, memory manager, and file system of MINIX 1.0 are printed in the book. Prentice-Hall also released MINIX source code and executable binaries on floppy disk with a reference manual. MINIX 1 was system-call compatible with Seventh Edition Unix.\nTanenbaum originally developed MINIX for compatibility with the IBM PC and IBM PC/AT microcomputers available at the time.\nMINIX 1.4.\nThere is a version of MINIX floating around that supports the Peripheral Technology PT68K-2 and PT68K-4 computers. The PT68K-2 and the PT68K-4 are both 68000 based computers with a standard 8 bit IBM PC ISA bus that has 6 connectors on the main board. It was ported to the PT68K machines by Gary Mills and Sidney Thompson. The port was adapted from the Atari port since it too is a 68000 based machine. The PT68K version has added support for the PT XT-IDE card from Peripheral Technology. It currently only supports the MDA display adapter (no CGA, EGA or VGA). For this reason, it has not yet been ported to the PT68K-5 (aka CDS68020). There is an SD Card image available from https://github.com/mevenson/minix-for-the-PT68K-2-4.\nMINIX 1.5.\nMINIX 1.5, released in 1991, included support for MicroChannel IBM PS/2 systems and was also ported to the 68000 and SPARC architectures, supporting the Atari ST, Amiga, Macintosh, and Sun SPARCstation computer platforms. There were also unofficial ports to Intel 386 PC compatibles (in 32-bit protected mode), National Semiconductor NS32532, ARM and Inmos transputer processors. Meiko Scientific used an early version of MINIX as the basis for the MeikOS operating system for its transputer-based Computing Surface parallel computers.\nMINIX 2.0.\nDemand for the 68k-architectures waned, however, and MINIX 2.0, released in 1997, was only available for the x86 and Solaris-hosted SPARC architectures. It was the subject of the second edition of Tanenbaum's textbook, cowritten with Albert Woodhull and was distributed on a CD-ROM included with the book. MINIX 2.0 added POSIX.1 compliance, support for 386 and later processors in 32-bit mode and replaced the Amoeba network protocols included in MINIX 1.5 with a TCP/IP stack. A version of MINIX running as a user process under SunOS and Solaris was also available, a simulator named SMX (operating system) or just \"SMX\" for short.\nVersion 2.0.3 was released in May 2001. It was the first version after MINIX had been relicensed under the BSD-3-Clause license, which was retroactively applied to all previous versions.\nMinix-vmd.\nMinix-vmd is a variant of MINIX 2.0 for Intel IA-32-compatible processors, created by two Vrije Universiteit researchers, which adds virtual memory and support for the X Window System.\nMINIX 3.\nMINIX 3 was publicly announced on 24 October 2005 by Tanenbaum during his keynote speech at the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP). Although it still serves as an example for the new edition of Tanenbaum's textbook, coauthored by Albert S. Woodhull, it is comprehensively redesigned to be \"usable as a serious system on resource-limited and embedded computers and for applications requiring high reliability.\"\nMINIX 3 currently supports IA-32 and ARM architecture systems. It is available in a live CD format that allows it to be used on a computer without installing it on the hard drive, and in versions compatible with hardware emulating and virtualizing systems, including Bochs, QEMU, VMware Workstation and Fusion, VirtualBox, and Microsoft Virtual PC.\nVersion 3.1.2 was released on 18 April 2006. It was the first version after MINIX had been relicensed under the BSD-3-Clause license with a new fourth clause.\nVersion 3.1.5 was released on 5 November 2009. It contains X11, emacs, vi, cc, gcc, perl, python, ash, bash, zsh, ftp, ssh, telnet, pine, and over 400 other common Unix utility programs. With the addition of X11, this version marks the transition away from a text-only system. In many cases it can automatically restart a crashed driver without affecting running processes. In this way, MINIX is self-healing and can be used in applications demanding high reliability. MINIX 3 also has support for virtual memory management, making it suitable for desktop OS use. Desktop applications such as Firefox and OpenOffice.org are not yet available for MINIX 3 however.\nAs of version 3.2.0, the userland was mostly replaced by that of NetBSD and support from pkgsrc became possible, increasing the available software applications that MINIX can use. Clang replaced the prior compiler (with GCC now having to be manually compiled), and GDB, the GNU Debugger, was ported.\nMINIX 3.3.0, released in September 2014, brought ARM support.\nMINIX 3.4.0RC, Release Candidates became available in January 2016. However, a stable release of MINIX 3.4.0 is yet to be announced, and MINIX development has been dormant since 2018.\nMINIX supports many programming languages, including C, C++, FORTRAN, Modula-2, Pascal, Perl, Python, and Tcl.\nOver 50 people attended MINIXCon 2016, a conference to discuss the history and future of MINIX.\nAll Intel chipsets post-2015 are running MINIX 3 internally as the software component of the Intel Management Engine.\nRelationship with Linux.\nEarly influence.\nLinus Torvalds used and appreciated MINIX, but his design deviated from the MINIX architecture in significant ways, most notably by employing a monolithic kernel instead of a microkernel. This was disapproved of by Tanenbaum in the Tanenbaum\u2013Torvalds debate. Tanenbaum explained again his rationale for using a microkernel in May 2006.\nEarly Linux kernel development was done on a MINIX host system, which led to Linux inheriting various features from MINIX, such as the MINIX file system. Eric Raymond claimed that Linus hasn't actually written Linux from scratch, but rather reused source code of MINIX itself to have working codebase. As the development progressed, MINIX code was gradually phased out completely.\n\"Samizdat\" claims.\nIn his 2004 book, \"Samizdat\", Kenneth Brown of AdTI claimed that much of the Linux kernel was copied from MINIX.\nThese accusations were rebutted universally\u2014most prominently by Tanenbaum, who strongly criticised Brown and published a long rebuttal on his own personal Web site, also claiming that Brown was funded by Microsoft.\nLicensing.\nAt the time of MINIX's original development, its license was relatively liberal. Its licensing fee was very small ($69) relative to those of other operating systems. Tanenbaum wished for MINIX to be as accessible as possible to students, but his publisher was unwilling to offer material (such as the source code) that could be copied freely, so a restrictive license requiring a nominal fee (included in the price of Tanenbaum's book) was applied as a compromise. This prevented the use of MINIX as the basis for a freely distributed software system.\nWhen free and open-source Unix-like operating systems such as Linux and 386BSD became available in the early 1990s, many volunteer software developers abandoned MINIX in favor of these. In April 2000, MINIX became free and open-source software under the BSD-3-Clause license, which was retroactively applied to all previous versions. However, by this time other operating systems had surpassed its capabilities, and it remained primarily an operating system for students and hobbyists. In late 2005, MINIX was relicensed with a fourth clause added to the BSD-3-Clause license.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18978", "revid": "251228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18978", "title": "Mexican food", "text": ""}
{"id": "18982", "revid": "32164470", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18982", "title": "Muscular dystrophy", "text": "Diseases in which skeletal and visceral muscles breaks down over time\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nMuscular dystrophy (MD) is a genetically and clinically heterogeneous group of rare neuromuscular diseases that cause progressive weakness and breakdown of skeletal muscles over time. The disorders differ as to which muscles are primarily affected, the degree of weakness, how fast they worsen, and when symptoms begin. Some types are also associated with problems in other organs.\nOver 30 different disorders are classified as muscular dystrophies. Of those, Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) accounts for approximately 50% of cases and affects males beginning around the age of four. Other relatively common muscular dystrophies include Becker muscular dystrophy, facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, and myotonic dystrophy, whereas limb\u2013girdle muscular dystrophy and congenital muscular dystrophy are themselves groups of several \u2013 usually extremely rare \u2013 genetic disorders.\nMuscular dystrophies are caused by mutations in genes, usually those involved in making muscle proteins. The muscle protein dystrophin is in most muscle cells and works to strengthen the muscle fibers and protect them from injury as muscles contract and relax. It links the muscle membrane to the thin muscular filaments within the cell. Dystrophin is an integral part of the muscular structure. An absence of dystrophin can cause impairments: healthy muscle tissue can be replaced by fibrous tissue and fat, causing an inability to generate force. Respiratory and cardiac complications can occur as well. These mutations are either inherited from parents or may occur spontaneously during early development. Muscular dystrophies may be X-linked recessive, autosomal recessive, or autosomal dominant. Diagnosis often involves blood tests and genetic testing.\nThere is no cure for any disorder from the muscular dystrophy group. Several drugs designed to address the root cause are currently available including gene therapy (Elevidys), and antisense drugs (Ataluren, Eteplirsen etc.). Other medications used include glucocorticoids (Deflazacort, Vamorolone); calcium channel blockers (Diltiazem); to slow skeletal and cardiac muscle degeneration, anticonvulsants to control seizures and some muscle activity, and Histone deacetylase inhibitors (Givinostat) to delay damage to dying muscle cells. Physical therapy, braces, and corrective surgery may help with some symptoms while assisted ventilation may be required in those with weakness of breathing muscles.\nOutcomes depend on the specific type of disorder. Many affected people will eventually become unable to walk and Duchenne muscular dystrophy in particular is associated with shortened life expectancy.\nMuscular dystrophy was first described in the 1830s by Charles Bell. The word \"dystrophy\" comes from the Greek \"dys\", meaning \"no, un-\" and \"troph-\" meaning \"nourish\".\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe signs and symptoms consistent with muscular dystrophy are:\nCauses.\nThe majority of muscular dystrophies are inherited; the different muscular dystrophies follow various inheritance patterns (X-linked, autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant). In a small percentage of patients, the disorder may have been caused by a \"de novo\" (spontaneous) mutation.\nDiagnosis.\nThe diagnosis of muscular dystrophy is based on the results of muscle biopsy, increased creatine phosphokinase (CpK3), electromyography, and genetic testing. A physical examination and the patient's medical history will help the doctor determine the type of muscular dystrophy. Specific muscle groups are affected by different types of muscular dystrophy.\nAn MRI can be used to assess the white matter of the nervous system and measure the merosin levels in young boys. An absence of merosin in young boys will result with neurological deficits and changes in the white matter.\nManagement.\nThere is no cure for muscular dystrophy. In terms of management, physical therapy, occupational therapy, orthotic intervention (e.g., ankle-foot orthosis), speech therapy, and respiratory therapy may be helpful. Low-intensity corticosteroids such as prednisone, and deflazacort may help to maintain muscle tone. Orthoses (orthopedic appliances used for support) and corrective orthopedic surgery may be needed to improve the quality of life in some cases. The cardiac problems that occur with Emery\u2013Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) and myotonic muscular dystrophy may require a pacemaker. The myotonia (delayed relaxation of a muscle after a strong contraction) occurring in myotonic muscular dystrophy may be treated with medications such as quinine.\nLow-intensity assisted exercises, dynamic exercise training, or assisted bicycle training of the arms and legs during a 24-week trial were shown to significantly delay the functional loss of muscular dystrophy. These therapies may be performed in a safe and feasible manner, even for children in their ambulation stages. However, eccentric or intense exercises causing soreness should not be used, as they can cause further damage.\nOccupational therapy assists the patient to engage in activities of daily living (such as self-feeding and self-care activities) and leisure activities at the most independent level possible. This may be achieved with use of adaptive equipment or the use of energy-conservation techniques. Occupational therapy may implement changes to a person's environment, both at home or work, to increase the individual's function and accessibility. Furthermore, it addresses psychosocial changes and cognitive decline that may accompany MD, and provides support and education about the disease to the family and patient.\nPrognosis.\nPrognosis depends on the individual form of muscular dystrophy. Some dystrophies cause progressive weakness and loss of muscle function, which may result in severe physical disability and a life-threatening deterioration of respiratory muscles or heart. Other dystrophies do not affect life expectancy and only cause relatively mild impairment.\nHistory.\nIn the 1860s, descriptions of boys who grew progressively weaker, lost the ability to walk, and died at an early age became more prominent in medical journals. In the following decade, French neurologist Guillaume Duchenne published a comprehensive account of the most common and severe form of the disease, which now carries his name.\nSociety and culture.\nIn 1966 in the U.S. and Canada, Jerry Lewis and the Muscular Dystrophy Association (MDA) began the annual Labor Day telecast \"The Jerry Lewis Telethon\", significant in raising awareness of muscular dystrophy in North America. Some disability-rights advocates have criticized the telethon for portraying victims of the disease as deserving pity rather than respect.\nOn December 18, 2001, the MD CARE Act was signed into law in the United States. The law amends the Public Health Service Act to provide research for the various muscular dystrophies and established the Muscular Dystrophy Coordinating Committee to help focus research efforts through a coherent research strategy.\nResearch and advocacy.\nThe Muscular Dystrophy Association (MDA) is involved in research, advocacy, and services for individuals affected by muscular dystrophy. The organization provides resources that contribute to understanding and addressing this condition.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18984", "revid": "47026963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18984", "title": "Mongols", "text": "East Asian ethnic group\nMongols are an East Asian ethnic group native to Mongolia and China (Inner Mongolia and other 11 autonomous territories), as well as the republics of Buryatia and Kalmykia in Russia. The Mongols are the principal member of the large family of Mongolic peoples. The Oirats and the Buryats are classified either as distinct ethno-linguistic groups or as subgroups of Mongols.\nThe Mongols are bound together by a common heritage and ethnic identity, descending from the Proto-Mongols. Their indigenous dialects are collectively known as the Mongolian language. The contiguous geographical area in which the Mongols primarily live is referred to as the Mongol heartland, especially in discussions of the Mongols' history under the Mongol Empire.\nDefinition.\nBroadly defined, the term includes the Mongols proper (also known as the Khalkha Mongols), Buryats, Oirats, the Kalmyks and the Southern Mongols. The latter comprises the Abaga Mongols, Abaganar, Aohans, Arkhorchin, Asud, Baarins, Chahars, Darkhan (Shar Darkhad), D\u00f6rv\u00f6n Kh\u00fc\u00fckhed, Eastern Dorbets, Gorlos Mongols, Ikhmyangan, Jalaids, Jaruud, Kharchins, Khishigten, Khorchins, Khuuchid, Muumyangan, Naimans, Onnigud, Ordos, Sunud, Tumed, Urad and \u00dczemchins.\nThe designation \"Mongol\" briefly appeared in 8th century records of Tang China to describe a tribe of Shiwei. It resurfaced in the late 11th century during the Khitan-ruled Liao dynasty. After the fall of the Liao in 1125, the Khamag Mongols became a leading tribe on the Mongolian Plateau. However, their wars with the Jurchen-ruled Jin dynasty and the Tatar confederation had weakened them.\nIn the thirteenth century, the word Mongol grew into an umbrella term for a large group of Mongolic-speaking tribes united under the rule of Genghis Khan.\nEtymology.\nThere are several proposals for the ethnonym Mongol's etymology:\nHistory.\nThe ethnogenesis of Mongolic peoples is largely linked with the expansion of Ancient Northeast Asians. The Mongolian pastoralist lifestyle may in part be derived from the Western Steppe Herders, but without much geneflow between these two groups, suggesting cultural transmission.\nIn various times Mongolic peoples have been equated with the Scythians, the Magog, and the Tungusic peoples. Based on Chinese historical texts the ancestry of the Mongolic peoples can be traced back to the Donghu, a nomadic confederation occupying eastern Mongolia and Manchuria. The Donghu neighboured the Xiongnu, whose identity is still debated today. Although some scholars maintain that they were proto-Mongols, they were more likely a multi-ethnic group of Mongolic and Turkic tribes. It has been suggested that the language of the Huns was related to the Xiongnu.\nThe Donghu, however, can be much more easily labeled proto-Mongol since the Chinese histories trace only Mongolic tribes and kingdoms (Xianbei and Wuhuan peoples) from them, although some historical texts claim a mixed Xiongnu-Donghu ancestry for some tribes (e.g. the Khitan).\nIn the Chinese classics.\nThe Donghu are mentioned by Sima Qian as already existing in Inner Mongolia north of Yan in 699\u2013632 BCE along with the Shanrong. Unofficial Chinese sources such as \"Yi Zhou Shu\" (\"Lost Book of Zhou\") and the \"Classic of Mountains and Seas\" project the Donghu's activities back to the Shang dynasty (1600\u20131046 BCE). However, the Hu (\u80e1) were not mentioned among the non-Shang \"fang\" (\u65b9 \"border-region\"; modern term \"f\u0101nggu\u00f3\" \"fang-countries\") in the extant oracle bones from the Shang period.\nThe Xianbei formed part of the Donghu confederation, and possibly had in earlier times some independence within the Donghu confederation as well as from the Zhou dynasty. During the Warring States the poem \"The Great Summons\" (: ) in the anthology Verses of Chu mentions small-waisted and long-necked Xianbei women, and possibly also the book \"Discourses of the States\", which states that during the reign of King Cheng of Zhou (reigned 1042\u20131021 BCE) the Xianbei came to participate at a meeting of Zhou subject-lords at Qiyang (\u5c90\u9633) (now Qishan County) but were only allowed to perform the fire ceremony under the supervision of Chu since they were not vassals (\u8bf8\u4faf) by enfeoffment and establishment. The Xianbei chieftain was appointed joint guardian of the ritual torch along with Chu viscount Xiong Yi.\nThese early Xianbei came from the nearby Zhukaigou culture (2200\u20131500 BCE) in the Ordos Desert, where maternal DNA corresponds to the Mongol Daur people and the Tungusic Evenks. The Zhukaigou Xianbei (part of the Ordos culture of Inner Mongolia and northern Shaanxi) had trade relations with the Shang. Liu Song dynasty commentator Pei Yin (\u88f4\u99f0), in his Jixie (\u96c6\u89e3), quoted Eastern Han dynasty scholar Fu Qian (\u670d\u8654)'s assertion that Shanrong (\u5c71\u620e) and Beidi (\u5317\u72c4) are ancestors of the present-day Xianbei (\u9bae\u5351). Again in Inner Mongolia another closely connected core Mongolic Xianbei region was the Upper Xiajiadian culture (1000\u2013600 BCE) where the Donghu confederation was centered.\nAfter the Donghu were defeated by Xiongnu king Modu Chanyu, the Xianbei and Wuhuan survived as the main remnants of the confederation. Tadun Khan of the Wuhuan (died 207 AD) was the ancestor of the proto-Mongolic Kumo Xi. The Wuhuan are of the direct Donghu royal line and the \"New Book of Tang\" says that in 209 BCE, Modu Chanyu defeated the Wuhuan instead of using the word Donghu. The Xianbei, however, were of the lateral Donghu line and had a somewhat separate identity, although they shared the same language with the Wuhuan. In 49 CE the Xianbei ruler Bianhe (Bayan Khan?) raided and defeated the Xiongnu, killing 2000, after having received generous gifts from Emperor Guangwu of Han. The Xianbei reached their peak under Tanshihuai (reigned 156\u2013181) who expanded their vast but short lived confederation.\nThree prominent groups split from the Xianbei state as recorded by the Chinese histories: the Rouran (claimed by some to be the Pannonian Avars), the Khitan people and the Shiwei (a subtribe called the \"Shiwei Menggu\" is held to be the origin of the Genghisid Mongols). Besides these three Xianbei groups, there were others such as the Murong, Duan and Tuoba. Their culture was nomadic, their religion shamanism or Buddhism and their military strength formidable. There is still no direct evidence that the Rouran spoke Mongolic languages, although most scholars agree that they were Proto-Mongolic. The Khitan, however, had two scripts of their own and many Mongolic words are found in their half-deciphered writings.\nGeographically, the Tuoba Xianbei ruled the southern part of Inner Mongolia and northern China, the Rouran (Yujiul\u00fc Shelun was the first to use the title khagan in 402) ruled eastern Mongolia, western Mongolia, the northern part of Inner Mongolia and northern Mongolia, the Khitan were concentrated in eastern part of Inner Mongolia north of Korea and the Shiwei were located to the north of the Khitan. These tribes and kingdoms were soon overshadowed by the rise of the First Turkic Khaganate in 555, the Uyghur Khaganate in 745 and the Yenisei Kirghiz states in 840. The Tuoba were eventually absorbed into China. The Rouran fled west from the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks and either disappeared into obscurity or, as some say, invaded Europe as the Avars under their Khan, Bayan I. Some Rouran under Tatar Khan migrated east, founding the Tatar confederation, who became part of the Shiwei. The Khitans, who were independent after their separation from the Kumo Xi (of Wuhuan origin) in 388, continued as a minor power in Manchuria until one of them, Abaoji (872\u2013926), established the Liao dynasty (916\u20131125).\nMongol Empire.\nThe destruction of the Uyghur Khaganate by the Kirghiz resulted in the end of Turkic dominance in Mongolia. According to historians, Kirghiz were not interested in assimilating newly acquired lands; instead, they controlled local tribes through various \"manaps\" (tribal leaders). The Khitans occupied the areas vacated by the Turkic Uyghurs bringing them under their control. The Yenisei Kirghiz state was centered on Khakassia and they were expelled from Mongolia by the Khitans in 924. Beginning in the 10th century, the Khitans, under the leadership of Abaoji, prevailed in several military campaigns against the Tang dynasty's border guards, and the Xi, Shiwei and Jurchen nomadic groups.\nRemnants of the Liao dynasty led by Yel\u00fc Dashi fled west through Mongolia after being defeated by the Jurchen-led Jin dynasty and founded the Qara Khitai (Western Liao dynasty) in 1124 while still maintaining control over western Mongolia. In 1218, Genghis Khan incorporated the Qara Khitai after which the Khitan passed into obscurity. Some remnants surfaced as the Qutlugh-Khanid dynasty (1222\u20131306) in Iran and the Dai Khitai in Afghanistan. With the expansion of the Mongol Empire, the Mongolic people settled over almost all Eurasia and carried on military campaigns from the Adriatic Sea to Indonesian Java and from Japan to Palestine. They simultaneously became Padishahs of Persia, Emperors of China, and Great Khans of the Mongols, and one (Al-Adil Kitbugha) became Sultan of Egypt. The Mongolic peoples of the Golden Horde established themselves to govern Russia by 1240. By 1279, they conquered the Song dynasty and brought all of China proper under the control of the Yuan dynasty.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... from Chinggis up high down to the common people, all are shaven in the style \"pojiao\". As with small boys in China, they leave three locks, one hanging from the crown of their heads. When it has grown some, they clip it; the strands lower on both sides they plait to hang down on the shoulders.\u2014\u200a\nWith the breakup of the empire, the dispersed Mongolic peoples quickly adopted the mostly Turkic cultures surrounding them and were assimilated, forming parts of Afghanistan's Hazaras, Azerbaijanis, Uzbeks, Karakalpaks, Tatars, Bashkirs, Turkmens, Uyghurs, Nogais, Kyrgyzs, Kazakhs, Caucasus peoples, Iranian peoples and Moghuls; linguistic and cultural Persianization also began to be prominent in these territories. Some Mongols assimilated into the Yakuts after their migration to northern Siberia and about 30% of Yakut words have Mongol origin. However, remnants of the Yuan imperial family retreated north to Mongolia in 1368, retaining their language and culture. There were 250,000 Mongols in southern China and many Mongols were massacred by the rebel army. The survivors were trapped in southern China and eventually assimilated. The Dongxiangs, Bonans, Yugur and Monguor people were invaded by the Ming dynasty.\nNorthern Yuan.\nAfter the fall of the Yuan dynasty in 1368, the Mongols continued to rule the Northern Yuan in northern China and the Mongolian steppe. However, the Oirads began to challenge the Eastern Mongols under the Borjigin monarchs in the late 14th century and Mongolia was divided into two parts: Western Mongolia (Oirats) and Eastern Mongolia (Khalkha, Inner Mongols, Barga, Buryats). The earliest written references to the plough in Middle Mongol language sources appear towards the end of the 14th c.\nIn 1434, Eastern Mongol Taisun Khan's (1433\u20131452) Oirat prime minister Togoon Taish reunited the Mongols after killing Adai Khan in Ejin. Togoon died in 1439 and his son Esen Taish became ruler of Northern Yuan dynasty. Esen later unified the Mongol tribes. The Ming dynasty attempted to invade the Northern Yuan in the 14\u201316th centuries, however, the Ming dynasty was defeated by the Oirat, Southern Mongol, Eastern Mongol and united Mongol armies. Esen's 30,000 cavalries defeated 500,000 Chinese soldiers in the 1449 Tumu Crisis. Within eighteen months of his defeat of the titular Khan Taisun, in 1453, Esen himself took the title of Great Khan (1454\u20131455) of the Great Yuan.\nThe Khalkha emerged during the reign of Dayan Khan (1479\u20131543) as one of the six tumens of the Eastern Mongolic peoples. They quickly became the dominant Mongolic clan in Mongolia proper. He reunited the Mongols again. In 1550, Altan Khan led a Tumed Mongol raid on Beijing. The Mongols voluntarily reunified during Eastern Mongolian T\u00fcmen Zasagt Khan rule (1558\u20131592) for the last time (the Mongol Empire united all Mongols before this).\nEastern Mongolia was divided into three parts in the 17th century: Outer Mongolia (Khalkha), Inner Mongolia (Inner Mongols) and the Buryat region in southern Siberia.\nThe last Mongol khagan was Ligdan in the early 17th century. He got into conflicts with the Manchus over the looting of Chinese cities, and managed to alienate most Mongol tribes. In 1618, Ligdan signed a treaty with the Ming dynasty to protect their northern border from the Manchus attack in exchange for thousands of taels of silver. By the 1620s, only the Chahars remained under his rule.\nQing era.\nThe Chahar army was defeated in 1625 and 1628 by the Inner Mongol and Manchu armies due to Ligdan's faulty tactics. The Qing forces secured their control over Inner Mongolia by 1635, and the army of the last khan Ligdan moved to battle against Tibetan Gelugpa sect (Yellow Hat sect) forces. The Gelugpa forces supported the Manchus, while Ligdan supported Kagyu sect (Red Hat sect) of Tibetan Buddhism. Ligden died in 1634 on his way to Tibet. By 1636, most Inner Mongolian nobles had submitted to the Qing dynasty founded by the Manchus. Inner Mongolian Tengis noyan revolted against the Qing in the 1640s and the Khalkha battled to protect Sunud.\nWestern Mongol Oirats and Eastern Mongolian Khalkhas vied for domination in Mongolia since the 15th century and this conflict weakened Mongol strength. In 1688, the Western Mongol Dzungar Khanate's king Galdan Boshugtu attacked Khalkha after murder of his younger brother by Tusheet Khan Chakhundorj (main or Central Khalkha leader) and the Khalkha-Oirat War began. Galdan threatened to kill Chakhundorj and Zanabazar (Javzandamba Khutagt I, spiritual head of Khalkha) but they escaped to Sunud (Inner Mongolia). Many Khalkha nobles and folks fled to Inner Mongolia because of the war. Few Khalkhas fled to the Buryat region and Russia threatened to exterminate them if they did not submit, but many of them submitted to Galdan Boshugtu.\nIn 1683 Galdan's armies reached Tashkent and the Syr Darya and crushed two armies of the Kazakhs. After that Galdan subjugated the Black Khirgizs and ravaged the Fergana Valley. From 1685 Galdan's forces aggressively pushed the Kazakhs. While his general Rabtan took Taraz, and his main force forced the Kazakhs to migrate westwards. In 1687, he besieged the City of Turkistan. Under the leadership of Abul Khair Khan, the Kazakhs won major victories over the Dzungars at the Bulanty River in 1726, and at the Battle of Anrakay in 1729.\nThe Khalkha eventually submitted to Qing rule in 1691 by Zanabazar's decision, thus bringing all of today's Mongolia under the rule of the Qing dynasty but Khalkha \"de facto\" remained under the rule of Galdan Boshugtu Khaan until 1696. The Mongol-Oirat's Code (a treaty of alliance) against foreign invasion between the Oirats and Khalkhas was signed in 1640, however, the Mongols could not unite against foreign invasions. Chakhundorj fought against Russian invasion of Outer Mongolia until 1688 and stopped Russian invasion of Kh\u00f6vsg\u00f6l Province. Zanabazar struggled to bring together the Oirats and Khalkhas before the war.\nGaldan Boshugtu sent his army to \"liberate\" Inner Mongolia after defeating the Khalkha's army and called Inner Mongolian nobles to fight for Mongolian independence. Some Inner Mongolian nobles, Tibetans, Kumul Khanate and some Moghulistan's nobles supported his war against the Manchus, however, Inner Mongolian nobles did not battle against the Qing.\nThere were three khans in Khalkha and Zasagt Khan Shar (Western Khalkha leader) was Galdan's ally. Tsetsen Khan (Eastern Khalkha leader) did not engage in this conflict. While Galdan was fighting in Eastern Mongolia, his nephew Tseveenravdan seized the Dzungarian throne in 1689 and this event made Galdan impossible to fight against the Qing Empire. The Russian and Qing Empires supported his action because this coup weakened Western Mongolian strength. Galdan Boshugtu's army was defeated by the outnumbering Qing army in 1696 and he died in 1697. The Mongols who fled to the Buryat region and Inner Mongolia returned after the war. Some Khalkhas mixed with the Buryats.\nThe Buryats fought against Russian invasion since the 1620s and thousands of Buryats were massacred. The Buryat region was formally annexed to Russia by treaties in 1689 and 1727, when the territories on both the sides of Lake Baikal were separated from Mongolia. In 1689 the Treaty of Nerchinsk established the northern border of Manchuria north of the present line. The Russians retained Trans-Baikalia between Lake Baikal and the Argun River north of Mongolia. The Treaty of Kyakhta (1727), along with the Treaty of Nerchinsk, regulated the relations between Russian and Qing empires until the mid-nineteenth century, and established the Mongolia-Russia border. Oka Buryats revolted in 1767 and Russia completely conquered the Buryat region in the late 18th century. Russia and Qing were rival empires until the early 20th century, however, both empires carried out united policy against Central Asians.\nThe Qing Empire conquered Upper Mongolia or the Oirat's Khoshut Khanate in the 1720s and 80,000 people were killed. By that period, Upper Mongolian population reached 200,000. The Dzungar Khanate conquered by the Qing dynasty in 1755\u20131758 because of their leaders and military commanders conflicts. Some scholars estimate that about 80% of the Dzungar population were destroyed by a combination of warfare and disease during the Qing conquest of the Dzungar Khanate in 1755\u20131758. Mark Levene, a historian whose recent research interests focus on genocide, has stated that the extermination of the Dzungars was \"arguably the eighteenth century genocide par excellence.\" The Dzungar population reached 600,000 in 1755.\nAbout 200,000\u2013250,000 Oirats migrated from western Mongolia to Volga River in 1607 and established the Kalmyk Khanate.The Torghuts were led by their Tayishi, Kho Orluk. Russia was concerned about their attack but the Kalmyks became a Russian ally and a treaty to protect the southern Russian border was signed between the Kalmyk Khanate and Russia. In 1724 the Kalmyks came under control of Russia. By the early 18th century, there were approximately 300,000\u2013350,000 Kalmyks and 15,000,000 Russians. The Tsardom of Russia gradually chipped away at the autonomy of the Kalmyk Khanate. These policies, for instance, encouraged the establishment of Russian and German settlements on pastures the Kalmyks used to roam and feed their livestock. In addition, the Tsarist government imposed a council on the Kalmyk Khan, thereby diluting his authority, while continuing to expect the Kalmyk Khan to provide cavalry units to fight on behalf of Russia. The Russian Orthodox church, by contrast, pressured Buddhist Kalmyks to adopt Orthodoxy. In January 1771, approximately 200,000 (170,000) Kalmyks began the migration from their pastures on the left bank of the Volga to Dzungaria, through the territories of their Bashkir and Kazakh enemies. The last Kalmyk khan Ubashi led the migration to restore Mongolian independence. Ubashi Khan sent his 30,000 cavalries to the Russo-Turkish War (1768\u201374) to gain weapon before the migration. The Empress Catherine the Great ordered the Russian army, Bashkirs and Kazakhs to exterminate all migrants and the Empress abolished the Kalmyk Khanate. The Kyrgyzs attacked them near Balkhash Lake. About 100,000\u2013150,000 Kalmyks who settled on the west bank of the Volga River could not cross the river because the river did not freeze in the winter of 1771 and Catherine the Great executed influential nobles of them. After seven months of travel, only one-third (66,073) of the original group reached Dzungaria (Balkhash Lake, western border of the Qing Empire). The Qing Empire transmigrated the Kalmyks to five different areas to prevent their revolt and influential leaders of the Kalmyks died soon (killed by the Manchus). Russia states that Buryatia voluntarily merged with Russia in 1659 due to Mongolian oppression and the Kalmyks voluntarily accepted Russian rule in 1609 but only Georgia voluntarily accepted Russian rule.\nIn the early 20th century, the late Qing government encouraged Han Chinese settlement of Mongolian lands under the name of \"New Policies\" or \"New Administration\" (xinzheng). As a result, some Mongol leaders, especially those of Outer Mongolia, decided to seek Mongolian independence. After the Xinhai Revolution, the Mongolian Revolution on 30 November 1911 in Outer Mongolia ended an over 200-year rule of the Qing dynasty.\nPost-Qing era.\nWith the independence of Outer Mongolia, the Mongolian army controlled Khalkha and Khovd regions (modern day Uvs, Khovd, and Bayan-\u00d6lgii provinces), but Northern Xinjiang (the Altai and Ili regions of the Qing empire), Upper Mongolia, Barga and Inner Mongolia came under control of the newly formed Republic of China. On February 2, 1913, the Bogd Khanate of Mongolia sent Mongolian cavalries to \"liberate\" Inner Mongolia from China. Russia refused to sell weapons to the Bogd Khanate, and the Russian czar, Nicholas II, referred to it as \"Mongolian imperialism\". Additionally, the United Kingdom urged Russia to abolish Mongolian independence as it was concerned that \"if Mongolians gain independence, then Central Asians will revolt\". 10,000 Khalkha and Inner Mongolian cavalries (about 3,500 Inner Mongols) defeated 70,000 Chinese soldiers and controlled almost all of Inner Mongolia; however, the Mongolian army retreated due to lack of weapons in 1914. 400 Mongol soldiers and 3,795 Chinese soldiers died in this war. The Khalkhas, Khovd Oirats, Buryats, Dzungarian Oirats, Upper Mongols, Barga Mongols, most Inner Mongolian and some Tuvan leaders sent statements to support Bogd Khan's call of Mongolian reunification. In reality however, most of them were too prudent or irresolute to attempt joining the Bogd Khan regime. Russia encouraged Mongolia to become an autonomous region of China in 1914. Mongolia lost Barga, Dzungaria, Tuva, Upper Mongolia and Inner Mongolia in the 1915 Treaty of Kyakhta.\nIn October 1919, the Republic of China occupied Mongolia after the suspicious deaths of Mongolian patriotic nobles. On 3 February 1921 the White Russian army\u2014led by Baron Ungern and mainly consisting of Mongolian volunteer cavalries, and Buryat and Tatar cossacks\u2014liberated Ulaanbaatar. Baron Ungern's purpose was to find allies to defeat the Soviet Union. The Statement of Reunification of Mongolia was adopted by Mongolian revolutionaries in 1921. The Soviet, however, considered Mongolia to be Chinese territory in 1924 during a secret meeting with the Republic of China. Finally, the National Government of the Republic of China officially recognized Mongolian independence in 1945. Although the Soviet Union supported the Mongolian People's Republic, Soviets carried out various policies (political, economic and cultural) against Mongolia until its fall in 1991 to prevent Pan-Mongolism and other irredentist movements.\nOn 10 April 1932, Mongolians revolted against the government's new policy and Soviets. The government and Soviet soldiers defeated the rebels in October.\nThe Buryats started to migrate to Mongolia in the 1900s due to Russian oppression. Joseph Stalin's regime stopped the migration in 1930 and started a campaign of ethnic cleansing against newcomers and Mongolians. During the Stalinist repressions in Mongolia, almost all adult Buryat men and 22,000\u201333,000 Mongols (3\u20135% of the total population; common citizens, monks, Pan-Mongolists, nationalists, patriots, hundreds of military officers, nobles, intellectuals and elite people) were shot dead under Soviet orders. Some authors also offer much higher estimates, up to 100,000 victims. Around the late 1930s the Mongolian People's Republic had an overall population of about 700,000 to 900,000 people. By 1939, Soviet said \"We repressed too many people, the population of Mongolia is only hundred thousands\". The proportion of victims in relation to the population of the country is much higher than the corresponding figures of the Great Purge in the Soviet Union.\nThe Manchukuo (1932\u20131945), puppet state of the Empire of Japan (1868\u20131947) invaded Barga and some part of Inner Mongolia with Japanese help. The Mongolian army advanced to the Great Wall of China during the Soviet\u2013Japanese War of 1945 (Mongolian name: \"Liberation War of 1945\"). Japan forced Inner Mongolian and Barga people to fight against Mongolians but they surrendered to Mongolians and started to fight against their Japanese and Manchu allies. Marshal Khorloogiin Choibalsan called Inner Mongolians and Xinjiang Oirats to migrate to Mongolia during the war but the Soviet Army blocked Inner Mongolian migrants' way. It was a part of a Pan-Mongolian plan and few Oirats and Inner Mongols (Huuchids, Bargas, T\u00fcmeds, about 800 Uzemchins) arrived. Inner Mongolian leaders carried out active policy to merge Inner Mongolia with Mongolia since 1911. They founded the Inner Mongolian Army in 1929 but the Inner Mongolian Army disbanded after ending World War II. The Japanese Empire supported Pan-Mongolism since the 1910s but there have never been active relations between Mongolia and Imperial Japan due to Russian resistance. The nominally independent Inner Mongolian Mengjiang state (1936\u20131945) was established with support of Japan in 1936; also, some Buryat and Inner Mongol nobles founded a Pan-Mongolist government with the support of Japan in 1919.\nThe Inner Mongols established the short-lived Inner Mongolian People's Republic in 1945, before its integration into the Chinese Communist Party-led zones.\nAnother part of Choibalsan's plan was to merge Inner Mongolia and Dzungaria with Mongolia. By 1945, Chinese communist leader Mao Zedong requested the Soviets to stop Pan-Mongolism because China lost its control over Inner Mongolia and without Inner Mongolian support the Communists were unable to defeat Japan and Kuomintang.\nMongolia and thea Soviets supported the Uyghur and Kazakh separatist movement during the 1930s and 1940s. By 1945, the Soviets refused to support them after their alliance with the Chinese Communist Party and Mongolia interrupted its relations with the separatists under pressure. Xinjiang Oirat militant groups operated together the Turkic peoples but the Oirats did not have the leading role due to their small population. Basmachis or Turkic and Tajik militants fought to liberate Soviet Central Asia until 1942.\nOn February 2, 1913, the Treaty of Friendship and Alliance between the Government of Mongolia and Tibet was signed. Mongolian agents and the Bogd Khan disrupted Soviet secret operations in Tibet to change its regime in the 1920s.\nOn October 27, 1961, Mongolia officially became an official member of the United Nations.\nThe powerful states of Russia and China have committed many abuses against Mongols in their homeland, including war crimes and crimes against humanity, sometimes characterized as cultural genocide, with targets among the Mongol language, culture, tradition, history, religion, and ethnic identity. Peter the Great said: \"The headwaters of the Yenisei River must be Russian land\". The Russian Empire sent the Kalmyks and Buryats to war to reduce the populations (World War I and other wars). During the 20th century, Soviet scientists attempted to convince the Kalmyks and Buryats that they were not Mongols under its demongolization policy. 35,000 Buryats were killed during a rebellion in 1927, and around one-third of the Buryat population in Russia died in the 1900s\u20131950s. 10,000 Buryats of the Buryat-Mongol Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic were massacred by Stalin's order in the 1930s. In 1919, the Buryats established a small theocratic Balagad state in the Kizhinginsky District of Russia which later fell in 1926. In 1958, the name \"Mongol\" was removed from the name of the Buryat-Mongol Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic.\nOn 22 January 1922, Mongolia proposed to migrate the Kalmyks during the Kalmyk Famine, but Bolshevik Russia refused. 71,000\u201372,000 (93,000?; around half of the population) Kalmyks died during the Russian famine of 1921\u201322. The Kalmyks revolted against the Soviet Union in 1926, 1930 and 1942\u20131943. In 1913, Nicholas II, tsar of Russia, said: \"We need to prevent from the Volga Tatars. But the Kalmyks are more dangerous than them because they are the Mongols so send them to war to reduce the population\". On 23 April 1923 Joseph Stalin, communist leader of Russia, said: \"We are carrying out wrong policy on the Kalmyks who related to the Mongols. Our policy is too peaceful\". In March 1927, Soviet deported 20,000 Kalmyks to Siberia, the tundra and Karelia.The Kalmyks founded the sovereign Republic of Oirat-Kalmyk on 22 March 1930. The Oirats' state had a small army and 200 Kalmyk soldiers defeated 1,700 Soviet soldiers in Durvud province of Kalmykia but the Oirats' state was destroyed by the Soviet Army in 1930. Kalmykian nationalists and Pan-Mongolists attempted to migrate Kalmyks to Mongolia in the 1920s. Mongolia suggested to migrate the Soviet Union's Mongols to Mongolia in the 1920s but Russia refused the suggestion.\nStalin deported all Kalmyks to Siberia in 1943 and around half of the (97,000\u201398,000) Kalmyks deported to Siberia died before being allowed to return home in 1957. The government of the Soviet Union forbade teaching the Kalmyk language during the deportation. The Kalmyks' main purpose was to migrate to Mongolia and many Kalmyks joined the German Army. Marshal Khorloogiin Choibalsan attempted to migrate the deportees to Mongolia and he met with them in Siberia during his visit to Russia. Under the Law of the Russian Federation of April 26, 1991 \"On Rehabilitation of Exiled Peoples,\" repressions against Kalmyks and other peoples were qualified as acts of genocide.\nOn 3 October 2002, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced that Taiwan recognizes Mongolia as an independent country, although no legislative actions were taken to address concerns over its constitutional claims to Mongolia. Offices established to support Taipei's claims over Outer Mongolia, such as the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission, lie dormant.\nAgin-Buryat Okrug and Ust-Orda Buryat Okrugs merged with Irkutsk Oblast and Chita Oblast in 2008 despite Buryats' resistance. Small scale protests occurred in Inner Mongolia in 2011. The Inner Mongolian People's Party is a member of the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization and its leaders are attempting to establish a sovereign state or merge Inner Mongolia with Mongolia.\nLanguage.\nMongolian is the official national language of Mongolia, where it is spoken by nearly 2.8\u00a0million people (2010 estimate), and the official provincial language of China's Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, where there are at least 4.1\u00a0million ethnic Mongols. Across the whole of China, the language is spoken by roughly half of the country's 5.8\u00a0million ethnic Mongols (2005 estimate) However, the exact number of Mongolian speakers in China is unknown, as there is no data available on the language proficiency of that country's citizens. The use of Mongolian in China, specifically in Inner Mongolia, has witnessed periods of decline and revival over the last few hundred years. The language experienced a decline during the late Qing period, a revival between 1947 and 1965, a second decline between 1966 and 1976, a second revival between 1977 and 1992, and a third decline between 1995 and 2012. However, in spite of the decline of the Mongolian language in some of Inner Mongolia's urban areas and educational spheres, the ethnic identity of the urbanized Chinese-speaking Mongols is most likely going to survive due to the presence of urban ethnic communities. The multilingual situation in Inner Mongolia does not appear to obstruct efforts by ethnic Mongols to preserve their language. Although an unknown number of Mongols in China, such as the Tumets, may have completely or partially lost the ability to speak their language, they are still registered as ethnic Mongols and continue to identify themselves as ethnic Mongols. The children of inter-ethnic Mongol-Chinese marriages also claim to be and are registered as ethnic Mongols.\nThe specific origin of the Mongolic languages and associated tribes is unclear. Linguists have traditionally proposed a link to the Tungusic and Turkic language families, included alongside Mongolic in the broader group of Altaic languages, though this remains controversial. Today the Mongolian peoples speak at least one of several Mongolic languages including Mongolian, Buryat, Oirat, Dongxiang, Tu and Bonan. Additionally, many Mongols speak either Russian or Mandarin Chinese as languages of inter-ethnic communication.\nReligion.\nThe original religion of the Mongolic peoples was Mongolian shamanism. The Xianbei came in contact with Confucianism and Daoism but eventually adopted Buddhism. However, the Xianbeis and some other people in Mongolia and Rourans followed a form of shamanism. In the 5th century the Buddhist monk Dharmapriya was proclaimed \"State Teacher\" of the Rouran Khaganate and 3,000 families and some Rouran nobles became Buddhists. In 511 the Rouran Douluofubadoufa Khan sent Hong Xuan to the Tuoba court with a pearl-encrusted statue of the Buddha as a gift. The Tuoba Xianbei and Khitans were mostly Buddhists, although they still retained their original Shamanism. The Tuoba had a \"sacrificial castle\" to the west of their capital where ceremonies to spirits took place. Wooden statues of the spirits were erected on top of this sacrificial castle. One ritual involved seven princes with milk offerings who ascended the stairs with 20 female shamans and offered prayers, sprinkling the statues with the sacred milk. The Khitan had their holiest shrine on Mount Muye where portraits of their earliest ancestor Qishou Khagan, his wife Kedun and eight sons were kept in two temples. Mongolic peoples were also exposed to Zoroastrianism, Manicheism, Nestorianism, Eastern Orthodoxy and Islam from the west.\nThe Mongolic peoples, in particular the Borjigin, had their holiest shrine on Mount Burkhan Khaldun where their ancestor B\u00f6rte Chono (Blue Wolf) and Goo Maral (Beautiful Doe) had given birth to them. Genghis Khan usually fasted, prayed and meditated on this mountain before his campaigns. As a young man he had thanked the mountain for saving his life and prayed at the foot of the mountain sprinkling offerings and bowing nine times to the east with his belt around his neck and his hat held at his chest. Genghis Khan kept a close watch on the Mongolic supreme shaman Kokochu Teb who sometimes conflicted with his authority. Later, Tengrism, the imperial cult of Genghis Khan centered on the eight white gers and nine white banners in Ordos grew into a highly organized indigenous religion with scriptures in the Mongolian script. Indigenous moral precepts of the Mongolic peoples were enshrined in oral wisdom sayings (now collected in several volumes), the anda (blood-brother) system and ancient texts such as the \"Chinggis-un Bilig\" (Wisdom of Genghis) and \"Oyun Tulkhuur\" (Key of Intelligence). These moral precepts were expressed in poetic form and mainly involved truthfulness, fidelity, help in hardship, unity, self-control, fortitude, veneration of nature, veneration of the state and veneration of parents.\n, the younger son of \u00d6gedei, was the first of the Mongolian royal line to accept Islam.\nIn 1254 M\u00f6ngke Khan organized a formal religious debate (in which William of Rubruck took part) between Christians, Muslims and Buddhists in Karakorum, a cosmopolitan city of many religions. The Mongolic Empire was known for its religious tolerance, but had a special leaning towards Buddhism and was sympathetic towards Christianity while still worshipping Tengri. The Mongolic leader Abaqa Khan sent a delegation of 13\u201316 to the Second Council of Lyon (1274), which created a great stir, particularly when their leader 'Zaganus' underwent a public baptism. A joint crusade was announced in line with the Franco-Mongol alliance but did not materialize because Pope Gregory X died in 1276. Yahballaha III (1245\u20131317) and Rabban Bar Sauma (c. 1220\u20131294) were famous Mongolic Nestorian Christians. The Keraites in central Mongolia were Christian. In Istanbul the Church of Saint Mary of the Mongols stands as a reminder of the Byzantine-Mongol alliance.\nThe western Khanates, however, eventually adopted Islam (under Berke and Ghazan) and the Turkic languages (because of their commercial importance), although allegiance to the Great Khan and limited use of the Mongolic languages can be seen even in the 1330s. In 1521 the first Mughal emperor Babur took part in a military banner milk-sprinkling ceremony in the Chagatai Khanate where the Mongolian language was still used. Al-Adil Kitbugha (reigned 1294\u20131296), a Mongol Sultan of Egypt, and the half-Mongol An-Nasir Muhammad (reigned till 1341) built the Madrassa of Al-Nasir Muhammad in Cairo, Egypt. An-Nasir's Mongol mother was Ashlun bint Shaktay. The Mongolic nobility during the Yuan dynasty studied Confucianism, built Confucian temples (including Beijing Confucius Temple) and translated Confucian works into Mongolic but mainly followed the Sakya school of Tibetan Buddhism under Phags-pa Lama.\nThe general populace still practised Shamanism. Dongxiang and Bonan people adopted Islam, as did Moghol-speaking peoples in Afghanistan. In the 1576 the Gelug school of Tibetan Buddhism became the state religion of Mongolia. The Red Hat school of Tibetan Buddhism coexisted with the Gelug Yellow Hat school which was founded by the half-Mongol Je Tsongkhapa (1357\u20131419). Shamanism was absorbed into the state religion while being marginalized in its purer forms, later only surviving in far northern Mongolia. Monks were some of the leading intellectuals in Mongolia, responsible for much of the literature and art of the pre-modern period. Many Buddhist philosophical works lost in Tibet and elsewhere are preserved in older and purer form in Mongolian ancient texts (e.g. the Mongol Kanjur). Zanabazar (1635\u20131723), Zaya Pandita (1599\u20131662) and Danzanravjaa (1803\u20131856) are among the most famous Mongol holy men. The 4th Dalai Lama Yonten Gyatso (1589\u20131617), a Mongol himself, is recognized as the only non-Tibetan Dalai Lama although the current 14th Dalai Lama is of Mongolic Monguor extraction. The name is a combination of the Mongolian word dalai meaning \"ocean\" and the Tibetan word (bla-ma) meaning \"guru, teacher, mentor\". \nMany Buryats became Orthodox Christians due to the Russian expansion. During the socialist period religion was officially banned, although it was practiced in clandestine circles. Today, a sizable proportion of Mongolic peoples are atheist or agnostic. In the most recent census in Mongolia, almost forty percent of the population reported as being atheist, while the majority religion was Tibetan Buddhism, with 53%. Having survived suppression by the Communists, Buddhism among the Eastern, Northern, Southern and Western Mongols is today primarily of the Gelugpa school of Tibetan Buddhism. There is a strong shamanistic influence in the Gelugpa sect among the Mongols.\nKinship and family life.\nThe traditional Mongol family was patriarchal, patrilineal and patrilocal. Wives were brought for each of the sons, while daughters were married off to other clans. Wife-taking clans stood in a relation of inferiority to wife-giving clans. Thus wife-giving clans were considered \"elder\" or \"bigger\" in relation to wife-taking clans, who were considered \"younger\" or \"smaller\". This distinction, symbolized in terms of \"elder\" and \"younger\" or \"bigger\" and \"smaller\", was carried into the clan and family as well, and all members of a lineage were terminologically distinguished by generation and age, with senior superior to junior.\nIn the traditional Mongolian family, each son received a part of the family herd as he married, with the elder son receiving more than the younger son. The youngest son would remain in the parental tent caring for his parents, and after their death he would inherit the parental tent in addition to his own part of the herd. This inheritance system was mandated by law codes such as the Yassa, created by Genghis Khan. Likewise, each son inherited a part of the family's camping lands and pastures, with the elder son receiving more than the younger son. The eldest son inherited the farthest camping lands and pastures, and each son in turn inherited camping lands and pastures closer to the family tent until the youngest son inherited the camping lands and pastures immediately surrounding the family tent. Family units would often remain near each other and in close cooperation, though extended families would inevitably break up after a few generations. It is probable that the Yasa simply put into written law the principles of customary law.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is apparent that in many cases, for example in family instructions, the yasa tacitly accepted the principles of customary law and avoided any interference with them. For example, Riasanovsky said that killing the man or the woman in case of adultery is a good illustration. Yasa permitted the institutions of polygamy and concubinage so characteristic of southerly nomadic peoples. Children born of concubines were legitimate. Seniority of children derived their status from their mother. Eldest son received more than the youngest after the death of father. But the latter inherited the household of the father. Children of concubines also received a share in the inheritance, in accordance with the instructions of their father (or with custom).\u2014\u200a\nAfter the family, the next largest social units were the subclan and clan. These units were derived from groups claiming patrilineal descent from a common ancestor, ranked in order of seniority (the \"conical clan\"). By the Chingissid era this ranking was symbolically expressed at formal feasts, in which tribal chieftains were seated and received particular portions of the slaughtered animal according to their status. The lineage structure of Central Asia had three different modes. It was organized on the basis of genealogical distance, or the proximity of individuals to one another on a graph of kinship; generational distance, or the rank of generation in relation to a common ancestor, and birth order, the rank of brothers in relation to each another. The paternal descent lines were collaterally ranked according to the birth of their founders, and were thus considered senior and junior to each other. Of the various collateral patrilines, the senior in order of descent from the founding ancestor, the line of eldest sons, was the most noble. In the steppe, no one had his exact equal; everyone found his place in a system of collaterally ranked lines of descent from a common ancestor. It was according to this idiom of superiority and inferiority of lineages derived from birth order that legal claims to superior rank were couched.\nThe Mongol kinship is one of a particular patrilineal type classed as Omaha, in which relatives are grouped together under separate terms that crosscut generations, age, and even sexual difference. Thus, one uses different terms for a man's father's sister's children, his sister's children, and his daughter's children. A further attribute is strict terminological differentiation of siblings according to seniority.\nThe anthropologist Herbert Harold Vreeland visited three Mongol communities in 1920 and published a highly detailed book with the results of his fieldwork, \"Mongol community and kinship structure\".\nRoyal family.\nThe royal clan of the Mongols is the Borjigin clan descended from Bodonchar Munkhag (c.\u2009850\u2013900). This clan produced Khans and princes for Mongolia and surrounding regions until the early 20th century. All the Great Khans of the Mongol Empire, including its founder Genghis Khan, were of the Borjigin clan. The royal family of Mongolia was called the \"Altan Urag\" (Golden Lineage) and is synonymous with Genghisid. After the fall of the Northern Yuan dynasty in 1635 the Dayan Khanid aristocracy continued the Genghisid legacy in Mongolia until 1937 when most were killed during the Stalinist purges. The four hereditary Khans of the Khalkha (T\u00fcsheet Khan, Setsen Khan, Zasagt Khan and Sain Noyan Khan) were all descended from Dayan Khan (1464\u20131543) through Abtai Sain Khan, Sholoi Khan, Laikhur Khan and Tumenkhen Sain Noyan respectively. Dayan Khan was himself raised to power by Queen Mandukhai (c.\u20091449\u20131510) during the crisis of the late 15th century when the line of Kublai Khan, the grandson of Genghis Khan, was on the verge of dying out.\nThe Khongirad was the main consort clan of the Borjigin and provided numerous Empresses and consorts. There were five minor non-Khonggirad inputs from the maternal side which passed on to the Dayan Khanid aristocracy of Mongolia and Inner Mongolia. The first was the Keraite lineage added through Kublai Khan's mother Sorghaghtani Beki which linked the Borjigin to the Nestorian Christian tribe of Cyriacus Buyruk Khan. The second was the Turkic Karluk lineage added through Toghon Temur Khan's mother Mailaiti which linked the Borjigin to Bilge Kul Qadir Khan (840\u2013893) of the Kara-Khanid Khanate and ultimately to the Lion-Karluks as well as the Ashina tribe of the 6th century G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks. The third was the Korean lineage added through Biligt\u00fc Khan's mother Empress Gi (1315\u2013370) which linked the Borjigin to the Haengju Gi clan and ultimately to King Jun of Gojeoson (262\u2013184 BC) and possibly even further to King Tang of Shang (1675\u20131646 BCE) through Jizi. The fourth was the Esen Taishi lineage added through Bayanmunkh Jonon's mother Tsetseg Khatan which linked the Borjigin more firmly to the Oirats. The fifth was the Aisin-Gioro lineage added during the Qing dynasty. To the west, Genghisid Khans received daughters of the Byzantine emperor in marriage, such as when the Byzantine princess Maria Palaiologina married to Abaqa Khan (1234\u20131282), while there were also connections with European royalty through Russia, where, for example, Prince Gleb (1237\u20131278) married Feodora Sartaqovna the daughter of Sartaq Khan, a great-grandson of Genghis Khan.\nThe Dayan Khanid aristocracy still held power during the Bogd Khanate of Mongolia (1911\u20131919) and the Constitutional Monarchy period (1921\u20131924). They were accused of collaboration with the Japanese and executed in 1937 while their counterparts in Inner Mongolia were severely persecuted during the Cultural Revolution. Ancestral shrines of Genghis Khan were destroyed by the Red Guards during the 1960s and the Horse-Tail Banner of Genghis Khan disappeared.\nGeographic distribution.\nToday, the majority of Mongols live in the modern states of Mongolia, China (mainly Inner Mongolia and Xinjiang), Russia, Kyrgyzstan and Afghanistan.\nThe differentiation between tribes and peoples (ethnic groups) is handled differently depending on the country. The Tumed, Chahar, Ordos, Barga, Altai Uriankhai, Buryats, D\u00f6rb\u00f6d (D\u00f6rv\u00f6d, D\u00f6rbed), Torguud, Dariganga, \u00dczemchin (or \u00dcz\u00fcmchin), Bayads, Khoton, Myangad (Mingad), Eljigin, Zakhchin, Darkhad, and Olots (or \u00d6\u00f6lds or \u00d6l\u00f6ts) are all considered as tribes of the Mongols.\nSubgroups.\nThe Eastern Mongols are mainly concentrated in Mongolia, including the Khalkha, Eljigin Khalkha, Darkhad, Sartuul Khalkha, and Dariganga (Khalkha).\nThe Southern or Inner Mongols mainly are concentrated in Inner Mongolia, China. They comprise the Abaga Mongols, Abaganar, Aohans, Arkhorchin, Asud, Baarins, Chahar, Darkhan (Shar Darkhad), D\u00f6rv\u00f6n Kh\u00fc\u00fckhed, Durved, Gorlos, Kharchin, Khishigten, Khorchin, Huuchid, Ikhmyangan, Jalaid, Jaruud, Muumyangan, Naiman (Southern Mongols), Onnigud, Ordos, Sunud, T\u00fcmed, Urad, and Uzemchin.\nSister groups.\nThe Buryats are mainly concentrated in their homeland, the Buryat Republic, a federal subject of Russia. They are the major northern subgroup of the Mongols. The Barga Mongols are mainly concentrated in Inner Mongolia, China, along with the Buryats and Hamnigan. Some orientalists also include the Soyots in the Buryat sub-ethnic groups.\nThe Western Oirats are mainly concentrated in Western Mongolia:\nAltai Uriankhai, Baatud, Bayad, Chantuu, Choros, Durvud, Khoshut, Khoid, Khoton, Myangad, Olots, Sart Kalmyks (mainly Olots), Torghut, Zakhchin.\nMongolia.\nIn modern-day Mongolia, Mongols make up approximately 95% of the population, with the largest ethnic group being Khalkha Mongols, followed by Buryats, both belonging to the Eastern Mongolian peoples. They are followed by Oirats, who belong to the Western Mongolian peoples.\nMongolian ethnic groups:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChina.\nThe 2010 census of the People's Republic of China counted more than 7\u00a0million people of various Mongolic groups. The 1992 census of China counted only 3.6\u00a0million ethnic Mongols. The 2010 census counted roughly 5.8\u00a0million ethnic Mongols, 621,500 Dongxiangs, 289,565 Mongours, 132,000 Daurs, 20,074 Baoans, and 14,370 Yugurs. Most of them live in the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, followed by Liaoning. Small numbers can also be found in provinces near those two.\nThere were 669,972 Mongols in Liaoning in 2011, making up 11.52% of Mongols in China. The closest Mongol area to the sea is the Dabao Mongol Ethnic Township () in Fengcheng, Liaoning. With 8,460 Mongols (37.4% of the township population) it is located from the North Korean border and from Korea Bay of the Yellow Sea. Another contender for closest Mongol area to the sea would be Erdaowanzi Mongol Ethnic Township () in Jianchang County, Liaoning. With 5,011 Mongols (20.7% of the township population) it is located around from the Bohai Sea.\nOther peoples speaking Mongolic languages are the Daur, Sogwo Arig, Monguor people, Dongxiangs, Bonans, Sichuan Mongols and eastern part of the Yugur people. Those do not officially count as part of the Mongol ethnicity, but are recognized as ethnic groups of their own. The Mongols lost their contact with the Mongours, Bonan, Dongxiangs, Yunnan Mongols since the fall of the Yuan dynasty. Mongolian scientists and journalists met with the Dongxiangs and Yunnan Mongols in the 2000s.\nInner Mongolia: Southern Mongols, Barga, Buryat, D\u00f6rbet Oirat, Khalkha, Dzungar people, Eznee Torgut.\nXinjiang province: Altai Uriankhai, Chahar, Khoshut, Olots, Torghut, Zakhchin.\nQinghai province: Upper Mongols: Choros, Khoshut\nRussia.\n \nTwo Mongolic ethnic groups are present in Russia; the 2010 census found 461,410 Buryats and 183,400 Kalmyks.\nElsewhere.\nSmaller numbers of Mongolic peoples exist in Western Europe and North America. Some of the more notable communities exist in South Korea, the United States, the Czech Republic and the United Kingdom.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18985", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18985", "title": "Manga", "text": "Comics or graphic novels created in Japan\n are comics or graphic novels originating from Japan. Most manga conform to a style developed in Japan in the late 19th century, and the form has a long history in earlier Japanese art. The term is used in Japan to refer to both comics and cartooning. Outside of Japan, the word is typically used to refer to comics originally published in Japan.\nIn Japan, people of all ages and walks of life read manga. The medium includes works in a broad range of genres: action, adventure, business and commerce, comedy, detective, drama, historical, horror, mystery, romance, science fiction and fantasy, erotica ( and ), sports and games, and suspense, among others. Many manga are translated into other languages.\nSince the 1950s, manga has become an increasingly major part of the Japanese publishing industry. By 1995, the manga market in Japan was valued at \u00a5 (US$), with annual sales of 1.9billion manga books and manga magazines (also known as manga anthologies) in Japan (equivalent to 15issues per person). The domestic manga market in Japan remained in the \u00a5400 billion range annually from 2014 to 2019. In 2020, as the COVID-19 pandemic led to increased time spent at home, the market rapidly expanded to \u00a5612.6 billion. Growth continued even after the end of lockdowns, reaching a record high of \u00a5704.3 billion in 2024. Alongside this rapid expansion, the print manga market has continued to shrink; as of 2024, digital manga accounts for approximately \u00a5500 billion, while print manga makes up about \u00a5200 billion. Manga have also gained a significant worldwide readership. Beginning with the late 2010s manga started massively outselling American comics.\nAs of 2021, the top four comics publishers in the world are manga publishers Shueisha, Kodansha, Kadokawa, and Shogakukan. In 2020 the North American manga market was valued at almost $250 million. According to NPD BookScan manga made up 76% of overall comics and graphic novel sales in the US in 2021. The fast growth of the North American manga market is attributed to manga's wide availability on digital reading apps, book retailer chains such as Barnes &amp; Noble and online retailers such as Amazon as well as the increased streaming of anime. Manga represented 38% of the French comics market in 2005. This is equivalent to approximately three times that of the United States and was valued at about \u20ac ($million). In Europe and the Middle East, the market was valued at $250 million in 2012.\nManga stories are typically printed in black-and-white\u2014due to time constraints, artistic reasons (as coloring could lessen the impact of the artwork) and to keep printing costs low\u2014although some full-color manga exist (e.g., \"Colorful\"). In Japan, manga are usually serialized in large manga magazines, often containing many stories, each presented in a single episode to be continued in the next issue. A single manga story is almost always longer than a single issue from a Western comic. Collected chapters are usually republished in volumes, frequently but not exclusively paperback books. A manga artist (\"mangaka\" in Japanese) typically works with a few assistants in a small studio and is associated with a creative editor from a commercial publishing company. If a manga series is popular enough, it may be animated after or during its run. Sometimes, manga are based on previous live-action or animated films.\nManga-influenced comics, among original works, exist in other parts of the world, particularly in those places that speak Chinese (\"manhua\"), Korean (\"manhwa\"), English (\"OEL manga\"), and French (\"manfra\"), as well as in the nation of Algeria (\"DZ-manga\").\nEtymology.\nThe word \"manga\" comes from the Japanese word (katakana: ; hiragana: ), composed of the two kanji meaning 'whimsical or impromptu' and meaning 'pictures'. The same term is the root of the Korean word for comics, \"manhwa\", and the Chinese word \"manhua\".\nThe word first came into common usage in the late 18th century with the publication of such works as Sant\u014d Ky\u014dden's picturebook \"Shiji no yukikai\" (1798), and in the early 19th century with such works as Aikawa Minwa's \"Manga hyakujo\" (1814) and the celebrated \"Hokusai Manga\" books (1814\u20131834) containing assorted drawings from the sketchbooks of the famous ukiyo-e artist Hokusai. Rakuten Kitazawa (1876\u20131955) first used the word \"manga\" in the modern sense.\nIn Japanese, \"\" refers to all kinds of cartooning, comics, and animation. Among English speakers, \"manga\" has the stricter meaning of \"Japanese comics\", in parallel to the usage of \"anime\" in and outside Japan. The term \"ani-manga\" is used to describe comics produced from animation cels.\nHistory and characteristics.\nManga originated from (scrolls), \"Ch\u014dj\u016b-jinbutsu-giga\", dating back to the 12th century. During the Edo period (1603\u20131867), a book of drawings titled \"Toba Ehon\" further developed what would later be called manga. The word itself first came into common usage in 1798, with the publication of works such as Sant\u014d Ky\u014dden's picturebook \"Shiji no yukikai\" (1798), and in the early 19th century with such works as Aikawa Minwa's \"Manga hyakujo\" (1814) and the \"Hokusai Manga\" books (1814\u20131834). Adam L. Kern has suggested that , picture books from the late 18th century, may have been the world's first comic books. These graphical narratives share with modern manga humorous, satirical, and romantic themes. Some works were mass-produced as serials using woodblock printing. However, Eastern comics are generally held separate from the evolution of Western comics; Western comic art probably originated in 17th century Italy.\nWriters on manga history have described two broad and complementary processes shaping modern manga. One view represented by other writers such as Frederik L. Schodt, Kinko Ito, and Adam L. Kern, stress continuity of Japanese cultural and aesthetic traditions, including pre-war, Meiji, and pre-Meiji culture and art. The other view, emphasizes events occurring during and after the Allied occupation of Japan (1945\u20131952), and stresses U.S. cultural influences, including U.S. comics (brought to Japan by the GIs) and images and themes from U.S. television, film, and cartoons (especially Disney).\nRegardless of its source, an explosion of artistic creativity occurred in the post-war period, involving manga artists such as Osamu Tezuka (\"Astro Boy\") and Machiko Hasegawa (\"Sazae-san\"). \"Astro Boy\" quickly became (and remains) immensely popular in Japan and elsewhere, and the anime adaptation of \"Sazae-san\" drew more viewers than any other anime on Japanese television in 2011. Tezuka and Hasegawa both made stylistic innovations. In Tezuka's \"cinematographic\" technique, the panels are like a motion picture that reveals details of action bordering on slow motion as well as rapid zooms from distance to close-up shots. This kind of visual dynamism was widely adopted by later manga artists. Hasegawa's focus on daily life and women's experience also came to characterize later manga. Between 1950 and 1969, an increasingly large readership for manga emerged in Japan with the solidification of its two main marketing genres, manga aimed at boys and manga aimed at girls.\nIn 1969, a group of female manga artists (later called the \"Year 24 Group\", also known as \"Magnificent 24s\") made their manga debut (\"year 24\" comes from the Japanese name for the year 1949, the birth-year of many of these artists). The group included Moto Hagio, Riyoko Ikeda, Yumiko \u014cshima, Keiko Takemiya, and Ryoko Yamagishi. Thereafter, primarily female manga artists would draw for a readership of girls and young women. In the following decades (1975\u2013present), manga continued to develop stylistically while simultaneously evolving different but overlapping subgenres. Major subgenres include romance, superheroines, and \"Ladies Comics\" (in Japanese, , , and ).\nModern manga romance features love as a major theme set into emotionally intense narratives of self-realization. With the superheroines, \"sh\u014djo\" manga saw releases such as Pink Hanamori's \"Mermaid Melody Pichi Pichi Pitch\", Reiko Yoshida's \"Tokyo Mew Mew\", and Naoko Takeuchi's \"Pretty Soldier Sailor Moon\", which became internationally popular in both manga and anime formats. Groups (or ) of girls working together have also been popular within this genre. Like Lucia, Hanon, and Rina singing together, and Sailor Moon, Sailor Mercury, Sailor Mars, Sailor Jupiter, and Sailor Venus working together.\nManga for male readers sub-divides according to the age of its intended readership: boys up to 18 years old ( manga) and young men 18 to 30 years old ( manga); as well as by content, including action-adventure often involving male heroes, slapstick humor, themes of honor, and sometimes explicit sex. The Japanese use different kanji for two closely allied meanings of \"\"\u2014 for \"youth, young man\" and for \"adult, majority\"\u2014the second referring to pornographic manga aimed at grown men and also called manga. , , and manga share a number of features in common.\nBoys and young men became some of the earliest readers of manga after World War II. From the 1950s on, manga focused on topics thought to interest the archetypal boy, including subjects like robots, space-travel, and heroic action-adventure. Popular themes include science fiction, technology, sports, and supernatural settings. Manga with solitary costumed superheroes like Superman, Batman, and Spider-Man generally did not become as popular.\nThe role of girls and women in manga produced for male readers has evolved considerably over time to include those featuring single pretty girls () such as Belldandy from \"Oh My Goddess!\", stories where such girls and women surround the hero, as in \"\" and \"Hanaukyo Maid Team\", or groups of heavily armed female warriors ()\nBy the turn of the 21st century, manga \"achieved worldwide popularity\".\nWith the relaxation of censorship in Japan in the 1990s, an assortment of explicit sexual material appeared in manga intended for male readers, and correspondingly continued into the English translations. In 2010, the Tokyo Metropolitan Government considered a bill to restrict minors' access to such content.\nThe style of storytelling\u2014thematically somber, adult-oriented, and sometimes deeply violent\u2014focuses on the day-in, day-out grim realities of life, often drawn in a gritty and unvarnished fashion. such as Sampei Shirato's 1959\u20131962 \"Chronicles of a Ninja's Military Accomplishments\" (\"Ninja Bugeich\u014d\") arose in the late 1950s and 1960s, partly from left-wing student and working-class political activism, and partly from the aesthetic dissatisfaction of young manga artists like Yoshihiro Tatsumi with existing manga.\nPublications and exhibition.\nIn Japan, manga constituted an annual 40.6 billion yen (approximately US$395 million) publication-industry by 2007. In 2006 sales of manga books made up for about 27% of total book-sales, and sale of manga magazines, for 20% of total magazine-sales. The manga industry has expanded worldwide, where distribution companies license and reprint manga into their native languages.\nMarketeers primarily classify manga by the age and gender of the target readership. In particular, books and magazines sold to boys () and girls () have distinctive cover-art, and most bookstores place them on different shelves. Due to cross-readership, consumer response is not limited by demographics. For example, male readers may subscribe to a series intended for female readers, and so on. Japan has manga caf\u00e9s, or ( is an abbreviation of ). At a , people drink coffee, read manga and sometimes stay overnight.\nThe Kyoto International Manga Museum maintains a very large website listing manga published in Japanese.\nMagazines.\n\"E-shimbun Nippon-chi\" (1874), published by Kanagaki Robun and Kawanabe Kyosai, is credited as the first manga magazine ever made.\n usually have many series running concurrently with approximately 20\u201340 pages allocated to each series per issue. Other magazines such as the anime fandom magazine \"Newtype\" featured single chapters within their monthly periodicals. Other magazines like \"Nakayoshi\" feature many stories written by many different artists; these magazines, or \"anthology magazines\", as they are also known (colloquially \"phone books\"), are usually printed on low-quality newsprint and can be anywhere from 200 to more than 850 pages thick. Manga magazines also contain one-shot comics and various four-panel (equivalent to comic strips). Manga series can run for many years if they are successful. Popular shonen magazines include \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\", \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Magazine\" and \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Sunday\" - Popular manga include \"Ciao\", \"Nakayoshi\" and \"Ribon\". Manga artists sometimes start out with a few \"one-shot\" manga projects just to try to get their name out. If these are successful and receive good reviews, they are continued. Magazines often have a short life.\nCollected volumes.\nAfter a series has run for a while, publishers often collect the chapters and print them in dedicated book-sized volumes, called . These can be hardcover, or more usually softcover books, and are the equivalent of U.S. trade paperbacks or graphic novels. These volumes often use higher-quality paper, and are useful to those who want to \"catch up\" with a series so they can follow it in the magazines or if they find the cost of the weeklies or monthlies to be prohibitive. \"Deluxe\" versions have also been printed as readers have gotten older and the need for something special grew. Old manga have also been reprinted using somewhat lesser quality paper and sold for 100 yen (about $1 U.S. dollar) each to compete with the used book market.\nHistory.\nKanagaki Robun and Kawanabe Ky\u014dsai created the first manga magazine in 1874: \"Eshinbun Nipponchi\". The magazine was heavily influenced by \"Japan Punch\", founded in 1862 by Charles Wirgman, a British cartoonist. \"Eshinbun Nipponchi\" had a very simple style of drawings and did not become popular with many people. \"Eshinbun Nipponchi\" ended after three issues. The magazine \"Kisho Shimbun\" in 1875 was inspired by \"Eshinbun Nipponchi\", which was followed by \"Marumaru Chinbun\" in 1877, and then \"Garakuta Chinpo\" in 1879. \"Sh\u014dnen Sekai\" was the first \"sh\u014dnen\" magazine created in 1895 by Iwaya Sazanami, a famous writer of Japanese children's literature back then. \"Sh\u014dnen Sekai\" had a strong focus on the First Sino-Japanese War.\nIn 1905, the manga-magazine publishing boom started with the Russo-Japanese War, \"Tokyo Pakku\" was created and became a huge hit. After \"Tokyo Pakku\" in 1905, a female version of \"Sh\u014dnen Sekai\" was created and named \"Sh\u014djo Sekai\", considered the first magazine. \"Sh\u014dnen Pakku\" was made and is considered the first children's manga magazine. The children's demographic was in an early stage of development in the Meiji period. \"Sh\u014dnen Pakku\" was influenced from foreign children's magazines such as \"Puck\" which an employee of Jitsugy\u014d no Nihon (publisher of the magazine) saw and decided to emulate. In 1924, \"Kodomo Pakku\" was launched as another children's manga magazine after \"Sh\u014dnen Pakku\". During the boom, \"Poten\" (derived from the French \"\") was published in 1908. All the pages were in full color with influences from \"Tokyo Pakku\" and \"Osaka Puck\". It is unknown if there were any more issues besides the first one. \"Kodomo Pakku\" was launched May 1924 by Tokyosha and featured high-quality art by many members of the manga artistry like Takei Takeo, Takehisa Yumeji and Aso Yutaka. Some of the manga featured speech balloons, where other manga from the previous eras did not use speech balloons and were silent.\nPublished from May 1935 to January 1941, \"Manga no Kuni\" coincided with the period of the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937\u20131945). \"Manga no Kuni\" featured information on becoming a mangaka and on other comics industries around the world. \"Manga no Kuni\" handed its title to \"Sashie Manga Kenky\u016b\" in August 1940.\n, produced by small publishers outside of the mainstream commercial market, resemble in their publishing small-press independently published comic books in the United States. Comiket, the largest comic book convention in the world with around 500,000 visitors gathering over three days, is devoted to . While they most often contain original stories, many are parodies of or include characters from popular manga and anime series. Some continue with a series' story or write an entirely new one using its characters, much like fan fiction. In 2007, sales amounted to 27.73 billion yen (US$245 million). In 2006 they represented about a tenth of manga books and magazines sales.\nDigital manga.\nThanks to the advent of the internet, there have been new ways for aspiring mangaka to upload and sell their manga online. Before, there were two main ways in which a mangaka's work could be published: taking their manga drawn on paper to a publisher themselves, or submitting their work to competitions run by magazines.\nWeb manga.\nIn recent years, there has been a rise in manga released digitally. Web manga, as it is known in Japan, has seen an increase thanks in part to image hosting websites where anyone can upload pages from their works for free. Although released digitally, almost all web manga sticks to the conventional black-and-white format despite some never getting physical publication. Pixiv is the most popular site where amateur and professional work gets published on the site. It has grown to be the most visited site for artwork in Japan. Twitter has also become a popular place for web manga with many artists releasing pages weekly on their accounts in the hope of their work getting picked up or published professionally. One of the best examples of an amateur work becoming professional is \"One-Punch Man\" which was released online and later received a professional remake released digitally and an anime adaptation soon thereafter.\nMany of the big print publishers have also released digital only magazines and websites where web manga get published alongside their serialized magazines. Shogakukan for instance has two websites, Sunday Webry and Ura Sunday, that release weekly chapters for web manga and even offer contests for mangaka to submit their work. Both Sunday Webry and Ura Sunday have become one of the top web manga sites in Japan. Some have even released apps that teach how to draw professional manga and learn how to create them. \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" released \"Jump Paint\", an app that guides users on how to make their own manga from making storyboards to digitally inking lines. It also offers more than 120 types of pen tips and more than 1,000 screentones for artists to practice. Kodansha has also used the popularity of web manga to launch more series and also offer better distribution of their officially translated works under Kodansha Comics thanks in part to the titles being released digitally first before being published physically.\nThe rise web manga has also been credited to smartphones and computers as more and more readers read manga on their phones rather than from a print publication. While paper manga has seen a decrease over time, digital manga have been growing in sales each year. The Research Institute for Publications reports that sales of digital manga books excluding magazines jumped 27.1 percent to \u00a5146 billion in 2016 from the year before while sales of paper manga saw a record year-on-year decline of 7.4 percent to \u00a5194.7 billion. They have also said that if the digital and paper keep the same growth and drop rates, web manga would exceed their paper counterparts. In 2020 manga sales topped the \u00a5600 billion mark for the first time in history, beating the 1995 peak due to a fast growth of the digital manga market which rose by \u00a582.7 billion from a previous year, surpassing print manga sales which have also increased.\nOf the total \u00a5704.3 billion domestic manga market in Japan in 2024, the digital segment accounted for \u00a5512.2 billion, excluding print editions.\nWebtoons.\nWhile webtoons have caught on in popularity as a new medium for comics in Asia, Japan has been slow to adopt webtoons as the traditional format and print publication still dominate the way manga is created and consumed (although this is rapidly changing). Despite this, one of the biggest webtoon publishers in the world, Comico, has had success in the traditional Japanese manga market. Comico was launched by NHN Japan, the Japanese subsidiary of Korean company, NHN Entertainment. As of now, there are only two webtoon publishers that publish Japanese webtoons: Comico and Naver Webtoon (under the name XOY in Japan). Kakao has also had success by offering licensed manga and translated Korean webtoons with their service Piccoma. All three companies credit their success to the webtoon pay model where users can purchase each chapter individually instead of having to buy the whole book while also offering some chapters for free for a period of time allowing anyone to read a whole series for free if they wait long enough. The added benefit of having all of their titles in color and some with special animations and effects have also helped them succeed. Some popular Japanese webtoons have also gotten anime adaptations and print releases, the most notable being \"ReLIFE\" and \"Recovery of an MMO Junkie\".\nInternational markets.\nBy 2007, the influence of manga on international comics had grown considerably over the past two decades. \"Influence\" is used here to refer to effects on the comics markets outside Japan and to aesthetic effects on comics artists internationally.\nTraditionally, manga stories flow from top to bottom and from right to left. Some publishers of translated manga keep to this original format. Other publishers mirror the pages horizontally before printing the translation, changing the reading direction to a more \"Western\" left to right, so as not to confuse foreign readers or traditional comics-consumers. This practice is known as \"flipping\". For the most part, criticism suggests that flipping goes against the original intentions of the creator (for example, if a person wears a shirt that reads \"MAY\" on it, and gets flipped, then the word is altered to \"YAM\"), who may be ignorant of how awkward it is to read comics when the eyes must flow through the pages and text in opposite directions, resulting in an experience that's quite distinct from reading something that flows homogeneously. If the translation is not adapted to the flipped artwork carefully enough it is also possible for the text to go against the picture, such as a person referring to something on their left in the text while pointing to their right in the graphic. Characters shown writing with their right hands, the majority of them, would become left-handed when a series is flipped. Flipping may also cause oddities with familiar asymmetrical objects or layouts, such as a car being depicted with the gas pedal on the left and the brake on the right, or a shirt with the buttons on the wrong side, however these issues are minor when compared to the unnatural reading flow, and some of them could be solved with an adaptation work that goes beyond just translation and blind flipping.\nIn April 2023, the Japan Business Federation laid out a proposal aiming to spur the economic growth of Japan by further promoting the contents industry abroad, primarily anime, manga and video games, for measures to invite industry experts from abroad to come to Japan to work, and to link with the tourism sector to help foreign fans of manga and anime visit sites across the country associated with particular manga stories. The federation seeks to quadruple the sales of Japanese content in overseas markets within the upcoming 10 years. The increasing globalization of the manga industry has led to Japanese publishers inviting artists from other countries.\nAsia.\nManga has highly influenced the art styles of manhwa and manhua. Manga in Indonesia is published by Elex Media Komputindo, Level Comic, M&amp;C and Gramedia. Manga has influenced Indonesia's original comic industry. Manga in the Philippines were imported from the US and were sold only in specialty stores and in limited copies. The first manga in Filipino language is Doraemon which was published by J-Line Comics and was then followed by Case Closed. In 2015, Boys' Love manga became popular through the introduction of BL manga by printing company BLACKink. Among the first BL titles to be printed were Poster Boy, Tagila, and Sprinters, all were written in Filipino. BL manga have become bestsellers in the top three bookstore companies in the Philippines since their introduction in 2015. During the same year, Boys' Love manga have become a popular mainstream with Thai consumers, leading to television series adapted from BL manga stories since 2016. Manga piracy is an increasing problem in Asia which effects many publishers. This has led to the Japanese government taking legal action against multiple operators of pirate websites. Manga has become increasingly popular in Southeast Asia being one the main assets of Japan's soft power in the region. Since the start of the 2020s the sales of manga have also significantly increased in India.\nEurope.\nManga has influenced European cartooning in a way that is somewhat different from in the U.S. Broadcast anime in France and Italy opened the European market to manga during the 1970s. French art has borrowed from Japan since the 19th century (Japonism) and has its own highly developed tradition of bande dessin\u00e9e cartooning. Manga was introduced to France in the late 1990s, where Japanese pop culture became massively popular: in 2021, 55% of comics sold in the country were manga and France is the biggest manga importer.\nBy mid-2021, 75 percent of the \u20ac300 value of Culture Pass accounts given to French 18 year-olds was spent on manga. According to the Japan External Trade Organization, sales of manga reached $212.6 million within France and Germany alone in 2006. France represents about 50% of the European market and is the second worldwide market, behind Japan. In 2013, there were 41 publishers of manga in France and, together with other Asian comics, manga represented around 40% of new comics releases in the country, surpassing Franco-Belgian comics for the first time. European publishers marketing manga translated into French include Asuka, Casterman, Gl\u00e9nat, Kana, and Pika \u00c9dition, among others. European publishers also translate manga into Dutch, German, Italian, and other languages. In 2007, about 70% of all comics sold in Germany were manga. Since 2010 the country celebrates Manga Day on every 27 August. In 2021 manga sales in Germany rose by 75% from its original record of 70 million in 2005. As of 2022 Germany is the third largest manga market in Europe after Italy and France.\nIn 2021, the Spanish manga market hit a record of 1033 new title publications. In 2022 the 28th edition of the Barcelona Manga Festival opened its doors to more than 163,000 fans, compared to a pre-pandemic 120,000 in 2019.\nManga publishers based in the United Kingdom include Gollancz and Titan Books. Manga publishers from the United States have a strong marketing presence in the United Kingdom: for example, the Tanoshimi line from Random House. In 2019 The British Museum held a .\nThe Europe manga market size was estimated at USD 676.1 million in 2023 and is expected to grow at a CAGR of 19.6% from 2024 to 2030.\nUnited States.\nManga made their way only gradually into U.S. markets, first in association with anime and then independently. Some U.S. fans became aware of manga in the 1970s and early 1980s. However, anime was initially more accessible than manga to U.S. fans, many of whom were college-age young people who found it easier to obtain, subtitle, and exhibit video tapes of anime than translate, reproduce, and distribute -style manga books. One of the first manga translated into English and marketed in the U.S. was Keiji Nakazawa's \"Barefoot Gen\", an autobiographical story of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima issued by Leonard Rifas and Educomics (1980\u20131982). More manga were translated between the mid-1980s and 1990s, including \"Golgo 13\" in 1986, \"Lone Wolf and Cub\" from First Comics in 1987, and \"Kamui\", \"Area 88\", and \"Mai the Psychic Girl\", also in 1987 and all from Viz Media-Eclipse Comics. Others soon followed, including \"Akira\" from Marvel Comics' Epic Comics imprint, \"Nausica\u00e4 of the Valley of the Wind\" from Viz Media, and \"Appleseed\" from Eclipse Comics in 1988, and later \"Iczer-1\" (Antarctic Press, 1994) and Ippongi Bang's \"F-111 Bandit\" (Antarctic Press, 1995).\nDuring the 1980s and 1990s, Japanese animation, such as \"Akira\", \"Dragon Ball\", \"Neon Genesis Evangelion\", and \"Pok\u00e9mon\", made a larger impact on the fan experience and in the market than manga. Matters changed when translator-entrepreneur Toren Smith founded Studio Proteus in 1986. Smith and Studio Proteus acted as an agent and translator of many Japanese manga, including Masamune Shirow's \"Appleseed\" and K\u014dsuke Fujishima's \"Oh My Goddess!\", for Dark Horse and Eros Comix, eliminating the need for these publishers to seek their own contacts in Japan.\nSimultaneously, the Japanese publisher Shogakukan opened a U.S. market initiative with their U.S. subsidiary Viz, enabling Viz to draw directly on Shogakukan's catalogue and translation skills.\nJapanese publishers began pursuing a U.S. market in the mid-1990s, due to a stagnation in the domestic market for manga. The U.S. manga market took an upturn with mid-1990s anime and manga versions of Masamune Shirow's \"Ghost in the Shell\" (translated by Frederik L. Schodt and Toren Smith) becoming very popular among fans. An extremely successful manga and anime translated and dubbed in English in the mid-1990s was \"Sailor Moon\". By 1995\u20131998, the \"Sailor Moon\" manga had been exported to over 23 countries, including China, Brazil, Mexico, Australia, North America and most of Europe. In 1997, Mixx Entertainment began publishing \"Sailor Moon\", along with CLAMP's \"Magic Knight Rayearth\", Hitoshi Iwaaki's \"Parasyte\" and Tsutomu Takahashi's \"Ice Blade\" in the monthly manga magazine \"MixxZine\". Mixx Entertainment, later renamed Tokyopop, also published manga in trade paperbacks and, like Viz, began aggressive marketing of manga to both young male and young female demographics.\nDuring this period, Dark Horse Manga was a major publisher of translated manga. In addition to \"Oh My Goddess!\", the company published \"Akira\", \"Astro Boy\", \"Berserk\", \"Blade of the Immortal\", \"Ghost in the Shell\", \"Lone Wolf and Cub\", Yasuhiro Nightow's \"Trigun\" and \"Blood Blockade Battlefront\", \"Gantz\", Kouta Hirano's \"Hellsing\" and \"Drifters\", \"Blood+\", \"Multiple Personality Detective Psycho\", \"FLCL\", \"Mob Psycho 100\", and \"Oreimo\". The company received 13 Eisner Award nominations for its manga titles, and three of the four manga creators admitted to The Will Eisner Award Hall of Fame \u2014 Osamu Tezuka, Kazuo Koike, and Goseki Kojima \u2014 were published in Dark Horse translations.\nIn the following years, manga became increasingly popular, and new publishers entered the field while the established publishers greatly expanded their catalogues. The \"Pok\u00e9mon\" manga \"Electric Tale of Pikachu\" issue #1 sold over 1million copies in the United States, making it the best-selling single comic book in the United States since 1993. By 2008, the U.S. and Canadian manga market generated $175 million in annual sales. Simultaneously, mainstream U.S. media began to discuss manga, with articles in \"The New York Times\", \"Time\" magazine, \"The Wall Street Journal\", and \"Wired\" magazine. As of 2017, manga distributor Viz Media is the largest publisher of graphic novels and comic books in the United States, with a 23% share of the market. BookScan sales show that manga is one of the fastest-growing areas of the comic book and narrative fiction markets. From January 2019 to May 2019, the manga market grew 16%, compared to the overall comic book market's 5% growth. The NPD Group noted that, compared to other comic book readers, manga readers are younger (76% under 30) and more diverse, including a higher female readership (16% higher than other comic books).\nAs of January 2020, manga is the second largest category in the US comic book and graphic novel market, accounting for 27% of the entire market share. During the COVID-19 pandemic some stores of the American bookseller Barnes &amp; Noble saw up to a 500% increase in sales from graphic novel and manga sales due to the younger generations showing a high interest in the medium. Sales of print manga titles in the U.S. increased by 3.6 million units in the first quarter of 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. In 2021, 24.4 million units of manga were sold in the United States. This is an increase of about 15 million (160%) more sales than in 2020. In 2022, most of the top-selling comic creators in the United States were mangaka. The same year manga sales saw an increase of 9%. In 2023 manga sales amounted a value of $381.16 million USD with 57% of all titles sold coming from Viz Media.\nLocalized manga.\nA number of artists in the United States have drawn comics and cartoons influenced by manga. As an early example, Vernon Grant drew manga-influenced comics while living in Japan in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Others include Frank Miller's mid-1980s \"Ronin\", Adam Warren and Toren Smith's 1988 \"The Dirty Pair\", Ben Dunn's 1987 \"Ninja High School\" and \"Manga Shi 2000\" from Crusade Comics (1997).\nBy the beginning of the 21st century, several U.S. manga publishers had begun to produce work by U.S. artists under the broad marketing-label of manga. In 2002, I.C. Entertainment, formerly Studio Ironcat and now out of business, launched a series of manga by U.S. artists called \"Amerimanga\". In 2004, eigoMANGA launched the \"Rumble Pak\" and \"Sakura Pakk\" anthology series. Seven Seas Entertainment followed suit with \"World Manga\". Simultaneously, TokyoPop introduced original English-language manga (OEL manga) later renamed \"Global Manga\".\nFrancophone artists have also developed their own versions of manga (\"manfra\"), like Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Boilet's \"la nouvelle manga\". Boilet has worked in France and in Japan, sometimes collaborating with Japanese artists.\nAwards.\nThe Japanese manga industry grants a large number of awards, mostly sponsored by publishers, with the winning prize usually including publication of the winning stories in magazines released by the sponsoring publisher. Examples of these awards include:\nThe Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs has awarded the International Manga Award annually since May 2007.\nIn 2024, LeftField Media (creators of the annual event Anime NYC) in cooperation with Japan Society created an awards program to honor manga creators with work available in English.\nUniversity education.\nKyoto Seika University in Japan has offered a highly competitive course in manga since 2000. Then, several established universities and established a .\nShuho Sato, who wrote \"Umizaru\" and \"Say Hello to Black Jack\", has created some controversy on Twitter. Sato says, \"Manga school is meaningless because those schools have very low success rates. Then, I could teach novices required skills on the job in three months. Meanwhile, those school students spend several million yen, and four years, yet they are good for nothing.\" and that, \"For instance, Keiko Takemiya, the then professor of Seika Univ., remarked in the Government Council that 'A complete novice will be able to understand where is \"\" (i.e., margin section) during four years.' On the other hand, I would imagine that, it takes about thirty minutes to completely understand that at work.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nInline citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18987", "revid": "24013162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18987", "title": "Mexico City", "text": "Capital and most populous city of Mexico\nMexico City \nis the capital and largest city of Mexico, as well as the most populous city in North America. It is one of the most important cultural and financial centers in the world, and is classified as an Alpha world city according to the Globalization and World Cities Research Network (GaWC) 2024 ranking. Mexico City is located in the Valley of Mexico within the high Mexican central plateau, at an altitude of . The city has 16 boroughs or , which are in turn divided into neighborhoods or .\nThe 2020 population for the city proper was 9,209,944, with a land area of , making it the second largest Spanish-speaking city proper in the world. According to the most recent definition agreed upon by the federal and state governments, the population of Greater Mexico City is 21,804,515, which makes it the world's sixth-largest metropolitan area and the second-largest urban agglomeration in the Western Hemisphere (behind S\u00e3o Paulo, Brazil). Greater Mexico City has a GDP of $411 billion in 2011, which makes it one of the most productive urban areas in the world. The city was responsible for generating 15.8% of Mexico's GDP, and the metropolitan area accounted for about 22% of the country's GDP. If it were an independent country in 2013, Mexico City would be the fifth-largest economy in Latin America.\nMexico City is the oldest capital city in the Americas and one of two founded by Indigenous peoples. The city was originally built on a group of islands in Lake Texcoco by the Mexica around 1325, under the name Tenochtitlan. It was almost completely destroyed in the 1521 siege of Tenochtitlan and subsequently redesigned and rebuilt in accordance with Spanish urban standards. In 1524, the municipality of Mexico City was established, known as , and beginning in 1585, it was officially known as (Mexico City). Mexico City played a major role in the Spanish colonial empire as a political, administrative, and financial center. Following independence from Spain, the region around and containing the city was established as the new and only Mexican federal district ( or \"DF\") in 1824.\nAfter years of demanding greater political autonomy, in 1997 residents were finally given the right to elect both a head of government and the representatives of the unicameral Legislative Assembly by election. Ever since, left-wing parties (first the Party of the Democratic Revolution and later the National Regeneration Movement) have controlled both of them. The city has several progressive policies, such as elective abortions, a limited form of euthanasia, no-fault divorce, same-sex marriage, and legal gender change. On 29 January 2016, it ceased to be the \"Federal District\" () and is now officially known as (). These 2016 reforms gave the city a greater degree of autonomy and made changes to its governance and political power structures. A clause in the Constitution of Mexico, however, prevents it from becoming a state within the Mexican federation, as long as it remains the capital of the country.\nNicknames and mottos.\nUp until 2013, it was common to refer to the city by the initialism \n\"DF\" from . Since 2013, use of the abbreviation \"CDMX\" () has been more common, particularly by government.\nThe city is colloquially known as \"Chilangolandia\" after the locals' nickname \"chilangos\". Chilango is used pejoratively by people living outside Mexico City to \"connote a loud, arrogant, ill-mannered, loutish person\". For their part those living in Mexico City designate insultingly those who live elsewhere as living in \"la provincia\" ('the provinces', 'the periphery') and many proudly embrace the term chilango. Residents of Mexico City are formally called \"capitalinos\" (in reference to the city being the capital of the country), but \"[p]erhaps because capitalino is the more polite, specific, and correct word, it is almost never utilized\".\nMexico City was traditionally known as \"La Ciudad de los Palacios\" (\"the City of the Palaces\"), a nickname attributed to Baron Alexander von Humboldt when visiting the city in the 19th century, who, sending a letter back to Germany, said Mexico City could rival any major city in Europe. But it was English politician Charles Latrobe who really penned the following: \"... look at their works: the moles, aqueducts, churches, roads\u2014and the luxurious \"City of Palaces\" which has risen from the clay-built ruins of Tenochtitlan...\", on page 84 of the Letter V of \"The Rambler in Mexico\".\nDuring the colonial period, the city's motto was \"Muy Noble e Insigne, Muy Leal e Imperial\" (Very Noble and Distinguished, Very Loyal and Imperial). During Andr\u00e9s Manuel L\u00f3pez Obrador's administration (2018\u201324) a political slogan was introduced: \"la Ciudad de la Esperanza\" (lit.\u2009'The City of Hope'). This motto was quickly adopted as a city nickname but has faded since the new motto, \"Capital en Movimiento\" (\"Capital in Movement\"), was adopted by the administration headed by Marcelo Ebrard; this latter motto is not really treated as a nickname.\nHistory.\nThe oldest signs of human occupation in the area of Mexico City are those of the \"Pe\u00f1\u00f3n woman\" and others found in San Bartolo Atepehuacan (Gustavo A. Madero). They were believed to correspond to the lower Cenolithic period (9500\u20137000 BC). However, a 2003 study placed the age of the Pe\u00f1on woman at 12,700 years old (calendar age), one of the oldest human remains discovered in the Americas. Studies of her mitochondrial DNA suggest she was either of Asian or European or Aboriginal Australian origin.\nThe area was the destination of the migrations of the Teochichimecas during the 8th and 13th centuries, people that would give rise to the Toltec, and Mexica (Aztecs) cultures. The latter arrived around the 14th century to settle first on the shores of the lake.\nAztec period.\nThe city of Mexico-Tenochtitlan was founded by the Mexica people in 1325 or 1327. The old Mexica city that is now referred to as Tenochtitlan was built on an island in the center of the inland lake system of the Valley of Mexico, which is shared with a smaller city-state called Tlatelolco. According to legend, the Mexicas' principal god, Huitzilopochtli, indicated the site where they were to build their home by presenting a golden eagle perched on a prickly pear devouring a rattlesnake.\nBetween 1325 and 1521, Tenochtitlan grew in size and strength, eventually dominating the other city-states around Lake Texcoco and in the Valley of Mexico. When the Spaniards arrived, the Aztec Empire had reached much of Mesoamerica, touching both the Gulf of Mexico and the Pacific Ocean.\nSpanish conquest.\nAfter landing in Veracruz, Spanish explorer Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s advanced upon Tenochtitlan with the aid of many of the other native peoples,\narriving there on 8 November 1519. Cort\u00e9s and his men marched along the causeway leading into the city from Iztapalapa (Ixtapalapa), and the city's ruler, Moctezuma II, greeted the Spaniards; they exchanged gifts, but the camaraderie did not last long. Cort\u00e9s put Moctezuma under house arrest at his father's palace, hoping to rule through him.\nTensions increased until, on the night of 30 June 1520 \u2013 during a struggle known as \"La Noche Triste\" \u2013 the Aztecs rose up against the Spanish intrusion and managed to capture or drive out the Europeans and their Tlaxcalan allies. Cort\u00e9s regrouped at Tlaxcala. The Aztecs thought the Spaniards were permanently gone, and they elected a new king, Cuitl\u00e1huac, but he soon died; the next king was Cuauht\u00e9moc. Cort\u00e9s began a siege of Tenochtitlan in May 1521. For three months, the city suffered from the lack of food and water as well as the spread of smallpox brought by the Europeans. Cort\u00e9s and his allies landed their forces in the south of the island and slowly fought their way through the city. Cuauht\u00e9moc surrendered in August 1521. The Spaniards practically razed Tenochtitlan during the final siege of the conquest.\nCort\u00e9s first settled in Coyoac\u00e1n, but decided to rebuild the Aztec site to erase all traces of the old order. He did not establish a territory under his own personal rule, but remained loyal to the Spanish crown. The first Spanish viceroy arrived in Mexico City fourteen years later. By that time, the city had again become a city-state, having power that extended far beyond its borders. Although the Spanish preserved Tenochtitlan's basic layout, they built Catholic churches over the old Aztec temples and claimed the imperial palaces for themselves. Tenochtitlan was renamed \"Mexico\" because the Spanish found the word easier to pronounce.\nGrowth of colonial Mexico City.\nThe city had been the capital of the Aztec Empire and in the colonial era, Mexico City became the capital of New Spain. The viceroy of Mexico or vice-king lived in the viceregal palace on the main square or Z\u00f3calo. The Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral, the seat of the Archbishopric of New Spain, was constructed on another side of the Z\u00f3calo, as was the archbishop's palace, and across from it the building housing the city council or \"ayuntamiento\" of the city. A late seventeenth-century painting of the Z\u00f3calo by Crist\u00f3bal de Villalpando depicts the main square, which had been the old Aztec ceremonial center. The existing central plaza of the Aztecs was effectively and permanently transformed to the ceremonial center and seat of power during the colonial period, and remains to this day in modern Mexico, the central plaza of the nation. The rebuilding of the city after the siege of Tenochtitlan was accomplished by the abundant indigenous labor in the surrounding area. Franciscan friar Toribio de Benavente Motolinia, one of the Twelve Apostles of Mexico who arrived in New Spain in 1524, described the rebuilding of the city as one of the afflictions or plagues of the early period:\nThe seventh plague was the construction of the great City of Mexico, which, during the early years used more people than in the construction of Jerusalem. The crowds of laborers were so numerous that one could hardly move in the streets and causeways, although they are very wide. Many died from being crushed by beams, or falling from high places, or in tearing down old buildings for new ones. \nPreconquest Tenochtitlan was built in the center of the inland lake system, with the city reachable by canoe and by wide causeways to the mainland. The causeways were rebuilt under Spanish rule with indigenous labor. Colonial Spanish cities were constructed on a grid pattern, if no geographical obstacle prevented it. In Mexico City, the Z\u00f3calo (main square) was the central place from which the grid was then built outward. The Spanish lived in the area closest to the main square in what was known as the \"traza\", in orderly, well laid-out streets. Indigenous residences were outside that exclusive zone and houses were haphazardly located. The Z\u00f3calo was a center of commerce for indigenous people, making Spanish efforts to keep the area segregated difficult to enforce. At intervals Z\u00f3calo was where major celebrations took place as well as executions. It was also the site of two major riots in the seventeenth century, one in 1624, the other in 1692.\nThe city grew as the population did, coming up against the lake's waters. As the depth of the lake water fluctuated, Mexico City was subject to periodic flooding. A major labor draft, the desag\u00fce, compelled thousands of indigenous over the colonial period to work on infrastructure to prevent flooding. Floods were not only an inconvenience but also a health hazard, since during flood periods human waste polluted the city's streets. By draining the area, the mosquito population dropped as did the frequency of the diseases they spread. However, draining the wetlands also changed the habitat for fish and birds and the areas accessible for indigenous cultivation close to the capital. The 16th century saw a proliferation of churches, many of which can still be seen today in the historic center.\nEconomically, Mexico City prospered as a result of trade. Unlike Brazil or Peru, Mexico had easy contact with both the Atlantic and Pacific worlds. Although the Spanish crown tried to completely regulate all commerce in the city, it had only partial success.\nThe concept of nobility flourished in New Spain in a way not seen in other parts of the Americas. Spaniards encountered a society in which the concept of nobility mirrored that of their own. Spaniards respected the indigenous order of nobility and added to it. In the ensuing centuries, possession of a noble title in Mexico did not mean one exercised great political power, for one's power was limited even if the accumulation of wealth was not. The concept of nobility in Mexico was not political but rather a very conservative Spanish social one, based on proving the worthiness of the family. Most of these families proved their worth by making fortunes in New Spain outside of the city itself, then spending the revenues in the capital, building churches, supporting charities and building extravagant palatial homes. The craze to build the most opulent residence possible reached its height in the last half of the 18th century. Many of these palaces can still be seen today, leading to Mexico City's nickname of \"The city of palaces\" given by Alexander Von Humboldt.\nThe Grito de Dolores (\"Cry of Dolores\"), also known as El Grito de la Independencia (\"Cry of Independence\"), marked the beginning of the Mexican War of Independence. The Battle of Guanajuato, the first major engagement of the insurgency, occurred four days later. After a decade of war, Mexico's independence from Spain was effectively declared in the Declaration of Independence of the Mexican Empire on 27 September 1821. Agust\u00edn de Iturbide is proclaimed Emperor of the First Mexican Empire by Congress, crowned in the Cathedral of Mexico.\nThe Mexican Federal District was established by the new government and by the signing of their new constitution, where the concept of a federal district was adapted from the United States Constitution. Before this designation, Mexico City had served as the seat of government for both the State of Mexico and the nation as a whole. Texcoco de Mora and then Toluca became the capital of the State of Mexico.\nBattle of Mexico City in the U.S.\u2013Mexican War of 1847.\nDuring the 19th century, Mexico City was the center stage of all the political disputes of the country. It was the imperial capital on two occasions (1821\u20131823 and 1864\u20131867), and of two federalist states and two centralist states that followed innumerable coups d'\u00e9tats in the space of half a century before the triumph of the Liberals after the Reform War. It was also the objective of one of the two French invasions to Mexico (1861\u20131867), and occupied for a year by American troops in the framework of the Mexican\u2013American War (1847\u20131848).\nThe Battle for Mexico City was the series of engagements from 8 to 15 September 1847, in the general vicinity of Mexico City during the U.S. Mexican War. Included are major actions at the battles of Molino del Rey and Chapultepec, culminating with the fall of Mexico City. The U.S. Army under Winfield Scott scored a major success that ended the war. The American invasion into the Federal District was first resisted during the Battle of Churubusco on 8 August, where the Saint Patrick's Battalion, which was composed primarily of Catholic Irish and German immigrants but also Canadians, English, French, Italians, Poles, Scots, Spaniards, Swiss, and Mexicans, fought for the Mexican cause, repelling the American attacks. After defeating the Saint Patrick's Battalion, the Mexican\u2013American War came to a close after the United States deployed combat units deep into Mexico resulting in the capture of Mexico City and Veracruz by the U.S. Army's 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Divisions. The invasion culminated with the storming of Chapultepec Castle in the city itself.\nDuring this battle, on 13 September, the 4th Division, under John A. Quitman, spearheaded the attack against Chapultepec and carried the castle. Future Confederate generals George E. Pickett and James Longstreet participated in the attack. Serving in the Mexican defense were the cadets later immortalized as \"Los Ni\u00f1os H\u00e9roes\" (the \"Boy Heroes\"). The Mexican forces fell back from Chapultepec and retreated within the city. Attacks on the Bel\u00e9n and San Cosme Gates came afterwards. The treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo was signed in what is now the far north of the city.\nMexican Revolution (1910\u20131920).\nThe capital escaped the worst of the violence of the ten-year conflict of the Mexican Revolution. The most significant episode of this period for the city was the Decena Tr\u00e1gica (\"Ten Tragic Days\") of February 1913, when forces counter to the elected government of Francisco I. Madero staged a successful coup. The center of the city was subjected to artillery attacks from the army stronghold of the \"ciudadela\" or citadel, with significant civilian casualties and the undermining of confidence in the Madero government. Victoriano Huerta, chief general of the Federal Army, saw a chance to take power, forcing Madero and Pino Suarez to sign resignations. The two were murdered later while on their way to Lecumberri prison. Huerta's ouster in July 1914 saw the entry of the armies of Pancho Villa and Emiliano Zapata, but the city did not experience violence. Huerta had abandoned the capital and the conquering armies marched in. Venustiano Carranza's Constitutionalist faction ultimately prevailed in the revolutionary civil war and Carranza took up residence in the presidential palace.\n20th century to present.\nIn the 20th century the phenomenal growth of the city and its environmental and political consequences dominate. In 1900, the population of Mexico City was about 500,000. The city began to grow rapidly westward in the early part of the 20th century and then began to grow upwards in the 1950s, with the Torre Latinoamericana becoming the city's first skyscraper.\nThe rapid development of Mexico City as a center for modernist architecture was most fully manifested in the mid-1950s construction of the Ciudad Universitaria, Mexico City, the main campus of the National Autonomous University of Mexico. Designed by the most prestigious architects of the era, including Mario Pani, Eugenio Peschard, and Enrique del Moral, the buildings feature murals by artists Diego Rivera, David Alfaro Siqueiros, and Jos\u00e9 Ch\u00e1vez Morado. It has since been recognized as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nThe 1968 Olympic Games brought about the construction of large sporting facilities. In 1969, the Mexico City Metro was inaugurated. Explosive growth in the population of the city started in the 1960s, with the population overflowing the boundaries of the Federal District into the neighboring State of Mexico, especially to the north, northwest, and northeast. Between 1960 and 1980 the city's population more than doubled to nearly 9\u00a0million.\nIn 1980, half of all the industrial jobs in Mexico were located in Mexico City. Under relentless growth, the Mexico City government could barely keep up with services. Villagers from the countryside who continued to pour into the city to escape poverty only compounded the city's problems. With no housing available, they took over lands surrounding the city, creating huge shanty towns.\nThe inhabitants of Mexico City faced serious air pollution and water pollution problems, as well as groundwater-related subsidence. Air and water pollution has been contained and improved in several areas due to government programs, the renovation of vehicles and the modernization of public transportation.\nThe autocratic government that ruled Mexico City since the Revolution was tolerated, mostly because of the continued economic expansion since World War II. This was the case even though this government could not handle the population and pollution problems adequately. Nevertheless, discontent and protests began in the 1960s leading to the massacre of an unknown number of protesting students in Tlatelolco.\nThree years later, a demonstration in the Maestros avenue, organized by former members of the 1968 student movement, was violently repressed by a paramilitary group called \"Los Halcones\", composed of gang members and teenagers from many sports clubs who received training in the US.\nOn 19 September 1985, at 7:19am CST, the area was struck by the 1985 Mexico City earthquake. The earthquake proved to be a disaster politically for the one-party state government. The Mexican government was paralyzed by its own bureaucracy and corruption, forcing ordinary citizens to create and direct their own rescue efforts and to reconstruct much of the housing that was lost as well.\nIn 1987, the Historic center of Mexico City, a central neighborhood of Mexico City was enlisted as UNESCO World Heritage Site for its large collection of ancient Aztec and colonial architecture.\nGeography.\nMexico City is located in the Valley of Mexico, sometimes called the Basin of Mexico. This valley is located in the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt in the high plateaus of south-central Mexico.\nIt has a minimum altitude of above sea level and is surrounded by mountains and volcanoes that reach elevations of over . This valley has no natural drainage outlet for the waters that flow from the mountainsides, making the city vulnerable to flooding. Drainage was engineered through the use of canals and tunnels starting in the 17th century.\nMexico City primarily rests on what was Lake Texcoco. Seismic activity is frequent there. Lake Texcoco was drained starting from the 17th century. Although none of the lake waters remain, the city rests on the lake bed's heavily saturated clay. This soft base is collapsing due to the over-extraction of groundwater, called \"groundwater-related subsidence\".\nSince the beginning of the 20th century the city has sunk as much as in some areas, and it continues to sink almost every year. This sinking is causing problems with runoff and wastewater management, leading to flooding problems, especially during the summer. The entire lake bed is now paved over and most of the city's remaining forested areas lie in the southern boroughs of Milpa Alta, Tlalpan and Xochimilco.\nEnvironment.\nOriginally much of the valley lay beneath the waters of Lake Texcoco, a system of interconnected salt and freshwater lakes. The Aztecs built dikes to separate the fresh water used to raise crops in \"chinampas\" and to prevent recurrent floods. These dikes were destroyed during the siege of Tenochtitlan, and during colonial times the Spanish regularly drained the lake to prevent floods. Only a small section of the original lake remains, located outside Mexico City, in the municipality of Atenco, State of Mexico.\nArchitects Teodoro Gonz\u00e1lez de Le\u00f3n and Alberto Kalach along with a group of Mexican urbanists, engineers and biologists have developed the project plan for \"Recovering the City of Lakes\". If approved by the government the project will contribute to the supply of water from natural sources to the Valley of Mexico, the creation of new natural spaces, a great improvement in air quality, and greater population establishment planning.\nPollution.\nBy the 1990s Mexico City had become infamous as one of the world's most polluted cities; however, the city has since become a model for drastically lowering pollution levels. By 2014 carbon monoxide pollution had dropped drastically, while sulfur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide were at levels about a third of those in 1992. The levels of signature pollutants in Mexico City are similar to those of Los Angeles. Despite the cleanup, the metropolitan area is still the most ozone-polluted part of the country, with ozone levels 2.5 times beyond WHO-defined safe limits.\nTo clean up pollution, the federal and local governments implemented numerous plans including the constant monitoring and reporting of environmental conditions, such as ozone and nitrogen oxides. When the levels of these two pollutants reached critical levels, contingency actions were implemented which included closing factories, changing school hours, and extending the \"A day without a car\" program to two days of the week. The government also instituted industrial technology improvements, a strict biannual vehicle emission inspection and the reformulation of gasoline and diesel fuels. The introduction of Metrob\u00fas bus rapid transit and the Ecobici bike-sharing were among efforts to encourage alternate, greener forms of transportation.\nParks and recreation.\nChapultepec, the city's most iconic public park, has history back to the Aztec emperors who used the area as a retreat. It is south of Polanco district, and houses the Chapultepec Zoo the main city's zoo, several ponds and seven museums, including the National Museum of Anthropology. Other iconic city parks include the Alameda Central, it is recognized as the oldest public park in the Americas. Parque M\u00e9xico and Parque Espa\u00f1a in the hip Condesa district; Parque Hundido and \"Parque de los Venados\" in Colonia del Valle, and Parque Lincoln in Polanco. There are many smaller parks throughout the city. Most are small \"squares\" occupying two or three square blocks amid residential or commercial districts. Several other larger parks such as the Bosque de Tlalpan and Viveros de Coyoac\u00e1n, and in the east Alameda Oriente, offer many recreational activities. Northwest of the city is a large ecological reserve, the Bosque de Arag\u00f3n. In the southeast is the Xochimilco Ecological Park and Plant Market, a World Heritage Site. West of Santa Fe district are the pine forests of the Desierto de los Leones National Park. Amusement parks include Six Flags M\u00e9xico, in Ajusco neighborhood which is the largest in Latin America. There are numerous seasonal fairs present in the city.\nMexico City has three zoos. Chapultepec Zoo, the San Juan de Aragon Zoo and Los Coyotes Zoo. Chapultepec Zoo is located in the first section of Chapultepec Park in the Miguel Hidalgo. It was opened in 1924. Visitors can see about 243 specimens of different species including kangaroos, giant panda, gorillas, caracal, hyena, hippos, jaguar, giraffe, lemur, lion, among others. Zoo San Juan de Aragon is near the San Juan de Aragon Park in the Gustavo A. Madero. In this zoo, opened in 1964, there are species that are in danger of extinction such as the jaguar and the Mexican wolf. Other guests are the golden eagle, pronghorn, bighorn sheep, caracara, zebras, African elephant, macaw, hippo, among others. Zoo Los Coyotes is a 27.68-acre (11.2 ha) zoo located south of Mexico City in the Coyoacan. It was inaugurated on 2 February 1999. It has more than 301 specimens of 51 species of wild native or endemic fauna from the area, featuring eagles, ajolotes, coyotes, macaws, bobcats, Mexican wolves, raccoons, mountain lions, teporingos, foxes, white-tailed deer.\nClimate.\nMexico City has a subtropical highland climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cwb\"), due to its tropical location but high elevation. The lower region of the valley receives less rainfall than the upper regions of the south; the lower boroughs of Iztapalapa, Iztacalco, Venustiano Carranza and the east portion of Gustavo A. Madero are usually drier and warmer than the upper southern boroughs of Tlalpan and Milpa Alta, a mountainous region of pine and oak trees known as the range of Ajusco. The average annual temperature varies from , depending on the altitude of the borough. The temperature is rarely below or above . At the Tacubaya observatory, the lowest temperature ever registered was on 13 February 1960, and the highest temperature on record was on 25 May 2024. Overall precipitation is heavily concentrated in the summer months, and includes dense hail.\nSnow falls in the city scarcely, although somewhat more often on nearby mountaintops. Throughout its history, the Central Valley of Mexico was accustomed to having several snowfalls per decade (including a period between 1878 and 1895 in which every single year\u2014except 1880\u2014recorded snowfalls), mostly lake-effect snow. The effects of the draining of Lake Texcoco and global warming have greatly reduced snowfalls after the snow flurries of 12 February 1907. Since 1908, snow has only fallen thrice: snow on 14 February 1920; snow flurries on 14 March 1940; and on 12 January 1967, when of snow fell on the city, the most on record. The 1967 snowstorm coincided with the operation of \"Deep Drainage System\" that resulted in the total draining of what was left of Lake Texcoco. After the disappearance of Lake Texcoco, snow has never fallen again over Mexico City. The region of the Valley of Mexico receives anti-cyclonic systems. The weak winds of these systems do not allow for the dispersion, outside the basin, of the air pollutants which are produced by the 50,000 industries and 4\u00a0million vehicles operating in and around the metropolitan area.\nThe area receives about of annual rainfall, which is concentrated from May through October with little or no precipitation for the remainder of the year. The area has two main seasons. The wet humid summer runs from May to October when winds bring in tropical moisture from the sea, the wettest month being July. The cool sunny winter runs from November to April, when the air is relatively drier, the driest month being December. This season is subdivided into a cold winter period and a warm spring period. The cold period spans from November to February, when polar air masses push down from the north and keep the air fairly dry. The warm period extends from March to May when subtropical winds again dominate but do not yet carry enough moisture for rain to form.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistorically, and since Pre-Columbian times, the Valley of Anahuac has been one of the most densely populated areas in Mexico. When the Federal District was created in 1824, the urban area of Mexico City extended approximately to the area of today's Cuauht\u00e9moc borough. \nDuring the Porfiriato era at the beginning of the 20th century, the wealthy and middle class began migrating to the west and south of the city's periphery. This led to a class divide between the upper and lower classes of Mexico City. The wealthy neighborhoods such as Colonia Roma, Polanco, and Anzures were located on the western side of the city near the historic center, while the working-class neighborhoods were located on the eastern side on the lakebed of former Lake Texcoco. Over the 20th century, this led to the creation of less developed settlements like Iztapalapa and Tl\u00e1huac in the east.\nAccording to the 1921 census, 54.78% of the city's population was considered Mestizo (Indigenous mixed with European), 22.79% considered European, and 18.74% considered Indigenous.\nUp to the 1990s, the Federal District was the most populous federal entity in Mexico, but since then, its population has remained stable at around 8.7\u00a0million. The growth of the city has extended beyond the limits of the city proper to 59 municipalities of the State of Mexico and 1 in the state of Hidalgo. With a population of approximately 19.8\u00a0million inhabitants (2008), it is one of the most populous conurbations in the world. Nonetheless, the annual rate of growth of the Metropolitan Area of Mexico City is much lower than that of other large urban agglomerations in Mexico, a phenomenon most likely attributable to the environmental policy of decentralization. The net migration rate of Mexico City from 1995 to 2000 was negative.\nMetropolitan area.\nThe metropolitan area, Greater Mexico City ('Zona Metropolitana del Valle de M\u00e9xico' or 'ZMVM' in Spanish) consists of Mexico City itself plus 60 municipalities in the State of Mexico and one in Hidalgo state. With a population of 21,804,515 (2020 census), Greater Mexico City is both the biggest and the densest metropolitan area in the country. Of the ca. 21.8 million, 9.2 million live in Mexico City proper and 12.4 million in the State of Mexico (ca. 75% of the state's population), including the municipalities of:\nMegalopolis.\nGreater Mexico City, in turn, forms part of an even larger megalopolis officially known as the \"Corona regional del centro de M\u00e9xico\" (Mexico City megalopolis), with a population of 33.4 million, more than one quarter of the country's population according to the 2020 census. The megalopolis as defined by the Environmental Commission of the Megalopolis (\"CAMe\") covers Mexico City and the states of Mexico, Hidalgo, Puebla, Tlaxcala, Morelos, and since 2019, Quer\u00e9taro, thus encompassing the metropolitan areas of Mexico City, Puebla, Quer\u00e9taro, Toluca, Cuernavaca, Pachuca, and others.\nGrowth.\nGreater Mexico City was the fastest growing metropolitan area in the country until the late 1980s. Since then, government policies have supported decentralization with the aim of reducing pollution in Greater Mexico City. While still growing, the annual rate of growth has decreased and is lower than that of Greater Guadalajara and Greater Monterrey.\nThe net migration rate of Mexico City proper from 1995 to 2000 was negative, which implies that residents are moving to the suburbs of the metropolitan area, or to other states of Mexico. In addition, some inner suburbs are losing population to outer suburbs, indicating the continuing expansion of Greater Mexico City.\nReligion.\nThe majority (82%) of the residents in Mexico City are Catholic, slightly lower than the 2010 census national percentage of 87%, making it the largest Christian denomination, though it has been decreasing over the last decades. Many other religions and philosophies are also practiced in the city: many different types of Protestant groups, different types of Jewish communities, Buddhist, Islamic and other spiritual and philosophical groups. There are also growing numbers of irreligious people, whether agnostic or atheist.\nThe patron saint of Mexico City is Saint Philip of Jesus, a Mexican Catholic missionary who became one of the Twenty-six Martyrs of Japan.\nThe Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Mexico is the largest archdiocese in the world. There are two Catholic cathedrals in the city, the Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral and the Iztapalapa Cathedral, and three former Catholic churches who are now the cathedrals of other rites, the San Jos\u00e9 de Gracia Cathedral (Anglican church), the Porta Coeli Cathedral (Melkite Greek Catholic church) and the Valvanera Cathedral (Maronite church).\nEthnic groups.\nRepresenting around 18.74% of the city's population, indigenous peoples from different areas of Mexico have migrated to the capital in search of better economic opportunities. Nahuatl, Otomi, Mixtec, Zapotec and Mazahua are the indigenous languages with the greatest number of speakers in Mexico City. According to the 2020 Census, 2.03% of Mexico City's population identified as Black, Afro-Mexican, or of African descent.\nAdditionally, Mexico City is home to large communities of expatriates and immigrants from the rest of North America (U.S. and Canada), from South America (mainly from Argentina and Colombia, but also from Brazil, Chile, Uruguay and Venezuela), from Central America and the Caribbean (mainly from Cuba, Guatemala, El Salvador, Haiti and Honduras); from Europe (mainly from Spain, Germany and Switzerland, but also from Czech Republic, Hungary, France, Italy, Ireland, the Netherlands, Poland and Romania), and from the Arab world (mostly from Lebanon, and other countries like Syria and Egypt).\nMexico City is home to the largest population of Americans living outside the United States. Estimates are as high as 700,000 Americans living in Mexico City, while in 1999 the U.S. Bureau of Consular Affairs estimated over 440,000 Americans lived in the Mexico City Metropolitan Area.\nHealth.\nMexico City is home to some of the best private hospitals in the country, including Hospital \u00c1ngeles, Hospital ABC and M\u00e9dica Sur. The national public healthcare institution for private-sector employees, IMSS, has its largest facilities in Mexico City\u2014including the National Medical Center and the La Raza Medical Center\u2014and has an annual budget of over 6\u00a0billion pesos. The IMSS and other public health institutions, including the ISSSTE (Public Sector Employees' Social Security Institute) and the National Health Ministry (SSA) maintain large specialty facilities in the city. These include the National Institutes of Cardiology, Nutrition, Psychiatry, Oncology, Pediatrics, Rehabilitation, among others.\nEducation.\nAmong its many public and private schools (K\u201313), the city offers multi-cultural, multi-lingual and international schools attended by Mexican and foreign students. Best known are the Colegio Alem\u00e1n (German school with three main campuses), the Liceo Mexicano Japon\u00e9s (Japanese), the Centro Cultural Coreano en M\u00e9xico (Korean), the Lyc\u00e9e Franco-Mexicain (French), the American School, The Westhill Institute (American School), the Edron Academy and the Greengates School (British). Mexico City joined the UNESCO Global Network of Learning Cities in 2015 and was designated a \"Design City\" in 2017.\nIn the Plaza de las Tres Culturas is the Colegio de Santa Cruz de Tlatelolco that is recognized for being the first and oldest European school of higher learning in the Americas and the first major school of interpreters and translators in the New World. Other, the now-defunct Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico is considered the father of the UNAM, and it was located in the city and was the third oldest university in the Americas.\nThe National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), located in Mexico City, is the largest university on the continent, with more than 300,000 students from all backgrounds. Three Nobel laureates, several Mexican entrepreneurs and most of Mexico's modern-day presidents are among its former students. UNAM conducts 50% of Mexico's scientific research and has presence all across the country with satellite campuses, observatories and research centers. UNAM ranked 74th in the Top 200 World University Ranking published by Times Higher Education (then called Times Higher Education Supplement) in 2006, making it the highest ranked Spanish-speaking university in the world. The sprawling main campus of the university, known as Ciudad Universitaria, was named a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 2007.\nThe second largest higher-education institution is the National Polytechnic Institute (IPN), which includes among many other relevant centers the Centro de Investigaci\u00f3n y de Estudios Avanzados (Cinvestav), where varied high-level scientific and technological research is done. Other major higher-education institutions in the city include the Metropolitan Autonomous University (UAM), the National School of Anthropology and History (ENAH), the Instituto Tecnol\u00f3gico Aut\u00f3nomo de M\u00e9xico (ITAM), the Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education (3 campuses), the Universidad Panamericana (UP), the Universidad La Salle, the Universidad Intercontinental (UIC), the Universidad del Valle de M\u00e9xico (UVM), the Universidad An\u00e1huac, Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar University (USB), the Universidad Intercontinental (UIC), the Alliant International University, the Universidad Iberoamericana, El Colegio de M\u00e9xico (Colmex), Escuela Libre de Derecho and the Centro de Investigaci\u00f3n y Docencia Econ\u00f3mica, (CIDE).\nIn addition, the prestigious University of California maintains a campus known as \"Casa de California\" in the city. The Universidad Tecnol\u00f3gica de M\u00e9xico is also in Mexico City.\nPolitics.\nPolitical structure.\nThe Acta Constitutiva de la Federaci\u00f3n of 31 January 1824, and the Federal Constitution of 4 October 1824, fixed the political and administrative organization of the United Mexican States after the Mexican War of Independence. In addition, Section XXVIII of Article 50 gave the new Congress the right to choose where the federal government would be located. This location would then be appropriated as federal land, with the federal government acting as the local authority. The two main candidates to become the capital were Mexico City and Quer\u00e9taro.\nDue in large part to the persuasion of representative Servando Teresa de Mier, Mexico City was chosen because it was the center of the country's population and history, even though Queretaro was closer to the center geographically. The choice was official on 18 November 1824, and Congress delineated a surface area of two leagues square (8,800 acres) centered on the Zocalo. This area was then separated from the State of Mexico, forcing that state's government to move from the Palace of the Inquisition (now Museum of Mexican Medicine) in the city to Texcoco. This area did not include the population centers of the towns of Coyoac\u00e1n, Xochimilco, Mexicaltzingo and Tlalpan, all of which remained as part of the State of Mexico.\nIn 1854 president Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna enlarged the area of Mexico City almost eightfold from the original , annexing the rural and mountainous areas to secure the strategic mountain passes to the south and southwest to protect the city in the event of a foreign invasion. (The Mexican\u2013American War had just been fought.) The last changes to the limits of Mexico City were made between 1898 and 1902, reducing the area to the current by adjusting the southern border with the state of Morelos. By that time, the total number of municipalities within Mexico City was twenty-two. In 1941, the General Anaya borough was merged with the Central Department, which was then renamed \"Mexico City\" (thus reviving the name but not the autonomous municipality). From 1941 to 1970, the Federal District comprised twelve \"delegaciones\" and Mexico City. In 1970, Mexico City was split into four different \"delegaciones\": Cuauht\u00e9moc, Miguel Hidalgo, Venustiano Carranza and Benito Ju\u00e1rez, increasing the number of \"delegaciones\" to 16. Since then, the whole Federal District, whose \"delegaciones\" had by then almost formed a single urban area, began to be considered \"de facto\" a synonym of Mexico City.\nThe lack of a \"de jure\" stipulation left a legal vacuum that led to a number of sterile discussions about whether one concept had engulfed the other or if the latter had ceased to exist altogether. In 1993, the situation was solved by an amendment to the 44th article of the Constitution of Mexico; Mexico City and the Federal District were stated to be the same entity. The amendment was later introduced into the second article of the Statute of Government of the Federal District.\nOn 29 January 2016, Mexico City ceased to be the \"Federal District\" (Spanish: \"Distrito Federal\" or D.F.), and was officially renamed \"Ciudad de M\u00e9xico\" (or \"CDMX\"). On that date, Mexico City began a transition to becoming the country's 32nd federal entity, giving it a level of autonomy comparable to that of a state. It will have its own constitution and its legislature, and its \"delegaciones\" will now be headed by mayors. Because of a clause in the Mexican Constitution, however, as it is the seat of the powers of the federation, it can never become a state, or the capital of the country has to be relocated elsewhere.\nIn response to the demands, Mexico City received a greater degree of autonomy, with the 1987 elaboration the first Statute of Government (\"Estatuto de Gobierno\") and the creation of an assembly of representatives. The city has a Statute of Government, and as of its ratification on 31 January 2017, a , similar to the states of the Union. As part of the recent changes in autonomy, the budget is administered locally; it is proposed by the head of government and approved by the Legislative Assembly. Nonetheless, it is the Congress of the Union that sets the ceiling to internal and external public debt issued by the city government.\nThe politics pursued by the administrations of heads of government in Mexico City at the end of the 20th century have usually been more liberal than those of the rest of the country, whether with the support of the federal government, as was the case with the approval of several comprehensive environmental laws in the 1980s, or by laws that were since approved by the Legislative Assembly. The Legislative Assembly expanded provisions on abortions, becoming the first federal entity to expand abortion in Mexico beyond cases of rape and economic reasons, to permit it at the choice of the mother before the 12th week of pregnancy. In December 2009, the then Federal District became the first city in Latin America and one of very few in the world to legalize same-sex marriage.\nBoroughs and neighborhoods.\nAfter the political reforms in 2016, the city is divided for administrative purposes into 16 boroughs (, colloquially \"alcald\u00edas\"), formerly called \"delegaciones\". While they are not fully equivalent to municipalities, the boroughs have gained significant autonomy. Formerly appointed by the Federal District's head of government, local authorities were first elected directly by plurality in 2000. From 2016, each borough is headed by a mayor, expanding their local government powers.\nThe boroughs of Mexico City with their 2020 populations are:\nThe Human Development Index report of 2005 shows that there were three boroughs with a very high Human Development Index, 12 with a high HDI value (9 above .85), and one with a medium HDI value (almost high). Benito Ju\u00e1rez borough had the highest HDI of the country (0.9510) followed by Miguel Hidalgo, which came up fourth nationally with an HDI of (0.9189), and Coyoac\u00e1n was fifth nationally, with an HDI of (0.9169). Cuajimalpa (15th), Cuauht\u00e9moc (23rd), and Azcapotzalco (25th) also had very high values of 0.8994, 0.8922, and 0.8915, respectively.\nIn contrast, the boroughs of Xochimilco (172nd), Tl\u00e1huac (177th), and Iztapalapa (183rd) presented the lowest HDI values of Mexico City, with values of 0.8481, 0.8473, and 0.8464, respectively, which are still in the global high-HDI range. The only borough that did not have a high HDI was that of rural Milpa Alta, which had a \"medium\" HDI of 0.7984, far below those of all the other boroughs (627th nationally, the rest being in the top 200). Mexico City's HDI for the 2005 report was 0.9012 (very high), and its 2010 value of 0.9225 (very high), or (by newer methodology) 0.8307, was Mexico's highest.\nLaw enforcement.\nThe Secretariat of Public Security of Mexico City (Secretar\u00eda de Seguridad P\u00fablica de la Ciudad de M\u00e9xico \u2013 SSP) manages a combined force of over 90,000 officers in Mexico City. The SSP is charged with maintaining public order and safety in the heart of Mexico City. The historic district is also roamed by tourist police, aiming to orient and serve tourists. These horse-mounted agents dress in traditional uniforms. The investigative Judicial Police of Mexico City (Polic\u00eda Judicial de la Ciudad de M\u00e9xico \u2013 PJCDMX) is organized under the Office of the Attorney General of Mexico City (the Procuradur\u00eda General de Justicia de la Ciudad de M\u00e9xico). The PGJCDMX maintains 16 precincts (delegaciones) with an estimated 3,500 judicial police, 1,100 investigating agents for prosecuting attorneys (agentes del ministerio p\u00fablico), and nearly 1,000 criminology experts or specialists (peritos).\nBetween 2000 and 2004 an average of 478 crimes were reported each day in Mexico City; however, the actual crime rate is thought to be much higher \"since most people are reluctant to report crime\". Under policies enacted by Mayor Marcelo Ebrard between 2009 and 2011, Mexico City underwent a major security upgrade with violent and petty crime rates both falling significantly despite the rise in violent crime in other parts of the country. Some of the policies enacted included the installation of 11,000 security cameras around the city and a very large expansion of the police force. Mexico City has one of the world's highest police officer-to-resident ratios, with one uniformed officer per 100 citizens. Since 1997 the prison population has increased by more than 500%. Political scientist Markus-Michael M\u00fcller argues that mostly informal street vendors are hit by these measures. He sees punishment \"related to the growing politicization of security and crime issues and the resulting criminalization of the people living at the margins of urban society, in particular those who work in the city's informal economy\".\nIn 2016, the incidence of femicides was 3.2 per 100 000 inhabitants, the national average being 4.2. A 2015 city government report found that two of three women over the age of 15 in the capital suffered some form of violence. In addition to street harassment, one of the places where women in Mexico City are subjected to violence is on and around public transport. Annually the Metro of Mexico City receives 300 complaints of sexual harassment.\nInternational relations.\nMexico City is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nMexico City is one of the most important economic hubs in Latin America. The city proper produces 15.8% of the country's gross domestic product. In 2002, Mexico City had a Human Development Index score of 0.915, identical to that of South Korea. In 2007, residents in the top twelve percent of GDP per capita holders in the city had a mean disposable income of US$. The high spending power of Mexico City inhabitants makes the city attractive for companies offering prestige and luxury goods. According to a 2009 study conducted by PwC, Mexico City had a GDP of $390 billion, ranking it as the eighth richest city in the world and the richest in Latin America. In 2009, Mexico City alone would rank as the 30th largest economy in the world.\nMexico City is the greatest contributor to the country's industrial GDP (15.8%) and also the greatest contributor to the country's GDP in the service sector (25.3%). Due to the limited non-urbanized space at the south\u2014most of which is protected through environmental laws\u2014the contribution of Mexico City in agriculture is the smallest of all federal entities in the country. The economic reforms of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari had a tremendous effect on the city, as a number of businesses, including banks and airlines, were privatized. He also signed the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). This led to decentralization and a shift in Mexico City's economic base, from manufacturing to services, as most factories moved away to either the State of Mexico, or more commonly to the northern border. By contrast, corporate office buildings set their base in the city.\nMexico City offers an immense and varied consumer retail market, ranging from basic foods to ultra high-end luxury goods. Consumers may buy in fixed indoor markets, in mobile markets (\"tianguis\"), from street vendors, from downtown shops in a street dedicated to a certain type of good, in convenience stores and traditional neighborhood stores, in modern supermarkets, in warehouse and membership stores and the shopping centers that they anchor, in department stores, in big-box stores, and in modern shopping malls. In addition, \"tianguis\" or mobile markets set up shop on streets in many neighborhoods, depending on day of week. Sundays see the largest number of these markets.\nThe city's main source of fresh produce is the Central de Abasto. This in itself is a self-contained mini-city in Iztapalapa borough covering an area equivalent to several dozen city blocks. The wholesale market supplies most of the city's \"mercados\", supermarkets and restaurants, as well as people who come to buy the produce for themselves. Tons of fresh produce are trucked in from all over Mexico every day. The principal fish market is known as La Nueva Viga, in the same complex as the Central de Abastos. The world-renowned market of Tepito occupies 25 blocks, and sells a variety of products. A staple for consumers in the city is the omnipresent \"mercado\". Every major neighborhood in the city has its own borough-regulated market, often more than one. These are large well-established facilities offering most basic products, such as fresh produce and meat/poultry, dry goods, tortiller\u00edas, and many other services such as locksmiths, herbal medicine, hardware goods, sewing implements; and a multitude of stands offering freshly made, home-style cooking and drinks in the tradition of aguas frescas and atole.\nStreet vendors ply their trade from stalls in the \"tianguis\" as well as at non-officially controlled concentrations around metro stations and hospitals; at \"plazas comerciales\", where vendors of a certain \"theme\" (e.g. stationery) are housed; originally these were organized to accommodate vendors formerly selling on the street; or simply from improvised stalls on a city sidewalk. In addition, food and goods are sold from people walking with baskets, pushing carts, from bicycles or the backs of trucks, or simply from a tarp or cloth laid on the ground. In the center of the city informal street vendors are increasingly targeted by laws and prosecution. The weekly San Felipe de Jes\u00fas Tianguis is reported to be the largest in Latin America.\nThe Historic Center of Mexico City is widely known for specialized, often low-cost retailers. Certain blocks or streets are dedicated to shops selling a certain type of merchandise, with areas dedicated to over 40 categories such as home appliances, lamps and electricals, closets and bathrooms, housewares, wedding dresses, jukeboxes, printing, office furniture and safes, books, photography, jewelry, and opticians.\nTourism.\nMexico City is a destination for many foreign tourists. The Historic center of Mexico City (\"Centro Hist\u00f3rico\") and the \"floating gardens\" of Xochimilco in the southern borough have been declared World Heritage Sites by UNESCO. Landmarks in the Historic Center include the Plaza de la Constituci\u00f3n (Z\u00f3calo), the main central square with its epoch-contrasting Spanish-era Metropolitan Cathedral and National Palace, ancient Aztec temple ruins Templo Mayor (\"Major Temple\") and modern structures, all within a few steps of one another. (The Templo Mayor was discovered in 1978 while workers were digging to place underground electric cables).\nThe most recognizable icon of Mexico City is the golden Angel of Independence on the wide, elegant avenue Paseo de la Reforma, modeled by the order of the Emperor Maximilian of Mexico after the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es in Paris. This avenue was designed over the Americas' oldest known major roadway in the 19th century to connect the National Palace (seat of government) with the Castle of Chapultepec, the imperial residence. Today, this avenue is an important financial district in which the Mexican Stock Exchange and several corporate headquarters are located. Another important avenue is the Avenida de los Insurgentes, which extends and is one of the longest single avenues in the world.\nChapultepec Park houses the Chapultepec Castle, now a museum on a hill that overlooks the park and its numerous museums, monuments and the national zoo and the National Museum of Anthropology (which houses the Aztec Calendar Stone). \nAnother piece of architecture is the Palacio de Bellas Artes, a white marble theater/museum whose weight is such that it has gradually been sinking into the soft ground below. Its construction began during the presidency of Porfirio D\u00edaz and ended in 1934, after being interrupted by the Mexican Revolution in the 1920s.\nThe Plaza de las Tres Culturas, in this square are located the College of Santa Cruz de Tlatelolco, that is the first and oldest European school of higher learning in the Americas, and the archeological site of the city-state of Tlatelolco, and the shrine and Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe are also important sites. There is a double-decker bus, known as the \"Turibus\", that circles most of these sites, and has timed audio describing the sites in multiple languages as they are passed.\nIn addition, according to the Secretariat of Tourism, the city has about 170 museums\u2014is among the top ten of cities in the world with highest number of museums\u2014over 100 art galleries, and some 30 concert halls, all of which maintain a constant cultural activity during the whole year. Many areas (e.g. Palacio Nacional and the National Institute of Cardiology) have murals painted by Diego Rivera. He and his wife Frida Kahlo lived in Coyoac\u00e1n, where several of their homes, studios, and art collections are open to the public. The house where Leon Trotsky was initially granted asylum and finally murdered in 1940 is also in Coyoac\u00e1n. In addition, there are several \"haciendas\" that are now restaurants, such as the San \u00c1ngel Inn, the Hacienda de Tlalpan, Hacienda de Cort\u00e9s and the Hacienda de los Morales.\nTransportation.\nAirports.\nMexico City International Airport is Mexico City's primary airport (IATA Airport Code: MEX), and serves as the hub of Aerom\u00e9xico (Skyteam). Felipe \u00c1ngeles International Airport (IATA Airport Code: NLU) is Mexico City's secondary airport, and was opened in 2022, rebuilt from the former Santa Luc\u00eda Air Force Base. It is located in Zumpango, State of Mexico, north-northeast of the historic center of Mexico City by car.\nSistema de Movilidad Integrada.\nIn 2019, the graphic designer Lance Wyman was engaged to create an integrated map of the multimodal public transportation system; he presented a new logo for the Sistema de Movilidad Integrada, describing eight distinct modes of transportation. The head of the government, Claudia Sheinbaum, said the branding would be used for a new single payment card to streamline public transportation fare collection.\nMetro.\nMexico City is served by the Mexico City Metro, a metro system, which is the largest in Latin America. The first portions were opened in 1969 and it has expanded to 12 lines with 195 stations, transporting 4.4\u00a0million people every day.\nTren Suburbano.\nA suburban rail system, the Tren Suburbano serves the metropolitan area, beyond the reach of the metro, with one line serving to municipalities such as Tlalnepantla and Cuautitl\u00e1n Izcalli, but with future lines planned to serve e.g. Chalco and La Paz.\nElectric transport other than the metro also exists, in the form of several Mexico City trolleybus routes and the Xochimilco Light Rail line, both of which are operated by Servicio de Transportes El\u00e9ctricos. The central area's last streetcar line (tramway, or \"\") closed in 1979.\nBus.\nMexico City has an extensive bus network, consisting of public buses, bus rapid transit, and trolleybuses.\nRoads.\nMexico City has a large road network, and relatively high private car usage, estimated at more than 4.5 million in 2016. There is an environmental program, called Hoy No Circula (\"Today Does Not Run\", or \"One Day without a Car\"), whereby vehicles that have not passed emissions testing are restricted from circulating on certain days according to the ending digit of their license plates, in an attempt to cut down on pollution and traffic congestion.\nCycling.\nThe Mexico City local government oversees the administration of Ecobici, North America's second-largest bicycle sharing system. Established to promote sustainable urban transportation, Ecobici facilitates convenient access to bicycles for residents and visitors alike. As of September 2013, the system comprised 276 stations strategically positioned across an expansive area extending from the Historic center to Polanco, a prominent district in the city. Within this network, approximately 4,000 bicycles are available for public use, enabling individuals to navigate the metropolitan landscape efficiently and reduce reliance on traditional motorized modes of transportation. Ecobici serves as a model for environmentally conscious urban mobility initiatives, reflecting Mexico City's commitment to fostering sustainable development and enhancing the quality of life for its populace.\nCulture.\nArt.\nSecular works of art of this period include the equestrian sculpture of Charles IV of Spain, locally known as \"El Caballito\" (\"The little horse\"). This piece, in bronze, was the work of Manuel Tols\u00e1 and it has been placed at the Plaza Tols\u00e1, in front of the Palacio de Mineria (Mining Palace). Directly in front of this building is the Museo Nacional de Arte (Munal) (the National Museum of Art).\nDuring the 19th century, an important producer of art was the Academia de San Carlos (San Carlos Art Academy), founded during colonial times, and which later became the Escuela Nacional de Artes Pl\u00e1sticas (the National School of Arts) including painting, sculpture and graphic design, one of UNAM's art schools. Many of the works produced by the students and faculty of that time are now displayed in the Museo Nacional de San Carlos (National Museum of San Carlos).\nOne of the students, Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Velasco, is considered one of the greatest Mexican landscape painters of the 19th century. Porfirio D\u00edaz's regime sponsored arts, especially those that followed the French school. Popular arts in the form of cartoons and illustrations flourished, e.g. those of Jos\u00e9 Guadalupe Posada and Manuel Manilla. The permanent collection of the San Carlos Museum also includes paintings by European masters such as Rembrandt, Vel\u00e1zquez, Murillo, and Rubens.\nAfter the Mexican Revolution, an avant-garde artistic movement originated in Mexico City: muralism. Many of the works of muralists Jos\u00e9 Clemente Orozco, David Alfaro Siqueiros and Diego Rivera are displayed in numerous buildings in the city, most notably at the National Palace and the Palacio de Bellas Artes. Frida Kahlo, wife of Rivera, with a strong nationalist expression, was also one of the most renowned of Mexican painters. Her house has become a museum that displays many of her works.\nThe former home of Rivera muse Dolores Olmedo houses the namesake museum. The facility is in Xochimilco borough in southern Mexico City and includes several buildings surrounded by sprawling manicured lawns. It houses a large collection of Rivera and Kahlo paintings and drawings, as well as living \"Xoloizcuintles\" (Mexican Hairless Dog). It also regularly hosts small but important temporary exhibits of classical and modern art (e.g. Venetian Masters and Contemporary New York artists).\nIn the 20th century, many artists immigrated to Mexico City from different regions of Mexico, such as Leopoldo M\u00e9ndez, an engraver from Veracruz, who supported the creation of the socialist Taller de la Gr\u00e1fica Popular (Popular Graphics Workshop), designed to help blue-collar workers find a venue to express their art. Other painters came from abroad, such as Catalan painter Remedios Varo and other Spanish and Jewish exiles. It was in the second half of the 20th century that the artistic movement began to drift apart from the Revolutionary theme. Jos\u00e9 Luis Cuevas opted for a modernist style in contrast to the muralist movement associated with social politics.\nMuseums.\nMexico City has numerous museums dedicated to art, including Mexican colonial, modern and contemporary art, and international art. The Museo Tamayo was opened in the mid-1980s to house the collection of international contemporary art donated by Mexican painter Rufino Tamayo. The collection includes pieces by Picasso, Klee, Kandinsky, Warhol and many others, though most of the collection is stored while visiting exhibits are shown. The Museo de Arte Moderno is a repository of Mexican artists from the 20th century, including Rivera, Orozco, Siqueiros, Kahlo, Gerzso, Carrington, Tamayo, and regularly hosts temporary exhibits of international modern art. In southern Mexico City, the Carrillo Gil Museum showcases avant-garde artists, as does the Museo Universitario Arte Contempor\u00e1neo, designed by Mexican architect Teodoro Gonz\u00e1lez de Le\u00f3n, inaugurated in late 2008.\nThe Museo Soumaya, named after the wife of Mexican magnate Carlos Slim, has the largest private collection of original Rodin sculptures outside of France. It also has a large collection of Dal\u00ed sculptures, and recently began showing pieces in its masters collection including El Greco, Vel\u00e1zquez, Picasso and Canaletto. The museum inaugurated a new futuristic-design facility in 2011 just north of Polanco, while maintaining a smaller facility in Plaza Loreto in southern Mexico City.\nThe Colecci\u00f3n J\u00famex is a contemporary art museum located on the sprawling grounds of the Jumex juice company in the northern industrial suburb of Ecatepec. It has the largest private contemporary art collection in Latin America and hosts pieces from its permanent collection as well as traveling exhibits. The Museo de San Ildefonso, housed in the Antiguo Colegio de San Ildefonso in Mexico City's historic downtown district is a 17th-century colonnaded palace housing an art museum that regularly hosts world-class exhibits of Mexican and international art. The Museo Nacional de Arte is also located in a former palace in the historic center. It houses a large collection of pieces by all major Mexican artists of the last 400 years and also hosts visiting exhibits.\nJack Kerouac, the noted American author, spent extended periods of time in the city, and wrote his 1959 masterpiece volume of poetry \"Mexico City Blues\" here. Another American author, William S. Burroughs, also lived in Colonia Roma where he accidentally shot his wife. Most of Mexico City's museums can be visited from Tuesday to Sunday from 10am to 5pm, although some of them have extended schedules, such as the Museum of Anthropology and History, which is open to 7pm. In addition to this, entrance to most museums are free on Sunday. In some cases a modest fee may be charged.\nThe Memory and Tolerance Museum, inaugurated in 2011, showcases historical events of discrimination and genocide. Permanent exhibits include those on the Holocaust and other large-scale atrocities. It also houses temporary exhibits; one on Tibet was inaugurated by the Dalai Lama in September 2011.\nMusic, theater and entertainment.\nMexico City is home to a number of orchestras offering season programs. These include the Mexico City Philharmonic, which performs at the Sala Ollin Yoliztli; the National Symphony Orchestra, whose home base is the Palacio de Bellas Artes (Palace of the Fine Arts), a masterpiece of art nouveau and art dec\u00f3 styles; the Philharmonic Orchestra of the National Autonomous University of Mexico (OFUNAM), and the Miner\u00eda Symphony Orchestra, both of which perform at the Sala Nezahualc\u00f3yotl, which was the first wrap-around concert hall in the Western Hemisphere when inaugurated in 1976. There are also many smaller ensembles that enrich the city's musical scene, including the Carlos Ch\u00e1vez Youth Symphony, the Cuarteto Latinoamericano, the New World Orchestra (Orquesta del Nuevo Mundo), the National Polytechnical Symphony and the Bellas Artes Chamber Orchestra (Orquesta de C\u00e1mara de Bellas Artes).\nMexico City is a leading center of popular culture and music. There are a multitude of venues hosting Spanish and foreign-language performers. These include the 10,000-seat National Auditorium that regularly schedules the Spanish and English-language pop and rock artists, as well as many of the world's leading performing arts ensembles, the auditorium also broadcasts grand opera performances from New York's Metropolitan Opera on giant, high definition screens. In 2007, the National Auditorium was selected world's best venue by multiple genre media.\nOther sites for pop-artist performances include the 3,000-seat Teatro Metropolitan, the 15,000-seat Palacio de los Deportes, and the larger 50,000-seat Foro Sol Stadium, where popular international artists perform on a regular basis. The Cirque du Soleil has held several seasons at the Carpa Santa Fe, in the Santa Fe district in the western part of the city. There are numerous venues for smaller musical ensembles and solo performers. These include the Lunario, Circo Volador and Voil\u00e1 Acoustique. Recent additions include the 20,000-seat Arena Ciudad de M\u00e9xico, the 3,000-seat Pepsi Center World Trade Center, and the 2,500-seat Auditorio Blackberry.\nThe Centro Nacional de las Artes (National Center for the Arts) has several venues for music, theater, dance. UNAM's main campus, also in the southern part of the city, is home to the Centro Cultural Universitario (the University Culture Center) (CCU). The CCU also houses the National Library, the interactive Universum, Museo de las Ciencias, the Sala Nezahualc\u00f3yotl concert hall, several theaters and cinemas, and the new University Museum of Contemporary Art (MUAC). A branch of the National University's CCU cultural center was inaugurated in 2007 in the facilities of the former Ministry of Foreign Affairs, known as Tlatelolco, in north-central Mexico City. \nThe Jos\u00e9 Vasconcelos Library, a national library, is located on the grounds of the former Buenavista railroad station in the northern part of the city. The Papalote Museo del Ni\u00f1o (Kite Children's Museum), which houses the world's largest dome screen, is located in the wooded park of Chapultepec, near the Museo Tecnol\u00f3gico, and Aztl\u00e1n Parque Urbano, an amusement park. The theme park Six Flags M\u00e9xico (the largest amusement park in Latin America) is located in the Ajusco neighborhood, in Tlalpan borough, southern Mexico City. During the winter, the main square of the Z\u00f3calo is transformed into a gigantic ice skating rink, which is said to be the largest in the world behind that of Moscow's Red Square.\nThe Cineteca Nacional (Mexican Film Library), near the Coyoac\u00e1n suburb, shows a variety of films, and stages many film festivals, including the annual International Showcase, and many smaller ones ranging from Scandinavian and Uruguayan cinema, to Jewish and LGBT-themed films. Cin\u00e9polis and Cinemex, the two biggest film business chains, also have several film festivals throughout the year, with both national and international movies. Mexico City has a number of IMAX theaters, providing residents and visitors access to films ranging from documentaries to blockbusters on these large screens.\nCuisine.\nOnce considered plebeian fare, by the 19th century tacos was a standard of Mexico City's cuisine. As authorities struggled to tax local taquerias, imposing licensing requirements and penalties, they recorded some details of the types of foods being served by these establishments. The most frequent reference was for \"tacos de barbacoa\". Also mentioned were enchiladas, \"tacos de minero\" and \"gorditas\", along with oyster shops and fried fish stands. There is evidence of some regional specialties being made available for recent migrants; at least two shops were known to serve \"pozole\", a type of stew similar to hominy that is a staple of Guadalajara, Jalisco.\nMexico City is known for having some of the freshest fish and seafood in Mexico's interior. La Nueva Viga Market is the second largest seafood market in the world after the Tsukiji fish market in Japan.\nMexico City offers a variety of cuisines: restaurants specializing in the regional cuisines of Mexico's 31 states are available in the city, and the city also has several branches of internationally recognized restaurants. These include Paris' Au Pied de Cochon and Brasserie Lipp, Philippe (by Philippe Chow); Nobu, Quintonil, Morimoto; P\u00e1mpano, owned by Mexican-raised opera singer Pl\u00e1cido Domingo. There are branches of Japanese restaurant Suntory, Italian restaurant Alfredo, as well as New York steakhouses Morton's and The Palm, and Monte Carlo's BeefBar. Three of Lima's Haute restaurants, serving Peruvian cuisine, have locations in Mexico City: La Mar, Segundo Muelle and Astrid y Gast\u00f3n.\nFor the 2023 list of World's 50 Best Restaurants as named by the British magazine \"Restaurant\", Mexico City ranked 13th best with the Mexican avant-garde restaurant Pujol, owned by Mexican chef Enrique Olvera. Also notable is the Basque-Mexican fusion restaurant Biko, run and co-owned by Bruno Oteiza and Mikel Alonso, which placed outside the list at 59th, but in previous years has ranked within the top 50. Other that has been placed on the list in 2019 is the restaurant Sud 777 at 58th place. In 2024, seven restaurants in the city received Michelin stars. At the other end of the scale are working class pulque bars known as \"pulquer\u00edas\", a challenge for tourists to locate and experience.\nMedia.\nMexico City is Mexico's most important hub for the printed media and book publishing industries. Dozens of daily newspapers are published, including \"El Universal\", \"Exc\u00e9lsior\", \"Reforma\" and \"La Jornada\". Other major papers include \"Milenio\", \"Cr\u00f3nica\", \"El Economista\" and . Leading magazines include , \"Proceso\", \"Poder\", as well as dozens of entertainment publications such as \"Vanidades\", \"Qui\u00e9n\", \"Chilango\", \"TV Notas\", and local editions of \"Vogue\", \"GQ\", and \"Architectural Digest\".\nIt is also a leading center of the advertising industry. Most international ad firms have offices in the city, including Grey, JWT, Leo Burnett, Euro RSCG, BBDO, Ogilvy, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, and McCann Erickson. Many local firms also compete in the sector, including Alazraki, Olabuenaga/Chemistri, Ter\u00e1n, Augusto El\u00edas, and Clemente C\u00e1mara, among others. There are 60 radio stations operating in the city and many local community radio transmission networks.\nThe two largest media companies in the Spanish-speaking world, Televisa and TV Azteca, are headquartered in Mexico City. Televisa often presents itself as the largest producer of Spanish-language content. Other local television channels include:\nXHDF 1 (Azteca Uno),\nXEW 2 (Televisa W),\nXHCTMX 3,\nXHTV 4,\nXHGC 5,\nXHTDMX 6,\nXHIMT 7,\nXEQ 9,\nXEIPN 11,\nXHUNAM 20,\nXHCDM 21,\nXEIMT 22,\nXHTRES 28,\nXHTVM 40 and\nXHHCU 45.\nSports.\nAssociation football is Mexico's most popular and most televised franchised sport. Its important venues in Mexico City include the Azteca Stadium, home to the Mexico national football team and giants Am\u00e9rica and Cruz Azul, which can seat 91,653 fans, making it the biggest stadium in Latin America. The Olympic Stadium in Ciudad Universitaria is home to the football club giants Universidad Nacional, with a seating capacity of over 52,000. The Sports City Stadium, which seats 33,042 fans, is near the World Trade Center Mexico City in the Nochebuena neighborhood, and is home to the historical Atlante.\nAm\u00e9rica, Cruz Azul and Universidad Nacional are based in Mexico City and play in the First Division; they are also part, with Guadalajara-based giants Club Deportivo Guadalajara, of Mexico's traditional \"Big Four\". The city's three derbies are the \"Cl\u00e1sico Joven\", played between Am\u00e9rica and Cruz Azul, the capital's two most popular and successful teams; the \"Cl\u00e1sico Capitalino\", between Am\u00e9rica and Universidad Nacional, and the \"Cl\u00e1sico Metropolitano\", between Cruz Azul and Universidad Nacional.\nMexico hosted the FIFA World Cup in 1970 and 1986, and Azteca Stadium is the first stadium in World Cup history to host the final twice. The city will be one of the host cities for the 2026 FIFA World Cup. Mexico City is the first Latin American city to host the Olympic Games, having held the Summer Olympics in 1968, winning bids against Buenos Aires, Lyon and Detroit. The city hosted the 1955 and 1975 Pan American Games, the latter after Santiago and S\u00e3o Paulo withdrew. The ICF Flatwater Racing World Championships were hosted here in 1974 and 1994. Lucha libre is a Mexican style of wrestling, and is one of the more popular sports throughout the country. The main venues in the city are Arena M\u00e9xico and Arena Coliseo.\nThe Aut\u00f3dromo Hermanos Rodr\u00edguez is the main venue for motorsport, and hosts the Formula 1 Mexican Grand Prix since its return to the sport in 2015, the event being held in the past from 1962 to 1970, and again from 1986 to 1992. Since 2016, it also hosts the Formula E Mexico City ePrix. From 1980 to 1981 and again from 2002 to 2007, the circuit hosted the Champ Car World Series Gran Premio de M\u00e9xico. Beginning in 2005, the NASCAR Nationwide Series ran the Telcel-Motorola M\u00e9xico 200. 2005 also marked the first running of the Mexico City 250 by the Grand-Am Rolex Sports Car Series. Both races were removed from their series' schedules for 2009.\nBaseball is another sport played professionally in the city. Mexico City is home of the Mexico City Red Devils of the Mexican League, which is considered a Triple-A league by Major League Baseball. The Devils play their home games at Estadio Alfredo Harp Hel\u00fa designed by international Mexican-American architect http:// Founder Francisco Gonzalez Pulido in collaboration with local architect Taller ADG. Mexico City has some 10 Little Leagues for young baseball players. In 2005, Mexico City became the first city to host an NFL regular season game outside of the United States, at the Azteca Stadium. The crowd of 103,467 people attending this game was the largest ever for a regular season game in NFL history until 2009.\nThe city has also hosted several NBA pre-season games and has hosted international basketball's FIBA Americas Championship, along with north-of-the-border Major League Baseball exhibition games at Foro Sol. In 2017, NBA commissioner Adam Silver expressed interest in placing an NBA G League expansion team in Mexico City as early as 2018. This came to fruition on 12 December 2019 when commissioner Silver announced at a press conference in Mexico City Arena that LNBP team, Capitanes de la Ciudad de M\u00e9xico will be joining the G League in the 2020\u201321 season on a five-year agreement.\nOther sports facilities in Mexico City are the Palacio de los Deportes indoor arena, Francisco M\u00e1rquez Olympic Swimming Pool, the Hip\u00f3dromo de Las Am\u00e9ricas, the Agustin Melgar Olympic Velodrome, and venues for equestrianism and horse racing, ice hockey, rugby, American-style football, baseball, and basketball. Prior to the 2025 ban on traditional bullfights enacted by Mexico City's Congress, bullfighting was held every Sunday during the season at the 50,000-seat Plaza M\u00e9xico, the world's largest bullring. Mexico City's golf courses have hosted Women's LPGA action, and two Men's Golf World Cups. Courses throughout the city are available as private as well as public venues.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18988", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18988", "title": "Myocardial infarct", "text": ""}
{"id": "18989", "revid": "1282854091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18989", "title": "Merlot", "text": "Wine grape variety\nMerlot ( ) is a dark-blue-colored wine grape variety that is used as both a blending grape and for varietal wines. The name \"Merlot\" is thought to be a diminutive of , the French name for the blackbird, probably a reference to the color of the grape. Its softness and \"fleshiness\", combined with its earlier ripening, make Merlot a popular grape for blending with the sterner, later-ripening Cabernet Sauvignon, which tends to be higher in tannin.\nAlong with Cabernet Sauvignon, Cabernet Franc, Malbec, and Petit Verdot, Merlot is one of the primary grapes used in Bordeaux wine, and it is the most widely planted grape in the Bordeaux wine regions. Merlot is also one of the most popular red wine varietals in many markets. This flexibility has helped to make it one of the world's most planted grape varieties. As of 2004, Merlot was estimated to be the third most grown variety at globally.\nThe area dedicated to Merlot has continued to increase, with in 2015.\nWhile Merlot is made across the globe, there tend to be two main styles. The \"International style\" favored by many New World wine regions tends to emphasize late harvesting to gain physiological ripeness and produce inky, purple-colored wines that are full in body with high alcohol and lush, velvety tannins with hints of plum and blackberry. While this international style is practiced by many Bordeaux wine producers, the traditional \"Bordeaux-style\" of Merlot involves harvesting Merlot earlier. This maintains the acidity and produces more medium-bodied wines with moderate alcohol levels that have fresh, red fruit flavors (raspberries, strawberries) and potentially leafy, vegetal notes.\nHistory and name.\nThe earliest recorded mention of Merlot (under the synonym of \"Merlau\") was in the notes of a local Bordeaux official who in 1784 labeled wine made from the grape in the Libournais region as one of the area's best. In 1824, the word \"Merlot\" itself appeared in an article on M\u00e9doc wine which mentioned that the grape was named after the local black bird (called in the local variant of Occitan language, in standard French) who liked eating the ripe grapes on the vine. Other descriptions of the grape from the 19th century called the variety \"lou seme do\u00f9 flube\" (meaning \"the seedling from the river\") with the grape thought to have originated on one of the islands found along the Garonne river.\nBy the 19th century it was being regularly planted in the M\u00e9doc on the \"Left Bank\" of the Gironde. After a series of setbacks that included a severe frost in 1956 and several vintages in the 1960s lost to rot, French authorities in Bordeaux banned new plantings of Merlot vines between 1970 and 1975.\nIt was first recorded in Italy around Venice under the synonym \"Bord\u00f2\" in 1855. The grape was introduced to the Swiss, from Bordeaux, sometime in the 19th century and was recorded in the Swiss canton of Ticino between 1905 and 1910. In the 1990s, Merlot saw an upswing of popularity in the United States. Red wine consumption, in general, increased in the US following the airing of the \"60 Minutes\" report on the French Paradox and the potential health benefits of wine and, possibly, the chemical resveratrol. The popularity of Merlot stemmed in part from the relative ease in pronouncing the name of the wine as well as its softer, fruity profile that made it more approachable to some wine drinkers.\nParentage and relationship to other grapes.\nIn the late 1990s, researchers at the University of California, Davis, showed that Merlot is an offspring of Cabernet Franc and is a half-sibling of Carm\u00e9n\u00e8re, Malbec, and Cabernet Sauvignon. The identity of the second parent of Merlot wouldn't be discovered till the late 2000s when an obscure and unnamed variety, first sampled in 1996 from vines growing in an abandoned vineyard in Saint-Suliac in Brittany, was shown by DNA analysis to be the mother of Merlot.\nThis grape, later discovered in front of houses as a decorative vine in the villages of Figers, Mainxe, Saint-Savinien, and Tanzac in the Poitou-Charentes, was colloquially known as \"Madeleina\" or \"Raisin de La Madeleine\" due to its propensity to be fully ripe and ready for harvest around the July 22nd feast day of Mary Magdalene. As the connection to Merlot became known, the grape was formally registered under the name Magdeleine Noire des Charentes. Through its relationship with Magdeleine Noire des Charentes, Merlot is related to the Southwest France wine grape Abouriou, though the exact nature of that relationship (with Abouriou potentially being either a parent of Magdeleine Noire or an offspring) is not yet known.\nGrape breeders have used Merlot crossed with other grapes to create several new varieties including Carmine (an Olmo grape made by crossing a Carignan x Cabernet Sauvignon cross with Merlot), Ederena (with Abouriou), Evmolpia (with Mavrud), Fertilia (with Raboso Veronese), Mamaia (a Romanian wine grape made by crossing a Muscat Ottonel x Babeasca negra cross with Merlot), Nigra (with Barbera), Prodest (with Barbera), and Rebo (with Teroldego).\nOver the years, Merlot has spawned a color mutation that is used commercially, a pink-skinned variety known as \"Merlot gris\". However, unlike the relationship between Grenache noir and Grenache blanc or Pinot noir and Pinot blanc, the variety known as Merlot blanc is not a color mutation but rather an offspring variety of Merlot crossing with Folle blanche.\nViticulture.\nMerlot grapes are identified by their loose bunches of large berries. The color has less of a blue/black hue than Cabernet Sauvignon grapes and with a thinner skin and fewer tannins per unit volume. It normally ripens up to two weeks earlier than Cabernet Sauvignon. Also compared to Cabernet, Merlot grapes tend to have a higher sugar content and lower malic acid. Ampelographer J.M. Boursiquot has noted that Merlot has seemed to inherit some of the best characteristics from its parent varieties\u2014its fertility and easy ripening ability from Magdeleine Noire des Charentes and its color, tannin and flavor phenolic potential from Cabernet Franc.\nMerlot thrives in cold soil, particularly ferrous clay. The vine tends to bud early which gives it some risk to cold frost and its thinner skin increases its susceptibility to the viticultural hazard of Botrytis bunch rot. If bad weather occurs during flowering, the Merlot vine is prone to develop coulure. The vine can also be susceptible to downy mildew (though it has better resistance to powdery mildew than other Bordeaux varieties) and to infection by leafhopper insect varieties.\nWater stress is important to the vine with it thriving in well-drained soil more so than at base of a slope. Pruning is a major component to the quality of the wine that is produced with some producers believing it is best to prune the vine \"short\" (cutting back to only a few buds). Wine consultant Michel Rolland is a major proponent of reducing the yields of Merlot grapes to improve quality. The age of the vine is also important, with older vines contributing character to the resulting wine.\nA characteristic of the Merlot grape is the propensity to quickly overripen once it hits its initial ripeness level, sometimes in a matter of a few days. There are two schools of thought on the right time to harvest Merlot. The wine makers of Ch\u00e2teau P\u00e9trus favor early picking to best maintain the wine's acidity and finesse as well as its potential for aging. Others, such as Rolland, favor late picking and the added fruit body that comes with a little bit of over-ripeness.\nWine regions.\nMerlot is one of the world's most widely planted grape variety with plantings of the vine outpacing even the more well-known Cabernet Sauvignon in many regions, including the grape's homeland of France. Here, France is home to nearly two thirds of the world's total plantings of Merlot. Beyond France it is also grown in Italy (where it is the country's 5th most planted grape), Algeria, California, Romania, Australia, Argentina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Greece, New Zealand, South Africa, Switzerland, Croatia, Hungary, Montenegro, Slovenia, Mexico, and other parts of the United States such as Washington, Virginia, and Long Island. It grows in many regions that also grow Cabernet Sauvignon but tends to be cultivated in the cooler portions of those areas. In areas that are too warm, Merlot will ripen too early.\nIn places like Israel, Merlot is the second most widely planted grape variety after Cabernet Sauvignon with in cultivation, making very \"New World-style\" wines. The grape can also be found in Turkey ( in 2010), Malta, and Cyprus.\nFrance.\nMerlot is the most commonly grown grape variety in France. In 2004, total French plantations stood at . By 2017, that number had dropped slightly to . It is most prominent in Southwest France in regions like Bordeaux, Bergerac, and Cahors, where it is often blended with Malbec. The largest recent increase in Merlot plantations has occurred in the south of France, such as Languedoc-Roussillon, where it is often made under the designation of \"Vin de Pays\" wine. Here, Merlot accounted for , more than doubling the devoted to Cabernet Sauvignon in the Languedoc.\nIn the traditional Bordeaux blend, Merlot's role is to add body and softness. Despite accounting for 50-60% of overall plantings in Bordeaux, the grape tends to account for an average of 25% of the blends\u2014especially in the Bordeaux wine regions of Graves and M\u00e9doc. Of these Left Bank regions, the commune of St-Estephe uses the highest percentage of Merlot in the blends. However, Merlot is much more prominent on the Right Bank of the Gironde in the regions of Pomerol and Saint-\u00c9milion, where it will commonly comprise the majority of the blend. One of the most famous and rare wines in the world, Ch\u00e2teau P\u00e9trus, is almost all Merlot. In Pomerol, where Merlot usually accounts for around 80% of the blend, the iron-clay soils of the region give Merlot more of a tannic backbone than what is found in other Bordeaux regions. It was in Pomerol that the \"garagistes\" movement began with small-scale production of highly sought after Merlot-based wines. In the sandy, clay-limestone-based soils of Saint-\u00c9milion, Merlot accounts for around 60% of the blend and is usually blended with Cabernet Franc. In limestone, Merlot tends to develop more perfume notes while in sandy soils the wines are generally softer than Merlot grown in clay dominant soils. Merlot can also be found in significant quantities in Provence, Loire Valley, Savoie, Ard\u00e8che, Charente, Corr\u00e8ze, Dr\u00f4me, Is\u00e8re and Vienne.\nItaly.\nIn Italy, there were of the grape planted in 2000 with more than two-thirds of Italian Merlot being used in \"Indicazione geografica tipica\" (IGT) blends (such as the so-called \"Super Tuscans\") versus being used in classified \"Denominazione di origine controllata\" (DOC) or \"Denominazione di Origine Controllata e Garantita\" (DOCG) wines. A large portion of Merlot is planted in the Friuli wine region where it is made as a varietal or sometimes blended with Cabernet Sauvignon or Cabernet Franc. In other parts of Italy, such as the Maremma coast in Tuscany, it is often blended with Sangiovese to give the wine a similar softening effect as the Bordeaux blends.\nItalian Merlots are often characterized by their light bodies and herbal notes. Merlot's low acidity serves as a balance for the higher acidity in many Italian wine grapes with the grape often being used in blends in the Veneto, Alto Adige, and Umbria regions. Global warming is potentially having an influence on Italian Merlot as more cooler-climate regions in northern Italy are being able to ripen the grape successfully while other regions already planted are encountering issues with over-ripeness.\nAccording to Master of Wine Jancis Robinson, some of the higher quality Italian Merlots are often from vineyards planted with cuttings sourced from France. Robinson describes the style of Friuli Merlots from regarded estates as having potentially a \"Pomerol-quality\" to them while Merlots from the warm plains of the Veneto can often be over-ripe with high yields giving them a \"sweet and sour\" quality. Robinson notes that the Merlots from Trentino-Alto-Adige can fall somewhere between those of Friuli and the Veneto. The \"Strada del Merlot\" is a popular tourist route through Italian Merlot regions along the Isonzo river.\nSpain.\nIn the hot continental climate of many of Spain's major wine regions, Merlot is less valued than it is in the damp maritime climate of Bordeaux or the warm Mediterranean climate of the Tuscan coast. But as the popularity of international varieties continue to grow on the world wine market, Spanish wine producers have been experimenting with the variety with even winemakers in Rioja petitioning authorities to allow Merlot to be a permitted grape to be blended with Tempranillo in the red wines of the region.\nIn 2008, there were of Merlot, a significant increase from the that were being cultivated in the country only four years earlier. In 2015, this had dropped slightly to , making Merlot the eighth most planted red grape variety in Spain. The largest concentration of the grape is in the Mediterranean climate of Catalonia and the continental climate of Castilla\u2013La Mancha, with significant plantings also in Navarra and Aragon. In Costers del Segre, the grape is often used in Bordeaux-style blends while in Aragon, Navarra, and Castilla-La Mancha it is sometimes blended with Tempranillo and other local Spanish wine grape varieties.\nCentral Europe.\nIn Germany, there were of Merlot growing in 2008 with the grape mostly planted in the warmer German wine regions of the Palatinate and Rheinhessen.\nIn Switzerland, Merlot accounts for nearly 85% of the wine production in Ticino where it is often made in a pale \"white Merlot\" style. In 2009, there were plantings of Swiss Merlot.\nPlantings of Merlot have increased in recent years in the Austrian wine region of Burgenland where vineyards previously growing Welschriesling are being uprooted to make room for more plantings. The grape still lags behind its parent variety, Cabernet Franc, with in cultivation in 2008. Outside of Burgenland, nearly half of all Austrian Merlot plantings are found in Lower Austria.\nRest of Europe.\nIn the Eastern European countries of Bulgaria, Moldova, Croatia, and Romania, Merlot is often produced as a full bodied wine that can be very similar to Cabernet Sauvignon. In Bulgaria, plantings of Merlot lag slightly behind Cabernet Sauvignon with in 2009 while Croatia had . In the Czech Republic, most of the country's were found in Moravia while Moldova had in 2009.\nIn Slovenia, Merlot was the most widely planted grape variety of any color in the Vipava Valley in the Slovene Littoral and the second most widely planted variety in the Gorizia Hills located across the Italian border from Friuli. In the Slovene Littoral, collectively, Merlot accounts for around 15% of total vineyard plantings with of Merlot in cultivation across Slovenia in 2009.\nIn Hungary, Merlot complements K\u00e9kfrankos, K\u00e9koport\u00f3, and Kadarka as a component in Bull's Blood. It is also made into varietal wine known as \"Egri M\u00e9doc Noir\" which is noted for its balanced acid levels and sweet taste. In 2009, there were of Merlot planted across Hungary. Most of these hectares can be found in the wine regions of Szeksz\u00e1rd and Vill\u00e1ny on the warm Pannonian Basin with significant plantings also found in Kuns\u00e1g, Eger, and Balaton.\nIn Romania, Merlot is the most widely exported red wine grape variety with in cultivation in 2008. Most of these plantings are found along the Black Sea in Dobruja, further inland in the Muntenia region of Dealu Mare and in the western Romanian wine region of Dr\u0103g\u0103\u0219ani. Here the grape is often made a varietal but is sometimes blended with other international varieties such as Cabernet Sauvignon and with local grape varieties such as Feteasc\u0103 neagr\u0103.\nIn 2009, Ukraine had of Merlot in cultivation.\nRussia had .\nPortugal, has only a very limited amount of Merlot compared to the abundance of native Portuguese grape varieties with planted in 2010, mostly in the Portuguese wine regions along the Tagus river.\nIn Greece, Merlot is one of the top six grape varieties planted in the eastern wine regions of Macedonia ()and Western Thrace (). In central Greece, there were of Merlot in cultivation as of 2012.\nUnited States.\nMerlot is grown across the United States\u2014as of 2015, it is the fourth most planted wine grape\u2014with California and Washington growing the most. Other regions producing significant quantities of Merlot include New York State with in 2006 with most of it in the maritime climate of the Long Island AVA and multiple regions in Ohio. In Texas, Merlot is the second most widely planted red wine grape after Cabernet Sauvignon with . In Virginia, the grape was the most widely planted red variety with in 2010, most of it in the Monticello AVA and Shenandoah Valley AVA, while Oregon had in 2008 with most planted in the Rogue Valley AVA.\nCalifornia.\nIn the early history of California wine, Merlot was used primarily as a 100% varietal wine until winemaker Warren Winiarski encouraged taking the grape back to its blending roots with Bordeaux style blends. Others saw its potential as a stand-alone labeled varietal: The first wineries to market Merlot as a varietal in the post WWII period were Louis M. Martini winery, which made a non-vintage dated Merlot, a blend of the 1968 and 1970 vintages, and Sterling Vineyards, which issued the first Merlot with a vintage, 1969 \u2014Sterling's winemaker, Ric Forman, was an early advocate of Merlot as a varietal bottling. Following the \"Merlot wine craze\" of the 1990s, sparked by \"60 Minutes\" French Paradox report, sales of Merlot spiked, with the grape plantings of over in 2004. A study published in \"Wine and Vines\" magazine indicated that the 2004 movie \"Sideways\", where the lead character is a Pinot noir fan who expresses his disdain of Merlot, caused a decline in Merlot sales in the US after its release (and an even larger spike of interest in Pinot noir). By 2010, plantings of California Merlot had dropped slightly to . Following that dip, Merlot plantings rebounded, totaling approximately 39,000 acres in 2020.\nIn California, Merlot can range from very fruity simple wines (sometimes referred to by critics as a \"red Chardonnay\") to more serious, barrel aged examples. It can also be used as a primary component in Meritage blends.\nWhile Merlot is grown throughout the state, it is particularly prominent in Napa, Monterey, and Sonoma County. In Napa, examples from Los Carneros, Mount Veeder, Oakville and Rutherford tend to show ripe blackberry and black raspberry notes. Sonoma Merlots from Alexander Valley, Carneros and Dry Creek Valley tend to show plum, tea leaf, and black cherry notes.\nWashington State.\nIn the 1980s, Merlot helped put the Washington wine industry on the world's wine map. Prior to this period there was a general perception that the climate of Washington State was too cold to produce red wine varietals. Merlots from Leonetti Cellar, Andrew Will, Columbia Crest, and Chateau Ste. Michelle demonstrated that areas of the Eastern Washington were warm enough for red wine production. Today it is the second most widely grown red wine grape in the state (after Cabernet Sauvignon), following many years of being the most widely planted variety, and accounts for nearly one fifth of the state's entire production. In 2011, there were of Washington Merlot in cultivation.\nIt is widely planted throughout the Columbia Valley AVA but has earned particular notice from plantings grown in Walla Walla, Red Mountain, and the Horse Heaven Hills. Washington Merlots are noted for their deep color and balanced acidity. The state's climate lends itself towards long days and hours of sunshine with cool nights that contributes to a significant diurnal temperature variation and produces wines with New World fruitiness and Old World structure.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, Merlot can be found across the country from the Short Hills Bench of the Niagara Peninsula Ontario, where there were of the grape in 2008, to British Columbia, where the grape is the most widely planted wine grape variety of either color at . Here Merlot accounts for almost a third of all red wine grape plantings and is used for both varietal and Bordeaux-style blends.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, Merlot is cultivated primarily in the Valle de Guadalupe of Baja California, the country's main wine-producing area. Plantings have increased substantially since the 1980s, and cultivation has spread into the nearby areas of Ojos Negros and Santo Tom\u00e1s. The grape can also be found in the north eastern Mexican wine region of Coahuila, across the border from Texas.\nChile.\nIn Chile, Merlot thrives in the Apalta region of Colchagua Province. It is also grown in significant quantities in Curic\u00f3, Casablanca, and the Maipo Valley. Until the early 1990s, the Chilean wine industry mistakenly sold a large quantity of wine made from the Carm\u00e9n\u00e8re grape as Merlot. Following the discovery that many Chilean vineyards thought to be planted with Sauvignon blanc were actually Sauvignonasse, the owners of the Chilean winery Domaine Paul Bruno (who previously worked with Ch\u00e2teau Margaux and Ch\u00e2teau Cos d'Estournel) invited ampelographers to comb through their vineyards to make sure that their wines were properly identified. Genetic studies discovered that much of what had been grown as Merlot was actually Carm\u00e9n\u00e8re, an old French variety that had gone largely extinct in France due to its poor resistance to phylloxera. While the vines, leaves, and grapes look very similar, both grapes produce wines with distinct characteristics\u2014Carm\u00e9n\u00e8re being more strongly flavored with green pepper notes and Merlot having softer fruit with chocolate notes.\nToday, \"true\" Merlot is the third most widely planted grape variety in Chile after Cabernet Sauvignon and List\u00e1n Prieto with in 2009. Most of these planting are in the Central Valley, with Colchagua leading the way with , followed by Maule Valley with and Curic\u00f3 with .\nSouth America.\nIn Uruguay, Merlot is often blended with Tannat and is the 2nd most widely planted red grape variety, representing around 10% of total vineyard plantings. More widely planted than Cabernet Sauvignon, there were of the grape in cultivation in 2009. Brazil is home to of Merlot (as of 2007) with most of them in the Rio Grande do Sul region that is across the border with Uruguay. Other South American wine regions growing Merlot include Bolivia with as of 2012 and Peru.\nArgentina.\nIn Argentina, Merlot plantings have been increasing in the Mendoza region with the grape showing an affinity to the Tupungato region of the Uco Valley. Argentine Merlots grown in the higher elevations of Tunpungato have shown a balance of ripe fruit, tannic structure, and acidity. The grape is not as widely planted here due to the natural fruity and fleshiness of the popular Malbec and Douce noir/Bonarda grapes that often don't need to be \"mellowed\" by Merlot as Cabernet Sauvignon and Cabernet Franc may benefit from. In 2008, there were of Merlot growing in Argentina, most of it in the Mendoza region and in the San Juan Province.\nOceania, South Africa, and Asia.\nIn New Zealand, plantings of Merlot have increased in the Hawke's Bay region, particularly in Gimblett Gravels where the grape has shown the ability to produce Bordeaux-style wine. The grape has been growing in favor among New Zealand producers due to its ability to ripen better, with less green flavors, than Cabernet Sauvignon. Other regions with significant plantings include Auckland, Marlborough, and Martinborough. In 2008, Merlot was the second most widely red grape variety (after Pinot noir) in New Zealand and accounted for nearly 5% of all the country's plantings with in cultivation.\nIn Australia, some vineyards labeled as \"Merlot\" were discovered to actually be Cabernet Franc. Merlot vines can also be found growing in the Barossa Valley, McLaren Vale, and Wrattonbully in South Australia. In 2008, it was the third most widely planted red grape variety after Syrah and Cabernet Sauvignon with . As in California, the global \"Merlot craze\" spurred an increase of plantings, most of it in the warm, irrigated regions of Murray Darling, Riverina, and Riverland, where the grape variety could be mass-produced. Recent plantings, such as those in the Margaret River area of Western Australia have been focusing on making more Bordeaux-style blends.\nIn South Africa, plantings of Merlot have focused on cooler sites within the Paarl and Stellenbosch regions. Here the grape is the third most widely planted red grape variety, accounting for nearly 15% of all red wine grape plantings, with of Merlot in cultivation in 2008. The majority of these plantings are found in the Stellenbosch region with and Paarl with . According to wine expert Jancis Robinson, South African Merlot tend to be made as a varietal in a \"chocolately, glossy California style\".\nIn Asia, Merlot is planted in emerging wine regions in India. It can also be found in Japan with in 2009 and in China with .\nWines.\nAs a varietal wine, Merlot can make soft, velvety wines with plum flavors. While Merlot wines tend to mature faster than Cabernet Sauvignon, some examples can continue to develop in the bottle for decades. There are three main styles of Merlot\u2014a soft, fruity, smooth wine with very little tannins; a fruity wine with more tannic structure; and, finally, a brawny, highly tannic style made in the profile of Cabernet Sauvignon. Some of the fruit notes commonly associated with Merlot include cassis, black and red cherries, blackberry, blueberry, boysenberry, mulberry, ollalieberry, and plum. Vegetable and earthy notes include black and green olives, cola nut, bell pepper, fennel, humus, leather, mushrooms, rhubarb, and tobacco. Floral and herbal notes commonly associated with Merlot include green and black tea, eucalyptus, laurel, mint, oregano, pine, rosemary, sage, sarsaparilla, and thyme. When Merlot has spent significant time in oak, the wine may show notes of caramel, chocolate, coconut, coffee bean, dill weed, mocha, molasses, smoke, vanilla, and walnut.\nWhite Merlot.\nWhite Merlot is made the same way as White Zinfandel. The grapes are crushed, and after very brief skin contact, the resulting pink juice is run off the must and is then fermented. It normally has a hint of raspberry. White Merlot was reputedly first marketed in the late 1990s. In Switzerland, a type of White Merlot is made in the Ticino region but has been considered more a ros\u00e9.\nWhite Merlot should not be confused with the grape variety Merlot blanc, which is a cross between Merlot and Folle blanche that was discovered in 1891, nor should it be confused with the white mutant variety of the Merlot grape.\nFood pairing.\nIn food and wine pairings, the diversity of Merlot can lend itself to a wide array of matching options. Cabernet-like Merlots pair well with many of the same things that Cabernet Sauvignon would pair well with, such as grilled and charred meats. Softer, fruitier Merlots (particularly those with higher acidity from cooler climate regions like Washington State and Northeastern Italy) share many of the same food-pairing affinities with Pinot noir and go well with dishes like salmon, mushroom-based dishes, and greens like chard and radicchio. Light-bodied Merlots can go well with shellfish like prawns or scallops, especially if wrapped in a protein-rich food such as bacon or prosciutto. Merlot tends not to go well with strong and blue-veined cheeses that can overwhelm the fruit flavors of the wine. The capsaicins of spicy foods can accentuate the perception of alcohol in Merlot and make it taste more tannic and bitter.\nSynonyms.\nOver the years, Merlot has been known under many synonyms across the globe, including B\u00e9gney, Bidal, Bidalhe, Bigney, Bigney rouge, Bini, Bini Ruzh, Bioney, Bordeleza belcha, Crabutet, Crabutet noir, Crabutet noir merlau, Hebigney, Higney, Higney rouge, Langon, Lecchumskij, M\u00e9doc noir, Merlau, Merlaut, Merlaut noir, Merle, Merle Petite, Merleau, Merl\u00f4, Merlot noir, Merlot black, Merlot blauer, Merlot crni, Merlot nero, Merlott, Merlou, Odzalesi, Odzhaleshi, Odzhaleshi Legkhumskii, Petit Merle, Picard, Pikard, Plan medre, Planet Medok, Plant du M\u00e9doc, Plant M\u00e9doc, Saint-Macaire, Same de la Canan, Same dou Flaube, S\u00e8me de la Canau, S\u00e8me Dou Flube, Semilhon rouge, Semilhoum rouge, Semilhoun rouge, S\u00e9millon rouge, Sud des Graves, Vidal, Vini Ticinesi, Vitrai, and Vitraille.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18991", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18991", "title": "MM", "text": "MM or variants may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18995", "revid": "34602024", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18995", "title": "Martin Scorsese", "text": "American filmmaker (born 1942)\nMartin Charles Scorsese ( , ; born November17, 1942) is an American filmmaker. One of the major figures of the New Hollywood era, he has received many accolades, including an Academy Award, four BAFTA Awards, three Emmy Awards, a Grammy Award, and three Golden Globe Awards. He has been honored with the AFI Life Achievement Award in 1997, the Film Society of Lincoln Center tribute in 1998, the Kennedy Center Honor in 2007, the Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2010, and the BAFTA Fellowship in 2012. Four of his films have been inducted into the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\".\nScorsese received a Master of Arts degree from New York University's Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development in 1968. His directorial debut, \"Who's That Knocking at My Door\" (1967), was accepted into the Chicago Film Festival. In the 1970s and 1980s, Scorsese's films, much influenced by his Italian-American background and upbringing in New York City, centered on macho-posturing men and explore crime, machismo, nihilism and Catholic concepts of guilt and redemption. His trademark styles of extensive use of slow motion and freeze frames, voice-over narration, graphic depictions of extreme violence and liberal use of profanity were first shown in \"Mean Streets\" (1973).\nScorsese won the at Cannes with \"Taxi Driver\" (1976), which starred Robert De Niro as a disturbed Vietnam veteran. De Niro became associated with Scorsese through eight more films including \"New York, New York\" (1977), \"Raging Bull\" (1980), \"The King of Comedy\" (1982), \"Goodfellas\" (1990), \"Cape Fear\" (1991), \"Casino\" (1995) and \"The Irishman\" (2019). In the following decades, he garnered box office success with a series of collaborations with Leonardo DiCaprio, including \"Gangs of New York\" (2002), \"The Aviator\" (2004), \"The Departed\" (2006), \"Shutter Island\" (2010), and \"The Wolf of Wall Street\" (2013). He worked with both De Niro and DiCaprio on \"Killers of the Flower Moon\" (2023). He also directed \"After Hours\" (1985), \"The Color of Money\" (1986), \"The Last Temptation of Christ\" (1988), \"The Age of Innocence\" (1993), \"Kundun\" (1997), \"Hugo\" (2011), and \"Silence\" (2016).\nOn television, he has directed episodes for the HBO series \"Boardwalk Empire\" (2010\u20132014) and \"Vinyl\" (2016), as well as the HBO documentary \"Public Speaking\" (2010) and the Netflix docu-series \"Pretend It's a City\" (2021). He has also directed several rock documentaries including \"The Last Waltz\" (1978), \"No Direction Home\" (2005), and \"Shine a Light\" (2008). He has explored film history in the documentaries \"A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies\" (1995) and \"My Voyage to Italy\" (1999). An advocate for film preservation and restoration, he has founded three nonprofit organizations: The Film Foundation in 1990, the World Cinema Foundation in 2007 and the African Film Heritage Project in 2017.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and education.\nMartin Charles Scorsese was born in the Flushing neighborhood of New York City's Queens borough on November 17, 1942. He grew up in the Little Italy neighborhood of the city's Manhattan borough. Both of his parents, Catherine Scorsese (n\u00e9e Cappa) and Charles Scorsese, worked in the Garment District. Charles was a clothes presser and actor, while Catherine was a seamstress and an actress. All four of Scorsese's grandparents were Italian immigrants from Sicily, hailing from Polizzi Generosa on his father's side and Ciminna on his mother's side. The original surname of the family was Scozzese, meaning \"Scot\" or \"Scottish\" in Italian, and was changed to Scorsese because of a transcription error.\nScorsese was raised in a predominantly Catholic environment. As a boy, he had asthma and could not play sports or take part in any activities with other children, so his parents and his older brother would often take him to movie theaters; it was at this stage in his life that he developed a passion for cinema. He has spoken of the influence on him of Powell and Pressburger's \"Black Narcissus\" (1947) and \"The Red Shoes\" (1948). As a teenager living in Brooklyn, he frequently commuted to the Bronx to rent Powell and Pressburger's film, \"The Tales of Hoffmann\" (1951), from a store which had only one copy of the reel. He was one of only two people who regularly rented it; the other, George A. Romero, who then lived in that borough, also became a director.\nScorsese has named Sabu and Victor Mature as his favorite actors in his youth. He recalls his father taking him to see Jean Renoir's \"The River\" (1951) and being fascinated by its depiction of India. He became \"obsessed\" with Renoir's \"La Grande Illusion\" (1937) when it was rereleased. He names John Ford's \"The Quiet Man\" (1952) and \"The Searchers\" (1956) as formative influences. In a documentary on Italian neorealism, he commented on how Roberto Rossellini's \"Rome, Open City\" (1945) and Vittorio De Sica's \"Bicycle Thieves\" (1946) inspired him and influenced his view of his Sicilian roots. In his documentary \"Il Mio Viaggio in Italia\" (\"My Voyage to Italy\"), Scorsese noted that the Sicilian episode of Rossellini's \"Pais\u00e0\" (1946), which he first saw on television with his relatives who were themselves Sicilian immigrants, had a significant impact on his life. He remembers responding \"very strongly\" to Alfred Hitchcock's \"Vertigo\" (1958). He acknowledges owing a great debt to the French New Wave and has stated that \"the French New Wave has influenced all filmmakers who have worked since, whether they saw the films or not.\" He has also cited the works of Satyajit Ray, Ingmar Bergman, Andrzej Wajda, Michelangelo Antonioni, Federico Fellini, Ishir\u014d Honda and Eiji Tsuburaya as major influences on his career. Although there was no habit of reading at home, towards the end of the 1950s, Scorsese began to approach literature, being marked in particular by Fyodor Dostoevsky's \"Notes from Underground\" (1864), James Joyce's \"A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man\" (1916) and Graham Greene's \"The Heart of the Matter\" (1948).\nScorsese attended the all-boys Cardinal Hayes High School in the Bronx, graduating in 1960. He had initially desired to become a priest, attending a preparatory seminary, but failed after the first year and was unable to attend Fordham University. This gave way to cinema and consequently Scorsese enrolled in New York University's Washington Square College (now known as the College of Arts and Science), where he earned a bachelor's degree in English in 1964. He went on to earn his Master of Arts from NYU's School of Education (now the Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development) in 1968, a year after the school was founded.\nCareer.\n1963\u20131972: Short films and feature debut.\nWhile attending the Tisch School of the Arts, Scorsese made the short films \"What's a Nice Girl like You Doing in a Place like This?\" (1963) and \"It's Not Just You, Murray!\" (1964). His most famous short of the period is the darkly comic \"The Big Shave\" (1967), which features Peter Bernuth. The film is an indictment of America's involvement in Vietnam, suggested by its alternative title \"Viet '67\". Scorsese has mentioned on several occasions that he was greatly inspired in his early days at New York University by film professor Haig P. Manoogian. Scorsese's first professional job was when he was at NYU he was the assistant cameraman to cinematographer Baird Bryant on the John G. Avildsen directed short film \"Smiles\" (1964). Scorsese stated: \"It was really important because they were filming on 35mm\". He stated he was terrible at the job because he could not judge the distance of the focus. He also worked as a gaffer for Albert and David Maysles and as an editor for CBS News, the later of whom offered him a full time position, but Scorsese declined due to his pursuit in film.\nIn 1967, Scorsese made his first feature-length film, the black and white \"I Call First\", later retitled \"Who's That Knocking at My Door\", with his fellow students actor Harvey Keitel and editor Thelma Schoonmaker, both of whom were to become long-term collaborators. Roger Ebert saw the film at the 1967 Chicago International Film Festival and wrote, in Scorsese's first published review: \"it brings together two opposing worlds of American cinema. On the one hand, there have been traditional films like \"Marty\", \"View from the Bridge\", \"On the Waterfront\" and \"David and Lisa\" -- all sincere attempts to function at the level where real lives are led and all suffering to some degree from their makers' romantic and idealistic ideas, about such lives. On the other hand, there have been experimental films from Jonas Mekas, Shirley Clarke and other pioneers of the New York underground. In \"The Connection\", \"Shadows\" and \"Guns of the Trees\", they used improvised dialog and scenes and hidden and hand-held cameras in an attempt to capture the freshness of a spontaneous experience ... \"I Call First\" brings these two kinds of films together into a work that is absolutely genuine, artistically satisfying and technically comparable to the best films being made anywhere. I have no reservations in describing it as a great moment in American movies.\"\nScorsese became friends with the influential \"movie brats\" of the 1970s: Brian De Palma, Francis Ford Coppola, George Lucas and Steven Spielberg. It was De Palma who introduced Scorsese to Robert De Niro. During this period, Scorsese worked as the assistant director and one of the editors on Michael Wadleigh's documentary \"Woodstock\" (1970) and met actor\u2013director John Cassavetes, who became a close friend and mentor.\nScorsese met Roger Corman after coming to Hollywood to edit \"Medicine Ball Caravan\" and Corman, who had seen and liked \"Who's That Knocking at My Door\", asked Scorsese to make a sequel to \"Bloody Mama\" (1970). This came to be \"Boxcar Bertha\" (1972). It was Corman who taught Scorsese that entertaining films could be shot with very little money or time, preparing the young director well for the challenges to come. Following the film's release, Cassavetes encouraged Scorsese to make the films that he wanted to make, rather than someone else's projects.\n1973\u20131989: Breakthrough and acclaim.\n\"Mean Streets\" was a breakthrough for Scorsese, Keitel and Robert De Niro. Pauline Kael wrote: \"Martin Scorsese's \"Mean Streets\" is a true original of our time, a triumph of personal filmmaking. It has its own hallucinatory look; the characters live in the darkness of bars, with lighting and color just this shade of lurid ... It's about American life here and now, and it doesn't look like an American movie, or feel like one. If it were subtitled, we could hail a new European or South American talent \u2014 a new Bu\u00f1uel steeped in Verdi, perhaps.\" By now the signature Scorsese style was in place: macho posturing, bloody violence, Catholic guilt and redemption, gritty New York locale (though the majority of \"Mean Streets\" was shot in Los Angeles), rapid-fire editing, and a soundtrack with contemporary music. Although the film was innovative, its wired atmosphere, edgy documentary style, and gritty street-level direction owed a debt to Cassavetes, Samuel Fuller and early Jean-Luc Godard. In 1974, actress Ellen Burstyn chose Scorsese to direct her in \"Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore\", for which she won an Academy Award for Best Actress. Although well regarded, the film remains an anomaly in Scorsese's early career as it focuses on a central female character. Returning to Little Italy to explore his ethnic roots, Scorsese directed \"Italianamerican\" (1974), a documentary featuring his parents Charles and Catherine Scorsese.\nScorsese followed with \"Taxi Driver\" in 1976, which depicted a Vietnam veteran who takes the law into his own hands on New York's crime-ridden streets. The film established him as an accomplished filmmaker and also brought attention to cinematographer Michael Chapman, whose style tends towards high contrasts, strong colors, and complex camera movements. The film starred De Niro as the angry and alienated Travis Bickle, and co-starred Jodie Foster in a highly controversial role as an underage prostitute, with Harvey Keitel as her pimp. \"Taxi Driver\" also marked the start of a series of collaborations between Scorsese and writer Paul Schrader, whose influences included the diary of would-be assassin Arthur Bremer, John Ford's \"The Searchers\" (1956), and Robert Bresson's \"Pickpocket\" (1959). Already controversial upon its release, \"Taxi Driver\" hit the headlines again five years later, when John Hinckley Jr. made an assassination attempt on then-president Ronald Reagan. He subsequently blamed his act on his obsession with Jodie Foster's \"Taxi Driver\" character (in the film, De Niro's character, Travis Bickle, makes an assassination attempt on a senator).\n\"Taxi Driver\" won the at the 1976 Cannes Film Festival, also receiving four Oscar nominations, including Best Picture. The critical and financial success of \"Taxi Driver\" encouraged Scorsese to move ahead with his first big-budget project: the highly stylized musical \"New York, New York\". This tribute to Scorsese's home town and the classic Hollywood musical was a box-office failure. The film was the director's third collaboration with De Niro, co-starring with Liza Minnelli. The film is best remembered today for the title theme song, which was popularized by Frank Sinatra. Although possessing Scorsese's usual visual panache and stylistic bravura, many critics felt its enclosed studio-bound atmosphere left it leaden in comparison with his earlier work. Despite its weak reception, the film is regarded positively by some critics. Richard Brody wrote: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For Scorsese, a lifelong cinephile, the essence of New York could be found in its depiction in classic Hollywood movies. Remarkably, his backward-looking tribute to the golden age of musicals and noirish romantic melodramas turned out to be one of his most freewheeling and personal films.\nIn 1977, he directed the Broadway musical \"The Act\", starring Minnelli. The disappointing reception of \"New York, New York\" drove Scorsese into depression. By this stage Scorsese had developed a serious cocaine addiction. However, he did find the creative drive to make the highly regarded \"The Last Waltz\", documenting the final concert by The Band. It was held at the Winterland Ballroom in San Francisco on Thanksgiving Day, 1976, and featured one of the most extensive lineups of prominent guest performers at a single concert, including Bob Dylan, Neil Young, Ringo Starr, Muddy Waters, Joni Mitchell, Van Morrison, Paul Butterfield, Neil Diamond, Ronnie Wood and Eric Clapton. However, Scorsese's commitments to other projects delayed the release of the film until 1978. Another Scorsese-directed documentary, titled \"\", also appeared in 1978, focusing on Steven Prince, the cocky gun salesman who appeared in \"Taxi Driver\". A period of wild partying followed, damaging Scorsese's already fragile health. Scorsese helped provide footage for the documentary \"Elvis on Tour\".\nBy several accounts (Scorsese's included), De Niro saved Scorsese's life when he persuaded him to kick his cocaine addiction to make his highly regarded film \"Raging Bull\". Mark Singer summarized Scorsese's condition: He (Scorsese) was more than mildly depressed. Drug abuse, and abuse of his body in general, culminated in a terrifying episode of internal bleeding. Robert De Niro came to see him in the hospital and asked, in so many words, whether he wanted to live or die. If you want to live, De Niro proposed, let's make this picture\u2014referring to \"Raging Bull\", an as-told-to book by Jake LaMotta, the former world middleweight boxing champion, that De Niro had given him to read years earlier. Convinced that he would never make another movie, he poured his energies into making the violent biopic of middleweight boxing champion Jake LaMotta, calling it a kamikaze method of film-making. The film is widely viewed as a masterpiece and was voted the greatest film of the 1980s by Britain's \"Sight &amp; Sound\" magazine. It received eight Oscar nominations, including Best Picture, Best Actor for De Niro, Best Supporting Actress for Cathy Moriarty, Best Supporting Actor for Joe Pesci and Scorsese's first for Best Director. De Niro won, as did Thelma Schoonmaker for editing, but Best Director went to Robert Redford for \"Ordinary People\". From this work onwards, Scorsese's films are always labeled as \"A Martin Scorsese Picture\" on promotional material. \"Raging Bull\", filmed in high contrast black and white, is where Scorsese's style reached its zenith: \"Taxi Driver\" and \"New York, New York\" had used elements of expressionism to replicate psychological points of view, but here the style was taken to new extremes, employing extensive slow-motion, complex tracking shots, and extravagant distortion of perspective (for example, the size of boxing rings would change from fight to fight). Thematically too, the concerns carried on from \"Mean Streets\" and \"Taxi Driver\": insecure males, violence, guilt, and redemption.\nAlthough the screenplay for \"Raging Bull\" was credited to Paul Schrader and Mardik Martin (who earlier co-wrote \"Mean Streets\"), the finished script differed extensively from Schrader's original draft. It was rewritten several times by various writers including Jay Cocks. The final draft was largely written by Scorsese and De Niro. In 1997, the American Film Institute ranked \"Raging Bull\" as the twenty-fourth greatest American film of all time on their AFI's 100 Years\u00a0... 100 Movies list. In 2007, they ranked \"Raging Bull\" as the fourth American greatest film on their AFI's 100 Years\u00a0... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) list.\nScorsese's next project was his fifth collaboration with De Niro, \"The King of Comedy\" (1982). It is a satire on the world of media and celebrity, whose central character is a troubled loner who ironically becomes famous through a criminal act (kidnapping). The film was an obvious departure from the more emotionally committed films he had become associated with. Visually, it was far less kinetic than the style Scorsese had developed previously, often using a static camera and long takes. Here the expressionism of his previous work gave way to moments of almost total surrealism. It still bore many of Scorsese's trademarks, however. \"The\" \"King of Comedy\" failed at the box office, but has become increasingly well regarded by critics in the years since its release. German director Wim Wenders numbered it among his 15 favorite films. In 1983, Scorsese made a brief cameo appearance in \"Anna Pavlova\" (also known as \"A Woman for All Time\"), originally intended to be directed by one of his heroes, Michael Powell. This led to a more significant acting appearance in Bertrand Tavernier's jazz film \"Round Midnight\". He also made a brief venture into television, directing an episode of Steven Spielberg's \"Amazing Stories\".\nWith \"After Hours\" (1985), for which he won a Best Director Award at Cannes, Scorsese made an esthetic shift back to a pared-down, almost \"underground\" film-making style. Filmed on an extremely low budget, on location, and at night in the SoHo neighborhood of Manhattan, the film is a black comedy about one increasingly misfortunate night for a mild New York word processor (Griffin Dunne) and features cameos by such disparate actors as Teri Garr and Cheech &amp; Chong. Along with the 1987 Michael Jackson music video \"Bad\", in 1986 Scorsese made \"The Color of Money\", a sequel to Robert Rossen's \"The Hustler\" (1961) with Paul Newman, which co-starred Tom Cruise. Although adhering to Scorsese's established style, \"The Color of Money\" was Scorsese's first official foray into mainstream film-making. The film finally won Newman an Oscar and gave Scorsese the clout to finally secure backing for a project that had been a longtime goal for him: \"The Last Temptation of Christ\".\nIn 1983, Scorsese began work on this long-cherished personal project. \"The Last Temptation of Christ\", based on the 1955 novel by Nikos Kazantzakis, retold the life of Christ in human rather than divine terms. Barbara Hershey recalls introducing Scorsese to the book while they were filming \"Boxcar Bertha\". The film was slated to shoot under the Paramount Pictures banner, but shortly before principal photography was to start, Paramount pulled the plug on the project, citing pressure from religious groups. In this aborted 1983 version, Aidan Quinn was cast as Jesus, and Sting was cast as Pontius Pilate. (In the 1988 version, these roles were played by Willem Dafoe and David Bowie respectively.) However, following his mid-1980s flirtation with commercial Hollywood, Scorsese made a major return to personal filmmaking with the project; Universal Pictures agreed to finance the film as Scorsese agreed to make a more mainstream film for the studio in the future (it eventually resulted in \"Cape Fear\"). Even prior to its 1988 release, the film (adapted by \"Taxi Driver\" and \"Raging Bull\" veteran Paul Schrader) caused a massive furor, with worldwide protests against its perceived blasphemy effectively turning a low-budget independent film into a media sensation. Most of the controversy centered on the final passages of the film, which depicted Christ marrying and raising a family with Mary Magdalene in a Satan-induced hallucination while on the cross.\nIn 1986, Scorsese directed the 18-minute short film \"Bad\" featuring Michael Jackson and Wesley Snipes (in his film debut). The short also serves as a music video and was shot in the Hoyt\u2013Schermerhorn Streets station in Brooklyn over a 6-week period during November and December 1986. Chapman was the film's cinematographer. The direction and choreography were heavily influenced by \"West Side Story\" (1961). Scorsese also noted the influence of \"Taxi Driver\" in Spike Lee's documentary \"Bad 25\" (2012). The short has been praised by critics as one of the greatest and most iconic videos of all time. That year, he had signed a deal with upstart major The Walt Disney Studios to produce and direct features, following the success of \"The Color of Money\".\nLooking past the controversy, \"The Last Temptation of Christ\" gained critical acclaim and remains an important work in Scorsese's canon: an explicit attempt to wrestle with the spirituality underpinning his films up until that point. He received his second nomination for a Best Director Academy Award (again unsuccessfully, this time losing to Barry Levinson for \"Rain Man\"). Scorsese directed \"Life Lessons\", one of three segments in the anthology film \"New York Stories\" (1989). Ebert gave the film a mixed review, while praising Scorsese's short as \"really successful\".\n1990\u20131999: Established director.\nAfter a decade of films considered by critics to be mixed results, some considered Scorsese's gangster epic \"Goodfellas\" (1990) his return to directorial form, and his most confident and fully realized film since \"Raging Bull\". De Niro and Joe Pesci offered a virtuoso display of Scorsese's bravura cinematic technique in the film and re-established, enhanced, and consolidated his reputation. After the film was released, Roger Ebert, a friend and supporter of Scorsese, named \"Goodfellas\" \"the best mob movie ever\". It is ranked No. 1 on Ebert's movie list for 1990, along with those of Gene Siskel and Peter Travers', and is widely considered one of the director's greatest achievements. The film was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Director, and Scorsese earned his third Best Director nomination but again lost to a first-time director, Kevin Costner (\"Dances with Wolves\"). Joe Pesci earned the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance. Scorsese and the film also won many other awards, including five BAFTA Awards, a Silver Lion and more. The American Film Institute placed \"Goodfellas\" at No. 94 on the AFI's 100 Years\u00a0... 100 Movies list. On the 2007 updated version, they moved \"Goodfellas\" up to No. 92 on the AFI's 100 Years\u00a0... 100 Movies list (10th Anniversary Edition) and put \"Goodfellas\" at No. 2 on their list of the top 10 gangster films (after \"The Godfather\").\nIn 1990, he released his only short-form documentary: \"Made in Milan\" about fashion designer Giorgio Armani. The following year brought \"Cape Fear\", a remake of a cult 1962 movie of the same name and the director's seventh collaboration with De Niro. Another foray into the mainstream, the film was a stylized thriller taking its cues heavily from Alfred Hitchcock and Charles Laughton's \"The Night of the Hunter\" (1955). The film garnered two Oscar nominations, and earned $80 million in domestic box office, placing it as Scorsese's most commercially successful release until \"The Aviator\" (2004), and then \"The Departed\" (2006). The film also marked the first time Scorsese used wide-screen Panavision with an aspect ratio of 2.39:1.\nIn 1990, Scorsese acted in a small role as Vincent van Gogh in the film \"Dreams\" by Japanese director Akira Kurosawa. Scorsese's 1994 cameo appearance in the Robert Redford film \"Quiz Show\" is remembered for the telling line: \"You see, the audience didn't tune in to watch some amazing display of intellectual ability. They just wanted to watch the money.\"\nIn 1994, Scorsese and producer Barbara De Fina formed the production company \nDe Fina-Cappa. In the early 1990s, Scorsese also expanded his role as a film producer. He produced a wide range of films, including major Hollywood studio productions (\"Mad Dog and Glory\", \"Clockers\"), low-budget independent films (\"The Grifters\", \"Naked in New York\", \"Grace of My Heart\", \"Search and Destroy\", \"The Hi-Lo Country\"), and even the foreign film \"Con gli occhi chiusi\" (\"With Closed Eyes\").\n\"The Age of Innocence\" (1993) was a significant departure for Scorsese, a period adaptation of the Edith Wharton novel about the constrictive high society of late-19th century New York. It was highly lauded by critics upon its original release but was a box office bomb, making an overall loss. As noted in \"Scorsese on Scorsese\" by editor\u2013interviewer Ian Christie, the news that Scorsese wanted to make a film about a failed 19th-century romance raised many eyebrows among the film fraternity; all the more when Scorsese made it clear that it was a personal project and not a studio for-hire job.\nScorsese was interested in doing a \"romantic piece\", and he was strongly drawn to the characters and the story of Wharton's text. Scorsese wanted his film to be as rich an emotional experience as the book was to him rather than the traditional academic adaptations of literary works. To this end, Scorsese sought influence from diverse period films that had had an emotional impact on him. In \"Scorsese on Scorsese\", he documents influences from films such as Luchino Visconti's \"Senso\" and his \"Il Gattopardo\" (\"The Leopard\") as well as Orson Welles's \"The Magnificent Ambersons\" and also Roberto Rossellini's \"La prise de pouvoir par Louis\u00a0XIV\" (\"The Taking of Power by Louis\u00a0XIV\"). Although \"The Age of Innocence\" was ultimately different from these films in terms of narrative, story, and thematic concern, the presence of a lost society, of lost values as well as detailed re-creations of social customs and rituals continues the tradition of these films. It came back into the public eye, especially in countries such as the UK and France, but still is largely neglected in North America. The film earned five Academy Award nominations (including Best Adapted Screenplay for Scorsese), winning the Costume Design Oscar. This was his first collaboration with the Academy Award-winning actor Daniel Day-Lewis, with whom he would work again on \"Gangs of New York\". This was Scorsese's first film to be shot on Super 35 format.\n\"Casino\" (1995), like \"The Age of Innocence\" before it, focused on a tightly wound male whose well-ordered life is disrupted by the arrival of unpredictable forces. The fact that it was a violent gangster film made it more palatable to the director's fans who perhaps were baffled by the apparent departure of the earlier film. \"Casino\" was a box office success, and it received generally positive notices from critics. Comparisons were drawn to his earlier film \"Goodfellas\", and Scorsese admitted \"Casino\" bore a superficial resemblance to it, but he maintained that the story was significantly larger in scope. Sharon Stone was nominated for the Best Actress Academy Award for her performance. During the filming, Scorsese played a background part as a gambler at one of the tables.\nScorsese still found time for a four-hour documentary in 1995, titled \"A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies\", offering a thorough trek through American cinema. It covered the silent era to 1969, a year after which Scorsese began his feature career. He said, \"I wouldn't feel right commenting on myself or my contemporaries.\" In the four-hour documentary, Scorsese lists the four aspects of the director he believes are the most important as (1) the director as storyteller; (2) the director as an illusionist: D. W. Griffith or F. W. Murnau, who created new editing techniques among other innovations that made the appearance of sound and color possible later on; (3) the director as a smuggler\u2014filmmakers such as Douglas Sirk, Samuel Fuller, and Vincente Minnelli, who used to hide subversive messages in their films; and (4) the director as iconoclast. In the preface to this documentary, Scorsese states his commitment to the \"Director's Dilemma\", in which a successful contemporary director must be pragmatic about the realities of getting financing for films of personal esthetic interest by accepting the need of \"making one film for the studio, and (then) making one for oneself.\"\nIf \"The Age of Innocence\" alienated and confused some fans, then \"Kundun\" (1997) went several steps further, offering an account of the early life of Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, the People's Liberation Army's entry into Tibet, and the Dalai Lama's subsequent exile to India. Not only a departure in subject matter, \"Kundun\" saw Scorsese employing a fresh narrative and visual approach. Traditional dramatic devices were substituted for a trance-like meditation achieved through an elaborate tableau of colorful visual images. The film was a source of turmoil for its distributor, Buena Vista Pictures, which was planning significant expansion into the Chinese market at the time. Initially defiant in the face of pressure from Chinese officials, Disney has since distanced itself from the project, hurting \"Kundun\"'s commercial profile. In the short term, the sheer eclecticism in evidence enhanced the director's reputation. In the long term, however, it appears \"Kundun\" has been sidelined in most critical appraisals of the director, mostly noted as a stylistic and thematic detour. \"Kundun\" was Scorsese's second attempt to profile the life of a great religious leader, following \"The Last Temptation of Christ\".\n\"Bringing Out the Dead\" (1999) was a return to familiar territory, with the director and writer Paul Schrader constructing a pitch-black comic take on their own earlier \"Taxi Driver\". Like earlier Scorsese-Schrader collaborations, its final scenes of spiritual redemption explicitly recall the films of Robert Bresson. (It is also worth noting that the film's incident-filled nocturnal setting is reminiscent of \"After Hours\".) It received generally positive reviews, although not the universal critical acclaim of some of his other films. It stars Nicolas Cage, Ving Rhames, John Goodman, Tom Sizemore, and Patricia Arquette.\nOn various occasions Scorsese has been asked to present the Honorary Academy Award during the Oscar telecast. In 1998, at the 70th Academy Awards, Scorsese presented the award to film legend Stanley Donen. When accepting the award Donen quipped, \"Marty this is backwards, I should be giving this to you, believe me\". In 1999, at the 71st Academy Awards, Scorsese and De Niro presented the award to film director Elia Kazan. This was a controversial pick for the academy due to Kazan's involvement with the Hollywood blacklist in the 1950s. Several members of the audience including Nick Nolte and Ed Harris refused to applaud Kazan when he received the award while others such as Warren Beatty, Meryl Streep, Kathy Bates, and Kurt Russell gave him a standing ovation.\n2000\u20132015: Film and television work.\nIn 1999, Scorsese directed a documentary on Italian filmmakers titled \"Il Mio Viaggio in Italia\", also known as \"My Voyage to Italy\". The documentary foreshadowed Scorsese's next project, the epic \"Gangs of New York\" (2002), influenced by (amongst many others) major Italian directors such as Luchino Visconti and filmed in its entirety at Rome's famous Cinecitt\u00e0 film studios. With a production budget said to be in excess of $100 million, \"Gangs of New York\" was Scorsese's biggest and arguably most mainstream venture to date. Like \"The Age of Innocence\", it was set in 19th-century New York, although focusing on the other end of the social scale (and like that film, also starring Daniel Day-Lewis). The film marked the first collaboration between Scorsese and actor Leonardo DiCaprio, who became a fixture in later Scorsese films. The production was highly troubled, with many rumors referring to the director's conflict with Miramax Films boss Harvey Weinstein. The final cut of the movie ran to 168 minutes, while Scorsese's original cut was over 180 minutes long.\nDespite denials of artistic compromise, some felt that \"Gangs of New York\" was Scorsese's most conventional film, featuring standard film tropes that Scorsese had traditionally avoided, such as characters existing purely for exposition purposes and explanatory flashbacks. Even so, the film received generally positive reviews with the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reporting that 75 percent of the reviews for the film they tallied were positive and summarizing the critics writing, \"Though flawed, the sprawling, messy \"Gangs of New York\" is redeemed by impressive production design and Day-Lewis's electrifying performance.\" The film's central themes are consistent with Scorsese's established concerns: New York, violence as culturally endemic, and subcultural divisions down ethnic lines. Originally filmed for a release in the winter of 2001 (to qualify for Academy Award nominations), Scorsese delayed the final production of the film until after the beginning of 2002; Miramax Films consequently delayed the film until its release in the Oscar season of late 2002. \"Gangs of New York\" earned Scorsese his first Golden Globe for Best Director. In February 2003, \"Gangs of New York\" received 10 Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture, Best Director, and Best Actor for Daniel Day-Lewis; however, it did not win in any category.\nThe following year, Scorsese completed production of \"The Blues\", an expansive seven-part documentary tracing the history of blues music from its African roots to the Mississippi Delta and beyond. Seven filmmakers including Wim Wenders, Clint Eastwood, Mike Figgis, and Scorsese himself each contributed a 90-minute film (Scorsese's entry was titled \"Feel Like Going Home\"). In the early 2000s, Scorsese produced several films for up-and-coming directors, such as \"You Can Count on Me\" (directed by Kenneth Lonergan), \"Rain\" (directed by Katherine Lindberg), \"Lymelife\" (directed by Derick Martini) and \"The Young Victoria\" (directed by Jean-Marc Vall\u00e9e). At that time, he established Sikelia Productions. In 2003, producer Emma Tillinger Koskoff joined the company. Scorsese also produced several documentaries, such as \"The Soul of a Man\" (directed by Wim Wenders) and \"Lightning in a Bottle\" (directed by Antoine Fuqua).\nScorsese's film \"The Aviator\" (2004) is a lavish, large-scale biopic of eccentric aviation pioneer and film mogul Howard Hughes and reunited Scorsese with actor Leonardo DiCaprio. The film received highly positive reviews. The film was a widespread box office success and gained Academy recognition. \"The Aviator\" was nominated for six Golden Globe Awards, including Best Motion Picture-Drama, Best Director, Best Screenplay, and Best Actor-Motion Picture Drama for Leonardo DiCaprio. It won three, including Best Motion Picture-Drama and Best Actor-Motion Picture Drama. In January 2005 \"The Aviator\" became the most-nominated film of the 77th Academy Awards nominations, nominated in 11 categories including Best Picture. The film also garnered nominations in nearly all the other major categories, including a fifth Best Director nomination for Scorsese. Despite having the most nominations, the film won only five Oscars. Scorsese lost again, this time to director Clint Eastwood for \"Million Dollar Baby\" (which also won Best Picture).\n\"No Direction Home\" is a documentary film by Scorsese that tells of the life of Bob Dylan, and his impact on American popular music and the culture of the 20th century. The film does not cover Dylan's entire career; it focuses on his beginnings, his rise to fame in the 1960s, his then-controversial transformation from an acoustic guitar-based musician and performer to an electric guitar-influenced sound and his \"retirement\" from touring in 1966 following an infamous motorcycle accident. The film was first presented on television in both the United States (as part of the PBS \"American Masters\" series) and the United Kingdom (as part of the BBC Two \"Arena\" series) on September 26 to 27, 2005. A DVD version of the film was released the same month. The film won a Peabody Award and the Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video. In addition, Scorsese received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Documentary/Nonfiction Program, losing to \"Baghdad ER\".\nScorsese returned to the crime genre with the Boston-set thriller \"The Departed\", based on the Hong Kong police drama \"Infernal Affairs\" (which is co-directed by Andrew Lau and Alan Mak). The film continued Scorsese's collaboration with Leonardo DiCaprio and was the first time he worked with Matt Damon, Jack Nicholson, Mark Wahlberg, and Martin Sheen. \"The Departed\" opened to widespread critical acclaim, with some proclaiming it as one of the best efforts Scorsese had brought to the screen since 1990's \"Goodfellas\", and still others putting it at the same level as Scorsese's most celebrated classics \"Taxi Driver\" and \"Raging Bull\". With domestic box office receipts surpassing US$million, \"The Departed\" was Scorsese's highest-grossing film (not accounting for inflation) until 2010's \"Shutter Island\". \"The Departed\" earned Scorsese a second Golden Globe for Best Director, as well as a Critics' Choice Award, his first Directors Guild of America Award, and the Academy Award for Best Director. Presented with the latter, Scorsese poked fun at his track record of nominations, asking, \"Could you double-check the envelope?\" The award was presented by his longtime friends and colleagues Francis Ford Coppola, George Lucas and Steven Spielberg. \"The Departed\" also received the Academy Award for the Best Motion Picture of 2006, Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Film Editing by longtime Scorsese editor Thelma Schoonmaker, her third win for a Scorsese film.\n\"Shine a Light\" captures rock and roll band the Rolling Stones' performing at New York City's Beacon Theatre on October 29 and November 1, 2006, intercut with brief news and interview footage from throughout their career. The film was initially scheduled for release on September 21, 2007, but Paramount Classics postponed its general release until April 2008. Its world premiere was at the opening of the 58th Berlinale Film Festival on February 7, 2008. \"Marty did an amazing job of making us look great...\" observed drummer Charlie Watts. \"It's all in the edits and the cuts. That's a movie maker rather than a guy just shooting a band onstage... It's not \"Casablanca\", but it's a great thing to have from our point of view, not being egotistical. It's a document.\"\nIn 2009, Scorsese signed a petition in support of director Roman Polanski, who had been detained while traveling to a film festival in relation to his 1977 sexual abuse charges, which the petition argued would undermine the tradition of film festivals as a place for works to be shown \"freely and safely\", and that arresting filmmakers traveling to neutral countries could open the door \"for actions of which no-one can know the effects.\"\nOn October 22, 2007, \"Daily Variety\" reported that Scorsese would reunite with Leonardo DiCaprio on a fourth picture, \"Shutter Island\". Principal photography on the Laeta Kalogridis screenplay, based on the novel of the same name by Dennis Lehane, began in Massachusetts in March 2008. In December 2007, actors Mark Ruffalo, Max von Sydow, Ben Kingsley, and Michelle Williams joined the cast, marking the first time these actors had worked with Scorsese. The film was released on February 19, 2010. On May 20, 2010, \"Shutter Island\" became Scorsese's highest-grossing film. In 2010, \"The Wall Street Journal\" reported that Scorsese was supporting the David Lynch Foundation's initiative to help 10,000 military veterans overcome posttraumatic stress disorder through Transcendental Meditation; Scorsese has publicly discussed his own practice of TM.\nScorsese directed a television commercial for Chanel's then-new men's fragrance, \"Bleu de Chanel\", starring French actor Gaspard Ulliel. Filmed in New York City, it debuted online on August 25, 2010, and was released on TV in September 2010. Scorsese directed the series premiere for \"Boardwalk Empire\", an HBO drama series, starring Steve Buscemi and Michael Pitt, based on Nelson Johnson's book \"Boardwalk Empire: The Birth, High Times and Corruption of Atlantic City\". Terence Winter, who wrote for \"The Sopranos\", created the series. In addition to directing the pilot (for which he won the 2011 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing), Scorsese also served as an executive producer on the series. The series premiered on September 19, 2010, and ran for five seasons.\nScorsese directed the three-and-a-half-hour documentary \"\" about the life and music of former Beatles' member George Harrison, which premiered in the United States on HBO over two parts on October 5 and 6, 2011. His next film \"Hugo\" is a 3D adventure drama film based on Brian Selznick's novel \"The Invention of Hugo Cabret\". The film stars Asa Butterfield, Chlo\u00eb Grace Moretz, Ben Kingsley, Sacha Baron Cohen, Ray Winstone, Emily Mortimer, Christopher Lee, and Jude Law. The film has been met with critical acclaim and earned Scorsese his third Golden Globe Award for Best Director. The film was also nominated for 11 Academy Awards, winning five of them and becoming tied with Michel Hazanavicius's film \"The Artist\" for the most Academy Awards won by a single film in 2011. \"Hugo\" also won two BAFTA awards, among numerous other awards and nominations. \"Hugo\" was Scorsese's first 3D film and was released in the United States on November 23, 2011.\nScorsese's 2013 film, \"The Wolf of Wall Street\", is an American biographical black comedy based on Jordan Belfort's memoir of the same name. The screenplay was written by Terence Winter and starred Leonardo DiCaprio as Belfort, along with Jonah Hill, Matthew McConaughey, and others. The film marked the fifth collaboration between Scorsese and DiCaprio and the second between Scorsese and Winter after \"Boardwalk Empire\". It was released on December 25, 2013. The film tells the story of a New York stockbroker, played by DiCaprio, who engages in a large securities fraud case involving illicit stock manipulation, by way of the practice of \"pump and dump\". DiCaprio was given the award for Best Actor-Motion Picture Musical or Comedy at the 2014 Golden Globe Awards. The film was also nominated for Best Motion Picture-Musical or Comedy as well. \"The Wolf of Wall Street\" was nominated for five Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actor for Leonardo DiCaprio, Best Supporting Actor for Jonah Hill, Best Director for Martin Scorsese, and Best Adapted Screenplay for Terence Winter but did not win in any category. In a 2016 critics' poll conducted by the BBC, the film was ranked among the 100 greatest motion pictures since 2000.\nScorsese and David Tedeschi made a documentary about the history of \"The New York Review of Books\", titled \"The 50 Year Argument\". It screened as a work in progress at the Berlin International Film Festival in February 2014 and premiered in June 2014 at the Sheffield DocFest. It was also screened in Oslo, and Jerusalem before being shown on the BBC's \"Arena\" series in July and at Telluride in August. In September, it was screened at the Toronto and Calgary International Film Festivals, and the New York Film Festival. It aired on HBO on September 29, 2014.\nScorsese directed the pilot for \"Vinyl\" written by Terence Winter and George Mastras, with Mick Jagger producing and Mastras as showrunner. The series stars Bobby Cannavale as Richie Finestra, founder and president of a top-tier record label, set in 1970s New York City's drug-and sex-fueled music business as punk and disco were breaking out, all told through the eyes of Finestra trying to resurrect his label and find the next new sound. Filming began on July 25, 2014. Co-stars include Ray Romano, Olivia Wilde, Juno Temple, Andrew Dice Clay, Ato Essandoh, Max Casella, and James Jagger. On December 2, 2014, \"Vinyl\" was picked up by HBO. The series lasted one season. Scorsese has acted as executive producer of several indie films, like the 2014 \"The Third Side of the River\" (directed by his protege Celina Murga), another 2014 film \"Revenge of the Green Dragons\" (co-directed by Andrew Lau, whose film \"Infernal Affairs\" inspired \"The Departed\"), as well as \"Bleed for This\" and \"Free Fire\".\nScorsese directed \"The Audition\", a short film that also served as a promotional piece for casinos Studio City in Macau and City of Dreams in Manila, Philippines. The short brought together Scorsese's long-time muses Leonardo DiCaprio and Robert De Niro for the first time under his direction. The short film featured the two actors, playing fictionalized versions of themselves, competing for a role in Scorsese's next film. It was Scorsese's first collaboration with De Niro in two decades. The film premiered in October 2015 in conjunction with the grand opening of Studio City.\n2016\u2013present.\nScorsese had long anticipated filming an adaptation of Sh\u016bsaku End\u014d's novel \"Silence\", a drama about the lives of two Portuguese Jesuit priests in Japan during the 17th century. He had originally planned \"Silence\" as his next project following \"Shutter Island.\" On April 19, 2013, financing was secured for \"Silence\" by Emmett/Furla Films, and filming began in January 2015. By November 2016, the film had completed post-production. It was written by Jay Cocks and Scorsese, based on the novel, and stars Andrew Garfield, Liam Neeson, and Adam Driver. The film was released on December 23, 2016, to positive reviews from critics. Scorsese was recognized as an Italian citizen by \"jus sanguinis\" in 2018.\nOn January 10, 2019, \"Variety\"'s Chris Willman reported that Scorsese's long-anticipated documentary of Bob Dylan's 1975 tour, the Rolling Thunder Revue, would be released by Netflix: \"\"\" captures the troubled spirit of America in 1975 and the joyous music that Dylan performed during the fall of that year. Part documentary, part concert film, part fever dream, \"Rolling Thunder\" is a one of a kind experience, from master filmmaker Martin Scorsese.\" On April 25, 2019, it was announced that the documentary would be released on Netflix on June 12, 2019, with a concurrent theatrical engagement in twenty American, European, and Australian cities the night before, and an extended theatrical schedule in Los Angeles and New York so that the film will qualify for award consideration. After years of development, principal photography on Scorsese's crime film \"The Irishman\", based on the book \"I Heard You Paint Houses\" by Charles Brandt, began in August 2017, starring Robert De Niro, Joe Pesci, and Al Pacino. The film had its world premiere at the 57th New York Film Festival on September 27, 2019. It received a limited theatrical release on November 1, 2019, followed by digital streaming on November 27, 2019, on Netflix. In January 2020, \"The Irishman\" received ten Academy Award nominations, including for Best Picture, Best Director, Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Supporting Actor for Pacino and Pesci.\nOn December 29, 2020, the trailer for Scorsese's Netflix documentary series \"Pretend It's a City\" was released. The series features Fran Lebowitz and Scorsese as they delve into her personal beliefs and thoughts on New York City. The project was released January 8, 2021, on Netflix. This is Scorsese's second documentary featuring Lebowitz, the first being \"Public Speaking\" (2010), which was released on HBO. In October 2022, Scorsese and David Tedeschi premiered their collaborative film \"Personality Crisis: One Night Only\", at the New York Film Festival. The film is a documentary about David Johansen, featuring both contemporary concert footage shot for the project as well as archival footage.\nIn July 2019, Scorsese started scouting locations in preparation for the 2020 filming of his next film \"Killers of the Flower Moon\", a film adaptation of the book of the same name by David Grann. Scorsese would team up with Leonardo DiCaprio for the sixth time and Robert De Niro for the tenth time. In December 2019, Scorsese's frequent cinematographer Rodrigo Prieto confirmed that \"Flower Moon\" was gearing up to start principal photography in March 2020, which was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In November 2020 Scorsese was hounored with Stockholm Lifetime Achievement Award. In April 2020, it was announced that filming for \"Killers of the Flower Moon\" had been postponed indefinitely in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, that the potential cost of the film had ballooned to $200 million, and that Scorsese was in talks with Netflix or Apple to produce and distribute, with Paramount Pictures involved as a partner. On May 27, 2020, Apple bought the production and distribution rights to the film, which was released theatrically by Paramount and streamed on Apple TV+. Principal photography commenced in April 2021. It premiered at the 76th Cannes Film Festival on May 20, 2023, receiving a nine-minute standing ovation and was released theatrically on October 20, 2023. On May 16, 2023, while promoting \"Killers of the Flower Moon\", Scorsese spoke about his eagerness to continue working, stating: \"I'm old. I read stuff. I see things. I want to tell stories, and there's no more time.\" It was nominated for ten Oscars, and seven Golden Globes, winning one for Best Actress in a Drama Lily Gladstone. That same year, he directed a commercial for Bleu de Chanel starring Timoth\u00e9e Chalamet.\nIn 2024, Scorsese narrated the documentary film \"\" directed by David Hinton. Guy Lodge of \"Variety\" wrote: \"Scorsese may not have directed this engaging tour through a vital filmography, but he narrates with palpable, personal devotion to his subject.\" The film premiered at the Berlin International Film Festival where it was picked up for distribution by MUBI.\nUpcoming projects.\nIn November 2021, Scorsese was set to direct a biopic feature about rock band the Grateful Dead for Apple Studios featuring Jonah Hill. In July 2022, it was announced Scorsese would direct an adaptation of David Grann's non-fiction novel \"\" for Apple Studios, reteaming once again with DiCaprio. In May 2023, after meeting with Pope Francis, Scorsese said he was considering writing and directing a new film about Jesus. More details were revealed in January 2024, revealing that it would likely be Scorsese's next film and that he had co-written it with Kent Jones, based on the Sh\u016bsaku End\u014d novel \"A Life of Jesus\". In 2023, during an interview with \"GQ\", it was revealed that Scorsese was working on an adaptation of Marilynne Robinson's \"Home\" with Todd Field and Jones. It was reported in February 2025 that Scorsese would be directing a mob film set in Hawaii, starring and being co-produced by Dwayne Johnson, Leonardo DiCaprio and Emily Blunt. Johnson and Blunt pitched the plot to Scorsese and DiCaprio, which was described as being \"a cross between \"Goodfellas\" and \"The Departed\"\", and Nick Bilton was hired as a screenwriter. In March 2025, it was announced that he would be adapting Robinson's \"Home\" for Apple TV+ with DiCaprio starring. On September 18, 2025, it was announced that Scorsese would direct an adaptation of the Peter Cameron novel \"What Happens At Night\" as his next film, with DiCaprio set to star alongside Jennifer Lawrence and a planned production start in January 2026.\nFilmmaking style and technique.\nSeveral recurring filmmaking techniques are identifiable in many of Scorsese's films. He has established a filmmaking history which involves repeat collaborations with actors, screenwriters, film editors, and cinematographers, sometimes extending over several decades, such as that with recurring cinematographers Michael Ballhaus, Robert Richardson, and Rodrigo Prieto.\nSlow motion and freeze frame.\nScorsese is known for his frequent use of slow motion, for example, in \"Who's That Knocking at My Door\" (1967) and \"Mean Streets\" (1973). He is also known for using freeze frames, such as: in the opening credits of \"The King of Comedy\" (1983), throughout \"Goodfellas\" (1990), \"Casino\" (1995), \"The Departed\" (2006), and in \"The Irishman\" (2019). His blonde leading ladies are usually seen through the eyes of the protagonist as angelic and ethereal; they wear white in their first scene and are photographed in slow motion\u2014Cybill Shepherd in \"Taxi Driver\"; Cathy Moriarty's white bikini in \"Raging Bull\"; Sharon Stone's white minidress in \"Casino\". This may be a nod to director Alfred Hitchcock.\nScorsese often uses long tracking shots, as seen in \"Taxi Driver\", \"Goodfellas\", \"Casino\", \"Gangs of New York\", and \"Hugo\". MOS sequences set to popular music or voice-over are regularly seen in his films, often involving aggressive camera movement or rapid editing. Scorsese sometimes highlights characters in a scene with an iris, an homage to 1920s silent film cinema (as scenes at the time sometimes used this transition). This effect can be seen in \"Casino\" (it is used on Sharon Stone and Joe Pesci), \"Life Lessons\", \"The Departed\" (on Matt Damon), and \"Hugo\". Some of his films include references/allusions to Westerns, particularly \"Rio Bravo\", \"The Great Train Robbery\", \"Shane\", \"The Searchers\", and \"The Oklahoma Kid\". Slow motion flashbulbs and accented camera/flash/shutter sounds are often used, as is the song \"Gimme Shelter\" by The Rolling Stones heard in several of Scorsese's films: \"Goodfellas\", \"Casino\", and \"The Departed\".\nCameo appearances.\nScorsese usually has a quick cameo in his films (\"Who's That Knocking at My Door\", \"Boxcar Bertha\", \"Mean Streets\", \"Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore\", \"Taxi Driver\", \"The King of Comedy\", \"After Hours\", \"The Last Temptation of Christ\" (albeit hidden under a hood), \"The Age of Innocence\", \"Gangs of New York\", \"Hugo\", \"Killers of the Flower Moon\"), he is also known to contribute his voice to a film without appearing on screen (e.g. as in \"The Aviator\" and \"The Wolf of Wall Street\"). In \"The Age of Innocence\", for example, he appears in the non-speaking role of a large format portrait photographer in one of the passing scenes of the film. He provides the opening voice-over narration in \"Mean Streets\" and \"The Color of Money\"; plays the off-screen dressing room attendant in the final scene of \"Raging Bull\", and provides the voice of the unseen ambulance dispatcher in \"Bringing Out the Dead\". He also appears as the director of fictional newly formed Vatican Television in the Italian comedy \"In the Pope's Eye\" and played himself in the first episode of the TV series The Studio.\nReligious guilt.\nGuilt is a prominent theme in many of his films, as is the role of Catholicism in creating and dealing with guilt (\"Who's That Knocking at My Door\", \"Mean Streets\", \"Raging Bull\", \"Bringing Out the Dead\", \"The Departed\", \"Shutter Island\", and \"The Irishman\"). In a similar manner, Scorsese considered \"Silence\" a \"passion project\": it had been in development since 1990, two years after the release of his film \"The Last Temptation of Christ\", which also contained strongly religious themes. When asked why he retained interest in a project dealing with strong theological themes for over 26 years, Scorsese said,As you get older, ideas go and come. Questions, answers, loss of the answer again and more questions, and this is what really interests me. Yes, the cinema and the people in my life and my family are most important, but ultimately as you get older, there's got to be more\u00a0... \"Silence\" is just something that I'm drawn to in that way. It's been an obsession, it has to be done\u00a0... it's a strong, wonderful true story, a thriller in a way, but it deals with those questions.\nPolitical corruption.\nMore recently, his films have featured corrupt authority figures, such as policemen in \"The Departed\" and politicians in \"Gangs of New York\" and \"The Aviator\". He is also known for his liberal usage of profanity, dark humor, and violence.\nScorsese's interest in political corruption as depicted in his films was expanded further in his 2019 film \"The Irishman\". Richard Brody writing for \"The New Yorker\" found the main interpretation of the film to be a dark allegory of a realist reading of American politics and American society stating: The real-life Hoffa... (was) a crucial player in both gangland politics and the actual practical politics of the day, and the movie's key through line is the inseparability of those two realms. \"The Irishman\" is a sociopolitical horror story that views much of modern American history as a continuous crime in motion, in which every level of society\u2014from domestic life through local business through big business through national and international politics\u2014is poisoned by graft and bribery, shady deals and dirty money, threats of violence and its gruesome enactment, and the hard-baked impunity that keeps the entire system running.\nFrequent collaborators.\nScorsese often casts the same actors in his projects, particularly Robert De Niro, who has collaborated with Scorsese on ten feature films and one short film. Included are the three films (\"Taxi Driver\", \"Raging Bull\", and \"Goodfellas\") that made AFI's 100 Years\u00a0... 100 Movies list. Scorsese has often said he thinks De Niro's best work under his direction was Rupert Pupkin in \"The King of Comedy\". After the turn of the century, Scorsese found a new muse with younger actor Leonardo DiCaprio, collaborating on six feature films and one short to date. Several critics have compared Scorsese's new partnership with DiCaprio with his previous one with De Niro. Frequent collaborators also include: Victor Argo (6), Harvey Keitel (6), Harry Northup (6), J. C. MacKenzie (5), Murray Moston (5), Illeana Douglas (4), Joe Pesci (4), Frank Vincent (3), Barry Primus (3), and Verna Bloom (3). Others who have appeared in multiple Scorsese projects include Daniel Day-Lewis, who had become very reclusive to the Hollywood scene, Alec Baldwin, Willem Dafoe, Ben Kingsley, Jude Law, Dick Miller, Liam Neeson, Emily Mortimer, Jesse Plemons, John C. Reilly, David Carradine, Barbara Hershey, Kevin Corrigan, Jake Hoffman, Frank Sivero, Ray Winstone and Nick Nolte. Before their deaths, Scorsese's parents, Charles Scorsese and Catherine Scorsese, appeared in bit parts, walk-ons or supporting roles, such as in \"Goodfellas\".\nFor his crew, Scorsese frequently worked with editors Marcia Lucas and Thelma Schoonmaker, cinematographers Michael Ballhaus, Robert Richardson, Michael Chapman and Rodrigo Prieto, screenwriters Paul Schrader, Mardik Martin, Jay Cocks, Terrence Winter, John Logan and Steven Zaillian, costume designer Sandy Powell, production designers Dante Ferretti and Bob Shaw, music producer Robbie Robertson, and composers Howard Shore and Elmer Bernstein. Schoonmaker, Richardson, Powell, and Ferretti have each won Academy Awards in their respective categories on collaborations with Scorsese. Elaine and Saul Bass, the latter being Hitchcock's frequent title designer, designed the opening credits for \"Goodfellas\", \"The Age of Innocence\", \"Casino\" and \"Cape Fear\".\nPersonal life.\nMarriages.\nScorsese has been married five times.\nIn 1965, Scorsese married Laraine Marie Brennan. They have a daughter, Catherine, who was named after Scorsese's mother. The couple remained together until 1971.\nIn 1976, Scorsese married writer Julia Cameron. They have a daughter, Domenica Cameron-Scorsese, an actress who appeared in \"The Age of Innocence.\" After one year of marriage, the couple had an acrimonious divorce which served as the basis of Cameron's first feature, the dark comedy \"God's Will\", which also starred their daughter. The latter had a small role in \"Cape Fear\" using the name Domenica Scorsese and has continued to act, write, direct and produce.\nIn 1979, Scorsese married actress Isabella Rossellini. The couple divorced in 1983.\nIn March 1983, Scorsese met Dawn Steel (then-junior executive at Paramount) at an annual ShoWest Convention (in Las Vegas, Nevada), after which the pair began a romantic relationship. Scorsese moved from New York to live in her Sunset Plaza residence while his \"Last Temptation of Christ\" was initially in development at Paramount (Steel reportedly recused herself from her boyfriend's passion project). In her 1993 memoir, Steel discussed their relationship, including attending the Cannes Film Festival premiere of \"The King of Comedy\" and later location scouting in Tunisia together. The two would reconnect professionally in 1987, jump-starting the restoration of \"Lawrence of Arabia\" (shortly after Steel's installation as president at Columbia Pictures).\nIn 1985, Scorsese married producer Barbara De Fina. The couple divorced in 1991.\nFrom 1989 to 1997, Scorsese was romantically involved with actress Illeana Douglas.\nIn 1999, Scorsese married Helen Schermerhorn Morris. They have a daughter, actress and filmmaker Francesca, who appeared in his films \"The Departed\", \"Hugo\", and \"The Aviator\", and had a leading role in HBO/Sky's miniseries \"We Are Who We Are\" in 2020.\nPolitics.\nScorsese was an opponent of the Iraq War, wearing a white dove pin to the 75th Academy Awards in 2003 and clapping for Michael Moore's acceptance speech wherein he criticized President George W. Bush and the invasion. In June 2025, Scorsese said of Donald Trump's administration: \"I do not see compassion in this administration. Indeed, it seems that it takes pleasure in the opposite: hurting, humiliating.\"\nLegal issues.\nIn March 2024, Scorsese settled a lawsuit with aspiring screenwriter Simon Afram. Afram accused him of pocketing $500,000 to help handle casting, production and postproduction of his screenplay about World War II's Operation Fortitude, which was titled \"Operation Fortitude\", only for Scorsese to then do nothing.\nReligious beliefs.\nScorsese previously identified as a lapsed Catholic, declaring \"I'm a lapsed Catholic. But I am Roman Catholic; there's no way out of it.\" In 2016, Scorsese identified himself as a Catholic again, saying, \"my way has been, and is, Catholicism. After many years of thinking about other things, dabbling here and there, I am most comfortable as a Catholic. I believe in the tenets of Catholicism.\"\nFilmography.\nAs of 2025[ [update]], Scorsese has directed 26 full-length narrative films and 16 full-length documentary films.\nOther work.\nFilm preservation.\nScorsese had been at the forefront in film preservation and restoration ever since 1990, when he created The Film Foundation, a non-profit film organization which collaborates with film studios to restore prints of old or damaged films. Scorsese launched the organization with Woody Allen, Robert Altman, Francis Ford Coppola, Clint Eastwood, Stanley Kubrick, George Lucas, Sydney Pollack, Robert Redford, and Steven Spielberg, who all sat on the foundation's original board of directors. In 2006, Paul Thomas Anderson, Wes Anderson, Curtis Hanson, Peter Jackson, Ang Lee and Alexander Payne joined them. In 2015, Christopher Nolan also joined the board. Recent members include Spike Lee, Sofia Coppola, Guillermo del Toro, Barry Jenkins, Lynne Ramsay, Joanna Hogg and Kathryn Bigelow.\nThe foundation has restored more than 800 films from around the world and conducts a free educational curriculum for young people on the language and history of film. Scorsese and the Foundation spearheaded fundraising for the film restoration of Michael Powell, and Emeric Pressburger's \"The Red Shoes\" (1948). For his advocacy in film restoration he received the Robert Osborne Award at the 2018 TCM Film Festival. The award was given to Scorsese as \"an individual who has significantly contributed to preserving the cultural heritage of classic films\".\nIn November 2020, The Criterion Channel released a 30-minute video titled, \"30 Years of The Film Foundation: Martin Scorsese and Ari Aster in Conversation\", celebrating the \"mission, evolution, and ongoing work of The Film Foundation\". Scorsese stated as of 2020, the Foundation has helped restore 850 films.\nOn April 20, 2024, Scorsese partnered with Seth MacFarlane to showcase \"Back From the Ink: Restored Animated Shorts\" at the 2024 TCM Classic Film Festival. Macfarlane and Scorsese funded the restoration, and worked with the UCLA Film and Television Archive and The Film Foundation with Paramount Pictures Archives.\nThe World Cinema Project.\nIn 2007, Scorsese established the World Cinema Project with the mission to preserve and present marginalized and infrequently screened films from regions generally ill-equipped to preserve their own cinema history. Scorsese's organization has worked with the Criterion Collection to not only preserve the films but to allow them to be released on DVD and Blu-ray boxsets and on streaming services such as The Criterion Channel. Films in the WCP include Ousmane Semb\u00e8ne's \"Black Girl\" (1966), and Djibril Diop Mamb\u00e9ty's \"Touki Bouki\" (1973).\nThe Criterion Collection so far has released four Vol. boxsets on DVD and Blu-ray, titled, \"Martin Scorsese's World Cinema Project\". The first Volume includes 6 titles, \"Touki Bouki\" (1973), \"Redes\" (1936), \"A River Called Titas\" (1973), \"Dry Summer\" (1964), \"Trances\" (1981) and \"The Housemaid\" (1960). The second volume also includes 6 titles, \"Insiang\" (1976), \"Mysterious Object at Noon\" (2000), \"Revenge\" (1989), \"Limite\" (1931), \"Law of the Border\" (1967), and \"Taipei Story\" (1985). The third volume includes 6 titles as well: \"Luc\u00eda\" (1968), \"After the Curfew\" (1954), \"Pixote\" (1980), \"Dos monjes\" (1934), \"Soleil \u00d4\" (1970), and \"Downpour\" (1972). The 6 films included in the fourth set are \"Sambizanga\" (1972), \"Prisioneros de la tierra\" (1939), \"Chess of the Wind\" (1979), \"Muna Moto\" (1975), \"Two Girls on the Street\" (1939), and \"Kalpana\" (1948).\nThe African Film Heritage Project.\nIn 2017, Scorsese also introduced The African Film Heritage Project (AFHP), which is a joint initiative between Scorsese's non-profit The Film Foundation, UNESCO, Cineteca di Bologna, and the Pan African Federation of Filmmakers (FEPACI). The project aims to locate and preserve 50 classic African films, some thought lost and others beyond repair, with hopes to make them available to audiences everywhere. In an interview with \"Cinema Escapist\" in 2018, Scorsese talked about the ambitious collaboration saying, \"Our first goal is to launch and conduct a thorough investigation in film archives and laboratories around the world, in order to locate the best surviving elements\u2014original negatives, we hope\u2014for our first 50 titles.\" He also stated that \"Restoration is always the primary goal, of course, but within the initiative, it's also a starting point of a process that follows through with exhibition and dissemination in Africa and abroad. And of course, our restoration process always includes the creation of preservation elements.\"\nIn 2019, the AFHP, announced that they would screen restorations of four African films on their home continent for the first time as part of the 50th anniversary of the Pan African Film Festival of Ouagadougou. The movies in question are Med Hondo's \"Soleil \u00d4\" (1970), Mohammed Lakhdar-Hamina's \"Chronique des ann\u00e9es de braise\" (1975), Timit\u00e9 Bassori's \"La Femme au couteau\" (1969), and Jean-Pierre Dikongue-Pipa's \"Muna Moto\" (1975).\nFilm activism.\nScorsese has mentioned his mentors being such filmmakers as John Cassavetes, Roger Corman, and Michael Powell. In film critic Roger Ebert's book, \"Scorsese by Ebert\", Ebert praised Scorsese for championing and supporting other filmmakers by serving as an executive producer on projects of filmmakers such as Antoine Fuqua, Wim Wenders, Kenneth Lonergan, Stephen Frears, Allison Anders, Spike Lee, and John McNaughton. More recently he has executive produced the films of the Safdie Brothers, Joanna Hogg, Korn\u00e9l Mundrucz\u00f3, Josephine Decker, Danielle Lessovitz, Alice Rohrwacher, Jonas Carpignano, Am\u00e9lie van Elmbt, and Celina Murga. Scorsese has also chosen to name filmmakers throughout the years that he admires such as fellow New York City-based directors Woody Allen and Spike Lee, as well as other artists such as Wes Anderson, Bong Joon-ho, Greta Gerwig, Ari Aster, Kelly Reichardt, Claire Denis, Noah Baumbach, Paul Thomas Anderson, Christopher Nolan, the Coen Brothers, and Kathryn Bigelow.\nFavorite films.\nScorsese listed \"Pickup on South Street\" as one of his favorite films. \"The Band Wagon\" is his favorite musical.\nIn 2012, Scorsese participated in the \"Sight &amp; Sound\" film polls of that year. Held every ten years to select the greatest films of all time, contemporary directors were asked to select ten films of their choice. Scorsese, however, picked 12, which are listed below in alphabetical order:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTen years later, Scorsese participated again in the \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls, picking 15 films, the same 12 of the 2012 list, plus the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 1999, after the death of Gene Siskel, Scorsese joined Roger Ebert as the guest co-host for an episode of \"Siskel &amp; Ebert\" where they each stated their 10 favorite films of the 1990s. Scorsese's list numerically is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2012, Scorsese recommended 39 foreign films to Colin Levy.\nIn 2019, Martin Scorsese contributed his list of favorite films to LaCinetek, a streaming platform that compiles film lists from filmmakers worldwide. As a tireless cinephile, Scorsese submitted two lists: one featuring 73 \"founding\" films and another \"alternative list\" with 106 films. He also included a letter to C\u00e9dric Klapisch, one of LaCinetek's founders, explaining his selections and noting that many filmmakers and films he admires are not included in these lists.\nLegacy and honors.\nScorsese's films have been nominated for numerous awards both nationally and internationally, with an Academy Award win for \"The Departed\". In 1991, he received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement. In 1997, Scorsese received the AFI Life Achievement Award. In 1998, the American Film Institute placed three Scorsese films on their list of the greatest American movies: \"Raging Bull\" at No. 24, \"Taxi Driver\" at No. 47, and \"Goodfellas\" at No. 94. For the tenth-anniversary edition of their list, \"Raging Bull\" was moved to No. 4, \"Taxi Driver\" was moved to No. 52, and \"Goodfellas\" was moved to No. 92. In 2001, the American Film Institute placed two Scorsese films on their list of the most \"heart-pounding movies\" in American cinema: \"Taxi Driver\" at No. 22 and \"Raging Bull\" at No. 51. At a ceremony in Paris, France, on January 5, 2005, Martin Scorsese was awarded the French Legion of Honour in recognition of his contribution to cinema. On February 8, 2006, at the 48th Annual Grammy Awards, Scorsese was awarded the Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video for \"No Direction Home\".\nLynda Myles organized a retrospective of Scorsese's work at the Edinburgh International Film Festival in 1975.\nIn 2007, Scorsese was listed among \"Time\" magazine's 100 Most Influential People in The World. In August 2007, Scorsese was named the second-greatest director of all time in a poll by \"Total Film\" magazine, in front of Steven Spielberg and behind Alfred Hitchcock. In 2007, Scorsese was honored by the National Italian American Foundation (N.I.A.F.) at the nonprofit's thirty-second Anniversary Gala. During the ceremony, Scorsese helped launch N.I.A.F.'s Jack Valenti Institute in memory of former foundation board member and past president of the Motion Picture Association of America (M.P.A.A.) Jack Valenti. The Institute provides support to Italian film students in the U.S. Scorsese received his award from Mary Margaret Valenti, Jack Valenti's widow. Certain pieces of Scorsese's film-related material and personal papers are contained in the Wesleyan University Cinema Archives, to which scholars and media experts from around the world may have full access. On September 11, 2007, the Kennedy Center Honors committee, which recognizes career excellence and cultural influence, named Scorsese as one of the honorees for the year. On June 17, 2008, the American Film Institute placed two of Scorsese's films on the AFI's 10 Top 10 list: \"Raging Bull\" at number one for the Sports genre and \"Goodfellas\" at number two for the Gangster genre. In 2013, the staff of \"Entertainment Weekly\" voted \"Mean Streets\" the seventh greatest film ever made.\nOn January 17, 2010, at the 67th Golden Globe Awards, Scorsese was the recipient of the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award. On September 18, 2011, at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards, Scorsese won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for his work on the series premiere of \"Boardwalk Empire\". In 2011, Scorsese received an honorary doctorate from the National Film School in Lodz. At the awards ceremony he said, \"I feel like I'm a part of this school and that I attended it,\" paying tribute to the films of Wajda, Munk, Has, Polanski and Skolimowski. King Missile wrote \"Martin Scorsese\" in his honor. On February 12, 2012, at the 65th British Academy Film Awards, Scorsese was the recipient of the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award.\nOn September 16, 2012, Scorsese won two Emmy Awards for Outstanding Directing for Nonfiction Programming and Outstanding Nonfiction Special for his work on the documentary \"George Harrison: Living in the Material World\". In 2013, the National Endowment for the Humanities selected Scorsese for the Jefferson Lecture, the U.S. federal government's highest honor for achievement in the humanities. He was the first filmmaker chosen for the honor. His lecture, delivered on April 1, 2013, at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, was titled \"Persistence of Vision: Reading the Language of Cinema\". Scorsese was appointed to the Polish Gold Medal for Merit to Culture \u2013 Gloria Artis on April 11, 2017, in recognition of his contribution to Polish cinema. He received the Medal on May 29, 2025.\nScorsese has also garnered favorable responses from numerous film giants including Ingmar Bergman, Frank Capra, Jean-Luc Godard, Werner Herzog, Elia Kazan, Akira Kurosawa, David Lean, Michael Powell, Satyajit Ray, and Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut. He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 2008. He was awarded an Honorary Doctorate from the University of Oxford on June 20, 2018. As of 2021, four of Scorsese's films (\"Mean Streets\", \"Taxi Driver\", \"Raging Bull\", and \"Goodfellas\") have been selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the National Film Registry for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". In commenting on Scorsese's 2019 film \"The Irishman\", Guillermo del Toro cited Scorsese's ability as a director for the depiction of character development comparable to the films of \"Renoir, Bresson, Bergman, Oliveira or Kurosawa\". Sam Mendes, in his acceptance speech after winning the 2020 Golden Globe Award for Best Director for \"1917\", praised Scorsese's contribution to cinema, stating, \"There's not one director in this room, not one director in the world, that is not in the shadow of Martin Scorsese... I just have to say that.\" Bong Joon-ho, in his acceptance speech for the 2020 Academy Award for Best Director for \"Parasite\", said, \"When I was young and studying cinema, there was a saying that I carved deep into my heart, which is, the most personal is the most creative.\" He then said that this quote had come from Scorsese, which prompted the audience to give Scorsese a standing ovation.\nIn 2021, lifelong friend George Lucas and his wife Mellody Hobson through the Hobson/Lucas Family Foundation made a donation to NYU to establish the Martin Scorsese Institute of Global Cinematic Arts.\nOn October 17, 2025, Apple TV+ premiered a five-part documentary series about Scorsese titled \"Mr. Scorsese\", directed by Rebecca Miller.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18996", "revid": "3664477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18996", "title": "Mean Streets", "text": "1973 film by Martin Scorsese\nMean Streets is a 1973 American neo-noir crime drama film directed by Martin Scorsese, from a screenplay co-written with Mardik Martin. It stars Harvey Keitel and Robert De Niro, along with David Proval, Amy Robinson, Richard Romanus, and Cesare Danova. Scorsese's third feature film, it centers on a group of troubled young men in New York's Little Italy, and centers on many themes the director would later revisit, including the Mafia, Italian-American identity, urban life, and Catholic guilt.\nProduced independently and released by Warner Bros. on October 2, 1973, \"Mean Streets\" received positive reviews from critics and marked Scorsese's arrival as a major figure of the New Hollywood movement. Robert De Niro won the National Society of Film Critics and the New York Film Critics Circle awards for Best Supporting Actor for his role as \"Johnny Boy\" Civello.\nIn 1997, \"Mean Streets\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nCharlie Cappa, a young Italian American in the Little Italy neighborhood of New York City, is hampered by his feeling of responsibility toward his reckless younger friend John \"Johnny Boy\" Civello, a small-time gambler and degenerate who refuses to work and owes money to many loan sharks. Charlie is also having a secret affair with Johnny's cousin Teresa, who has epilepsy and is ostracized because of her condition\u2014especially by Charlie's Uncle Giovanni, a powerful mafioso, and is told to stay away from her. Giovanni also wants Charlie to distance himself from Johnny, saying that \"honorable men go with honorable men\".\nCharlie is torn between his devout Catholicism and his illicit Mafia work for Giovanni. Johnny becomes increasingly self-destructive and disrespectful of his Mafia-connected creditors. Failing to receive redemption in the Church, Charlie seeks it through sacrificing himself on Johnny's behalf. At Tony's bar, a loan shark and friend named Michael comes looking for Johnny again to pay his debts; he has been doing so for a few days and is becoming increasingly frustrated, thinking that Johnny is taking advantage of him and that he is not going to pay up, with Charlie promising to convince Johnny.\nTo his surprise, Johnny insults him and tells him that he is not going to pay back the money. Michael lunges at Johnny, who pulls a gun. After a tense standoff, Michael walks away and Charlie convinces Johnny that they should leave town for a brief period. Teresa insists on coming with them. Charlie borrows a car and they drive off, leaving the neighborhood without incident.\nA car that has been following them suddenly pulls up with Michael at the wheel and his henchman, Jimmy Shorts, in the backseat. Jimmy fires several shots at Charlie's car, hitting Johnny in the neck and Charlie in the arm, causing Charlie to crash the car into a fire hydrant. Teresa is injured in the crash. Johnny is seen in an alley staggering toward a white light that is revealed to be a police car, and Charlie gets out of the crashed vehicle and kneels in the water spurting from the hydrant, dazed and bleeding. Paramedics take Teresa and Charlie away while Johnny's fate remains unknown.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Harvey Keitel as Charlie Cappa\nDevelopment.\nApart from his first actual feature, \"Who's That Knocking at My Door\", this was Scorsese's first feature film of his own design. Director John Cassavetes told him after he completed his second film, \"Boxcar Bertha\", a directing project given to him by early independent filmmaker Roger Corman: \"You\u2019ve just spent a year of your life making a piece of shit.\" This inspired Scorsese to make a film about his own experiences, inspired his upbringing in New York's Little Italy. Cassavetes told Scorsese he should do something like \"Who's That Knocking at My Door\", which Cassavetes had liked.\nProduction.\nWriting.\nThe screenplay began as a continuation of the characters in \"Who's That Knocking\". Scorsese and Mardik Martin worked on-and-off on the script, whose working title was \"Season of the Witch\", for seven years. Scorsese changed the title from \"Season of the Witch\" to \"Mean Streets\", a reference to Raymond Chandler's essay \"The Simple Art of Murder\", where Chandler writes, \"But down these mean streets a man must go who is not himself mean, who is neither tarnished nor afraid.\" The title was recommended by Jay Cocks, then a film critic, who later became a screenwriter.\nScorsese sent the script to Corman, who agreed to back the film if all the characters were black. Scorsese was anxious to make the film so he considered this option, but actress Verna Bloom arranged a meeting with potential financial backer Jonathan Taplin, the road manager for The Band. Taplin liked the script and was willing to raise the $300,000 Scorsese wanted if Corman promised, in writing, to distribute the film. The blaxploitation suggestion came to nothing when funding from Warner Bros. allowed him to make the film with Italian-American characters.\nCasting.\nOriginally, the film's financiers wanted Jon Voight in the role of Charlie, but he turned them down. Robert De Niro requested the part, but Scorsese cast Harvey Keitel, as he'd written the character with Keitel in mind. De Niro and Keitel considered switching roles, but Scorsese vetoed it.\nMartin Scorsese provides the voiceover narration heard throughout the film despite not appearing as a character in it, a technique he borrowed from Federico Fellini's \"I Vitelloni\" (1953).\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography lasted 27 days, between April and June 1973. Due to the low budget, the majority of the film's interiors were shot in Los Angeles, with seven days of location shooting in New York City. The church scenes were filmed at St. Patrick's Old Cathedral in Little Italy, while the 'Volpe Bar' was a restaurant in the Nolita neighborhood of Manhattan. Many scenes were shot without permits, with Scorsese calling favors from his old friends and neighbors, including Francis Ford Coppola.\nMany of the crew were veterans of Roger Corman productions, and students from New York University, to keep costs down. Cinematographer Kent L. Wakeford was a veteran documentary cameraman who had never shot a feature film before.\nThe scenes where Harvey Keitel and Robert De Niro fight with trash cans and talk behind the bar were completely improvised by the actors.\nRelease.\nHome media.\n\"Mean Streets\" was released on VHS and Betamax in 1985. The film debuted as a letterboxed LaserDisc on October 7, 1991, in the US. It was released on Blu-ray on April 6, 2011, in France, and in America on July 17, 2012. The film received a 4K Ultra HD and Blu-ray release from The Criterion Collection on November 21, 2023.\nThe film also received a 4K Ultra HD and Blu-ray release from Second Sight on January 15, 2024.\nReception.\n\"Mean Streets\" received immense critical acclaim on its release. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 92% based on 78 reviews, with an average rating of 8.7/10. The website's critics consensus reads: \"\"Mean Streets\" is a powerful tale of urban sin and guilt that marks Scorsese's arrival as an important cinematic voice and features electrifying performances from Harvey Keitel and Robert De Niro.\" According to Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average of 96 out of 100, based on eleven critics, the film received \"universal acclaim\".\nPauline Kael of \"The New Yorker\" was among the enthusiastic critics, calling it \"a true original of our period, a triumph of personal filmmaking\" and \"dizzyingly sensual\".\nVincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" reflected that \"no matter how bleak the milieu, no matter how heartbreaking the narrative, some films are so thoroughly, beautifully realized they have a kind of tonic effect that has no relation to the subject matter\".\nDavid Denby, writing for \"Sight and Sound\", praised the film's acting, saying that Scorsese had used improvisation \"better than anyone in American movies so far\". He concluded by saying, \"Scorsese's impulse to express all he feels about life in every scene (a cannier, more prudent director wouldn't have started his film with that great De Niro monologue), and thus to wrench his audience upwards into a new state of consciousness with one prolonged and devastating gesture, infinitely hurting and infinitely tender. \"Mean Streets\" comes close enough to this feverish ideal to warrant our love and much of our respect.\"\nRetrospectively, Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" inducted \"Mean Streets\" on his Great Movies list and wrote: \"In countless ways, right down to the detail of modern TV crime shows, \"Mean Streets\" is one of the source points of modern movies.\"\nIn 2011, \"Empire\" listed the film as #1 on its \"50 Greatest American Independent Films\" list. Additionally, in 2013 \"Entertainment Weekly\" staff voted the film the seventh greatest of all time. In 2015, it was ranked 93rd on the BBC's list of the 100 greatest American films. The film also appeared on \"\"Variety\"'s 100 Greatest Films of All Time\" list in 2022.\nIn 1997, \"Mean Streets\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nSoundtrack.\nScorsese mainly used vintage pop songs as the movie soundtrack, a revolutionary move at the time. The use of the song \"Be My Baby\" by the Ronettes, at the start of the film is considered one of the most memorable moments of Scorsese's career, and according to critic Owen Gleiberman, \"arguably the single greatest use of a pop song in Hollywood history\". Lucy Sante wrote \"\"Mean Streets\" changed soundtracks forever.\"\nOther songs that appear on the film are:\nNo official release of the soundtrack has been published.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the 2005 novel \"Remainder\", the unnamed narrator venerated the authenticity of De Niro's character as \u201cnatural when he does things,\u201d unlike the narrator himself, and an effort to feel similar ease with himself is the quest that catalyzes the book's plot.\nIn the Arctic Monkeys song \"Knee Socks\", there's a lyric that says \"like the beginning of Mean Streets you could be my baby\" in reference to the song \"Be My Baby\" by the Ronettes that is used in the movie's iconic opening credits. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18997", "revid": "1303505729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18997", "title": "Marcel Achard", "text": "French writer (1899\u20131974)\nMarcel Achard (5 July 1899 \u2013 4 September 1974) was a French playwright and screenwriter whose popular sentimental comedies maintained his position as a highly recognizable name in his country's theatrical and literary circles for five decades. He was elected to the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise in 1959.\nThemes and variations within a philosophical outlook.\nA native of the Rh\u00f4ne d\u00e9partement's Urban Community of Lyon, France's second largest metropolitan area, Marcel-Auguste Ferr\u00e9ol was born in Sainte-Foy-l\u00e8s-Lyon, one of the city's suburbs, and adopted his pen name at the start of his writing career in the early 1920s. Able to absorb knowledge quickly, he became, in 1916, in the midst of World War I, a village schoolteacher at the age of 17. In 1919, a few months after the end of the war, the 20-year-old aspiring writer arrived in Paris and found jobs as a prompter at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre du Vieux-Colombier and as a journalist for various publications, including the major daily newspaper, \"Le Figaro\".\nMarcel Achard wrote his first play in 1922 and had a major success the following year when renowned actor-director Charles Dullin staged his play \"Voulez-vous jouer avec mo\u00e2?\" [\"Will You Play with Me?\"], a sensitively delicate comedy about circus and its clowns, casting the playwright in a small part, as one of the clowns. The production set a pattern for the remainder of his theatrical output, most of which can be considered as 20th century reworkings of stock characters and situations from the Italian traditional Commedia dell'arte. The personages of Pierrot and Columbine are transported into modern-day settings and inserted into an occasionally mawkish or nostalgic love plot with equal doses of laughter mingled with pain and regret.\nThese themes were expanded upon in two of his most popular plays of the period\u20141929's \"Jean de la Lune\" [\"John of the Moon\" a/k/a \"The Dreamer\"] and 1932's \"Domino\". \"Jean\" showed how the unwavering trust of Jef, the faithful Pierrot prototype, transforms his scandalously adulterous wife into his idealized image of her, while \"Domino\" presented another unfaithful wife who pays a gigolo to make a pretense of courting her so as to distract her husband from her real lover, but the gigolo manages to act his character with such pretend sincerity that she winds up falling in love with this fictional persona.\nThe distinctive quality of Achard's plays was their dreamlike mood of sentimental melancholy, underscored by the very titles which were primarily taken from popular bittersweet songs of the day. 1924's \"Marlbrough s'en va-t-en guerre\" [\"Marlborough Gets Himself Off to War\"], 1935's \"Noix de coco\" [\"Coconuts\"], 1946's \"Aupr\u00e8s de ma blonde\" [\"Close to My Girlfriend\"] and \"Savez-vous planter les choux?\" [\"Do You Know How to Plant Cabbage?\"] and 1948's \"Nous irons \u00e0 Valparaiso\" [\"We're Going to Valparaiso\"] are among some examples of this specific style.\nCareer peak in the interwar period.\nAchard's greatest successes and popularity were in the period between the two World Wars when contemporary critics favorably compared him to some of his renowned French predecessors such as Pierre de Marivaux and Alfred de Musset. Postwar pundits were not as kind, pointing out the rather narrow scope of human psyche that he represented and deprecatingly referring to him as a \"sp\u00e9cialiste de l'amour\" [\"love specialist\"] for the sickly-sweet characteristics of his poetic imagination.\nThe critics focused, of course, on Achard's most popular plays, disregarding the fact that the reason Achard continued to write them is precisely because they met with such unvarying success. His less-well known works, however, show innovative techniques and original themes. 1929's \"La Belle Marini\u00e8re\" [\"The Beautiful Lady of the Canals\" a/k/a \"The Beautiful Bargewoman\"] still has some of the excessively-poetic dialogue, but is overall a realistic play about a love triangle involving a bargeman, his wife and his best friend and companion. Similarly, 1933's \"La femme en blanc\" [\"The Woman in White\"] uses a then-new technique of recreating for the audience events as they are being described by the play's characters. In 1938's \"Le corsaire\" [\"The Privateer\"], a \"play-in-a-play\" device, pioneered by Luigi Pirandello, depicts film actors portraying the life of a long-ago pirate, finding themselves caught in an endless loop of similarities. The same year saw the production of his most controversial play, \"Adam\", which strove to give insight into the conflicted emotions of an unhappy homosexual. Although the very subject matter caused it to be considered scandalous at the time, its brief revival three decades later, in the open and radicalized culture of the late 1960s, when the author was approaching his 70th birthday, found the once-ahead-of-its-time work judged as a tame and dated period piece below Achard's usual literary standard.\nSuccessful postwar plays.\nAfter World War II, despite the criticism, Achard's literary output continued unabated. Among his most successful later plays were 1952's \"Les compagnons de la Marjolaine\" [\"The Companions of Marjoram\"] and 1955's \"Le mal d'amour\" [\"Love Sickness\"]. The greatest popularity, however, was achieved by a 1957 comedy about a testy, ill-tempered character nicknamed \"Patate\" [\"Spud\"] and a 1962 comic mystery \"L'Idiote\" [\"The Idiot\"], best known in America as the basis for the play and film \"A Shot in the Dark\".\nFour of Achard's plays also had Broadway runs. \"Domino\", adapted by actress-writer Grace George, opened at the Playhouse Theatre on 16 August 1932 and closed after seven performances. The title role went to Rod La Rocque, a top star of the silent cinema, whose career was on the wane following the advent of the talkies, and the lead actress was Jessie Royce Landis. Seventeen years later, a much better run was enjoyed by \"Aupr\u00e8s de ma blonde\", which was reworked by S. N. Behrman into \"I Know My Love\". It opened at the Shubert Theatre on 2 November 1949 and ran for 247 performances, closing on 3 June 1950. It was directed by and starred Alfred Lunt and his leading lady was, as always, his wife, Lynn Fontanne. Nine years after that premiere, however, \"Patate\", which played to sold-out theaters in Paris, could not translate its elusive charm to American audiences and repeated the seven-performance fiasco of the previous single-name character, \"Domino\". The fellow whose nickname made up the title was played by Tom Ewell, and the female lead, Susan Oliver, won the Theatre World Award for her performance, while the Irwin Shaw adaptation opened at Henry Miller's Theatre on 28 October 1958 and closed on November 1. Ultimately, it would be \"A Shot in the Dark\", three years later, which would boast the longest run. Adapted by Harry Kurnitz and directed by Harold Clurman, it racked up an impressive 389 performances, opening at the Booth Theatre on 18 October 1961 and closing on 22 September 1962. The stars were Julie Harris, Walter Matthau and William Shatner.\nAchard's numerous screenplays, frequently centering on relatively recent historical events and personalities, include 1936's \"Mayerling\", 1938's \"Orage\" and 1942's \"F\u00e9licie Nanteuil\". He presided over the Cannes Film Festival in 1958 and 1959 and had a similar role at the Venice Film Festival in 1960. It was also in 1959 that he was finally, at the age of 60, elected to the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise.\nDeath.\nMarcel Achard died of diabetes in his Paris home two months after his 75th birthday. He was survived by his wife, Lily.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18998", "revid": "51002682", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18998", "title": "Myasthenia gravis", "text": "Autoimmune disease resulting in skeletal muscle weakness\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nMyasthenia gravis (MG) is a long-term neuromuscular junction disease that leads to varying degrees of skeletal muscle weakness. The most commonly affected muscles are those of the eyes, face, and swallowing. It can result in double vision, drooping eyelids, and difficulties in talking and walking. Onset can be sudden. Those affected often have a large thymus or develop a thymoma.\nMyasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease of the neuromuscular junction which results from antibodies that block or destroy nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (AChR) at the junction between the nerve and muscle. This prevents nerve impulses from triggering muscle contractions. Most cases are due to immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) and IgG3 antibodies that attack AChR in the postsynaptic membrane, causing complement-mediated damage and muscle weakness. Rarely, an inherited genetic defect in the neuromuscular junction results in a similar condition known as congenital myasthenia. Babies of mothers with myasthenia may have symptoms during their first few months of life, known as neonatal myasthenia or more specifically transient neonatal myasthenia gravis. Diagnosis can be supported by blood tests for specific antibodies, the edrophonium test, electromyography (EMG), or a nerve conduction study.\nMild forms of myasthenia gravis may be treated with medications known as acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, such as neostigmine and pyridostigmine. Immunosuppressants, such as prednisone or azathioprine, may also be required for more severe symptoms that acetylcholinesterase inhibitors are insufficient to treat. The surgical removal of the thymus may improve symptoms in certain cases. Plasmapheresis and high-dose intravenous immunoglobulin may be used when oral medications are insufficient to treat severe symptoms, including during sudden flares of the condition. If the breathing muscles become significantly weak, mechanical ventilation may be required. Once intubated acetylcholinesterase inhibitors may be temporarily held to reduce airway secretions.\nMyasthenia gravis affects 50 to 200 people per million. It is newly diagnosed in 3 to 30 people per million each year. Diagnosis has become more common due to increased awareness. Myasthenia gravis most commonly occurs in women under the age of 40 and in men over the age of 60. It is uncommon in children. With treatment, most live to an average life expectancy. The word is from the Greek \"mys\", \"muscle\" and \"asthenia\" \"weakness\", and the Latin \"gravis\", \"serious\".\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe initial, main symptom in myasthenia gravis is painless weakness of specific muscles, not fatigue. The muscle weakness becomes progressively worse (fatigue) during periods of physical activity and improves after periods of rest. Typically, the weakness and fatigue are worse toward the end of the day. Myasthenia gravis generally starts with ocular (eye) weakness; it might then progress to a more severe generalized form, characterized by weakness in the extremities or in muscles that govern basic life functions.\nEyes.\nIn about two-thirds of people, the initial symptom of myasthenia gravis is related to the muscles around the eye. Eyelid drooping (ptosis may occur due to weakness of m. levator palpebrae superioris) and double vision (diplopia, due to weakness of the extraocular muscles). Eye symptoms tend to get worse when watching television, reading, or driving, particularly in bright conditions. Consequently, some affected individuals choose to wear sunglasses. The term \"ocular myasthenia gravis\" describes a subtype of myasthenia gravis where muscle weakness is confined to the eyes, i.e. extraocular muscles, m. levator palpebrae superioris, and m. orbicularis oculi. This subtype may evolve into generalized myasthenia gravis, usually after a few years. If an individual with ocular myasthenia gravis does not generalize for three or more years after the onset of symptoms, then generalized myasthenia gravis is unlikely to occur.\nEating.\nThe weakness of the muscles involved in swallowing may lead to swallowing difficulty (dysphagia). Typically, this means that some food may be left in the mouth after an attempt to swallow, or food and liquids may regurgitate into the nose rather than go down the throat (velopharyngeal insufficiency). Weakness of the muscles that move the jaw (muscles of mastication) may cause difficulty chewing. In individuals with myasthenia gravis, chewing tends to become more tiring when chewing tough, fibrous foods. Difficulty in swallowing, chewing, and speaking is the first symptom in about one-sixth of individuals.\nSpeaking.\nWeakness of the muscles involved in speaking may lead to dysarthria and hypophonia. Speech may be slow and slurred, or have a nasal quality. In some cases, a singing hobby or profession must be abandoned.\nHead and neck.\nDue to weakness of the muscles of facial expression and muscles of mastication, facial weakness may manifest as the inability to hold the mouth closed (the \"hanging jaw sign\") and as a snarling expression when attempting to smile. With drooping eyelids, facial weakness may make the individual appear sleepy or sad. Difficulty in holding the head upright may occur.\nOther.\nThe muscles that control breathing and limb movements can also be affected; rarely do these present as the first symptoms of myasthenia gravis, but develop over months to years. In a myasthenic crisis, a paralysis of the respiratory muscles occurs, necessitating assisted ventilation to sustain life. Crises may be triggered by various biological stressors such as infection, fever, an adverse reaction to medication, or emotional stress.\nCauses.\nMedications that cause or worsen myasthenia gravis.\nAntibiotics: In the macrolide family of antibiotics, azithromycin, telithromycin (which is no longer available in the U.S. market), and erythromycin are reported to exacerbate myasthenia gravis. In the fluoroquinolone antibiotic family, ciprofloxacin, norfloxacin, ofloxacin, and moxifloxacin are reported to exacerbate myasthenia gravis. And, In the aminoglycoside family of antibiotics, gentamicin, streptomycin, and neomycin are reported to exacerbate myasthenia gravis. The aminoglycoside tobramycin has not been reported to exacerbate myasthenia gravis and may be used in people that require aminoglycoside treatment. Because of the rarity or absent reports on their exacerbation of myasthenia gravis, the following antibiotics are considered safe to use in people with myasthenia gravis: the cephalosporin class of drugs, sulfa drugs, the tetracycline group of drugs, clindamycin, polymyxin B, and nitrofurantoin.\nImmune checkpoint inhibitors: Immune checkpoint inhibitors promote certain types of autoimmune responses by blocking checkpoint pathways that inhibit these responses. They are used to treat cancers that promote their own growth and spread by stimulating checkpoint pathways. These checkpoint inhibitors include pembrolizumab, nivolumab, ipilimumab, avelumab, atezolizumab, and durvalumab. From a total 5,898 people who received these drugs, 52 developed new onset myasthenia gravis and 11 had a flare of their preexisting myasthenia gravis. The symptoms of myasthenia gravis developed within 6 days to 16 weeks (median time 4\u2009weeks). Their medicine-induced myasthenia gravis symptoms were often severe with 29 people developing respiratory failure that required mechanical ventilation. Other studies have reported that these checkpoint inhibitors cause respiratory failure in 45% and death in 25\u201340% of people with myasthenia gravis.\nStatins: Statins are drugs that lower blood cholesterol levels in order to reduce the risk of developing a cardiovascular disease due to atherosclerosis. In a 2019 review of 169 people who were reported to develop myasthenia gravis or had worsened myasthenia gravis symptoms while taking a statin, 138 had developed generalized myasthenia gravis, 13 had developed ocular myasthenia gravis, and 18 had worsening of their myasthenia gravis. Following discontinuance of the statin and treatment of their myasthenia gravis, 63 people fully recovered, 27 people were recovering, 19 people had not yet recovered, 5 people recovered but had ongoing symptoms, 1 individual had died, and there was no follow-up data for 54 people. Among these cases, 56% were considered to be serious. A 2024 study evaluated 593 people who had myasthenia gravis and 790,399 people who did not have myasthenia gravis after being treated with a statin. The statin-treatment caused small but statistically significant increases in numbers of exacerbations of myasthenia gravis as well as new onsets of myasthenia gravis in people without the disorder. The development of myasthenia gravis in people without myasthenia gravis appeared to be more likely in people over 60 years of age. Six non-statin cholesterol-lowering drugs, nicotinic acid, cholestyramine, colestipol, colesevelam, alirocumab, and evolocumab, have been used in people without causing or worsening myasthenia gravis.\nBeta blockers: Beta blockers (i.e., \u03b2-blockers) are drugs that block the binding of two stress hormones, epinephrine and norepinephrine, to their target beta receptors. They are used to decrease the heart rate, reduce the force of heart contractions, and relax blood vessels in order to lower blood pressure and reduce the workload on the heart. In one study the odds of an myasthenia gravis exacerbation after taking a beta blocker was increased 2.7-fold compared with people with myasthenia gravis not taking a beta blocker. These exacerbations generally did not occur immediately after their usage and therefore may have reflected other comorbidities in people with myasthenia gravis being treated with beta blockers. In a study of 20 people with myasthenia gravis treated with a beta blocker, 3 who received oral metoprolol, 9 who received intravenous metoprolol, 1 who received oral labetalol, and 9 who received intravenous labetalol, only one (i.e., 5%) of the 20 participants (who received intravenous labetalol) reacted with an exacerbation of myasthenia gravis symptoms.\nIa antiarrhythmic agents: A type Ia antiarrhythmic agent (see Vaughan Williams classification), i.e., procainamide, which is used to treat cardiac arrhythmias, has caused respiratory failure in people with myasthenia gravis who, prior to being treated with it, did not have respiratory symptoms. Furthermore, this drug has caused MG-like symptoms in people who have kidney failure but do not have myasthenia gravis. And, procainamide worsened muscle dysfunction in a rat model of human myasthenia gravis.\nDepolarizing neuromuscular blockers: Depolarizing neuromuscular blockers suppress the neurons' signaling at neuromuscular junctions thereby reducing the affected skeletal muscles contractibility. These blockers are used as muscle relaxants in people undergoing surgery. Succinylcholine is the only depolarizing neuromuscular blocker available in the US market. Succinylcholine's ability to induce or worsen myasthenia gravis is unclear. It has been suggested to cause life-threatening side effects such as rhabdomyolysis, myotonia, and hyperkalemia in people with muscle disease although the role of succinylcholine in causing these side effects also remains unclear.\nInhalation anesthetics: Inhalation anesthetics are general anesthetics that are delivered by inhalation generally for people undergoing surgery. People with myasthenia gravis undergoing surgery with inhaled anesthetics (i.e., halothane, isoflurane, enflurane, and sevoflurane) may develop neuromuscular blockage and have an increased incidence of developing a life-threatening myasthenia crisis which must be treated by prolonged mechanical ventilation. In a study of 795 people with myasthenia gravis undergoing surgical removal of their thymus under general anesthesia, sugammadex, a neuromuscular-blocking drug (i.e., a drug that reverses neuromuscular blockade) significantly reduced the development of this crisis.\nGlucocorticoids: Glucocorticoids are anti-inflammatory agents that in initial studies were used at high dosages and found to worsen myasthenia gravis in 25-75% of cases. However, further studies found that glucocorticoids do have favorable effects on myasthenia gravis when taken long term. Two glucocorticoids, oral prednisone and prednisolone, are the first-line immunosuppressive treatment for myasthenia gravis. A review published in 2020 on 27 earlier publications found that myasthenia gravis was worsened by glucocorticoids in 33.3% of patients. These myasthenia gravis exacerbations seemed significantly greater for cortisone, intermediate for prednisone, and lowest for methylprednisolone. High dosages or alternate day dosages of prednisone were associated with exacerbation more frequently than low-dose treatments. Most of these exacerbations were mild to moderately severe and developed more often in patients who were older in age or had generalized myasthenia gravis, myasthenia gravis with bulbar symptoms, severe symptoms, a thymoma, or a history of thymectomy to remove a thymoma. These studies, however, were mostly of low quality. Prospective studies comparing the effects of the different corticosteroids and corticosteroids to define the rate and severity of the myasthenia exacerbations are needed.\nCalcium channel blockers: Calcium channel blockers (e.g., felodipine, nifedipine, and verapamil) are drugs that lower blood pressure in people with hypertension. Felodipine and nifedipine are reported to worsen myasthenia gravis and nifedipine and verapamil are reported to cause respiratory failure in people with severe generalized myasthenia gravis.\nPenicillamine: Penicillamine is a chelation therapy drug used to treat various diseases (e.g., Wilson's disease). About 1-2% of individuals treated long term with penicillamine develop myasthenia gravis and/or develop low concentrations of antibodies to AChR. Their myasthenia gravis is often mild and predominantly ocular myasthenia gravis, becomes evident usually 6\u20137 months (range one month to 8 years) after starting the drug, and goes into complete remission in 70% of the cases within 6\u201310 months after discontinuing the drug.\nBotulinum toxin A: Botulinum toxin A (sold under the brand name Botox, Jeuveau, and Xeomin) blocks transmission at neuromuscular junctions to paralyze the muscles into which it is injected. Local botulinum toxin A injections for cosmetic purposes have on occasion caused weaknesses in distant muscles, symptoms resembling ocular or generalized myasthenia gravis in individuals with subclinical myasthenia gravis, and exacerbations of previously controlled myasthenia gravis. Botulinum toxin A has also been used to treat spasmodic torticollis (i.e., involuntarily neck turning), blepharospasm (involuntary contraction of the eye lids), and other uncontrolled facial muscle spasms in people with myasthenia gravis without side effects or with only short-lived dysphagia or diplopia.\nMagnesium: Magnesium is a chemical element that blocks skeletal muscle contraction by inhibiting the release or acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction and also by lowering the sensitivity of these muscles to acetylcholine. Respiratory failure has occurred after systemic use of magnesium (mainly in the form of intravenous magnesium sulfate injections) for pre-eclampsia and after magnesium replacement during the course of a hospitalization in people with underlying myasthenia gravis.\nLocal anesthetics: Local anesthetics cause absence of pain and all other sensations in a specific body part without loss of consciousness. There are two broad classes of these anesthetics: esters (i.e., procaine, cocaine, tetracaine benzocaine, and chloroprocaine) and amides (i.e. lidocaine, bupivacaine, etidocaine, levobupivacaine, mepivacaine, prilocaine, and ropivacaine). Ester local anesthetics are metabolized by pseudocholinesterases which in people with myasthenia gravis taking anticholinesterase drugs may lead to excessive levels of these ester anesthetics. Amide local anesthetics are not metabolized by psuedocholineesterases. Based on these considerations, amide local anesthetics are strongly preferred over ester local anesthetics in people with myasthenia gravis.\nOther Drugs: Rare cases of myasthenia gravis exacerbations have been reported in people treated with: 1) penicillins, i.e., ampicillin and amoxicillin; 2) anti-cancer medications, i.e., lorlatinib, nilotinib, imatinib (these three drugs are tyrosine kinase inhibitors that may also cause myasthenia gravis), dabrafenib, and trametinib; 3) antipsychotic drugs, i.e., chlorpromazine, pimozide, thioridazine, clozapine, olanzapine, haloperidol, quetiapine, and risperidone; 4) IFN-\u03b1 (may also cause myasthenia gravis); and 5) the chemical element, lithium. These agents can be used in people with myasthenia gravis because reports on their exacerbation (or induction) of myasthenia gravis are rare.\nPathophysiology.\nMyasthenia gravis is an autoimmune synaptopathy. The disorder occurs when the immune system malfunctions and generates antibodies that attack the body's tissues. The antibodies in MG attack a normal human protein, the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, or a related protein called MuSK, a muscle-specific kinase. Other, less frequent antibodies are found against LRP4, agrin, and titin proteins.\nHuman leukocyte antigen haplotypes are associated with increased susceptibility to myasthenia gravis and other autoimmune disorders. Relatives of people with myasthenia gravis have a higher percentage of other immune disorders.\nThe thymus gland cells form part of the body's immune system. In those with myasthenia gravis, the thymus gland is large and abnormal. It sometimes contains clusters of immune cells that indicate lymphoid hyperplasia, and the thymus gland may give wrong instructions to immune cells.\nIn pregnancy.\nFor women who are pregnant and already have MG, in a third of cases, they have been known to experience an exacerbation of their symptoms, and in those cases, it usually occurs in the first trimester of pregnancy. Signs and symptoms in pregnant mothers tend to improve during the second and third trimesters. Complete remission can occur in some mothers. Immunosuppressive therapy should be maintained throughout pregnancy, as this reduces the chance of neonatal muscle weakness, and controls the mother's myasthenia.\nAbout 10\u201320% of infants with mothers affected by the condition are born with transient neonatal myasthenia gravis (TNMG), which generally produces feeding and respiratory difficulties that develop about 12 hours to several days after birth. A child with TNMG typically responds very well to acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, and the condition generally resolves over a period of three weeks, as the antibodies diminish, and generally does not result in any complications. However, a small percentage of fetuses and newborns with TNMG, particularly those who have antibodies directed against the fetal form of the AChR (their disorder is a subtype of TNMG termed the \"acetylcholine receptor inactivation syndrome\") have a more severe form of TNMG which includes weakness in skeletal muscles regulating breathing, respiratory failure, and various deformities such as arthrogryposis multiplex congenita. In some of these cases, the mother remains asymptomatic.\nDiagnosis.\nMyasthenia gravis can be difficult to diagnose, as the symptoms can be subtle and hard to distinguish from both normal variants and other neurological disorders.\nThree types of myasthenic symptoms in children can be distinguished:\nCongenital myasthenias cause muscle weakness and fatigability similar to those of MG.\nThe signs of congenital myasthenia usually are present in the first years of childhood, although they may not be recognized until adulthood.\nSubgroup classification.\nWhen diagnosed with myasthenia gravis, an individual can be stratified into distinct subgroups based on the clinical features and serological status, e.g. affected muscle group, age of onset, thymic abnormalities, and profile of serum autoantibodies.\nBased on the affected muscle group, people with myasthenia gravis can be sub-grouped into ocular myasthenia gravis or generalized myasthenia gravis. Ocular myasthenia gravis is characterized by exclusively ocular symptoms, droopy eyelids, or double vision. Generalized myasthenia gravis has muscle weakness with a variable combination of the bulbar, axial, or limb and respiratory muscles.\nPeople with myasthenia gravis can also be sub-grouped by the age of onset: juvenile-onset myasthenia gravis (onset age \u2264 18 years of age), early-onset MG (EOMG; 19\u201350 years of age), late-onset MG (LOMG; onset &gt; 50 years of age), and very late-onset (VLOMG; onset age \u2265 65 years of age).\nThe subgroup of the autoantibody profile includes AChR seropositive, MuSK seropositive, LRP4 seropositive, and agrin seropositive.\nPhysical examination.\nDuring a physical examination to check for MG, a doctor might ask the person to perform repetitive movements. For instance, the doctor may ask one to look at a fixed point for 30 seconds and to relax the muscles of the forehead, because a person with MG and ptosis of the eyes might be involuntarily using the forehead muscles to compensate for the weakness in the eyelids. The clinical examiner might also try to elicit the \"curtain sign\" in a person by holding one of the person's eyes open, which in the case of MG will lead the other eye to close.\nTrain of four ratio test.\nThe train of four ratio (i.e., ToFr) is a neuromuscular test for monitoring neuromuscular function (see monitoring neuromuscular blockade). In this test, a peripheral nerve (most commonly the ulnar nerve) is stimulated by an electrical impulse 4 times (i.e., T1, T2, T3, T4) and the strength of contraction is measured in a muscle(s) (i.e., the abductor pollicis longus and brevis muscles for the ulnar nerve). The ratio of the amplitude of muscle contraction in response to the fourth impulse (T4) divided by the amplitude of muscle contraction in response to the first impulse is calculated. The ratio of these two contractions should be 1.0. Values less that this are regarded as abnormal. ToFr is used to determine when the effects of an administered neuromuscular-blocking drug have worn off (see postoperative residual curarization) or as the most objective, accurate, and sensitive test for determining the presence and severity of myasthenia gravis: myasthenia gravis is considered to afflict the tested muscle if its ToFr ratio (i.e., T4/T1) is less than 0.9.\nBlood tests.\nIf the diagnosis is suspected, serology can be performed:\nElectrodiagnostics.\nMuscle fibers of people with MG are easily fatigued, which the repetitive nerve stimulation test can help diagnose. In single-fiber electromyography, which is considered to be the most sensitive (although not the most specific) test for MG, a thin needle electrode is inserted into different areas of a particular muscle to record the action potentials from several samplings of different individual muscle fibers. Two muscle fibers belonging to the same motor unit are identified, and the temporal variability in their firing patterns is measured. Frequency and proportion of particular abnormal action potential patterns, called \"jitter\" and \"blocking\", are diagnostic.\nJitter refers to the abnormal variation in the time interval between action potentials of adjacent muscle fibers in the same motor unit. Blocking refers to the failure of nerve impulses to elicit action potentials in adjacent muscle fibers of the same motor unit.\nIce test.\nApplying ice for 2\u20135 minutes to the muscles reportedly has a sensitivity and specificity of 76.9% and 98.3%, respectively, for the identification of MG. Acetylcholinesterase is thought to be inhibited at the lower temperature, which is the basis for this diagnostic test. This generally is performed on the eyelids when ptosis is present and is deemed positive if a \u22652-mm rise in the eyelid occurs after the ice is removed.\nEdrophonium test.\nThis test requires the intravenous administration of edrophonium chloride or neostigmine, drugs that block the breakdown of acetylcholine by cholinesterase (acetylcholinesterase inhibitors). This test is no longer typically performed, as its use can lead to life-threatening bradycardia (slow heart rate) which requires immediate emergency attention. Production of edrophonium was discontinued in 2008.\nImaging.\nA chest X-ray may identify widening of the mediastinum suggestive of thymoma, but computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are more sensitive ways to identify thymomas and are generally done for this reason. MRI of the cranium and orbits may also be performed to exclude compressive and inflammatory lesions of the cranial nerves and ocular muscles.\nPulmonary function test.\nThe forced vital capacity may be monitored at intervals to detect increasing muscular weakness. Acutely, negative inspiratory force may be used to determine adequacy of ventilation; it is performed on those individuals with MG.\nDifferential diagnoses.\nThe muscle weakness that worsens with activity (abnormal muscle fatigue) in myasthenia gravis is a symptom shared by other neuromuscular diseases. Most of the metabolic myopathies, such as McArdle disease (GSD-V), have abnormal muscle fatigue rather than fixed muscle weakness. Also, like myasthenia gravis, exercise intolerance in McArdle disease improves with regular physical activity (performed safely using activity adaptations such as getting into second wind, the \"30 for 80 rule,\" and \"six second rule\"). A small minority of people with McArdle disease also have the comorbidity of ptosis (drooping upper eyelid). Late-onset GSD-II (Pompe disease) and GSD-XV also have muscle weakness or fatigue with comorbidities of ptosis and ophthalmoplegia; as do many of the mitochondrial myopathies.\nOther diseases that involve abnormal muscle fatigue (which may be described as exercise-induced muscle weakness, reversible muscle weakness, or muscle weakness that improves with rest) include: endocrine myopathies (such as Hoffman syndrome), Tubular aggregate myopathy (TAM), ischemia (such as intermittent claudication, popliteal artery entrapment syndrome, and chronic venous insufficiency), and poor diet or malabsorption diseases that lead to vitamin D deficiency (osteomalic myopathy). Although limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) involve fixed muscle weakness, LGMDR8 also involves muscle fatigue; as do some limb-girdle muscular dystrophy-dystroglycanopathies such as MDDGC3 (a.k.a. LGMDR15 and LGMD2O). Myofibrillar myopathy 10, dimethylglycine dehydrogenase deficiency, erythrocyte lactate transporter defect, and myopathy with myalgia, increased serum creatine kinase, with or without episodic rhabdomyolysis (MMCKR) also include muscle fatigue.\nX-linked episodic muscle weakness (EMWX) includes general muscle weakness, ptosis, and fluctuations in strength. In some individuals, fatiguability was demonstrable, the phenotype having features comparable to congenital myasthenic syndromes and channelopathies.\nSigns and symptoms of myasthenia presenting from infancy or childhood may be one of the congenital myasthenic syndromes, which can be inherited in either an autosomal dominant or recessive manner. There are currently over two dozen types of congenital myasthenic syndromes.\nLimb\u2013girdle myasthenia gravis is a distinct condition from myasthenia gravis. It is an adult-onset, autoimmune condition affecting the neuromuscular junction. However, it lacks eye abnormalities and is associated with autoimmune conditions such as systemic lupus erythematosus, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, and thymoma.\nLambert\u2013Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) is an autoimmune condition that attacks the neuromuscular junction, either as a paraneoplastic syndrome (typically older people) or associated with a non-cancerous primary autoimmune condition (typically younger people). It usually involves lower limb weakness and exercise-induced fatiguability, although the upper limbs and eyes may also be involved. Lambert's sign is the unusual improvement of grip strength that follows after squeezing the hand at maximum intensity for 2\u20133 seconds.\nManagement.\nTreatment is by medication and/or surgery. Medication consists mainly of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors to directly improve muscle function and immunosuppressant drugs to reduce the autoimmune process. Thymectomy is a surgical method to treat MG.\nMedication.\nAbout 10% of people with generalized MG are considered treatment-refractory. Autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is sometimes used in severe, treatment-refractory MG. Available data provide preliminary evidence that HSCT can be an effective therapeutic option in carefully selected cases.\nEfgartigimod alfa (Vyvgart) was approved for medical use in the United States in December 2021.\nEfgartigimod alfa/hyaluronidase (Vyvgart Hytrulo) was approved for medical use in the United States in June 2023.\nRozanolixizumab (Rystiggo) was approved for medical use in the United States in June 2023.\nAcetylcholinesterase inhibitors.\nAcetylcholinesterase inhibitors can provide symptomatic benefit and may not fully remove a person's weakness from MG. While they might not fully remove all symptoms of MG, they still may allow a person the ability to perform normal daily activities. Usually, acetylcholinesterase inhibitors are started at a low dose and increased until the desired result is achieved. If taken 30 minutes before a meal, symptoms will be mild during eating, which is helpful for those who have difficulty swallowing due to their illness. Another medication used for MG, atropine, can reduce the muscarinic side effects of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. Pyridostigmine is a relatively long-acting drug (when compared to other cholinergic agonists), with a half-life around four hours with relatively few side effects. Generally, it is discontinued in those who are being mechanically ventilated, as it is known to increase the amount of salivary secretions. A few high-quality studies have directly compared cholinesterase inhibitors with other treatments (or placebo); their practical benefit may be so significant that conducting studies in which they would be withheld from some people would be difficult.\nImmune suppressants.\nThe steroid prednisone might also be used to achieve a better result, but it can lead to the worsening of symptoms and takes weeks to achieve its maximal effectiveness. Research suggests that up to 15% of people with myasthenia gravis do not positively respond to immune suppressants. Due to the myriad symptoms that steroid treatments can cause, it is not the preferred method of treatment. Other immune suppressing medications may also be used including rituximab or azathioprine.\nNipocalimab (Imaavy) was approved for medical use in the United States in April 2025.\nPlasmapheresis and IVIG.\nIf the myasthenia is serious (myasthenic crisis), plasmapheresis can be used to remove the putative antibodies from the circulation. Also, intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIGs) can be used to bind the circulating antibodies. Both of these treatments have relatively short-lived benefits, typically measured in weeks, and often are associated with high costs, which make them prohibitive; they are generally reserved for when MG requires hospitalization.\nSurgery.\nAs thymomas are seen in 10% of all people with the MG, they are often given a chest X-ray and CT scan to evaluate their need for surgical removal of their thymus glands and any cancerous tissue that may be present. Even if surgery is performed to remove a thymoma, it generally does not lead to the remission of MG. Surgery in the case of MG involves the removal of the thymus, although in 2013, no clear benefit was indicated except in the presence of a thymoma. A 2016 randomized, controlled trial, however, found some benefits.\nPhysical measures.\nPeople with MG should be educated regarding the fluctuating nature of their symptoms, including weakness and exercise-induced fatigue. Exercise participation should be encouraged with frequent rest. In people with generalized MG, some evidence indicates a partial home program including training in diaphragmatic breathing, pursed-lip breathing, and interval-based muscle therapy may improve respiratory muscle strength, chest wall mobility, respiratory pattern, and respiratory endurance.\nMedical imaging.\nIn people with myasthenia gravis, older forms of iodinated contrast used for medical imaging have caused an increased risk of exacerbation of the disease, but modern forms have no immediate increased risk.\nPrognosis.\nThe prognosis of people with MG is generally good, as is quality of life, when given very good treatment. Monitoring of a person with MG is very important, as at least 20% of people diagnosed with it will experience a myasthenic crisis within two years of their diagnosis, requiring rapid medical intervention. Generally, the most disabling period of MG might be years after the initial diagnosis. Assistive devices may be needed to assist with mobility. In the early 1900s, 70% of detected cases died from lung problems; now, that number is estimated to be around 3\u20135%, an improvement attributed to increased awareness and medications to manage symptoms.\nEpidemiology.\nMG occurs in all ethnic groups and both sexes. It most commonly affects women under 40 and people from 50 to 70 years old of either sex, but it has been known to occur at any age. Younger people rarely have thymoma. Prevalence in the United States is estimated at between 0.5 and 20.4 cases per 100,000, with an estimated 60,000 Americans affected. In the United Kingdom, an estimated 15 cases of MG occur per 100,000 people. The mortality rate of MG is around 5-9%.\nHistory.\nThe first to write about MG were Thomas Willis, Samuel Wilks, Erb, and Goldflam. The term \"myasthenia gravis pseudo-paralytica\" was proposed in 1895 by Jolly, a German physician. Mary Walker treated a person with MG with physostigmine in 1934. Simpson and Nastuck detailed the autoimmune nature of the condition. In 1973, Patrick and Lindstrom used rabbits to show that immunization with purified muscle-like acetylcholine receptors caused the development of MG-like symptoms.\nResearch.\nImmunomodulating substances, such as drugs that prevent acetylcholine receptor modulation by the immune system, are currently being researched. Some research recently has been on anti-c5 inhibitors for treatment research as they are safe and used in the treatment of other diseases. Ephedrine seems to benefit some people more than other medications, but it has not been properly studied as of 2014.\nIn the laboratory, MG is mostly studied in model organisms, such as rodents. In addition, in 2015, scientists developed an \"in vitro\" functional, all-human, neuromuscular junction assay from human embryonic stem cells and somatic-muscle stem cells. After the addition of pathogenic antibodies against the acetylcholine receptor and activation of the complement system, the neuromuscular co-culture shows symptoms such as weaker muscle contractions. Recent years, scientists have been working on finding the reliable biomarkers for MG to monitor the disease development and assess the severity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18999", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18999", "title": "Motala str\u00f6m", "text": "River in Sweden\nMotala str\u00f6m is the river system that drains lake V\u00e4ttern, the second largest lake in Sweden, into the Baltic Sea in Norrk\u00f6ping. It is named from the city Motala where it begins. In the early 19th century, the G\u00f6ta Canal was constructed in parallel with Motala str\u00f6m.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19001", "revid": "1126265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19001", "title": "Microsoft", "text": "American multinational technology corporation\nMicrosoft Corporation is an American multinational technology conglomerate headquartered in Redmond, Washington. Founded in 1975, the company became influential in the rise of personal computers through software like Windows, and has since expanded to Internet services, cloud computing, artificial intelligence, video gaming, and other fields. Often described as a Big Tech company, Microsoft is the largest software company by revenue, one of the most valuable public companies, and one of the most valuable brands globally.\nMicrosoft was founded by Bill Gates and Paul Allen to market BASIC interpreters for the Altair 8800. It rose to dominate the personal computer operating system market with MS-DOS in the mid-1980s, followed by Windows. During the 41 years from 1980 to 2021 Microsoft released 9 versions of MS-DOS with a median frequency of 2 years, and 13 versions of Windows with a median frequency of 3 years. The company's 1986 initial public offering (IPO) and subsequent rise in its share price created three billionaires and an estimated 12,000\u00a0millionaires among Microsoft employees. Since the 1990s, it has increasingly diversified from the operating system market. Steve Ballmer replaced Gates as CEO in 2000. He oversaw the then-largest of Microsoft's corporate acquisitions in Skype Technologies in 2011, an increased focus on hardware that led to its first in-house PC line, the Surface, in 2012, and the formation of Microsoft Mobile through Nokia. Since Satya Nadella took over as CEO in 2014, the company has changed focus towards cloud computing, as well as its acquisition of LinkedIn for $26.2\u00a0billion in 2016. Under Nadella's direction, the company has expanded its video gaming business to support the Xbox brand, establishing the Microsoft Gaming division in 2022 and the acquisition of Activision Blizzard for $68.7 billion in 2023.\nMicrosoft has been dominant in the IBM PC\u2013compatible operating system market and the office software suite market since the 1990s. Its best-known software products are the Windows line of operating systems and the Microsoft Office and Microsoft 365 suite of productivity applications, which most notably include the Word word processor, Excel spreadsheet editor, and the PowerPoint presentation program. Its flagship hardware products are the Surface lineup of personal computers and Xbox video game consoles, the latter of which includes the Xbox network; the company also provides a range of consumer Internet services such as Bing web search, the MSN web portal, the Outlook.com (Hotmail) email service and the Microsoft Store. In the enterprise and development fields, Microsoft most notably provides the Azure cloud computing platform, Microsoft SQL Server database software, and Visual Studio.\nIn April 2019, Microsoft became the third public U.S. company to be valued at over $1 trillion. It has been criticized for its monopolistic practices, and the company's software received criticism for problems with ease of use, robustness, and security. More recently, it has been criticized for its role in providing services to Israel during the Gaza war.\nHistory.\n1972\u20131985: Founding.\nChildhood friends Bill Gates and Paul Allen sought to make a business using their skills in computer programming. In 1972, they founded Traf-O-Data, which sold a rudimentary computer to track and analyze automobile traffic data. Gates enrolled at Harvard University while Allen pursued a degree in computer science at Washington State University, though he later dropped out to work at Honeywell.\nThe January 1975 issue of \"Popular Electronics\" featured Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems's (MITS) Altair 8800 microcomputer, which inspired Allen to suggest that they could program a BASIC interpreter for the device. Gates called MITS and claimed that he had a working interpreter, and MITS requested a demonstration. Allen worked on a simulator for the Altair while Gates developed the interpreter, and it worked flawlessly when they demonstrated it to MITS in March 1975 in Albuquerque, New Mexico. MITS agreed to distribute it, marketing it as Altair BASIC. Gates and Allen established Microsoft on April 4, 1975, with Gates as CEO, and Allen suggested the name \"Micro-Soft\", short for micro-computer software. In August 1977, the company formed an agreement with ASCII Magazine in Japan, resulting in its first international office of ASCII Microsoft. Microsoft moved its headquarters to Bellevue, Washington, in January 1979.\nMicrosoft entered the operating system (OS) business in 1980 with its own version of Unix, licensed from AT&amp;T Corporation a year before, called Xenix, but it was MS-DOS that solidified the company's dominance. IBM awarded a contract to Microsoft in November 1980 to provide a version of the CP/M OS to be used in the IBM Personal Computer (IBM PC). For this deal, Microsoft purchased a CP/M clone called 86-DOS from Seattle Computer Products which it branded as MS-DOS, although IBM rebranded it to IBM PC DOS. Microsoft retained ownership of MS-DOS following the release of the IBM PC in August 1981. IBM had copyrighted the IBM PC BIOS, so other companies had to reverse engineer it for non-IBM hardware to run as IBM PC compatibles, but no such restriction applied to the operating systems. Microsoft eventually became the leading PC operating systems vendor. The company expanded into new markets with the release of the Microsoft Mouse in 1983, as well as with a publishing division named Microsoft Press.\nPaul Allen resigned from Microsoft in 1983 after developing Hodgkin's lymphoma. Allen claimed in \"Idea Man: A Memoir by the co-founder of Microsoft\" that Gates wanted to dilute his share in the company when he was diagnosed with Hodgkin's disease because he did not think that he was working hard enough. Allen later invested in low-tech sectors, sports teams, commercial real estate, neuroscience, private space flight, and more.\n1985\u20131994: Windows and Office.\nMicrosoft released Windows 1.0 on November 20, 1985, as a graphical extension for MS-DOS, despite having begun jointly developing OS/2 with IBM that August. Microsoft moved its headquarters from Bellevue to Redmond, Washington, on February 26, 1986, and went public with an initial public offering (IPO) at the NASDAQ exchange on March 13, with the resulting rise in stock making an estimated four billionaires and 12,000\u00a0millionaires from Microsoft employees. Microsoft released its version of OS/2 to original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) on April 2, 1987. In 1990, the Federal Trade Commission examined Microsoft for possible collusion due to the partnership with IBM, marking the beginning of more than a decade of legal clashes with the government. Meanwhile, the company was at work on Microsoft Windows NT, which was heavily based on their copy of the OS/2 code. It shipped on July 21, 1993, with a new modular kernel and the 32-bit Win32 application programming interface (API), making it easier to port from 16-bit (MS-DOS-based) Windows. Microsoft informed IBM of Windows NT, and the OS/2 partnership deteriorated.\nIn 1990, Microsoft introduced the Microsoft Office suite which bundled separate applications such as Microsoft Word and Microsoft Excel. On May 22, Microsoft launched Windows 3.0, featuring streamlined user interface graphics and improved protected mode capability for the Intel 386 processor, and both Office and Windows became dominant in their respective areas.\nOn July 27, 1994, the Department of Justice's Antitrust Division filed a competitive impact statement that said: \"Beginning in 1988 and continuing until July 15, 1994, Microsoft induced many OEMs to execute anti-competitive per processor licenses. Under a per-processor license, an OEM pays Microsoft a royalty for each computer it sells containing a particular microprocessor, whether the OEM sells the computer with a Microsoft operating system or a non-Microsoft operating system. In effect, the royalty payment to Microsoft when no Microsoft product is being used acts as a penalty, or tax, on the OEM's use of a competing PC operating system. Since 1988, Microsoft's use of per processor licenses has increased.\"\n1995\u20132007: Foray into the Web, Windows 95, Windows XP, and Xbox.\nFollowing Bill Gates's internal \"Internet Tidal Wave memo\" on May 26, 1995, Microsoft began to redefine its offerings and expand its product line into computer networking and the World Wide Web. With a few exceptions of new companies, like Netscape, Microsoft was the only major and established company that acted fast enough to be a part of the World Wide Web practically from the start. Other companies like Borland, WordPerfect, Novell, IBM and Lotus, being much slower to adapt to the new situation, would give Microsoft market dominance.\nThe company released Windows 95 on August 24, 1995, featuring pre-emptive multitasking, a completely new user interface with a novel start button, and 32-bit compatibility; similar to NT, it provided the Win32 API. Windows 95 came bundled with the online service MSN, which was intended to be a competitor to services such as CompuServe and AOL. The web browser Internet Explorer was not bundled with the retail release of Windows 95, and was instead included in the later Microsoft Plus! pack, as well as OEM releases of Windows 95. Backed by a high-profile marketing campaign and what \"The New York Times\" called \"the splashiest, most frenzied, most expensive introduction of a computer product in the industry's history,\" Windows 95 quickly became a success. Branching out into new markets in 1996, Microsoft and General Electric's NBC unit created a new 24/7 cable news channel, MSNBC. Microsoft created Windows CE 1.0, a new OS designed for devices with low memory and other constraints, such as personal digital assistants. In October 1997, the Justice Department filed a motion in the Federal District Court, stating that Microsoft violated an agreement signed in 1994 and asked the court to stop the bundling of Internet Explorer with Windows.\nOn January 13, 2000, Bill Gates handed over the CEO position to Steve Ballmer, an old college friend of Gates and employee of the company since 1980, while creating a new position for himself as Chief Software Architect. Various companies including Microsoft formed the Trusted Computing Platform Alliance in October 1999 to (among other things) increase security and protect intellectual property through identifying changes in hardware and software. Critics decried the alliance as a way to enforce indiscriminate restrictions over how consumers use software, and over how computers behave, and as a form of digital rights management: for example, the scenario where a computer is not only secured for its owner but also secured against its owner as well. On April 3, 2000, a judgment was handed down in the case of \"United States v. Microsoft Corp.\", calling the company an \"abusive monopoly\". Microsoft later settled with the U.S. Department of Justice in 2004.\nOn October 25, 2001, Microsoft released Windows XP, unifying the mainstream and NT lines of OS under the NT codebase. The company released the Xbox later that year, entering the video game console market dominated by Sony and Nintendo. In March 2004 the European Union brought antitrust legal action against the company, citing it abused its dominance with the Windows OS, resulting in a judgment of \u20ac497\u00a0million ($613\u00a0million) and requiring Microsoft to produce new versions of Windows XP without Windows Media Player: Windows XP Home Edition N and Windows XP Professional N. In November 2005, the company's second video game console, the Xbox 360, was released. There were two versions, a basic version for $299.99 and a deluxe version for $399.99.\nIncreasingly present in the hardware business following Xbox, Microsoft 2006 released the Zune series of digital media players, a successor of its previous software platform Portable Media Center. These expanded on previous hardware commitments from Microsoft following its original Microsoft Mouse in 1983; as of 2007 the company sold the best-selling wired keyboard (Natural Ergonomic Keyboard 4000), mouse (IntelliMouse), and desktop webcam (LifeCam) in the United States. That year the company also launched the Surface \"digital table\", later renamed PixelSense.\n2007\u20132011: Microsoft Azure, Windows Vista, Windows 7, and Microsoft Stores.\nReleased in January 2007, the next version of Windows, Vista, focused on features, security and a redesigned user interface dubbed Aero. Microsoft Office 2007, released at the same time, featured a \"Ribbon\" user interface which was a significant departure from its predecessors. Relatively strong sales of both products helped to produce a record profit in 2007. The European Union imposed another fine of \u20ac899\u00a0million ($1.4\u00a0billion) for Microsoft's lack of compliance with the March 2004 judgment on February 27, 2008, saying that the company charged rivals unreasonable prices for key information about its workgroup and backoffice servers. Microsoft stated that it was in compliance and that \"these fines are about the past issues that have been resolved\". 2007 also saw the creation of a multi-core unit at Microsoft, following the steps of server companies such as Sun and IBM.\nGates retired from his role as Chief Software Architect on June 27, 2008, a decision announced in June 2006, while retaining other positions related to the company in addition to being an advisor for the company on key projects. Azure Services Platform, the company's entry into the cloud computing market for Windows, launched on October 27, 2008. On February 12, 2009, Microsoft announced its intent to open a chain of Microsoft-branded retail stores, and on October 22, 2009, the first retail Microsoft Store opened in Scottsdale, Arizona; the same day Windows 7 was officially released to the public. Windows 7's focus was on refining Vista with ease-of-use features and performance enhancements, rather than an extensive reworking of Windows.\nAs the smartphone industry boomed in the late 2000s, Microsoft had struggled to keep up with its rivals in providing a modern smartphone operating system, falling behind Apple and Google-sponsored Android in the United States. As a result, in 2010 Microsoft revamped its aging flagship mobile operating system, Windows Mobile, replacing it with the new Windows Phone OS that was released in October that year. It used a new user interface design language, codenamed \"Metro\", which prominently used simple shapes, typography, and iconography, utilizing the concept of minimalism. Microsoft implemented a new strategy for the software industry, providing a consistent user experience across all smartphones using the Windows Phone OS. It launched an alliance with Nokia in 2011 and Microsoft worked closely with the company to co-develop Windows Phone, but remained partners with long-time Windows Mobile OEM HTC. Microsoft is a founding member of the Open Networking Foundation started on March 23, 2011. Fellow founders were Google, HPE Networking, Yahoo!, Verizon Communications, Deutsche Telekom and 17 other companies. This nonprofit organization is focused on providing support for a cloud computing initiative called Software-Defined Networking. The initiative is meant to speed innovation through simple software changes in telecommunications networks, wireless networks, data centers, and other networking areas.\n2011\u20132014: Windows 8/8.1, Xbox One, Outlook.com, and Surface devices.\nFollowing the release of Windows Phone, Microsoft undertook a gradual rebranding of its product range throughout 2011 and 2012, with the corporation's logos, products, services, and websites adopting the principles and concepts of the Metro design language. Microsoft unveiled Windows 8, an operating system designed to power both personal computers and tablet computers, in Taipei in June 2011. A developer preview was released on September 13, which was subsequently replaced by a consumer preview on February 29, 2012, and released to the public in May. The Surface was unveiled on June 18, becoming the first computer in the company's history to have its hardware made by Microsoft. On June 25, Microsoft paid US$1.2\u00a0billion to buy the social network Yammer. On July 31, it launched the Outlook.com webmail service to compete with Gmail. On September 4, 2012, Microsoft released Windows Server 2012.\nIn July 2012, Microsoft sold its 50% stake in MSNBC, which it had run as a joint venture with NBC since 1996. On October 1, 2012, Microsoft announced its intention to launch a news operation, part of a new-look MSN, with Windows 8 later in the month. On October 26, 2012, Microsoft launched Windows 8 and the Microsoft Surface. Three days later, Windows Phone 8 was launched. To cope with the potential for an increase in demand for products and services, Microsoft opened a number of \"holiday stores\" across the U.S. to complement the increasing number of \"bricks-and-mortar\" Microsoft Stores that opened in 2012. On March 29, 2013, Microsoft launched a Patent Tracker.\nIn August 2012, the New York City Police Department announced a partnership with Microsoft for the development of the Domain Awareness System which is used for police surveillance in New York City.\nThe Kinect, a motion-sensing input device made by Microsoft and designed as a video game controller, first introduced in November 2010, was upgraded for the 2013 release of the Xbox One video game console. Kinect's capabilities were revealed in May 2013: an ultra-wide 1080p camera, function in the dark due to an infrared sensor, higher-end processing power and new software, the ability to distinguish between fine movements (such as a thumb movement), and determining a user's heart rate by looking at their face. Microsoft filed a patent application in 2011 that suggests that the corporation may use the Kinect camera system to monitor the behavior of television viewers as part of a plan to make the viewing experience more interactive. On July 19, 2013, Microsoft stocks suffered its biggest one-day percentage sell-off since the year 2000, after its fourth-quarter report raised concerns among investors on the poor showings of both Windows 8 and the Surface tablet. Microsoft suffered a loss of more than US$32\u00a0billion.\nIn line with the maturing PC business, in July 2013, Microsoft announced that it would reorganize into four new business divisions: Operating Systems, Apps, Cloud, and Devices. All previous divisions were dissolved into new divisions without any workforce cuts. On September 3, 2013, Microsoft agreed to buy Nokia's mobile unit for $7\u00a0billion, following Amy Hood taking the role of CFO.\n2014\u20132020: Windows 10, Microsoft Edge, and HoloLens.\nOn February 4, 2014, Steve Ballmer stepped down as CEO of Microsoft and was succeeded by Satya Nadella, who previously led Microsoft's Cloud and Enterprise division. On the same day, John W. Thompson took on the role of chairman, in place of Bill Gates, who continued to participate as a technology advisor. Thompson became the second chairman in Microsoft's history. On April 25, 2014, Microsoft acquired Nokia Devices and Services for $7.2\u00a0billion. This new subsidiary was renamed Microsoft Mobile Oy. On September 15, 2014, Microsoft acquired the video game development company Mojang, best known for \"Minecraft\", for $2.5\u00a0billion. On June 8, 2017, Microsoft acquired Hexadite, an Israeli security firm, for $100\u00a0million.\nOn January 21, 2015, Microsoft announced the release of its first interactive whiteboard, named Surface Hub. On July 29, 2015, Windows 10 was released, with its server sibling, Windows Server 2016, released in September 2016. In Q1 2015, Microsoft was the third-largest maker of mobile phones, selling 33\u00a0million units (7.2% of all). While a large majority (at least 75%) of them do not run any version of Windows Phone \u2014 those other phones are not categorized as smartphones by Gartner\u00a0\u2013 in the same timeframe 8\u00a0million Windows smartphones (2.5% of all smartphones) were made by all manufacturers (mostly Microsoft). Microsoft's share of the U.S. smartphone market in January 2016 was 2.7%. During the summer of 2015 the company lost $7.6\u00a0billion related to its mobile-phone business, firing 7,800 employees.\nIn 2015, the construction of a data center in Mecklenburg County, Virginia, led to the destruction of a historic African American cemetery despite archeological recommendations for preservation.\nOn March 1, 2016, Microsoft announced the merger of its PC and Xbox divisions, with Phil Spencer announcing that Universal Windows Platform (UWP) apps would be the focus for Microsoft's gaming in the future. On January 24, 2017, Microsoft showcased Intune for Education at the BETT 2017 education technology conference in London. Intune for Education is a new cloud-based application and device management service for the education sector. In May 2016, the company announced it was laying off 1,850 workers, and taking an impairment and restructuring charge of $950\u00a0million.\nIn June 2016, Microsoft announced a project named Microsoft Azure Information Protection. It aims to help enterprises protect their data as it moves between servers and devices. In November 2016, Microsoft joined the Linux Foundation as a Platinum member during Microsoft's Connect(); developer event in New York. The cost of each Platinum membership is US$500,000 per year. Some analysts had deemed this unthinkable ten years prior, however, as in 2001 then-CEO Steve Ballmer called Linux \"cancer\". Microsoft planned to launch a preview of Intune for Education \"in the coming weeks\", with general availability scheduled for spring 2017, priced at $30 per device, or through volume licensing agreements.\nIn January 2018, Microsoft patched Windows 10 to account for CPU problems related to Intel's Meltdown security breach. The patch led to issues with the Microsoft Azure virtual machines reliant on Intel's CPU architecture. On January 12, Microsoft released PowerShell Core 6.0 for the macOS and Linux operating systems. In February 2018, Microsoft ceased notification support for its Windows Phone devices which effectively ended firmware updates for the discontinued devices. In March 2018, Microsoft recalled Windows 10 S to change it to a mode for the Windows operating system rather than a separate and unique operating system. In March the company also established guidelines that censor users of Office 365 from using profanity in private documents.\nIn April 2018, Microsoft released the source code for Windows File Manager under the MIT License to celebrate the program's 20th anniversary. In April the company further expressed willingness to embrace open source initiatives by announcing Azure Sphere as its own derivative of the Linux operating system. In May 2018, Microsoft partnered with 17 American intelligence agencies to develop cloud computing products. The project is dubbed \"Azure Government\" and has ties to the Joint Enterprise Defense Infrastructure (JEDI) surveillance program. On June 4, 2018, Microsoft officially announced the acquisition of GitHub for $7.5\u00a0billion, a deal that closed on October 26, 2018. On July 10, 2018, Microsoft revealed the Surface Go platform to the public. Later in the month, it converted Microsoft Teams to gratis. In August 2018, Microsoft released two projects called Microsoft AccountGuard and Defending Democracy. It also unveiled Snapdragon 850 compatibility for Windows 10 on the ARM architecture.\nIn August 2018, Toyota Tsusho began a partnership with Microsoft to create fish farming tools using the Microsoft Azure application suite for Internet of things (IoT) technologies related to water management. Developed in part by researchers from Kindai University, the water pump mechanisms use artificial intelligence to count the number of fish on a conveyor belt, analyze the number of fish, and deduce the effectiveness of water flow from the data the fish provide. The specific computer programs used in the process fall under the Azure Machine Learning and the Azure IoT Hub platforms.\nIn September 2018, Microsoft discontinued Skype Classic. On October 10, 2018, Microsoft joined the Open Invention Network community despite holding more than 60,000 patents. In November 2018, Microsoft agreed to supply 100,000 Microsoft HoloLens headsets to the United States military in order to \"increase lethality by enhancing the ability to detect, decide and engage before the enemy.\" In November 2018, Microsoft introduced Azure Multi-Factor Authentication for Microsoft Azure. In December 2018, Microsoft announced Project Mu, an open source release of the Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI) core used in Microsoft Surface and Hyper-V products. The project promotes the idea of Firmware as a Service. In the same month, Microsoft announced the open source implementation of Windows Forms and the Windows Presentation Foundation (WPF) which will allow for further movement of the company toward the transparent release of key frameworks used in developing Windows desktop applications and software. December also saw the company discontinue the Microsoft Edge [Legacy] browser project in favor of the \"New Edge\" browser project, featuring a Chromium based backend.\nOn February 20, 2019, Microsoft said it would offer its cyber security service AccountGuard to 12 new markets in Europe, including Germany, France and Spain, to close security gaps and protect customers in the political space from hacking. In February 2019, hundreds of Microsoft employees protested the company's war profiteering from a $480\u00a0million contract to develop virtual reality headsets for the United States Army.\n2020\u2013present: Acquisitions, Xbox Series X/S, and Windows 11.\nOn March 26, 2020, Microsoft announced it was acquiring Affirmed Networks for about $1.35\u00a0billion. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Microsoft closed all of its retail stores indefinitely due to health concerns. On July 22, 2020, Microsoft announced plans to close its Mixer service, planning to move existing partners to Facebook Gaming.\nOn July 31, 2020, it was reported that Microsoft was in talks to acquire TikTok after the Trump administration ordered ByteDance to divest ownership of the application to the U.S. On August 3, 2020, after speculation on the deal, Donald Trump stated that Microsoft could buy the application, however, it should be completed by September 15, 2020, and that the United States Department of the Treasury should receive a portion if it were to go through.\nOn August 5, 2020, Microsoft stopped its xCloud game streaming test for iOS devices. According to Microsoft, the future of xCloud on iOS remains unclear and potentially out of Microsoft's hands. Apple has imposed a strict limit on \"remote desktop clients\" which means applications are only allowed to connect to a user-owned host device or gaming console owned by the user. On September 21, 2020, Microsoft announced its intent to acquire video game company ZeniMax Media, the parent company of Bethesda Softworks, for about $7.5\u00a0billion, with the deal expected to occur in the second half of 2021 fiscal year. On March 9, 2021, the acquisition was finalized and ZeniMax Media became part of Microsoft's Xbox Game Studios division. The total price of the deal was $8.1 billion.\nOn September 22, 2020, Microsoft announced that it had an exclusive license to use OpenAI's GPT-3 artificial intelligence language generator. The previous version of GPT-3, called GPT-2, made headlines for being \"too dangerous to release\" and had numerous capabilities, including designing websites, prescribing medication, answering questions, and penning articles.\nOn November 10, 2020, Microsoft released the Xbox Series X and Xbox Series S video game consoles.\nIn February 2021, Microsoft released Azure Quantum for public preview.\u202fThe public cloud computing platform provides access to quantum software and quantum hardware including\u202ftrapped ion,\u202fneutral atom, and\u202fsuperconducting\u202fsystems.\nIn April 2021, Microsoft announced it would buy Nuance Communications for approximately $16 billion. The acquisition of Nuance was completed in March 2022. In 2021, in part due to the strong quarterly earnings spurred by the COVID-19 pandemic, Microsoft's valuation came to nearly $2 trillion. The increased necessity for remote work and distance education drove demand for cloud computing and grew the company's gaming sales.\nOn June 24, 2021, Microsoft announced Windows 11 during a livestreamed event. The announcement came with confusion after Microsoft announced Windows 10 would be the last version of the operating system. It was released to the general public on October 5, 2021.\nIn September 2021, it was announced that the company had acquired Takelessons, an online platform that connects students and tutors in numerous subjects. The acquisition positioned Microsoft to grow its presence in the market of providing online education to large numbers of people. In the same month, Microsoft acquired Australia-based video editing software company Clipchamp.\nIn October 2021, Microsoft announced that it began rolling out end-to-end encryption (E2EE) support for Microsoft Teams calls in order to secure business communication while using video conferencing software. Users can ensure that their calls are encrypted and can utilize a security code that both parties on a call must verify on their respective ends. On October 7, Microsoft acquired Ally.io, a software service that measures companies' progress against OKRs. Microsoft plans to incorporate Ally.io into its Viva family of employee experience products.\nOn January 18, 2022, Microsoft announced the acquisition of American video game developer and holding company Activision Blizzard in an all-cash deal worth $68.7 billion. Activision Blizzard is best known for producing franchises, including but not limited to \"Warcraft\", \"Diablo\", \"Call of Duty\", \"StarCraft\", \"Candy Crush Saga\", \"Crash Bandicoot\", \"Spyro\", \"Tony Hawk's\", \"Guitar Hero\", and \"Overwatch\". Activision and Microsoft each released statements saying the acquisition was to benefit their businesses in the metaverse, many saw Microsoft's acquisition of video game studios as an attempt to compete against Meta Platforms, with \"TheStreet\" referring to Microsoft wanting to become \"the Disney of the metaverse\". Microsoft also named Phil Spencer, head of the Xbox brand since 2014, the inaugural CEO of the newly established Microsoft Gaming division, which now houses the Xbox operations team and the three publishers in the company's portfolio (Xbox Game Studios, ZeniMax Media, Activision Blizzard). Microsoft has not released statements regarding Activision's recent legal controversies regarding employee abuse, but reports have alleged that Activision CEO Bobby Kotick, a major target of the controversy, will leave the company after the acquisition is finalized. The deal was closed on October 13, 2023.\nIn December 2022, Microsoft announced a new 10-year deal with the London Stock Exchange Group for products including Microsoft Azure; Microsoft acquired around 4% of LSEG as part of the deal.\nIn January 2023, CEO Satya Nadella announced Microsoft would lay off some 10,000 employees. The announcement came a day after hosting a Sting concert for 50 people, including Microsoft executives, in Davos, Switzerland.\nOn January 23, 2023, Microsoft announced a new multi-year, multi-billion dollar investment deal with ChatGPT developer OpenAI.\nIn June 2023, Microsoft released Azure Quantum Elements to run molecular simulations and calculations in computational chemistry and materials science using a combination of AI, high-performance computing and quantum computing. The service includes Copilot, a GPT-4 based large language model tool to query and visualize data, write code, initiate simulations, and educate researchers.\nAt a November 2023 developer conference, Microsoft announced two new custom-designed computing chips: The Maia chip, designed to run large language models, and Cobalt CPU, designed to power general cloud services on Azure.\nOn November 20, 2023, Satya Nadella announced that Sam Altman, who had been ousted as CEO of OpenAI just days earlier, and Greg Brockman, who had resigned as president, would join Microsoft to lead a new advanced AI research team. However, the plan was short-lived, as Altman was subsequently reinstated as OpenAI's CEO and Brockman rejoined the company amid pressure from OpenAI's employees and investors on its board. In March 2024, Inflection AI's cofounders Mustafa Suleyman and Karen Simonyan announced their departure from the company in order to start Microsoft AI, with Microsoft acqui-hiring nearly the entirety of its 70-person workforce. As part of the deal, Microsoft paid Inflection $650\u00a0million to license its technology.\nIn January 2024, Microsoft became the most valued publicly traded company. Meanwhile, that month, the company announced a subscription offering of artificial intelligence for small businesses via Copilot Pro.\nIn April 2024, Microsoft made a $1.5 billion investment in the Emirati AI firm G42. As part of the deal, G42 said it would use the Microsoft Azure platform for its AI development and deployment. Later that month, Microsoft unveiled plans to invest $1.7 billion in developing AI and cloud infrastructure in Indonesia. The plan includes establishment of data centers and partnerships to support digital transformation efforts.\nIn May 2024, Microsoft announced a $3.3 billion investment to build an artificial intelligence hub in southeast Wisconsin, tripling its initial proposal. This initiative, unveiled by President Joe Biden in Racine County, includes constructing a data center, creating 2,300 construction jobs by 2025, and 2,000 permanent jobs over time, alongside establishing an AI co-innovation lab at UW-Milwaukee to train up to 1,000 individuals by 2030.\nIn June 2024, Microsoft announced it would be laying off 1,000 employees from the company's mixed reality and Azure cloud computing divisions.\nIn June 2024, Microsoft announced that it was building a \"hyperscale data centre\" in South East Leeds. In July 2024, it was reported that the company was laying off its diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) team.\nOn July 19, 2024, a global IT outage impacted Microsoft services, affecting businesses, airlines, and financial institutions worldwide. The outage was traced back to a flawed update of CrowdStrike's cybersecurity software, which resulted in Microsoft systems crashing and causing disruptions across various sectors. Despite CrowdStrike's CEO George Kurtz clarifying that the issue was not a cyberattack, the incident had widespread consequences, leading to delays in air travel, financial transactions, and medical services globally. Microsoft stated that the underlying cause had been fixed but acknowledged ongoing residual impacts on some Microsoft 365 apps and services.\nIn September 2024, BlackRock and Microsoft announced a $30 billion fund, the Global AI Infrastructure Investment Partnership, to invest in AI infrastructure such as data centers and energy projects. The fund has the potential to reach $100 billion with debt financing, and partners include Abu Dhabi-backed MGX and Nvidia, which will provide AI expertise. Investments will primarily focus on the U.S., with some in partner countries. Microsoft also announced relaunch of its controversial tool, Recall, in November 2024 after addressing privacy concerns. Initially criticized for taking regular screenshots without user consent, Recall was changed to an opt-in feature instead of being default on. The UK's Information Commissioner's Office monitored the situation and noted the adjustments, which included enhanced security measures like encryption and biometric access. While experts regarded these changes as improvements, they advised caution, with some recommending further testing before users opted in.\nOn February 28, 2025, Microsoft announced that Skype would be shutting down on May 5, 2025, to streamline its focus on Microsoft Teams. The company stated there would be no job cuts due to the shutdown.\nOn April 4, 2025, Microsoft celebrated its 50th anniversary.\nOn May 30, 2025, it was reported that Microsoft's Russian division would be preparing to file for bankruptcy, days after President Vladimir Putin stated that foreign services providers should be throttled in Russia to make way for domestic software, which included Microsoft. The company previously restructured operations in Russia in June 2022 after being significantly impacted by the Russian invasion of Ukraine, but stated those restructuring efforts have failed.\nOn May 23, 2025, it was reported that Europol's European Cybercrime Centre has worked with Microsoft to disrupt Lumma Stealer, a significant infostealer threat. The joint operation targeted a sophisticated ecosystem that allowed criminals to exploit stolen information on a massive scale.\nOn July 2, 2025, Microsoft announced it would cut nearly 4% of its workforce, around 9,000 jobs, to control costs amid heavy AI infrastructure spending, while also restructuring management and streamlining operations.\nCorporate affairs.\nMicrosoft is ranked No. 14 in the 2022 \"Fortune\" 500 rankings of the largest United States corporations by total revenue; and it was the world's largest software maker by revenue in 2022 according to \"Forbes\" Global 2000. In 2018, Microsoft became the most valuable publicly traded company in the world, a position it has repeatedly traded with Apple in the years since. In April 2019, Microsoft became the third U.S. public company to be valued at over $1\u00a0trillion. As of 2024[ [update]], Microsoft has the third-highest global brand valuation. Microsoft is one of only two U.S.-based companies that have a prime credit rating of AAA.\nBoard of directors.\nThe company is run by a board of directors made up of mostly company outsiders, as is customary for publicly traded companies. Members of the board of directors as of December 2023 are Satya Nadella, Reid Hoffman, Hugh Johnston, Teri List, Sandi Peterson, Penny Pritzker, Carlos Rodriguez, Charles Scharf, John W. Stanton, John W. Thompson, Emma Walmsley and Padmasree Warrior.\nBoard members are elected every year at the annual shareholders' meeting using a majority vote system. There are four committees within the board that oversee more specific matters. These committees include the Audit Committee, which handles accounting issues with the company including auditing and reporting; the Compensation Committee, which approves compensation for the CEO and other employees of the company; the Governance and Nominating Committee, which handles various corporate matters including the nomination of the board; and the Regulatory and Public Policy Committee, which includes legal/antitrust matters, along with privacy, trade, digital safety, artificial intelligence, and environmental sustainability.\nOn March 13, 2020, Gates announced that he is leaving the board of directors of Microsoft and Berkshire Hathaway to focus more on his philanthropic efforts. According to Aaron Tilley of \"The Wall Street Journal\" this is \"marking the biggest boardroom departure in the tech industry since the death of longtime rival and Apple Inc. co-founder Steve Jobs.\"\nOn January 13, 2022, \"The Wall Street Journal\" reported that Microsoft's board of directors plans to hire an external law firm to review its sexual harassment and gender discrimination policies, and to release a summary of how the company handled past allegations of misconduct against Bill Gates and other corporate executives.\nFinancial.\nWhen Microsoft went public and launched its initial public offering (IPO) in 1986, the opening stock price was $21; after the trading day, the price closed at $27.75. As of July 2010, with the company's nine stock splits, any IPO shares would be multiplied by 288; if one were to buy the IPO today, given the splits and other factors, it would cost about 9\u00a0cents. The stock price peaked in 1999 at around $119 ($60.928, adjusting for splits). The company began to offer a dividend on January 16, 2003, starting at eight cents per share for the fiscal year followed by a dividend of sixteen cents per share the subsequent year, switching from yearly to quarterly dividends in 2005 with eight cents a share per quarter and a special one-time payout of three dollars per share for the second quarter of the fiscal year. Though the company had subsequent increases in dividend payouts, the price of Microsoft's stock remained steady for years.\nStandard &amp; Poor's and Moody's Investors Service have both given a AAA rating to Microsoft, whose assets were valued at $41\u00a0billion as compared to only $8.5\u00a0billion in unsecured debt. Consequently, in February 2011 Microsoft released a corporate bond amounting to $2.25\u00a0billion with relatively low borrowing rates compared to government bonds. For the first time in 20 years Apple Inc. surpassed Microsoft in Q1 2011 quarterly profits and revenues due to a slowdown in PC sales and continuing huge losses in Microsoft's Online Services Division (which contains its search engine Bing). Microsoft profits were $5.2\u00a0billion, while Apple Inc. profits were $6\u00a0billion, on revenues of $14.5\u00a0billion and $24.7\u00a0billion respectively. Microsoft's Online Services Division has been continuously loss-making since 2006 and in Q1 2011 it lost $726\u00a0million. This follows a loss of $2.5\u00a0billion for the year 2010.\nOn July 20, 2012, Microsoft posted its first quarterly loss ever, despite earning record revenues for the quarter and fiscal year, with a net loss of $492\u00a0million due to a writedown related to the advertising company aQuantive, which had been acquired for $6.2\u00a0billion back in 2007. As of January 2014, Microsoft's market capitalization stood at $314B, making it the 8th-largest company in the world by market capitalization. On November 14, 2014, Microsoft overtook ExxonMobil to become the second most-valuable company by market capitalization, behind only Apple Inc. Its total market value was over $410B\u2014with the stock price hitting $50.04 a share, the highest since early 2000. In 2015, Reuters reported that Microsoft had earnings abroad of $76.4\u00a0billion which were untaxed by the Internal Revenue Service. Under U.S. law, corporations do not pay income tax on overseas profits until the profits are brought into the United States.\nThe key trends of Microsoft are (as at the financial year ending June 30):\nIn November 2018, the company won a $480\u00a0million military contract with the U.S. government to bring augmented reality (AR) headset technology into the weapon repertoires of American soldiers. The two-year contract may result in follow-on orders of more than 100,000 headsets, according to documentation describing the bidding process. One of the contract's tag lines for the augmented reality technology seems to be its ability to enable \"25 bloodless battles before the 1st battle\", suggesting that actual combat training is going to be an essential aspect of the augmented reality headset capabilities.\nSubsidiaries.\nMicrosoft is an international business. As such, it needs subsidiaries present in whatever national markets it chooses to harvest. An example is Microsoft Canada, which it established in 1985. Other countries have similar installations, to funnel profits back up to Redmond and to distribute the dividends to the holders of MSFT stock.\nOwnership.\nThe 10 largest shareholders of Microsoft in early 2024 were:\nMarketing.\nIn 2004, Microsoft commissioned research firms to do independent studies comparing the total cost of ownership (TCO) of Windows Server 2003 to Linux; the firms concluded that companies found Windows easier to administrate than Linux, thus those using Windows would administrate faster resulting in lower costs for their company (i.e. lower TCO). This spurred a wave of related studies; a study by the Yankee Group concluded that upgrading from one version of Windows Server to another costs a fraction of the switching costs from Windows Server to Linux, although companies surveyed noted the increased security and reliability of Linux servers and concern about being locked into using Microsoft products. Another study, released by the Open Source Development Labs, claimed that the Microsoft studies were \"simply outdated and one-sided\" and their survey concluded that the TCO of Linux was lower due to Linux administrators managing more servers on average and other reasons.\nAs part of the \"Get the Facts\" campaign, Microsoft highlighted the .NET Framework trading platform that it had developed in partnership with Accenture for the London Stock Exchange, claiming that it provided \"five nines\" reliability. After suffering extended downtime and unreliability the London Stock Exchange announced in 2009 that it was planning to drop its Microsoft solution and switch to a Linux-based one in 2010.\nIn 2012, Microsoft hired a political pollster named Mark Penn, whom \"The New York Times\" called \"famous for bulldozing\" his political opponents as Executive Vice-president, Advertising and Strategy. Penn created a series of negative advertisements targeting one of Microsoft's chief competitors, Google. The advertisements, called \"Scroogled\", attempted to make the case that Google is \"screwing\" consumers with search results rigged to favor Google's paid advertisers, that Gmail violates the privacy of its users to place ad results related to the content of their emails and shopping results, which favor Google products. Tech publications like TechCrunch were highly critical of the advertising campaign, while Google employees embraced it.\nLayoffs.\nIn July 2014, Microsoft announced plans to lay off 18,000 employees. Microsoft employed 127,104 people as of June 5, 2014, making this about a 14 percent reduction of its workforce as the biggest Microsoft layoff ever. This included 12,500 professional and factory personnel. Previously, Microsoft had eliminated 5,800 jobs in 2009 in line with the Great Recession of 2008\u20132017. In September 2014, Microsoft laid off 2,100 people, including 747 people in the Seattle\u2013Redmond area, where the company is headquartered. The firings came as a second wave of the layoffs that were previously announced. This brought the total number to over 15,000 out of the 18,000 expected cuts. In October 2014, Microsoft revealed that it was almost done with eliminating 18,000 employees, which was its largest-ever layoff sweep. In July 2015, Microsoft announced another 7,800 job cuts in the next several months. In May 2016, Microsoft announced another 1,850 job cuts mostly in its Nokia mobile phone division. As a result, the company will record an impairment and restructuring charge of approximately $950\u00a0million, of which approximately $200\u00a0million will relate to severance payments.\nMicrosoft laid off 1,900 employees in its gaming division in January 2024. The layoffs primarily affected Activision Blizzard employees, but some Xbox and ZeniMax employees were also affected. Blizzard president Mike Ybarra and chief design officer Allen Adham also resigned.\nIn May 2025, Microsoft announced that it is laying off more than 6,000 employees, around three percent of the company's entire workforce. In July 2025, Microsoft announced another round of layoffs, cutting approximately 9,000 employees in its largest workforce reduction in over two years. The cuts affected multiple divisions, including Xbox, with 830 positions eliminated at its Redmond, Washington headquarters. Amid the layoffs, Microsoft also announced that it was quitting Pakistan after 25 years of operations. While the exit was part of shift in business strategies and preference for cloud based models, the company's exit from Pakistan was also reportedly attributed to \"growing difficulties\" with the country's business environment.\nUnions.\nMicrosoft recognizes seven trade unions representing 1,750 workers in the United States at its video game subsidiaries Activision Blizzard and ZeniMax Media. U.S. workers have been vocal in opposing military and law-enforcement contracts with Microsoft. Bethesda Game Studios is unionized in Canada. Microsoft South Korea has recognized its union since 2017. German employees have elected works councils since 1998.\nUnited States government.\nMicrosoft provides information about reported bugs in its software to intelligence agencies of the United States government, prior to the public release of the fix. A Microsoft spokesperson stated that the corporation runs several programs that facilitate the sharing of such information with the U.S. government. Following media reports about PRISM, NSA's massive electronic surveillance program, in May 2013, several technology companies were identified as participants, including Microsoft. According to leaks of said program, Microsoft joined the PRISM program in 2007. However, in June 2013, an official statement from Microsoft flatly denied its participation in the program: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"We provide customer data only when we receive a legally binding order or subpoena to do so, and never on a voluntary basis. In addition, we only ever comply with orders for requests about specific accounts or identifiers. If the government has a broader voluntary national security program to gather customer data, we don't participate in it.\"\nDuring the first six months of 2013, Microsoft received requests that affected between 15,000 and 15,999 accounts. In December 2013, the company made a statement to further emphasize that it takes its customers' privacy and data protection very seriously, saying that \"government snooping potentially now constitutes an 'advanced persistent threat,' alongside sophisticated malware and cyber attacks\". The statement also marked the beginning of three-part program to enhance Microsoft's encryption and transparency efforts. On July 1, 2014, as part of this program, it opened the first (of many) Microsoft Transparency Center, which provides \"participating governments with the ability to review source code for our key products, assure themselves of their software integrity, and confirm there are no \"back doors.\" Microsoft has also argued that the United States Congress should enact strong privacy regulations to protect consumer data.\nIn April 2016, the company sued the U.S. government, argued that secrecy orders were preventing the company from disclosing warrants to customers in violation of the company's and customers' rights. Microsoft argued that it was unconstitutional for the government to indefinitely ban Microsoft from informing its users that the government was requesting their emails and other documents and that the Fourth Amendment made it so people or businesses had the right to know if the government searches or seizes their property. On October 23, 2017, Microsoft said it would drop the lawsuit as a result of a policy change by the United States Department of Justice (DoJ). The DoJ had \"changed data request rules on alerting the Internet users about agencies accessing their information.\"\nIn 2022 Microsoft shared a $9 billion contract from the United States Department of Defense for cloud computing with Amazon, Google, and Oracle.\nSecurity challenges.\nOn a Friday afternoon in January 2024, Microsoft disclosed that a Russian state-sponsored group hacked into its corporate systems. The group, accessed \"a very small percentage\" of Microsoft corporate email accounts, which also included members of its senior leadership team and employees in its cybersecurity and legal teams. Microsoft noted in a blog post that the attack might have been prevented if the accounts in question had enabled multi-factor authentication, a defensive measure which is widely recommended in the industry, including by Microsoft itself.\nCorporate identity.\nCorporate culture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]he Microsoft method. Understand the market, and the customers, and then go pedal to the metal, with release after release focused on what the customers need, incorporating their feedback. That puts the competition into reaction mode. And of course it helps if they also make a strategic error because they are under so much pressure.\nTechnical references for developers and articles for various Microsoft magazines such as \"Microsoft Systems Journal\" (\"MSJ\") are available through the Microsoft Developer Network (MSDN). MSDN also offers subscriptions for companies and individuals, and the more expensive subscriptions usually offer access to pre-release beta versions of Microsoft software. In April 2004, Microsoft launched a community site for developers and users, titled Channel 9, that provides a wiki and an Internet forum. Another community site that provides daily videocasts and other services, On10.net, launched on March 3, 2006. Free technical support is traditionally provided through online Usenet newsgroups, and CompuServe in the past, monitored by Microsoft employees; there can be several newsgroups for a single product. Helpful people can be elected by peers or Microsoft employees for Microsoft Most Valuable Professional (MVP) status, which entitles them to a sort of special social status and possibilities for awards and other benefits.\nNoted for its internal lexicon, the expression \"eating your own dog food\" is used to describe the policy of using pre-release and beta versions of products inside Microsoft to test them in \"real-world\" situations. This is usually shortened to just \"dog food\" and is used as a noun, verb, and adjective. Another bit of jargon, FYIFV or FYIV (\"Fuck You, I'm [Fully] Vested\"), is used by an employee to indicate they are financially independent and can avoid work anytime they wish.\nMicrosoft is an outspoken opponent of the cap on H-1B visas, which allows companies in the U.S. to employ certain foreign workers. Bill Gates claims the cap on H1B visas makes it difficult to hire employees for the company, stating \"I'd certainly get rid of the H1B cap\" in 2005. Critics of H1B visas argue that relaxing the limits would result in increased unemployment for U.S. citizens due to H1B workers working for lower salaries.\nThe Human Rights Campaign Corporate Equality Index, a report of how progressive the organization deems company policies towards LGBT employees, rated Microsoft as 87% from 2002 to 2004 and as 100% from 2005 to 2010 after it allowed gender expression.\nIn August 2018, Microsoft implemented a policy for all companies providing subcontractors to require 12 weeks of paid parental leave to each employee. This expands on the former requirement from 2015 requiring 15 days of paid vacation and sick leave each year. In 2015, Microsoft established its own parental leave policy to allow 12 weeks off for parental leave with an additional 8 weeks for the parent who gave birth.\nEnvironment.\nIn 2011, Greenpeace released a report rating the top ten big brands in cloud computing on the sources of electricity for their data centers. At the time, data centers consumed up to 2% of all global electricity, and this amount was projected to increase. Phil Radford of Greenpeace said, \"We are concerned that this new explosion in electricity use could lock us into old, polluting energy sources instead of the clean energy available today\", and called on \"Amazon, Microsoft and other leaders of the information-technology industry must embrace clean energy to power their cloud-based data centers\". In 2013, Microsoft agreed to buy power generated by a Texas wind project to power one of its data centers.\nMicrosoft is ranked on the 17th place in Greenpeace's \"Guide to Greener Electronics\" (16th Edition) that ranks 18 electronics manufacturers according to its policies on toxic chemicals, recycling, and climate change. Microsoft's timeline for phasing out brominated flame retardant (BFRs) and phthalates in all products was 2012 but its commitment to phasing out PVC is not clear. As of \u00a02011,[ [update]] it has no products that are completely free from PVC and BFRs.\nMicrosoft's main U.S. campus received a silver certification from the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) program in 2008, and it installed over 2,000 solar panels on top of its buildings at its Silicon Valley campus, generating approximately 15 percent of the total energy needed by the facilities in April 2005. Microsoft makes use of alternative forms of transit. It created one of the world's largest private bus systems, the \"Connector\", to transport people from outside the company; for on-campus transportation, the \"Shuttle Connect\" uses a large fleet of hybrid cars to save fuel. The \"Connector\" does not compete with the public bus system and works with it to provide a cohesive transportation network not just for its employees but also for the public.\nMicrosoft also subsidizes regional public transport, provided by Sound Transit and King County Metro, as an incentive. In February 2010, however, Microsoft took a stance against adding additional public transport and high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) lanes to the State Route 520 and its floating bridge connecting Redmond to Seattle; the company did not want to delay the construction any further. Microsoft was ranked number 1 in the list of the World's Best Multinational Workplaces by the Great Place to Work Institute in 2011.\nIn January 2020, the company announced a strategy to take the company carbon negative by 2030 and to remove all carbon that it has emitted since its foundation in 1975. On October 9, 2020, Microsoft permanently allowed remote work. In January 2021, the company announced on Twitter to join the Climate Neutral Data Centre Pact, which engages the cloud infrastructure and data centers industries to reach carbon neutrality in Europe by 2030, and also disclosed an investment in Climeworks, a direct air capture company partnered with Carbfix for carbon sequestration. In the same year, it was awarded the EPA's Green Power Leadership Award, citing the company's all-renewable energy use since 2014.\nIn September 2023, Microsoft announced that it purchased $200 million in carbon credits to offset 315,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide over 10 years from Heirloom Carbon, a carbon removal company that mixes calcium oxide from heated crushed limestone with water to form carbon hydroxide to absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere to mineralize back into limestone while the released carbon dioxide is stored underground or injected into concrete. Despite spending spent more than $760 million through its Climate Innovation Fund by June 2024 on sustainability projects\u2014including purchases of more than 5 million metric tonnes of carbon dioxide removal with carbon offsets and more than 34 megawatts of renewable energy\u2014Microsoft's Scope 3 emissions had increased by 31% from the company's 2020 baseline, which caused the company's total emissions to rise by 29% in 2023.\nIn 2023 Microsoft consumed 24 TWh of electricity, more than countries such as Iceland, Ghana, the Dominican Republic, or Tunisia.\nHeadquarters.\nThe corporate headquarters, informally known as the Microsoft Redmond campus, is located at One Microsoft Way in Redmond, Washington. Microsoft initially moved onto the grounds of the campus on February 26, 1986, weeks before the company went public on March 13. The headquarters has since experienced multiple expansions since its establishment. It is estimated to encompass over 8\u00a0million ft2 (750,000\u00a0m2) of office space and 30,000\u201340,000 employees. Additional offices are located in Bellevue and Issaquah, Washington (90,000 employees worldwide). The company is planning to upgrade its Mountain View, California, campus on a grand scale. The company has occupied this campus since 1981. In 2016, the company bought the campus, with plans to renovate and expand it by 25%. Microsoft operates an East Coast headquarters in Charlotte, North Carolina.\nIn April 2024, it was announced that Microsoft would be opening a state-of-the-art artificial intelligence 'hub' around Paddington in London, England. It was announced that the division would be led by Jordan Hoffman, who previously worked for Deepmind and Inflection.\nFlagship stores.\nOn October 26, 2015, the company opened its retail location on Fifth Avenue in New York City. The location features a five-story glass storefront and is 22,270 square feet. As per company executives, Microsoft had been on the lookout for a flagship location since 2009. The company's retail locations are part of a greater strategy to help build a connection with its consumers. The opening of the store coincided with the launch of the Surface Book and Surface Pro 4. On November 12, 2015, Microsoft opened a second flagship store, located in Sydney's Pitt Street Mall.\nLogo.\nMicrosoft adopted the so-called \"\"Pac-Man\" Logo\", designed by Scott Baker, on February 26, 1987, with the concept being similar to InFocus Corporation logo that was adapted a year earlier in 1986. Baker stated \"The new logo, in Helvetica italic typeface, has a slash between the \"o\" and \"s\" to emphasize the \"soft\" part of the name and convey motion and speed\". Dave Norris ran an internal joke campaign to save the old logo, which was green, in all uppercase, and featured a fanciful letter \"O\", nicknamed the \"blibbet\", but it was discarded.\nMicrosoft's logo with the tagline \"Your potential. Our passion.\"\u2014below the main corporate name\u2014is based on a slogan Microsoft used in 2008. In 2002, the company started using the logo in the United States and eventually started a television campaign with the slogan, changed from the previous tagline of \"Where do you want to go today?\" During the private MGX (Microsoft Global Exchange) conference in 2010, Microsoft unveiled the company's next tagline, \"Be What's Next.\" It also had a slogan/tagline \"Making it all make sense.\" The Microsoft \"Pac-Man\" logo was used for 25 years, 5 months, and 28 days until August 23, 2012, being the longest enduring logo to be used by the company.\nOn August 23, 2012, Microsoft unveiled a new corporate logo at the opening of its 23rd Microsoft store in Boston, indicating the company's shift of focus from the classic style to the tile-centric modern interface, which it uses/will use on the Windows Phone platform, Xbox 360, Windows 8 and the upcoming Office Suites. The new logo also includes four squares with the colors of the then-current Windows logo which have been used to represent Microsoft's four major products: Windows (blue), Office (orange), Xbox (green) and Bing (yellow). The logo also resembles the opening of one of the commercials for Windows 95.\nSponsorship.\nThe company was the official jersey sponsor of Finland's national basketball team at EuroBasket 2015, a major sponsor of the Toyota Gazoo Racing WRT (2017\u20132020) and a sponsor of the Renault F1 Team (2016\u20132020).\nLobbying and political influence.\nIn 2025, Microsoft was one of the donors who funded the demolition of the East Wing of the White House and planned building of a ballroom.\nPhilanthropy.\nIn 2015, Microsoft Philanthropies, an internal charitable organization, was established to bring the benefits of technology and the digital revolution to areas and groups that lack them. The organisation's key areas of focus are: donating cloud computing resources to university researchers and nonprofit groups; supporting the expansion of broadband access worldwide; funding international computer science education through YouthSpark; supporting tech education in the U.S. from kindergarten to high school; and donating to global child and refugee relief organizations.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic, Microsoft's president, Brad Smith, announced that it had donated an initial batch of supplies, including 15,000 protection goggles, infrared thermometers, medical caps, and protective suits, to healthcare workers in Seattle, with further aid to come.\nDuring the Russian invasion of Ukraine Microsoft started monitoring cyberattacks originating from the Government of Russia and Russia-backed hackers. In June 2022, Microsoft published the report on Russian cyber attacks and concluded that state-backed Russian hackers \"have engaged in \"strategic espionage\" against governments, think tanks, businesses and aid groups\" in 42 countries supporting Kyiv.\nMicrosoft also supports initiatives through its AI for Accessibility grant program, providing funding to various global organizations that create technologies to enhance accessibility for individuals with disabilities. Among grant recipients from the Asia-Pacific region are the Sri Lankan IT company Fortude, the Thailand-based Vulcan Coalition, and the Indonesian organization Kerjabilitas.\nControversies.\nCriticism of Microsoft has followed various aspects of its products and business practices. Frequently criticized are the ease of use, robustness, and security of the company's software. It has also been criticized for the use of permatemp employees (employees employed for years as \"temporary\", and therefore without medical benefits), the use of forced retention tactics, which means that employees would be sued if they tried to leave. Historically, Microsoft has also been accused of overworking employees, in many cases, leading to burnout within just a few years of joining the company. The company is often referred to as a \"Velvet Sweatshop\", a term which originated in a 1989 \"Seattle Times\" article, and later became used to describe the company by some of Microsoft's own employees. This characterization is derived from the perception that Microsoft provides nearly everything for its employees in a convenient place, but in turn overworks them to a point where it would be bad for their (possibly long-term) health.\nAs reported by several news outlets, an Irish subsidiary of Microsoft based in the Republic of Ireland declared \u00a3220 bn in profits but paid no corporation tax for the year 2020. This is due to the company being tax resident in Bermuda as mentioned in the accounts for 'Microsoft Round Island One, a subsidiary that collects license fees from the use of Microsoft software worldwide. Dame Margaret Hodge, a Labour MP in the UK said, \"It is unsurprising \u2013 yet still shocking \u2013 that massively wealthy global corporations openly, unashamedly and blatantly refuse to pay tax on the profits they make in the countries where they undertake business\".\nIn 2020, ProPublica reported that the company had diverted more than $39 billion in U.S. profits to Puerto Rico using a mechanism structured to make it seem as if the company was unprofitable on paper. As a result, the company paid a tax rate on those profits of \"nearly 0%\". When the Internal Revenue Service audited these transactions, ProPublica reported that Microsoft aggressively fought back, including successfully lobbying Congress to change the law to make it harder for the agency to conduct audits of large corporations. In 2023, Microsoft reported in a securities filing that the U.S. Internal Revenue Service was alleging that the company owed the U.S. $28.9 billion in past taxes, plus penalties related to mis-allocation of corporate profits over a decade.\n\"Embrace, extend, and extinguish\" (EEE), also known as \"embrace, extend, and exterminate,\" is a phrase that the U.S. Department of Justice found that was used internally by Microsoft to describe its strategy for entering product categories involving widely used standards, extending those standards with proprietary capabilities, and then using those differences to strongly disadvantage competitors. Microsoft is frequently accused of using anticompetitive tactics and abusing its monopolistic power. People who use its products and services often end up becoming dependent on them, a process known as vendor lock-in.\nMicrosoft was the first company to participate in the PRISM surveillance program, according to leaked NSA documents obtained by \"The Guardian\" and \"The Washington Post\" in June 2013, and acknowledged by government officials following the leak. The program authorizes the government to secretly access data of non-US citizens hosted by American companies without a warrant. Microsoft has denied participation in such a program.\nJesse Jackson believes Microsoft should hire more minorities and women. In 2015, he praised Microsoft for appointing two women to its board of directors.\nIn 2020, Salesforce, the manufacturer of the Slack platform, complained to European regulators about Microsoft due to the integration of the Teams service into Office 365. Negotiations with the European Commission continued until the summer of 2023, but reached an impasse that led to Microsoft facing an antitrust investigation from the European Union.\nIn June 2024, Microsoft faced a potential EU fine after regulators accused it of abusing market power by bundling its Teams video-conferencing app with its Office 365 and Microsoft 365 software. The European Commission issued a statement of objections, alleging Microsoft's practice since 2019 gave Teams an unfair market advantage and limited interoperability with competing software. Despite Microsoft's efforts to avoid deeper scrutiny, including unbundling Teams, regulators remained unconvinced. This action followed a 2019 complaint from Slack, which was later acquired by Salesforce. Microsoft's Teams usage soared during the pandemic, growing from 2 million daily users in 2017 to 300 million in 2023. The company has a history of antitrust battles in the U.S. and Europe, with over \u20ac2 billion in EU fines previously imposed for similar abuses.\nInvolvement in the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict.\nIn October 2024, Microsoft fired two employees, software engineers Ibtihal Aboussad and Vaniya Agrawal, who organized an unauthorized vigil at its Redmond headquarters to honor Palestinians killed in the Gaza war. The employees, part of the group \"No Azure for Apartheid\", sought to address the company's involvement in the Israeli government's use of its technology. In February 2025, the Associated Press reported that the Israeli military was utilizing Microsoft-developed artificial intelligence tools in its military and intelligence operations against the people of Gaza. In May 2025, Microsoft issued an unsigned statement confirming that these services had been made available to Israel, while denying that these tools were employed during the massacre of the people of Gaza. On March 20, 2025, before an event at Seattle's Great Hall with Brad Smith and Steve Ballmer, protestors projected \"Microsoft powers genocide\" on the wall. Subsequently, two employees interrupted AI executive Mustafa Suleyman at a speaking event on April 4, 2025, in protest at the company's support of Israel. After the disruptions at these events, Microsoft contacted the FBI in search of assistance in surveilling its pro-Palestinian employees and their allies. The Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement added Microsoft to its list of targets for partnering \"with the apartheid regime of Israel and its prison system\". In August 2025 it was reported that Microsoft provides storage for mass-surveilled Palestinian phone calls that have been used to identify bombing targets in Gaza. On August 20, 20 Microsoft employees and their allies were arrested after refusing to disperse from a protest on Microsoft's Redmond, Washington campus.\nIn November 2024, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) launched an investigation into Microsoft, focusing on potential antitrust violations related to its cloud computing, AI, and cybersecurity businesses. The probe scrutinized Microsoft's bundling of cloud services with products like Office and security tools, as well as its growing AI presence through its partnership with OpenAI. This inquiry is part of broader efforts by the U.S. government to curb the power of major tech companies, especially under FTC chair Lina Khan. Concerns were raised about Microsoft's licensing practices potentially locking customers into its services and its AI investments possibly sidestepping regulatory oversight.\nIn June 2025 Microsoft helped suspend the email account of an International Criminal Court (ICC) prosecutor in the Netherlands who was investigating Israel for war crimes in order to comply with a Trump executive order. In June 2025, a UN expert's report named Microsoft as being \"central to Israel's surveillance apparatus and the ongoing Gaza destruction.\" In September 2025, Microsoft cut off some services to a unit of Israel's Ministry of Defence after an investigation found its technology had been used to conduct mass surveillance on people in Gaza.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBundled references\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19002", "revid": "152145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19002", "title": "Microserfs", "text": "Novel by Douglas Coupland\nMicroserfs is an epistolary novel by Douglas Coupland published by HarperCollins in 1995. It first appeared in short story form as the cover article for the January 1994 issue of \"Wired\" magazine and was subsequently expanded to full novel length. Set in the early 1990s, it captures the state of the technology industry before Windows 95, and anticipates the dot-com bubble of the late 1990s.\nThe novel is presented in the form of diary entries maintained on a PowerBook by the narrator, Daniel. Because of this, as well as its formatting and usage of emoticons, this novel is similar to what emerged a decade later as the blog format.\nCoupland revisited many of the ideas in \"Microserfs\" in his 2006 novel \"JPod\", which has been labeled \"\"Microserfs\" for the Google generation\".\nPlot.\nThe plot of the novel has two distinct movements: the events at Microsoft in Redmond, Washington, and the move to Silicon Valley and the \"Oop!\" project.\nThe novel begins in Redmond as the characters are working on different projects at Microsoft's main campus. Life at the campus feels like a feudalistic society, with Bill Gates as the lord, and the employees the serfs. The majority of the main characters\u2014Daniel (the narrator), Susan, Todd, Bug, Michael, and Abe\u2014are living together in a \"geek house\", and their lives are dedicated to their projects and the company. Daniel's foundations are shaken when his father, a longtime employee of IBM, is laid off. The lifespan of a Microsoft coder weighs heavily on Daniel's mind.\nThe second movement of the novel begins when the characters are offered jobs in Silicon Valley working on a project for Michael, who has by then left Redmond. All of the housemates\u2014some immediately, some after thought\u2014decide to move to the Valley.\nThe characters' lives change drastically once they leave the limited sphere of the Microsoft campus and enter the world of \"One-Point-Oh\". They begin to work on a project called \"Oop!\" (a reference to object-oriented programming). Oop! is a Lego-like design program, allowing dynamic creation of many objects, bearing a resemblance to 2009's \"Minecraft\" (Coupland appears on the rear cover of the novel's hardcover editions photographed in Denmark's Legoland Billund, holding a Lego 777.).\nOne of the undercurrents of the plot is Daniel and his family's relationship to Jed, Daniel's younger brother who died in a boating accident while they were children.\n The book's narrator and main character. Initially a software tester for Microsoft. His thoughts are funneled into the book through the epistolary format of the novel, and also as he records stream of consciousness lists of terms that he believes exist in a computer's subconscious.\n A programmer initially working for Microsoft. Throughout the novel, Susan attempts (not always successfully) to find and maintain a meaning to life outside of work. She eventually gains semi-celebrity status after founding Chyx, a feminist support group for Valley women who code.\n A tester and coworker of Daniel's who is obsessed with bodybuilding and is continually searching for something to believe in. His family is very Christian, while Todd has rejected his parents' faith.\n A tester and coworker of Daniel's; \"the World's Most Bitter Man\". He is older than most of the other characters, and likes to remind them of his greater experience in the software industry. Eventually he comes out of the closet. His primary reason for leaving Microsoft for Oop! was to \"leave the old me behind\" and start over.\n A gifted programmer with high-functioning autism (specifically developmental coordination disorder) initially working for Microsoft. Michael's decision to leave Microsoft and found a startup company is the impetus for the change in lives of the other characters. Michael lives on a \"Flatlander\" diet, meaning that he eats only things that are two dimensional; this began after a period during which he barred himself in his office, eating only what his co-workers slid under the door. His screen name is \"Kraft Singles\". Michael is addicted to Robitussin cough syrup, which contains the dissociative drug dextromethorphan.\n A coder, coworker, and girlfriend of Daniel. Karla's relationship with her family is tense, and she actively avoids contact with them. She begins the story as a closed-off person, but as the novel unfolds her character begins to be more open and understanding. She has a history of an eating disorder.\n MIT graduate coder and multimillionaire who stays with Microsoft when the rest of the characters leave for California. His email conversations with Daniel appear throughout the novel. Abe, who dearly missed his friends, eventually joins Oop! and saves the company from financial ruin.\n President and co-founder of Oop!. Primarily business-minded, he has been a millionaire three times over with various (eventually failed) projects. He devotes his time to seeking venture capital for the startup company. Ethan's personality is diametrically opposed to the other characters, in part because of his relative lack of technical knowledge. He suffers from bad dandruff and his skin is pocked by scars from procedures to remove cancerous growths.\n Female bodybuilder and coder who is introduced later in the novel. She is romantically involved with Todd, and they have a baby together (Lindsay). She becomes an employee at Oop!. She and Todd are obsessed with transforming their bodies into perfect \"machines\" by going to the gym every day and taking protein pills and drinks.\n A Canadian computer engineering student who is introduced later in the novel. She and Michael meet on the internet and fall in love despite never meeting in person or even knowing each other's genders. Due to Michael's fear of rejection, Daniel is sent to the University of Waterloo to meet her. Amy becomes engaged to Michael and joins the Oop! team after graduating from university.\n Introduced later in the novel, Emmett is a meek and asthmatic storyboard artist hired by Oop! who enters into a submissive relationship with Susan. He collects manga despite his hatred of Japan's influence on American animation.\n French coder who is Daniel's neighbor and used to work for Apple. Although not an Oop! employee, he visits the team often and accompanies them to Las Vegas for the CES convention. His accent becomes stronger around women.\n A mid-level manager at IBM who represents an older generation of technical workers. After being laid off, he begins to work closely with Michael on a secret project that evokes feelings of jealousy from Daniel.\n A librarian with little technical knowledge, she serves to give the group insight into what the laypeople understand about technology.\n Daniel's younger brother who died in a childhood drowning accident. He is a looming presence in Daniel's mind throughout the novel.\n The Underwoods' overweight golden retriever. She was originally trained to be a seeing eye dog, but failed the exam because she was too affectionate.\nInfluences.\nMicrosoft, Silicon Valley, and geek culture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt always amazes me that 90 per cent of people in the States now work directly around a PC. That's like a billion person-hours a day spent, and yet none of the stories we tell, or the books we write, take place in an office. There's just so much of the human soul and imagination in that strange environment now. I'm amazed we don't see 50 books a week on office life.\n Coupland, \"The Times\", July 1998. \nCoupland lived in Redmond, Washington for six weeks and Palo Alto, Silicon Valley for four months researching the lives of Microsoft workers. \"It was a 'Gorillas in the Mist' kind of observation\u2026 What do they put in their glove compartments? What snack foods do they eat? What posters are on their bedroom walls?\" Friends from Microsoft and Apple also helped him with research.\nThe novel was a radical departure from Coupland's previous novel, \"Life After God\". \"I wrote the two books under radically different mind-sets, and \"Serfs\" was a willful rerouting into a different realm\". Coupland first noticed that his art school friends were working in computers in 1992.\nDigital faith.\nCoupland's research turned up links to the themes of \"Life After God\". \"What surprised me about Microsoft is that no one has any conception of an afterlife. There is so little thought given to eternal issues that their very absence make them pointedly there. These people are so locked into the world, by default some sort of transcendence is located elsewhere, and obviously machines become the totem they imbue with sacred properties, wishes, hopes, goals, desires, dreams. That sounds like 1940s SF, but it's become the world.\"\nAllusions to history, geography, and science.\nThe book takes place first at Microsoft in Redmond, Washington (near Seattle) and then Silicon Valley (near San Francisco). The time period is 1993\u20131995, at a time when Microsoft has reached dominance in the software industry and emerged victorious from the \"Look &amp; Feel\" lawsuit by Apple Inc., a company that had at times seemed in danger of falling apart.\nThe Northridge earthquake takes place during the story. The earthquake has a profound effect on Ethan, who eventually constructs a replica highway interchange out of Lego pieces to honor the infrastructure destroyed by the earthquake.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen \"Microserfs\" first came out, most people thought it was a tightly focused anthropological look at a tiny group of historically transient information workers in the American Pacific Northwest. It turns out they were forming a template of the way everyone else in the world works in and around information. As time went on it became a lot broader, instead of a lot narrower, which is what happened with Generation X.\n Coupland, \"The Times\", June 1998. \nCoupland's interest in the world of Microsoft and technology workers began with the publication of a short story in \"Wired\" magazine in 1994. The story would later be expanded into the novel.\nShortly before the publication of \"Microserfs\", Coupland began to distance himself from his label as spokesperson for Generation X.\nCoupland's novel anticipated the outcome of the late-1990s dot-com bubble with his depiction of the Oop! project's search for capital.\nThe abridged audiobook for \"Microserfs\" was read by Matthew Perry.\nCoded messages.\nSeveral coded messages are included within the text:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I heart Lisa Computers\nThis is my computer. There are many like it, but this one is mine. My computer is my best friend. It is my life. I must master it, as I must master my life. Without me, my computer is useless. Without my computer, I am useless. I must use my computer true. I must compute faster than my enemy who is trying to kill me. I must outcompute him before he outcomputes me. I will. Before God, I swear this creed. My computer and myself are defenders of this country. We are masters of our enemy. We are the saviours of my life. So be it until there is no enemy, but peace. Amen.\nTinned Peaches Yttrium San Fran\"\nThis message is an adapted version of the Rifleman's Creed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19004", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19004", "title": "Moscow", "text": "Capital and most populous city of Russia\nMoscow is the capital and largest city of Russia, standing on the Moskva River in Central Russia. It has a population estimated at over 13 million residents within the city limits, over 19.1\u00a0million residents in the urban area, and over 21.5\u00a0million residents in its metropolitan area. The city covers an area of , while the urban area covers , and the metropolitan area covers over . Moscow is among the world's largest cities, being the most populous city entirely in Europe, the largest urban and metropolitan area in Europe, and the largest city by land area on the European continent.\nFirst documented in 1147, Moscow became the capital of the Grand Principality of Moscow, which led the unification of the Russian lands in the 15th century and became the center of a unified state. Following the proclamation of the Tsardom of Russia in 1547, Moscow remained the political and economic center for most of its history. During the reign of Peter the Great, the Russian capital was moved to the newly founded city of Saint Petersburg in 1712, leading to a decline in Moscow's importance throughout the imperial period. Following the Russian Revolution and the establishment of the Russian SFSR, the capital was moved back to Moscow in 1918. The city later became the political center of the Soviet Union and experienced significant population growth throughout the Soviet period. In the aftermath of the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Moscow remained the capital city of the newly reconstituted Russian Federation and has experienced continued growth.\nThe northernmost and coldest megacity in the world, Moscow is governed as a federal city, where it serves as the political, economic, cultural, and scientific center of Russia and Eastern Europe. Moscow has one of the world's largest urban economies. Moscow has the second-highest number of billionaires of any city (tied with Hong Kong). The Moscow International Business Center is one of the largest financial centers in the world and features the majority of Europe's tallest skyscrapers. Moscow was the host city of the 1980 Summer Olympics and one of the host cities of the 2018 FIFA World Cup.\nThe city contains several UNESCO World Heritage Sites and is known for its display of Russian architecture, particularly in areas such as Red Square and buildings such as Saint Basil's Cathedral and the Moscow Kremlin, the latter of which is the seat of power of the Government of Russia. Moscow is home to Russian companies in different industries and is served by a comprehensive transit network, which includes four international airports, ten railway terminals, a tram system, a monorail system, and the Moscow Metro, which is the busiest metro system in Europe and one of the largest rapid transit systems in the world. The city has over 40 percent of its territory covered by greenery, making it one of the greenest cities in the world.\nEtymology.\nThe city's name is thought to be derived from the Moskva River. Theories of the origin of the name of the river have been proposed.\nThe most linguistically well-grounded and widely accepted is from the Proto-Balto-Slavic root *\"m\u016dzg\"-/\"muzg\"- from the Proto-Indo-European \"wet\", so the name \"Moskva\" might signify a river at a wetland or marsh. Its cognates include , \"pool, puddle\", and \"to wash\", \"to drown\", \"to dip, immerse\", Prekmurian \"m\u00fczga\" \"marsh, swamp.\" In many Slavic countries Moskov is a surname, most common in Russia, Bulgaria, Ukraine and North Macedonia. Additionally, there are similarly named places in Poland like Mozgawa. According to a Finno-Ugric hypothesis, the Merya and Muroma people, who were among the pre-Slavic tribes which inhabited the area, called the river \"Mustajoki\" \"Black river\", and the name of the river derives from this term. Other theories, having little or no scientific basis, are rejected by linguists.\nThe Old Russian form of the name is reconstructed as *, *, hence it was one of a few Slavic \"\u016b\"-stem nouns. As with other nouns of that declension, it had been undergoing a morphological transformation at the early stage of the development of the language, as a result, the first written references in the 12th century were , (accusative case), , (locative case), , (genitive case). From the latter forms came the modern Russian form , , which is a result of morphological generalization with the numerous Slavic \"\u0101\"-stem nouns. The form \"Moskov\u012d\" has left traces in other languages, including ; ; ; ; and .\nMoscow has acquired epithets, such as the \"third Rome\". Moscow is one of twelve Hero Cities. The demonym for a Moscow resident is rendered as \"Muscovite\" in English.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe site of modern-day Moscow has been inhabited since prehistoric times. Among the earliest finds are relics of the Lyalovo culture, which experts assign to the Neolithic period. They confirm that the first inhabitants of the area were hunters and gatherers. Around 950 AD, two Slavic tribes, Vyatichi and Krivichi, settled here. The Vyatichi may have formed the majority of Moscow's indigenous population.\nEarly history (1147\u20131263).\nMoscow is first mentioned in chronicles under the year 1147, as part of the principality of Rostov-Suzdal, which emerged from the disintegration of Kievan Rus'. It was referred to as a meeting place of Yuri Dolgorukiy and Sviatoslav Olgovich. At the time, it was a minor town on the western border of the principality. The importance of Moscow greatly increased during the second half of the 12th century, and it was converted into a fortified \"gorod\" (stronghold) in the 1150s, with the first walls of the Kremlin being built. During the Mongol invasions of 1237\u20131238, Moscow was sacked following the destruction of Ryazan.\nThe first prince of Moscow was Daniel, the youngest son of Alexander Nevsky, and in 1263, he was given Moscow as an \"otchina\" (hereditary land), where he established a local branch of Rurikid princes. Two chronicles refer to Mikhail Khorobrit as \"Mikhail of Moscow\" in the mid-13th century, but Daniel is generally considered to be the first prince of Moscow. On Mikhail's death in 1248, if it is assumed that an appanage principality was created, Moscow reverted as an escheat to the grand prince of Vladimir. Until 1271, the principality was ruled by the governors of Daniel's uncle Yaroslav, who was given Tver as an appanage. Daniel himself is first mentioned in chronicles under the year 1282 as taking part in a feudal war between his two older brothers.\nGrand Principality (1263\u20131547).\nBy the turn of the century, Moscow was one of the leading principalities within Vladimir-Suzdal, alongside Tver. On the right bank of the Moskva River, at a distance of from the Kremlin, Daniel founded the first monastery with the wooden church of St. Daniel-Stylite, which is now the Danilov Monastery. Following Daniel's death in 1303, the territory of the principality had almost tripled in size, encompassing the entire Moskva River along with its tributaries, which allowed Moscow to become self-sufficient. The principality was also provided with an excellent river network that facilitated trade.\nDaniel's descendants struggled with the princes of Tver for succession to the grand principality. Yury won recognition from the Mongol khan as the grand prince in 1318, but he lost the title four years later. Ivan I recovered the grand princely throne from Tver after proving himself to be a loyal servant of the khan. Ivan collected the tribute to the khan of the Golden Horde from dependent Russian princes and he used the funds he acquired to develop Moscow. The metropolitan of the Russian Church also found an ally in Ivan and moved his seat from the nominal capital of Vladimir to Moscow. The foundation of Moscow's first stone church, the Dormition Cathedral, was laid in 1326, and the metropolitan chose to be buried there \u2013 an act that would cement Moscow's status as the spiritual center of Russian Orthodoxy. Masonry building continued in the following years with the construction of additional stone churches. The limestone walls and towers of the Kremlin were built in 1366\u20131368. A distinct architectural school emerged in the late 14th century.\nThe khan of the Golden Horde initially backed Moscow in an effort to halt the eastward expansion of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, but he continued to meddle in Moscow's relations with other Russian princes to prevent it from becoming too strong. In 1353, the Black Death spread from northwestern Russia to Moscow, causing the deaths of Simeon of Moscow, his sons, and the metropolitan. The ruling family of Moscow remained small as a result and a new vertical pattern of princely succession from father to son was defined. During the reign of Dmitry Donskoy, the Moscow principality greatly expanded in size. In 1380, Dmitry led a united Russian army to an important victory over the Mongols in the Battle of Kulikovo, which greatly increased Moscow's prestige and solidified the status of its rulers as the military leaders of the nation. Following his death in 1389, the thrones of Vladimir and Moscow were permanently united.\nDuring the reign of Vasily II, a civil war broke out after Yury of Zvenigorod challenged the succession of his nephew in 1425. Moscow switched hands numerous times, and Yury's son, Dmitry Shemyaka, continued to offer resistance until his appanage center of Galich was captured in 1450. In ecclesiastical matters, Vasily disapproved of the Council of Florence, leading him to arrest the metropolitan upon his return in 1441 for having it signed. Seven years later, a council of Russian bishops elected their own metropolitan, which amounted to a declaration of autocephaly by the Russian Church. The fall of Constantinople in 1453 was viewed by the Russians as divine punishment for apostasy, and in 1492, Moscow was called an imperial city for the first time by the Russian metropolitan.\nDuring the reign of Ivan III, nearly all of the Russian states were united with Moscow and the foundations for a centralized state were laid. His defeat of the Tatars in 1480 also traditionally marks the end of Tatar suzerainty. Ivan did his utmost to make his capital a worthy successor to Constantinople, and he had the Kremlin reconstructed after inviting architects from Renaissance Italy, including Petrus Antonius Solarius, who designed the new Kremlin wall and its towers, and Marco Ruffo who designed the new palace for the prince. The Kremlin walls as they now appear are those designed by Solarius, completed in 1495. The Ivan the Great Bell Tower was built in 1505\u20131508 and augmented to its present height in 1600. A trading settlement, or \"posad\", grew up to the east of the Kremlin, in the area known as \"Zaradye\". In the time of Ivan III, the Red Square, originally named the Hollow Field, appeared.\nIvan's son Vasily III continued the expansion of the Muscovite state and annexed the remaining Russian territories. His reign also saw the continued development of the doctrine of Moscow as the \"third Rome\". In 1508\u20131516, the Italian architect Aleviz Fryazin (Novy) arranged for the construction of a moat in front of the eastern wall, which would connect the Moskva and Neglinnaya and be filled with water from Neglinnaya. Known as the Alevizov moat and with a length of , width of , and depth of was lined with limestone and, in 1533, fenced on both sides with low, cogged-brick walls.\nTsardom (1547\u20131721).\nIn 1547, Ivan the Terrible was crowned in Moscow as not only the grand prince, but also the first tsar of all Russia. In the 16th and 17th centuries, three circular defenses were built: Kitay-gorod, the White City and the Earthen City. However, in 1547, fires destroyed much of the town, and in 1571 the Crimean Tatars captured Moscow, burning everything except the Kremlin. The annals record that only 30,000 of 200,000 inhabitants survived.\nThe Crimean Tatars attacked again in 1591, but were held back by new walls, built between 1584 and 1591 by a craftsman named Fyodor Kon. In 1592, an outer earth rampart with 50 towers was erected around the city, including an area on the right bank of the Moscow River. As an outermost line of defense, a chain of strongly fortified monasteries was established beyond the ramparts to the south and east, principally the Novodevichy Convent and Donskoy, Danilov, Simonov, Novospasskiy, and Andronikov monasteries, most of which now house museums. From its ramparts, the city became poetically known as \"Bielokamennaya\", the \"White-Walled\". The city's limits as marked by the ramparts, are now marked by the Garden Ring. Three square gates existed on the east side of the Kremlin wall, which in the 17th century, were known as Konstantino-Eleninsky, Spassky, Nikolsky (after the icons of Constantine and Helen, the Saviour and St. Nicholas that hung over them). The last two were directly opposite the Red Square, while the Konstantino-Elenensky gate was located behind Saint Basil's Cathedral.\nThe Russian famine of 1601\u20131603 killed perhaps 100,000 in Moscow. Between 1610 and 1612, troops of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth occupied Moscow, as its ruler Sigismund III tried to take the Russian throne. In 1612, Nizhny Novgorod and other Russian cities led by prince Dmitry Pozharsky and Kuzma Minin rose against the Polish occupants, besieged the Kremlin, and expelled them. In 1613, the Zemsky Sobor elected Michael Romanov aa tsar, establishing the Romanov dynasty. The 17th century saw several risings, such as the liberation of Moscow from the Polish\u2013Lithuanian invaders (1612), the Salt Riot (1648), the Copper Riot (1662), and the Moscow uprising of 1682.\nDuring the first half of the 17th century, the population doubled from 100,000 to 200,000, and it expanded beyond its ramparts in the latter part of the century. In the middle of the 17th century, 20% of Moscow suburb's inhabitants were from the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, being driven from their homeland by the Muscovite invaders. By 1682, there were 692 households established north of the ramparts, by Ukrainians and Belarusians abducted from their hometowns in the course of the Russo-Polish War of 1654\u20131667. These new outskirts became known as the \"Meshchanskaya sloboda\", after Ruthenian \"meshchane\" \"town people\". The term \"meshchane\" acquired pejorative connotations in 18th-century Russia and today means \"petty bourgeois\" or \"narrow-minded philistine\". The entire city of the late 17th century are contained within what is today Moscow's Central Administrative Okrug.\nNumerous disasters befell the city. The plague epidemics ravaged Moscow in 1570\u20131571, 1592 and 1654\u20131656. The plague killed upwards of 80% of the people in 1654\u201355. Fires burned out much of the wooden city in 1626 and 1648. In 1712, Peter the Great moved his government to the newly built Saint Petersburg on the Baltic coast.\nEmpire (1721\u20131917).\nAfter losing the status as capital, the population at first decreased, from 200,000 in the 17th century to 130,000 in 1750. But after 1750, the population grew tenfold over the remaining duration of the Russian Empire, reaching 1.8 million by 1915. The 1770\u20131772 Russian plague killed up to 100,000 people in Moscow. By 1700, the building of cobbled roads had begun. In 1730, permanent street lights were introduced, and by 1867 many streets had a gaslight. In 1883, near the Prechistinskiye Gates, arc lamps were installed. In 1741 Moscow was surrounded by a barricade long, the Kamer-Kollezhskiy barrier, with 16 gates at which customs tolls were collected. Its line is traced today by several streets called \"val\" (\"ramparts\"). In the early 19th century, the Arch of Konstantino-Elenensky gate was paved with bricks, but the Spassky Gate was the main front gate of the Kremlin and used for royal entrances. From this gate, wooden and stone bridges stretched across the moat. Books were sold on this bridge and stone platforms were built nearby for guns \u2013 \"raskats\". The Tsar Cannon was located on the platform of the Lobnoye mesto. The road connecting Moscow with St. Petersburg, now the M10 highway, was completed in 1746, its Moscow end following the old Tver road, which had existed since the 16th century. It became known as \"Peterburskoye Schosse\" after it was paved in the 1780s. Petrovsky Palace was built in 1776\u20131780 by Matvey Kazakov. Between 1781 and 1804 the Mytischinskiy water pipe (the first in Russia) was built.\nWhen Napoleon invaded Russia in 1812, the Muscovites were evacuated. The Moscow fire was principally the effect of Russian sabotage. Napoleon's \"Grande Arm\u00e9e\" was forced to retreat and nearly annihilated by the devastating Russian winter. In 1813, following the destruction during the French occupation, a \"Commission for the Construction of the City of Moscow\" was established. It launched a great program of rebuilding, including a partial replanning of the centre. Among many buildings constructed, or reconstructed, was the Grand Kremlin Palace and the Kremlin Armoury, the Moscow University, the Moscow Manege (Riding School), and the Bolshoi Theatre. The Arbat Street had been in existence since at least the 15th century, but it was developed into a prestigious area during the 18th century. It was destroyed in the fire of 1812 and was rebuilt completely in the early 19th century. Moscow State University was established in 1755. Its main building was reconstructed after the 1812 fire by Domenico Giliardi. The \"Moskovskiye Vedomosti\" newspaper appeared from 1756, originally in weekly intervals, and from 1859 as a daily newspaper.\nIn the 1830s, general Alexander Bashilov planned the first regular grid of city streets north from Petrovsky Palace. Khodynka field south of the highway was used for military training. Smolensky Rail station (forerunner of Belorussky Rail Terminal) was inaugurated in 1870. Sokolniki Park, in the 18th century the home of the tsar's falconers well outside Moscow, became contiguous with the expanding city in the later 19th century and was developed into a public municipal park in 1878. The suburban Savyolovsky Rail Terminal was built in 1902. In January 1905, the institution of the City Governor, or Mayor, was officially introduced, and Alexander Adrianov became Moscow's first official mayor.\nWhen Catherine II came to power in 1762, the city's filth and the smell of sewage were depicted by observers as a symptom of disorderly lifestyles of lower-class Russians recently arrived from the farms. Elites called for improved sanitation, which became part of Catherine's plans for increasing control over social life. National political and military successes from 1812 through 1855 calmed the critics and validated efforts to produce a more enlightened and stable society. There was less discussion about the poor conditions of public health. However, in the wake of Russia's failures in the Crimean War in 1855\u201356, confidence in the ability of the state to maintain order in the slums eroded, and demands for improved public health put it back on the agenda. In 1903 the Moskvoretskaya water supply was completed.\nSoviet period (1917\u20131991).\nIn November 1917, upon learning of the uprising in Petrograd, Moscow's Bolsheviks began their uprising. On 2 November (15), 1917, after heavy fighting, Soviet power was established in Moscow. Vladimir Lenin, fearing invasion, moved the capital back to Moscow on 12 March 1918. The Kremlin once again became the seat of power, political centre of the new state.\nWith the change in values imposed by communist ideology, the tradition of preserving cultural heritage was broken. Independent preservation societies, even those that defended only secular landmarks, were disbanded by the end of the 1920s. A new anti-religious campaign, launched in 1929, coincided with the collectivization of peasants; the destruction of churches in the cities peaked around 1932. In 1937 letters were written to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union to rename Moscow to \"Stalindar\" or \"Stalinodar\". Stalin rejected this suggestion.\nDuring World War II, the Soviet State Committee of Defence and the General Staff of the Red Army were located in Moscow. In 1941, 16 divisions of the national volunteers (more than 160,000 people), 25 battalions, and 4 engineering regiments were formed among the Muscovites. Between October 1941 and January 1942, the German Army Group Centre was stopped at the outskirts of the city, then driven off in the Battle of Moscow. Many factories were evacuated, together with much of the government, and from 20 October the city was declared to be in a siege. Its remaining inhabitants built and manned antitank defenses, while the city was bombarded from the air. On 1 May 1944, a medal \"For the defence of Moscow\" and in 1947 another medal \"In memory of the 800th anniversary of Moscow\" was instituted. German and Soviet casualties during the battle have been debated, as sources provide different estimates. Total casualties between 30 September 1941, and 7 January 1942, are estimated to be between 248,000 and 400,000 for the Wehrmacht and between 650,000 and 1,280,000 for the Red Army.\nDuring the postwar years, there was a housing crisis, solved by the invention of high-rise apartments. There are over 11,000 of these standardised and prefabricated apartment blocks, housing most of Moscow's population, making it by far the city with the most high-rise buildings. Apartments were built and partly furnished in the factory, before being raised and stacked into tall columns. The popular Soviet-era comic film \"Irony of Fate\" parodies this construction method. The city of Zelenograd was built in 1958 at from the city centre to the north-west, along with the Leningradskoye Shosse, and incorporated as one of Moscow's administrative okrugs. Moscow State University moved to its campus on Sparrow Hills in 1953.\nIn 1959, Nikita Khrushchev launched his anti-religious campaign. Of Moscow's fifty churches operating in 1959, thirty were closed and six demolished. On 8 May 1965, due to the actual 20th anniversary of the victory in World War II, Moscow was awarded a title of the Hero City.\nThe Moscow Ring Road (MKAD) was opened in 1961. It had four lanes running along the city borders. The MKAD marked the administrative boundaries of the city until the 1980s, when outlying suburbs beyond the ring road were incorporated. In 1980, Moscow hosted the Summer Olympic Games, which were boycotted by the US and other Western countries due to the Soviet Union's invasion of Afghanistan in 1979. In 1991 Moscow was the scene of a coup attempt by conservative communists opposed to the liberal reforms of Mikhail Gorbachev.\n1991\u2013present.\nWhen the USSR was dissolved in 1991, Moscow remained the capital of the Russian Federation. Since then, a market economy has emerged, producing an explosion of Western-style retailing, services, architecture, and lifestyles. The city continued to grow during the 1990s to 2000s, its population rising from below nine to above ten million. Mason and Nigmatullina argue that Soviet-era urban-growth controls produced controlled and sustainable metropolitan development, typified by the greenbelt built in 1935. Since then, however, there has been a dramatic growth of low-density suburban sprawl, created by heavy demand for single-family dwellings as opposed to crowded apartments. In 1995\u201397 the MKAD ring road was widened from the initial four to ten lanes.\nIn December 2002, Bulvar Dmitriya Donskogo became the first Moscow Metro station that opened beyond the limits of MKAD. The Third Ring Road, intermediate between the early 19th-century Garden Ring and the Soviet-era outer ring road, was completed in 2004. The greenbelt is becoming more and more fragmented, and satellite cities are appearing at the fringe. Summer dachas are being converted into year-round residences, and with the proliferation of automobiles, there is heavy traffic congestion. Multiple old churches and other examples of architectural heritage that had been demolished during the Stalin era have been restored, such as the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour.\nIn 2010s, Moscow's administration has launched some long duration projects like the \"Moja Ulitsa\" (in English: \"My Street\") urban redevelopment program or the Residency renovation one.\nBy its territorial expansion on 1 July 2012, southwest into the Moscow Oblast the area of the capital more than doubled, going from , resulting in Moscow becoming the largest city on the European continent by area; it also gained an additional population of 233,000 people. The annexed territory was officially named \"\u041d\u043e\u0432\u0430\u044f \u041c\u043e\u0441\u043a\u0432\u0430\" (New Moscow).\nGeography.\nLocation.\nMoscow is situated on the banks of the Moskva River, which flows for just over through the East European Plain in central Russia, not far from the natural border of the forest and forest-steppe zone. 49 bridges span the river and its canals within the city's limits. The elevation of Moscow at the All-Russia Exhibition Center (VVC), where the leading Moscow weather station is situated, is . Teplostan Upland is the city's highest point at . The width of Moscow city (not limiting MKAD) from west to east is , and the length from north to south is .\nTime.\nMoscow serves as the reference point for the time zone used in most of European Russia, Belarus and the Republic of Crimea. The areas operate in what is referred to in international standards as \"Moscow Standard Time (MSK, )\", which is 3 hours ahead of UTC, or UTC+3. Daylight saving time is no longer observed. According to the geographical longitude the average solar noon in Moscow occurs at 12:30.\nClimate.\nMoscow has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dfb\") with long, cold (although average by Russian standards) winters usually lasting from mid-November to the end of March, and warm summers. More extreme continental climates at the same latitude \u2013 such as parts of Eastern Canada or Siberia \u2013 have much colder winters than Moscow, suggesting that there is still significant moderation from the Atlantic Ocean despite the fact that Moscow is far from the sea. Weather can fluctuate widely, with temperatures ranging from in the city and in the suburbs to above in the winter, and from in the summer.\nTypical high temperatures in the warm months of June, July, and August are around a comfortable , but during heat waves (which can occur between May and September), daytime high temperatures often exceed , sometimes for a week or two at a time. In the winter, average temperatures normally drop to approximately , though almost every winter there are periods of warmth with day temperatures rising above , and periods of cooling with night temperatures falling below . These periods usually last about a week or two. The growing season in Moscow normally lasts for 156 days usually around 1 May to 5 October.\nThe highest temperature ever recorded was at the VVC weather station and in the center of Moscow and Domodedovo airport on 29 July 2010, during the unusual 2010 Northern Hemisphere summer heat waves. Record high and average temperatures were recorded for January, March, April, May, June, July, August, November, and December in 2007\u20132022. The average July temperature from 1991 to 2020 is . The lowest ever recorded temperature was in January 1940. Snow, which is present for about five months a year, often begins to fall mid-October, while snow cover lies in late November and melts at the end of March.\nOn average, Moscow has 1731 hours of sunshine per year, varying from a low of 8% in December to 52% from May to August. This large annual variation is due to convective cloud formation. In the winter, moist air from the Atlantic condenses in the cold continental interior, resulting in very overcast conditions. However, this same continental influence results in considerably sunnier summers than oceanic cities of similar latitude such as Edinburgh. Between 2004 and 2010, the average was between 1800 and 2000 hours with a tendency to more sunshine in summer months, up to a record 411 hours in July 2014, 79% of possible sunshine. December 2017 was the darkest month in Moscow since records began, with only six minutes of sunlight.\nTemperatures in the centre of Moscow are often significantly higher than in the outskirts and nearby suburbs, especially in winter. For example, if the average January temperature in the north-east of Moscow is , in the suburbs it is about . The temperature difference between the centre of Moscow and nearby areas of Moscow Oblast can sometimes be more than on frosty winter nights.\nRecent changes in Moscow's regional climate, since it is in the mid-latitudes of the northern hemisphere, are often cited by climate scientists as evidence of global warming, though by definition, climate change is global, not regional. During the summer, extreme heat is often observed in the city (2001, 2002, 2003, 2010, 2011, 2021). Along with a southern part of Central Russia, after recent years of hot summer seasons, the climate of the city gets hot-summer classification trends. Winter also became significantly milder: for example, the average January temperature in the early 1900s was , while now it is about . At the end of January\u2013February it is often colder, with frosts reaching a few nights per year (2006, 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013).\nThe last decade was the warmest in the history of meteorological observations of Moscow. Temperature changes in the city are depicted in the table below:\nPaleontology.\nMoscow is one of the few cities with paleontological monuments of world significance on its territory. One of them is the Gorodnya River with its tributaries, on the banks of which outcrops of the Quaternary and older Cretaceous periods are located. Fossils of the bivalve mollusk \"Inoceramus kleinii\" and tubular passages of burrowing animals, described in 2017 as a new ichnospecies \"Skolithos gorodnensis\", were discovered in the Coniacian deposits near the stream bed of the Bolshaya Glinka River. Ichnogenera \"Diplocraterion\", \"Planolites\", \"Skolithos\" and possibly \"Ophiomorpha\" were found in the Albian deposits. Paleolithic flint tools were discovered in the Quaternary deposits of the Bolshaya Glinka stream bed.\nIn 1878, paleontologist Hermann Trautschold discovered the left flipper of an ichthyosaur near the village of Mnevniki, which later became part of Moscow. In 2014, the animal was named \"Undorosaurus trautscholdi\", after its discoverer. Trautschold determined the age of the sediments from which the specimen was taken to be Kimmeridgian, but, according to more recent studies, they were formed in the Tithonian age of the Jurassic period.\nAlbian foraminifera and ammonites also known from the Moscow deposits.\nFossils of various organisms are on display in Moscow museums, including the Orlov Museum of Paleontology and Vernadsky State Geological Museum.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2021 Russian census, the population was 13,010,112; up from 11,503,501 in the 2010 Russian census.\nVital statistics.\nThe official population of Moscow is based on those holding \"permanent residency\". According to Russia's Federal Migration Service, Moscow holds 1.8 million official \"guests\" who have temporary residency on the basis of visas or other documentation, giving a legal population of 14.8 million. The number of Illegal immigrants, the vast majority originating from Central Asia, is estimated to be an additional 1 million people, giving a total population of about 15.8 million.\nVital statistics for 2024:\nTotal fertility rate (2024):\n1.46 children per woman\nLife expectancy (2021):\nTotal \u2014 74.55 years (male\u00a0\u2014 71.00, female\u00a0\u2014 77.94)\nReligion.\nChristians form the majority of the city's population; most of whom adhere Russian Orthodox Church. The Patriarch of Moscow serves as the head of the church and resides in the Danilov Monastery. Moscow was called the \"city of 40 times 40 churches\"\u2014prior to 1917. Moscow is Russia's capital of Eastern Orthodox Christianity, which has been the country's traditional religion.\nOther religions practiced in Moscow include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Yazidism, and Rodnovery. The Moscow Mufti Council claimed that Muslims numbered around 1.5 million of 10.5 million of the city's population in 2010. There are four mosques in the city.\nCityscape.\nArchitecture.\nMoscow's architecture is world-renowned. Moscow is the site of Saint Basil's Cathedral, with its elegant onion domes, as well as the Cathedral of Christ the Savior and the Seven Sisters. The first Kremlin was built in the middle of the 12th century.\nMedieval Moscow's design was of concentric walls and intersecting radial thoroughfares. This layout, as well as Moscow's rivers, helped shape Moscow's design in subsequent centuries.\nThe Kremlin was rebuilt in the 15th century. Its towers and some of its churches were built by Italian architects, lending the city some of the aurae of the renaissance. From the end of the 15th century, the city was embellished by masonry structures such as monasteries, palaces, walls, towers, and churches.\nThe city's appearance had not changed much by the 18th century. Houses were made of pine and spruce logs, with shingled roofs plastered with sod or covered by birch bark. The rebuilding of Moscow in the second half of the 18th century was necessitated by constant fires and the needs of the nobility. Much of the wooden city was replaced by buildings in the classical style.\nFor much of its architectural history, Moscow was dominated by Orthodox churches. However, the overall appearance of the city changed drastically during Soviet times, especially as a result of Joseph Stalin's large-scale effort to \"modernize\" Moscow. Stalin's plans for the city included a network of broad avenues and roadways, some of them over ten lanes wide, which, while greatly simplifying movement through the city, were constructed at the expense of a great number of historical buildings and districts. Among the many casualties of Stalin's demolitions was the Sukharev Tower, a longtime city landmark, as well as mansions and commercial buildings. The city's newfound status as the capital of a deeply secular nation, made religiously significant buildings especially vulnerable to demolition. Many of the city's churches, which in most cases were some of Moscow's oldest and most prominent buildings, were destroyed; some notable examples include the Kazan Cathedral and the Cathedral of Christ the Savior. During the 1990s, both were rebuilt. Many smaller churches, however, were lost.\nWhile the later Stalinist period was characterized by the curtailing of creativity and architectural innovation, the earlier post-revolutionary years saw a plethora of radical new buildings created in the city. Especially notable were the constructivist architects associated with VKHUTEMAS, responsible for such landmarks as Lenin's Mausoleum. Another prominent architect was Vladimir Shukhov, famous for Shukhov Tower, just one of many hyperboloid towers designed by Shukhov. It was built between 1919 and 1922 as a transmission tower for a Russian broadcasting company. Shukhov also left a lasting legacy to the Constructivist architecture of early Soviet Russia. He designed spacious elongated shop galleries, most notably the GUM department store on Red Square, bridged with innovative metal-and-glass vaults.\nPerhaps the most recognizable contributions of the Stalinist period are the so-called Seven Sisters, seven massive skyscrapers scattered throughout the city at about an equal distance from the Kremlin. A defining feature of Moscow's skyline, their imposing form was allegedly inspired by the Manhattan Municipal Building in New York City, and their style\u2014with intricate exteriors and a large central spire\u2014has been described as Stalinist Gothic architecture. All seven towers can be seen from most high points in the city; they are among the tallest constructions in central Moscow apart from the Ostankino Tower, which, when it was completed in 1967, was the highest free-standing land structure in the world and today remains the world's seventy-second tallest, ranking among buildings such as the Burj Khalifa in Dubai, Taipei 101 in Taiwan and the CN Tower in Toronto.\nThe Soviet goal of providing housing for every family, and the rapid growth of Moscow's population, led to the construction of large, monotonous housing blocks. Most of these date from the post-Stalin era and the styles are often named after the leader then in power (Brezhnev, Khrushchev, etc.). They are usually badly maintained.\nAlthough the city still has some five-story apartment buildings constructed before the mid-1960s, more recent apartment buildings are usually at least nine floors tall, and have elevators. It is estimated that Moscow has over twice as many elevators as New York City and four times as many as Chicago. Moslift, one of the city's major elevator operating companies, has about 1500 elevator mechanics on call, to release residents trapped in elevators.\nStalinist-era buildings, mostly found in the central part of the city, are massive and usually ornamented with Socialist realism motifs that imitate classical themes. However, small churches\u2014almost always Eastern Orthodox\u2013found across the city provide glimpses of its past. The Old Arbat Street, a tourist street that was once the heart of a bohemian area, preserves most of its buildings from prior to the 20th century. Many buildings found off the main streets of the inner city (behind the Stalinist fa\u00e7ades of Tverskaya Street, for example) are also examples of bourgeois architecture typical of Tsarist times. Ostankino Palace, Kuskovo, Uzkoye and other large estates just outside Moscow originally belong to nobles from the Tsarist era, and some , both inside and outside the city, are open to Muscovites and tourists.\nAttempts are being made to restore many of the city's best-kept examples of pre-Soviet architecture. These restored structures are easily spotted by their bright new colors and spotless fa\u00e7ades. There are a few examples of notable, early Soviet avant-garde work too, such as the house of the architect Konstantin Melnikov in the Arbat area. Many of these restorations were criticized for alleged disrespect of historical authenticity. Facadism is also widely practiced. Later examples of interesting Soviet architecture are usually marked by their impressive size and the semi-Modernist styles employed, such as with the Novy Arbat project, familiarly known as \"false teeth of Moscow\" and notorious for the wide-scale disruption of a historic area in central Moscow involved in the project.\nPlaques on house exteriors will inform passers-by that a well-known personality once lived there. Frequently, the plaques are dedicated to Soviet celebrities not well known outside (or often, like with decorated generals and revolutionaries, now both inside) of Russia. There are also many \"museum houses\" of famous Russian writers, composers, and artists in the city.\nMoscow's skyline is quickly modernizing, with several new towers under construction.\nIn recent years, the city administration has been widely criticized for heavy destruction that has affected many historical buildings. As much as a third of historic Moscow has been destroyed in the past few years to make space for luxury apartments and hotels. Other historical buildings, including such landmarks as the 1930 Moskva hotel and the 1913 department store Voyentorg, have been razed and reconstructed anew, with the inevitable loss of historical value. Critics blame the government for not enforcing conservation laws: in the last 12 years, more than 50 buildings with monument status were torn down, several of those dating back to the 17th century. Some critics also wonder if the money used for the reconstruction of razed buildings could not be used for the renovation of decaying structures, which include many works by architect Konstantin Melnikov and Mayakovskaya metro station.\nSome organizations, such as Moscow Architecture Preservation Society and Save Europe's Heritage, are trying to draw the international public attention to these problems.\nParks and landmarks.\nThere are 96 parks and 18 gardens in Moscow, including four botanical gardens. There are of green zones besides of forests. Moscow is a very green city, if compared to other cities of comparable size in Western Europe and North America; this is partly due to a history of having green \"yards\" with trees and grass, between residential buildings. There are on average of parks per person in Moscow compared with 6 for Paris, 7.5 in London and 8.6 in New York.\nGorky Park (officially the Central Park of Culture and Rest named after Maxim Gorky), was founded in 1928. The main part () along the Moskva river contains estrades, children's attractions (including the \"Observation Wheel\" water ponds with boats and water bicycles), dancing, tennis courts and other sports facilities. It borders the Neskuchny Garden (), the oldest park in Moscow and a former imperial residence, created as a result of the integration of three estates in the 18th century. The Garden features the Green Theater, one of the largest open amphitheaters in Europe, able to hold up to 15 thousand people. Several parks include a section known as a \"Park of Culture and Rest\", sometimes alongside a much wilder area (this includes parks such as Izmaylovsky, Fili and Sokolniki). Some parks are designated as Forest Parks (lesopark).\nIzmaylovsky Park, created in 1931, is one of the largest urban parks in the world along with Richmond Park in London. Its area of is six times greater than that of Central Park in New York.\nBauman Garden, officially founded in 1920 and renamed in 1922 after the bolshevik Nikolay Bauman, is one of the oldest parks in Moscow. It is standing on the site of the former Golitsyn estate and eighteenth-century public garden.\n Sokolniki Park, named after the falcon hunting that occurred there in the past, is one of the oldest parks in Moscow and has an area of . A central circle with a large fountain is surrounded by birch, maple, and elm tree alleys. A labyrinth composed of green paths lies beyond the park's ponds.\nLosiny Ostrov National Park (\"Elk Island\" National Park), with a total area of more than , borders Sokolniki Park and was Russia's first national park. It is quite wild, and is also known as the \"city taiga\" \u2013 elk can be seen there.\nTsytsin Main Botanical Garden of Academy of Sciences, founded in 1945 is the largest in Europe. It covers the territory of bordering the All-Russia Exhibition Center and contains a live exhibition of more than 20 thousand species of plants from around the world, as well as a lab for scientific research. It contains a rosarium with 20 thousand rose bushes, a dendrarium, and an oak forest, with the average age of trees exceeding 100 years. There is a greenhouse taking up more than of land.\nThe All-Russian Exhibition Center (\u0412\u0441\u0435\u0440\u043e\u0441\u0441\u0438\u0439\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u0432\u044b\u0441\u0442\u0430\u0432\u043e\u0447\u043d\u044b\u0439 \u0446\u0435\u043d\u0442\u0440), formerly known as the All-Union Agricultural Exhibition (VSKhV) and later Exhibition of Achievements of the National Economy (VDNKh), though officially named a \"permanent trade show\", is one of the most prominent examples of Stalinist-era monumental architecture. Among the large spans of a recreational park, areas are scores of elaborate pavilions, each representing either a branch of Soviet industry and science or a USSR republic. Even though during the 1990s it was, and for some part still is, misused as a gigantic shopping center (most of the pavilions are rented out for small businesses), it still retains the bulk of its architectural landmarks, including two monumental fountains (\"Stone Flower\" and \"Friendship of Nations\") and a 360 degrees panoramic cinema. In 2014 the park returned to the name Exhibition of Achievements of National Economy, and in the same year, huge renovation works had been started.\n\"Lilac Park\", founded in 1958, has a permanent sculpture display and a large rosarium. Moscow has always been a popular destination for tourists. Some of the more famous attractions include the city's UNESCO World Heritage Site, Moscow Kremlin and Red Square, which was built between the 14th and 17th centuries. The Church of the Ascension at Kolomenskoye, which dates from 1532, is also a UNESCO World Heritage Site and another popular attraction.\nNear the new Tretyakov Gallery there is a sculpture garden, Museon, often called \"the graveyard of fallen monuments\" that displays statues of the former Soviet Union that were removed from their place after its dissolution.\nOther attractions include the Moscow Zoo, a zoological garden in two sections (the valleys of two streams) linked by a bridge, with nearly a thousand species and more than 6,500 specimens. Each year, the zoo attracts more than 1.2 million visitors. Many of Moscow's parks and landscaped gardens are protected natural environments.\nMoscow rings.\nMoscow's road system is centered roughly on the Kremlin at the heart of the city. From there, roads generally span outwards to intersect with a sequence of circular roads (\"rings\").\nAside from the aforementioned hierarchy, line 5 of Moscow Metro is a circle-shaped looped subway line (hence the name \"Koltsevaya Liniya\", literally \"ring line\"), which is located between the \"Sadovoye Koltso\" and Third Transport Ring.\nTwo modern overlapping lines of Moscow Metro form \"two hearts\":\nThe outermost ring within Moscow is the Moscow Ring Road (often called \"MKAD\", acronym word for Russian \"\u041c\u043e\u0441\u043a\u043e\u0432\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f \u041a\u043e\u043b\u044c\u0446\u0435\u0432\u0430\u044f \u0410\u0432\u0442\u043e\u043c\u043e\u0431\u0438\u043b\u044c\u043d\u0430\u044f \u0414\u043e\u0440\u043e\u0433\u0430\"), which forms the cultural boundary of the city, and was established in the 1950s. It is to note the method of building the road (usage of ground elevation instead of concrete columns throughout the whole way) formed a wall-like barrier that obstacles building roads under the MKAD highway itself).\nOutside Moscow, some of the roads encompassing the city continue to follow this circular pattern seen inside city limits, with the notable examples of \"Betonka\" roads (highways A107 and A108), originally made of concrete pads.\nIn order to reduce transit traffic on MKAD, the new ring road (called \"CKAD\" - \"Centralnaya Koltsevaya Avtomobilnaya Doroga\", \"Central Ring Road\") is now under construction beyond the MKAD.\nCulture.\nMuseums and galleries.\nOne of the most notable art museums in Moscow is the Tretyakov Gallery, which was founded by Pavel Tretyakov, a wealthy patron of the arts who donated a large private collection to the city. The Tretyakov Gallery is split into two buildings. The Old Tretyakov gallery, the original gallery in the Tretyakovskaya area on the south bank of the Moskva River, houses works in the classic Russian tradition. The works of famous pre-Revolutionary painters, such as Ilya Repin, as well as the works of early Russian icon painters can be found here. Visitors can even see rare originals by early 15th-century iconographer Andrei Rublev.\nThe New Tretyakov gallery, created in Soviet times, mainly contains the works of Soviet artists, as well as of a few contemporary paintings, but there is some overlap with the Old Tretyakov Gallery for early 20th-century art. The new gallery includes a small reconstruction of Vladimir Tatlin's famous \"Monument to the Third International\" and a mixture of other avant-garde works by artists like Kazimir Malevich and Wassily Kandinsky. Socialist realism features can also be found within the halls of the New Tretyakov Gallery.\nAnother art museum in the city of Moscow is the Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts, which was founded by, among others, the father of Marina Tsvetaeva. The Pushkin Museum is similar to the British Museum in London in that its halls are a cross-section of exhibits on world civilisations, with many copies of ancient sculptures. However, it also hosts paintings from every major Western era; works by Claude Monet, Paul C\u00e9zanne, and Pablo Picasso are present in the museum's collection.\nThe State Historical Museum of Russia (\u0413\u043e\u0441\u0443\u0434\u0430\u0440\u0441\u0442\u0432\u0435\u043d\u043d\u044b\u0439 \u0418\u0441\u0442\u043e\u0440\u0438\u0447\u0435\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u043c\u0443\u0437\u0435\u0439) is a museum of Russian history located between Red Square and Manege Square in Moscow. Its exhibitions range from relics of the prehistoric tribes inhabiting present-day Russia, through priceless artworks acquired by members of the Romanov dynasty. The total number of objects in the museum's collection numbers is several million. The Polytechnical Museum, founded in 1872 is the largest technical museum in Russia, offering a wide array of historical inventions and technological achievements, including humanoid automata from the 18th century and the first Soviet computers. Its collection contains more than 160,000 items. The Borodino Panorama museum located on Kutuzov Avenue provides an opportunity for visitors to experience being on a battlefield with a 360\u00b0 diorama. It is a part of the large historical memorial commemorating the victory in the Patriotic War of 1812 over Napoleon's army, that includes also the triumphal arch, erected in 1827. There is also a military history museum that includes statues, and military hardware.\nMemorial Museum of Cosmonautics under the Monument to the Conquerors of Space at the end of Cosmonauts Alley is the central memorial place for the Russian space officials.\nThe Shchusev State Museum of Architecture is the national museum of Russian architecture by the name of the architect Alexey Shchusev near the Kremlin area.\nMoscow will get its own branch of the Hermitage Museum in 2024, with authorities having agreed upon the final project, to be executed by Hani Rashid, co-founder of New York-based 'Asymptote Architecture' - the same bureau that is behind the city's stock market building, the Busan-based World Business Center Solomon Tower and the Strata Tower in Abu-Dhabi.\nPerforming arts.\nMoscow is the heart of the Russian performing arts, including ballet and film, with 68 museums 103 theaters, 132 cinemas and 24 concert halls. Among Moscow's theaters and ballet studios is the Bolshoi Theatre and the Malyi Theatre as well as Vakhtangov Theatre and Moscow Art Theatre.\nThe Moscow International Performance Arts Center, opened in 2003, also known as Moscow International House of Music, is known for its performances in classical music. It has the largest organ in Russia installed in Svetlanov Hall.\nThere are also two large circuses in Moscow: Moscow State Circus and Moscow Circus on Tsvetnoy Boulevard named after Yuri Nikulin.\nThe Mosfilm studio was at the heart of many classic films, as it is responsible for both artistic and mainstream productions. However, despite the continued presence and reputation of internationally renowned Russian filmmakers, the once prolific native studios are much quieter. Rare and historical films may be seen in the Salut cinema, where films from the Museum of Cinema collection are shown regularly. International film festivals such as the Moscow International Film Festival, Stalker, Artdocfest, and Moscow Jewish Film Festival are staged in Moscow.\nSports.\nOver 500 Olympic sports champions lived in the city by 2005. Moscow is home to 63 stadiums (besides eight football and eleven light athletics maneges), of which Luzhniki Stadium is the largest and the 4th biggest in Europe (it hosted the 1998\u201399 UEFA Cup, 2007\u201308 UEFA Champions League finals, the 1980 Summer Olympics, and the 2018 FIFA World Cup with 7 games total, including the final). Forty other sports complexes are located within the city, including 24 with artificial ice. The Olympic Stadium was the world's first indoor arena for bandy and hosted the Bandy World Championship twice. Moscow was again the host of the competition in 2010, this time in Krylatskoye. That arena has also hosted the World Speed Skating Championships. There are also seven horse racing tracks in Moscow, of which Central Moscow Hippodrome, founded in 1834, is the largest.\nMoscow was the host city of the 1980 Summer Olympics, with the yachting events being held at Tallinn, in present-day Estonia. Large sports facilities and the main international airport, Sheremetyevo Terminal 2, were built in preparation for the 1980 Summer Olympics. Moscow had made a bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics. However, when final voting commenced on 6 July 2005, Moscow was the first city to be eliminated from further rounds. The Games were awarded to London.\nThe most titled ice hockey team in the Soviet Union and in the world, HC CSKA Moscow comes from Moscow. Other big ice hockey clubs from Moscow are HC Dynamo Moscow, which was the second most titled team in the Soviet Union, and HC Spartak Moscow.\nThe most titled Soviet, Russian, and one of the most titled Euroleague clubs, is the basketball club from Moscow PBC CSKA Moscow. Moscow hosted the EuroBasket in 1953 and 1965.\nMoscow had more winners at the USSR and Russian Chess Championship than any other city.\nThe most titled volleyball team in the Soviet Union and in Europe (CEV Champions League) is VC CSKA Moscow.\nIn football, FC Spartak Moscow has won more championship titles in the Russian Premier League than any other team. They were second only to FC Dynamo Kyiv in Soviet times. PFC CSKA Moscow became the first Russian football team to win a UEFA title, the UEFA Cup (present-day UEFA Europa League). FC Lokomotiv Moscow, FC Dynamo Moscow and FC Torpedo Moscow are other professional football teams also based in Moscow.\nMoscow houses other prominent football, ice hockey, and basketball teams. Because sports organisations in the Soviet Union were once highly centralized, two of the best Union-level teams represented defence and law-enforcing agencies: the Armed Forces (CSKA) and the Ministry of Internal Affairs (Dinamo). There were army and police teams in most major cities. As a result, Spartak, CSKA, and Dinamo were among the best-funded teams in the USSR.\nThe Irina Viner-Usmanova Gymnastics Palace is located in the Luzniki Olympic Complex. The building works started in 2017 and the opening ceremony took place on 18 June 2019. The investor of the Palace is the billionaire Alisher Usmanov, husband of the former gymnast and gymnastics coach Irina Viner-Usmanova. The total surface of the building is 23,500 m2, which include 3 fitness rooms, locker rooms, rooms reserved for referees and coaches, saunas, a canteen, a cafeteria, 2 ball halls, a Medical center, a hall reserved for journalists, and a hotel for athletes.\nBecause of Moscow's cold local climate, winter sports have a following. Many of Moscow's large parks offer marked trails for skiing and frozen ponds for skating.\nMoscow hosts the annual Kremlin Cup, a popular tennis tournament on both the WTA and ATP tours. It is one of the ten Tier-I events on the women's tour and a host of Russian players feature every year.\nSC Olimpiyskiy hosted the Eurovision Song Contest 2009, the first and so far the only Eurovision Song Contest arranged in Russia.\nSlava Moscow is a professional rugby club, competing in the national Professional Rugby League. Former rugby league heavyweights RC Lokomotiv have entered the same league as of 2011[ [update]]. The Luzhniki Stadium also hosted the 2013 Rugby World Cup Sevens.\nIn bandy, one of the most successful clubs in the world is 20 times Russian League champions Dynamo Moscow. They have also won the World Cup thrice and European Cup six times.\nMFK Dinamo Moskva is one of the major futsal clubs in Europe, having won the Futsal Champions League title once.\nWhen Russia was selected to host the 2018 FIFA World Cup, the Luzhniki Stadium got an increased capacity, by almost 10,000 new seats, in addition to a further two stadiums that have been built: the Dynamo Stadium, and the Spartak Stadium, although the first one later was dismissed from having World Cup matches.\nEntertainment.\nThe city is full of clubs, restaurants, and bars. Tverskaya Street is also one of the busiest shopping streets in Moscow.\nThe adjoining Tretyakovsky Proyezd, also south of Tverskaya Street, in Kitai-gorod, is host to upmarket boutique stores such as Bulgari, Tiffany &amp; Co., Armani, Prada and Bentley. Nightlife in Moscow has moved on since Soviet times and today the city has many of the world's largest nightclubs. The hottest area is located around the old chocolate factory, where bars, nightclubs, galleries, caf\u00e9s and restaurants are placed.\nDream Island is an amusement park in Moscow that opened on 29 February 2020. It is the largest indoor theme park in Europe.\nThe park covers 300,000 square meters. The complex includes a landscaped park along with a concert hall, a cinema, a hotel, a children's sailing school, restaurants, and shops.\nAuthorities.\nMoscow authorities.\nAccording to the Constitution of the Russian Federation, Moscow is an independent federal subject of the Russian Federation, a city of federal importance.\nThe Mayor of Moscow is the leading official in the executive, leading the Government of Moscow, which is the highest organ of executive power.\nThe Moscow City Duma is the city duma (city council or local parliament) and local laws must be approved by it. It includes 45 members who are elected for a five-year term on single-mandate constituency basis.\nFrom 2006 to 2012, direct elections of the mayor were not held due to changes in the Charter of the city of Moscow, with the mayor appointed by presidential decree. The first direct elections from the time of the 2003 vote were to be held after the expiration of the current mayor in 2015, however, in connection with his resignation of his own free will, they took place in September 2013.\nLocal administration is carried out through eleven prefectures, uniting the districts of Moscow into administrative districts on a territorial basis, and 125 regional administrations. According to the law \"On the organization of local self-government in the city of Moscow\", since the beginning of 2003, the executive bodies of local self-government are municipalities, representative bodies are municipal assemblies, whose members are elected in accordance with the Charter of the intracity municipality.\nFederal authorities.\nIn Moscow, as in a city endowed with the Constitution of the Russian Federation, the legislative, executive, and judicial federal authorities of the country are located, with the exception of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, which has been located in Saint Petersburg since 2008.\nThe supreme executive authority \u2013 the Government of the Russian Federation \u2013 is located in the House of the Government of the Russian Federation (the White House) on Krasnopresnenskaya Embankment in the center of Moscow. The State Duma sits on Okhotny Ryad. The Federation Council is located in a building on Bolshaya Dmitrovka. The Supreme Court of the Russian Federation is also located in Moscow.\nThe Moscow Kremlin is the official residence of the President of the Russian Federation. The president's working residence in the Kremlin is located in the Senate Palace.\nSafety.\nIn a ranking of the safest cities by \"The Economist\" in 2021, Moscow occupied the 38th position with a score of 62.5 points. The general level of crime is quite low. More than 170,000 surveillance cameras in Moscow are connected to the facial recognition system. The authorities recognized the successful two-month experiment with automatic recognition of faces, gender, and age of people in real-time \u2013 and deployed the system to the whole city. The network of video surveillance unites access video cameras (95% of residential apartment buildings in the capital), cameras in the territory and in buildings of schools and kindergartens, at the MCC stations, stadiums, public transport stops, and bus stations, in parks, underground passages.\nThe emergency numbers are the same as in all the other regions of Russia: 112 is the Single Emergency Number, 101 is the number of the Fire Service and Ministry of Emergency Situations, 102 is the Police one, 103 is the ambulance one, 104 is the Emergency Gas number. Moscow's EMS is the second most efficient one among the world's megacities, as reported by PwC during the presentation of the international study Analysis of EMS Efficiency in Megacities of the World.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe entire city of Moscow is headed by one mayor (Sergey Sobyanin). The city of Moscow is divided into twelve administrative okrugs and 125 districts.\nThe Russian capital's town-planning development began to show as early as the 12th century when the city was founded. The central part of Moscow grew by consolidating with suburbs in line with medieval principles of urban development when strong fortress walls would gradually spread along the circle streets of adjacent new settlements. The first circular defence walls set the trajectory of Moscow's rings, laying the groundwork for the future planning of the Russian capital.\nThe following fortifications served as the city's circular defense boundaries at some point in history: the Kremlin walls, Zemlyanoy Gorod (Earthwork Town), the Kamer-Kollezhsky Rampart, the Garden Ring, and the small railway ring. The Moscow Ring Road (MKAD) has been Moscow's boundary since 1960. Also in the form of a circle are the main Moscow subway line, the Ring Line, and the so-called Third Automobile Ring, which was completed in 2005. Hence, the characteristic radial-circle planning continues to define Moscow's further development. However, contemporary Moscow has also engulfed a number of territories outside the MKAD, such as Solntsevo, Butovo, and the town of Zelenograd. A part of Moscow Oblast's territory was merged into Moscow on 1 July 2012; as a result, Moscow is no longer fully surrounded by Moscow Oblast and now also has a border with Kaluga Oblast. In all, Moscow gained about and 230,000 inhabitants. Moscow's Mayor Sergey Sobyanin lauded the expansion that will help Moscow and the neighboring region, a \"mega-city\" of twenty million people, to develop \"harmonically\".\nAll administrative okrugs and districts have their own coats of arms and flags as well as individual heads of the area.\nIn addition to the districts, there are Territorial Units with Special Status. These usually include areas with small or no permanent populations. Such is the case with the All-Russia Exhibition Centre, the Botanical Garden, large parks, and industrial zones. In recent years, some territories have been merged with different districts. There are no ethnic-specific regions in Moscow, as in the Chinatowns that exist in some North American and East Asian cities. And although districts are not designated by income, as with most cities, those areas that are closer to the city center, metro stations or green zones are considered more prestigious.\nMoscow also hosts some of the government bodies of Moscow Oblast, although the city itself is not a part of the oblast.\nEconomy.\nOverview.\nMoscow has one of the largest municipal economies in Europe and it accounts more than one-fifth of Russia's gross domestic product (GDP). As of 2021[ [update]], the GRP of Moscow reached almost \u20bd24.5 trillion(US$332 billion). GMP of Moscow Region was \u20bd31.3 trillion or around US$425 billion.\nThe average gross monthly wage in the city is \u20bd123,688 (US$2,000), which is around twice the national average of \u20bd66,572 (US$1,000), and one of the highest among the federal subjects of Russia.\nMoscow is home to the third-highest number of billionaires of any city in the world, and has the highest number of billionaires of any city in Europe. It is the financial center of Russia and home to the country's largest banks and many of its largest companies, such as oil giant Rosneft. Moscow accounts for 17% of retail sales in Russia and for 13% of all construction activity in the country. Since the 1998 Russian financial crisis, business sectors in Moscow have shown exponential rates of growth. Many new business centers and office buildings have been built in recent years, but Moscow still experiences shortages in office space. As a result, many former industrial and research facilities are being reconstructed to become suitable for office use. Overall, economic stability has improved in recent years; nonetheless, crime and corruption still hinder business development.\nIndustry.\nPrimary industries in Moscow include the chemical, metallurgy, food, textile, furniture, energy production, software development and machinery industries.\nThe Mil Moscow Helicopter Plant is a manufacturer of military and civil helicopters. Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center produces various space equipment, including modules for space stations Mir, Salyut and the ISS as well as Proton launch vehicles and military ICBMs. Sukhoi, Ilyushin, Mikoyan, Tupolev and Yakovlev aircraft design bureaus also situated in Moscow. NPO Energomash, producing the rocket engines for Russian and American space programs, as well as Lavochkin design bureau, which built fighter planes during WWII, but switched to space probes since the Space Race, are in nearby Khimki, an independent city in Moscow Oblast that have largely been enclosed by Moscow from its sides. Automobile plants ZiL and AZLK, as well as the Voitovich Rail Vehicle plant, are situated in Moscow and Metrovagonmash metro wagon plant is located just outside the city limits. The Poljot Moscow watch factory produces military, professional and sport watches well known in Russia and abroad.\nThe Electrozavod factory was the first transformer factory in Russia. The Kristall distillery is the oldest distillery in Russia producing vodka types, including \"Stolichnaya\" while wines are produced at Moscow wine plants, including the Moscow Interrepublican Vinery. The Moscow Jewelry Factory and the Jewellerprom are producers of jewelry in Russia.\nThere are other industries located just outside the city of Moscow, as well as microelectronic industries in Zelenograd, including Ruselectronics companies.\nGazprom, the largest extractor of natural gas in the world and the largest Russian company, has head offices also in Moscow, as well as other oil, gas, and electricity companies.\nMoscow hosts headquarters of the many of telecommunications and technology companies, including 1C, ABBYY, Beeline, Kaspersky Lab, Mail.Ru Group, MegaFon, MTS, Rambler&amp;Co, Rostelecom, Yandex, and Yota.\nSome industry is being transferred out of the city to improve the ecological state of the city.\nCost of living.\nDuring Soviet times, apartments were lent to people by the government according to the square meters-per-person norm (some groups, including people's artists, heroes, and prominent scientists had bonuses according to their honors). Private ownership of apartments was limited until the 1990s when people were permitted to secure property rights to their inhabited places. Since the Soviet era, estate owners have had to pay the service charge for their residences, a fixed amount based on persons per living area.\nThe price of real estate in Moscow continues to rise. Today, one could expect to pay $4,000 on average per square meter (11 sq ft) on the outskirts of the city or US$6,500\u2013$8,000 per square meter in a prestigious district. The price sometimes may exceed US$40,000 per square meter in a flat. It costs about US$1,200 per month to rent a one-bedroom apartment and about US$1,000 per month for a studio in the center of Moscow.\nA typical one-bedroom apartment is about , a typical two-bedroom apartment is , and a typical three-bedroom apartment is . Many cannot move out of their apartments, especially if a family lives in a two-room apartment originally granted by the state during the Soviet era. Some city residents have attempted to cope with the cost of living by renting their apartments while staying in dachas (country houses) outside the city.\nIn 2006, Mercer Human Resources Consulting named Moscow the world's most expensive city for expatriate employees, ahead of perennial winner Tokyo, due to the stable Russian ruble as well as increasing housing prices within the city. Moscow also ranked first in the 2007 edition and 2008 edition of the survey. However, Tokyo has overtaken Moscow as the most expensive city in the world, placing Moscow at third behind Osaka in second place.\nIn 2008, Moscow ranked top on the list of most expensive cities for the third year in a row.\nIn 2014, according to \"Forbes\", Moscow was ranked the 9th most expensive city in the world. \"Forbes\" ranked Moscow the 2nd most expensive city the year prior.\nIn 2019 the Economist Intelligence Unit's Worldwide Cost of Living survey put Moscow to 102nd place in the biannual ranking of 133 most expensive cities. ECA International's Cost of Living 2019 Survey ranked Moscow at number 120 among 482 locations worldwide.\nPublic utilities.\nThe heating of buildings in Moscow, like in other cities in Russia is done using central heating system. Before 2004, state unitary enterprises were responsible to produce and supply heat to the clients by the operation of heating stations and heating distribution system of Mosgorteplo, Mosteploenergo, and Teploremontnaladka which gave service to the heating substations in the north-eastern part of the city. Clients were divided between the various enterprises based on their geographical location. A major reform launched in 2004 consolidated the various companies under the umbrella of MIPC which became the municipal heat supplier. Its subsidiaries were the newly transformed Joint-stock companies. The city's main source of heating is the power station of Mosenergo which was reformed in 2005, when around ten subsidiaries were separated from it. One of the newly independent companies was the District Heating Network Company (MTK) (). In 2007 the Government of Moscow bought controlling stakes in the company.\n\"Our city\" is a geo-information portal created in 2011 under the mayor of Moscow Sergei Sobyanin with the aim of building a constructive dialogue between Moscow residents and the city's executive authorities. The portal is being developed by the State Public Institution \"New Management Technologies\" together with the Moscow Department of Information Technologies. In its 10 years of operation, more than 1.7 million users have joined the portal, and during this time it has become an effective tool for monitoring the state of urban infrastructure.\nEducation.\nThere are 1,696 high schools in Moscow, as well as 91 colleges. Besides these, there are 222 institutions of higher education, including 60 state universities and the Lomonosov Moscow State University, which was founded in 1755. The main university building located in Vorobyovy Gory (Sparrow Hills) is tall and when completed, was the tallest building on the continent. The university has over 30,000 undergraduate and 7,000 postgraduate students, who have a choice of twenty-nine faculties and 450 departments for study. The Moscow State University library contains over nine million books, making it one of the largest libraries in all of Russia.\nThe I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University named after Ivan Sechenov or formerly known as Moscow Medical Academy (1stMSMU) is a medical university situated in Moscow, Russia. It was founded in 1785 as the faculty of the Moscow State University. It is a Russian Federal Agency for Health and Social Development. It is one of the largest medical universities in Russia and Europe. More than 9200 students are enrolled in 115 academic departments. It offers courses for post-graduate studies.\nThe Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University (formerly known as Russian State Medical University) is a medical higher education institution in Moscow, Russia founded in 1906. It is fully accredited and recognized by Russia's Ministry of Education and Science and is currently under the authority of the Ministry of Health and Social Development. Named after Russian surgeon and pedagogue N.I. Pirogov (1810\u20131888), it is one of the largest medical institutions and the first university in Russia to allow women to acquire degrees.\nMoscow is one of the financial centers of the Russian Federation and CIS countries and is known for its business schools. Among them are the Financial University under the Government of the Russian Federation; Plekhanov Russian University of Economics; The State University of Management, and the National Research University - Higher School of Economics. They offer undergraduate degrees in management, finance, accounting, marketing, real estate, and economic theory, as well as Masters programs and MBAs. Most of them have branches in other regions of Russia and countries around the world.\nBauman Moscow State Technical University, founded in 1830, is located in the center of Moscow and provides 18,000 undergraduate and 1,000 postgraduate students with an education in science and engineering, offering technical degrees.\nThe Moscow Conservatory, founded in 1866, is a prominent music school in Russia.\nThe Gerasimov All-Russian State Institute of Cinematography, abbreviated as VGIK, is the world's oldest educational institution in Cinematography, founded by Vladimir Gardin in 1919.\nMoscow State Institute of International Relations, founded in 1944, remains Russia's best- known school of international relations and diplomacy, with six schools focused on international relations. Approximately 4,500 students make up the university's student body and over 700,000 Russian and foreign-language books\u2014of which 20,000 are considered rare\u2014can be found in the library of the Moscow State Institute of International Relations.\nOther institutions are the Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, also known as Phystech, the Fyodorov Eye Microsurgery Complex, founded in 1988 by Russian eye surgeon Svyatoslav Fyodorov, the Moscow Aviation Institute, the Moscow Motorway Institute (State Technical University), and the Moscow Engineering Physics Institute. Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology has taught numerous Nobel Prize winners, including Pyotr Kapitsa, Nikolay Semyonov, Lev Landau and Alexander Prokhorov, while the Moscow Engineering Physics Institute is known for its research in nuclear physics. The highest Russian military school is the Combined Arms Academy of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.\nAlthough Moscow has a number of famous Soviet-era higher educational institutions, most of which are more oriented towards engineering or the fundamental sciences, in recent years Moscow has seen a growth in the number of commercial and private institutions that offer classes in business and management. Many state institutions have expanded their education scope and introduced new courses or departments. Institutions in Moscow, as well as the rest of post-Soviet Russia, have begun to offer new international certificates and postgraduate degrees, including the Master of Business Administration. Student exchange programs with numerous countries, specially with the rest of Europe, have also become widespread in Moscow's universities, while schools within the Russian capital also offer seminars, lectures, and courses for corporate employees and businessmen.\nMoscow is one of the largest science centers in Russia. The headquarters of the Russian Academy of Sciences are located in Moscow as well as research and applied science institutions. The Kurchatov Institute, Russia's leading research and development institution in the fields of nuclear energy, where the first nuclear reactor in Europe was built, the Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics, Institute for Theoretical and Experimental Physics, Kapitza Institute for Physical Problems and Steklov Institute of Mathematics are all situated in Moscow.\nThere are 452 libraries in the city, including 168 for children. The Russian State Library, founded in 1862, is the national library of Russia. The library is home to over of shelves and 42 million items, including over 17 million books and serial volumes, 13 million journals, 350,000 music scores and sound records, and 150,000 maps, making it the largest library in Russia and one of the largest in the world. Items in 247 languages account for 29% of the collection.\nThe State Public Historical Library, founded in 1863, is the largest library specialising in Russian history. Its collection contains four million items in 112 languages, mostly on Russian and world history, heraldry, numismatics, and the history of science.\nIn regard to primary and secondary education, in 2011, Clifford J. Levy of \"The New York Times\" wrote, \"Moscow has some strong public schools, but the system as a whole is dispiriting, in part because it is being corroded by the corruption that is a post-Soviet scourge. Parents often pay bribes to get their children admitted to better public schools. There are additional payoffs for good grades.\"\nTransportation.\nMetro.\nThe Moscow Metro system is famous for its art, murals, mosaics, and ornate chandeliers. It started operation in 1935 and immediately became the centrepiece of the transportation system. More than that it was a Stalinist device to awe and reward the populace, and give them an appreciation of Soviet realist art. It became the prototype for future Soviet large-scale technologies. Lazar Kaganovich was in charge; he designed the subway so that citizens would absorb the values and ethos of Stalinist civilisation as they rode. The artwork of the 13 original stations became nationally and internationally famous. For example, the Sverdlov Square subway station featured porcelain bas-reliefs depicting the daily life of the Soviet peoples, and the bas-reliefs at the Dynamo Stadium sports complex glorified sports and the physical prowess of the powerful new \"Homo Sovieticus\" (Soviet man).\nThe metro was touted as the symbol of the new social order\u2014a sort of Communist cathedral of engineering modernity. Soviet workers did the labour and the artwork, but the main engineering designs, routes, and construction plans were handled by specialists recruited from the London Underground. The Britons called for tunneling instead of the \"cut-and-cover\" technique, the use of escalators instead of lifts, and designed the routes and the rolling stock. The paranoia of Stalin and the NKVD was evident when the secret police arrested numerous British engineers for espionage\u2014that is for gaining an in-depth knowledge of the city's physical layout. Engineers for the Metropolitan Vickers Electrical Company were given a show trial and deported in 1933, ending the role of British business in the USSR.\nToday, the Moscow Metro comprises twelve lines, mostly underground with a total of 203 stations. The Metro is one of the deepest subway systems in the world; for instance, the Park Pobedy station, completed in 2003, at underground, has the longest escalators in Europe. The Moscow Metro is the busiest metro system in Europe, as well as one of the world's busiest metro systems, serving about ten million passengers daily (300,000,000 people every month). Facing serious transportation problems, Moscow has plans for expanding its Metro. In 2016, the authorities launched a new circle metro railway that contributed to solving transportation issues, namely daily congestion at Koltsevaya Line.\nDue to the treatment of Metro stations as possible canvas for art, characterized by the fact that workers of Moscow would get to see them every day, many Stalin-era metro stations were built in different \"custom\" designs (where each station's design would be, initially, a massive installation on a certain theme. For example, Elektrozavodskaya station was themed solely after nearby lightbulb factory and ceramic ribbed lightbulb sockets); the tradition of \"Grand Designs\" and, basically, decorating metro stations as single-themed installations, was restored in late 1979.\nMoscow's metro is one of the world's busiest, handling 2.6 billion passengers in 2019.\nIn the Russian capital, there are over 21.5 thousand Wi-Fi access points, in student dormitories, in parks, cultural and sports institutions, and within the Garden Ring and the Third Transport Ring. From September 2020 to August 2021, 1,700 new access points to urban Wi-Fi were launched in Moscow. The structure of the Wi-Fi network allows citizens to use the Internet without re-authorization.\nMonorail.\nThe Moscow Metro operates a short monorail line (line 13). The line connects Timiryazevskaya metro station and Ulitsa Sergeya Eisensteina, passing close to VDNH (and Line 6 Metro station \"V.D.N.Kh.\"). The line opened in 2004. It accepts overground interchanges, no additional fare is needed if a ride was spent at Moscow Metro within previous 90 minutes.\nBus, trolleybus and electric bus.\nAs Metro stations outside the city center are far apart in comparison to other cities, up to , a bus network radiates from each station to the surrounding residential zones. Moscow has a bus terminal for long-range and intercity passenger buses (Central Bus Terminal) with a daily turnover of about 25 thousand passengers serving about 40% of long-range bus routes in Moscow.\nEvery major street in the city is served by at least one bus route. Many of these routes are doubled by a trolleybus route and have trolley wires over them.\nWith the total line length of almost of a single wire, 8 depots, 104 routes, and 1740 vehicles, the Moscow trolleybus system was the largest in the world. But municipal authority, headed by Sergey Sobyanin, began to destroy the trolleybus system in Moscow in 2014 due the planned replacement of trolleybuses by electric buses. In 2018 Moscow trolleybus system has only 4 depots and dozens of kilometers of unused wires. Almost all trolleybus wires inside Garden Ring (Sadovoe Koltso) were cut in 2016\u20132017 due to the reconstruction of central streets (\"Moya Ulitsa\"). Opened on 15 November 1933, it is also the world's 6th oldest operating trolleybus system.\nIn 2018 the vehicle companies Kamaz and GAZ have won the Mosgortrans tender for delivering 200 electric buses and 62 ultra-fast charging stations to the city transport system. The manufacturers will be responsible for the quality and reliable operation of the buses and charging stations for the next 15 years. The city will be procuring only electric buses as of 2021, replacing the diesel bus fleet gradually. According to expectations, Moscow will become the leader amongst the European cities in terms of electric and gas fuel share in public transport by 2019.\nMoscow cable car.\nOn 26 November 2018, the mayor of Moscow Sergey Sobyanin took part in the ceremony to open the cable car above the Moskva River. The cable car will connect the Luzhniki sports complex with Sparrow Hills and Kosygin Street. The journey from the well-known viewpoint on Vorobyovy Gory to Luzhniki Stadium will last for five minutes instead of 20 minutes that one would have to spend on the same journey by car.\nTram.\nMoscow has an extensive tram system, which first opened in 1899. The newest line was built in 1984. Its daily usage by Muscovites is low, making up for approximately 5% of trips because many vital connections in the network have been withdrawn. Trams still remain important in some districts as feeders to Metro stations. The trams also provide important cross-links between metro lines, for example between Universitet station of Sokolnicheskaya Line (#1 red line) and Profsoyuznaya station of Kaluzhsko-Rizhskaya Line (#6 orange line) or between Voykovskaya and Strogino.\nThere are three tram networks in the city:\nIn addition, tram advocates have suggested that the new rapid transit services (metro to City, Butovo light metro, Monorail) would be more effective as at-grade tram lines and that the problems with trams are only due to poor management and operation, not the technical properties of trams. New tram models have been developed for the Moscow network despite the lack of expansion.\nTaxi.\nCommercial taxi services and route taxis are in widespread use. In the mid-2010s, service platforms such as Yandex.Taxi, Uber and Gett displaced many private drivers and small service providers and were in 2015 servicing more than 50% of all taxi orders in Moscow.\nRussian tech firm Yandex is testing self-driving taxis in Moscow.\nRailway.\n Several train stations serve the city. Moscow's ten rail terminals (or ) are:\nThe terminals are located close to the city center, along with the metro ringline 5 or close to it, and connect to a metro line to the centre of town. Each station handles trains from different parts of Europe and Asia. There are many smaller railway stations in Moscow. As train tickets are cheap, they are the preferred mode of travel for Russians, especially when departing to Saint Petersburg, Russia's second-largest city. Moscow is the western terminus of the Trans-Siberian Railway, which traverses nearly of Russian territory to Vladivostok on the Pacific coast.\nSuburbs and satellite cities are connected by commuter elektrichka (electric rail) network. Elektrichkas depart from each of these terminals to the nearby (up to ) large railway stations.\nDuring the 2010s, the Little Ring of the Moscow Railway was converted to be used for frequent passenger service; it is fully integrated with Moscow Metro; the passenger service started on 10 September 2016. A connecting railway line on the North side of the town connects Belorussky terminal with other railway lines. This is used by some suburban trains.\nMoscow Central Circle.\nThe Moskovskaya Okruzhnaya Zheleznaya Doroga formed a ring around the now-downtown Moscow since 1903, but only served as a non-electrified, fueled locomotive-only railway prior to reconstruction into MCC in 2010's.\nThe Moscow Central Circle is a urban-metro railway orbital line that encircles historical Moscow. It was built alongside Little Ring of the Moscow Railway, taking some of its tracks into itself as well. M.C.C. was opened for passenger use on 10 September 2016.\nThe line is operated by the Moscow Government owned company MKZD through the Moscow Metro, with the Federal Government owned Russian Railways selected as the operation subcontractor.\nMoscow Central Diameters.\nAnother system, which forms \"genuine \"S-Bahn\"\" as in \"suburbia-city-suburbia\"-designed railway, is the Moscow Central Diameters, a pass-through railways system, created by constructing bypasses from \"vokzals\" final stations (e.g. by avoiding the central stations of already existing Moscow Railway, used for both intercity and urban-suburban travel before) and forming a train line across Moscow's centre.\nOut of 5 projected lines, the first 2 lines were completed and launched on 2019-11-21.\nRoads.\nThere are over 2.6 million cars in the city daily. Recent years have seen growth in the number of cars, which have caused traffic jams and lack of parking space to become major problems.\nThe Moscow Ring Road (MKAD), along with the Third Transport Ring and the canceled Fourth Transport Ring, is one of only three freeways that run within Moscow city limits. Several other roadway systems form concentric circles around the city.\nAir.\nThere are five primary commercial airports serving Moscow: Sheremetyevo (SVO), Domodedovo (DME), Vnukovo (VKO), Zhukovsky (ZIA), Ostafyevo (OSF).\nSheremetyevo International Airport is the most globally connected of Moscow's airports, handling 60% of all international flights. It is also a home to all SkyTeam members, and the main hub for Aeroflot (itself a member of SkyTeam). Domodedovo International Airport is the leading airport in Russia in terms of passenger throughput and is the primary gateway to long-haul domestic and CIS destinations and its international traffic rivals Sheremetyevo. It is a hub for S7 airlines, and most of OneWorld and Star Alliance members use Domodedovo as their international hub. Vnukovo International Airport handles flights of Turkish Airlines, Wizz Air Abu Dhabi and others. Ostafyevo International Airport caters primarily to business aviation.\nMoscow's airports vary in distances from the MKAD beltway: Domodedovo is the farthest at ; Vnukovo is ; Sheremetyevo is ; and Ostafievo, the nearest, is about from MKAD.\nThere are a number of smaller airports close to Moscow (19 in Moscow Oblast) such as Myachkovo Airport, that are intended for private aircraft, helicopters and charters.\nWater.\nMoscow has two passenger terminals, (South River Terminal and North River Terminal), on the river and regular ship routes and cruises along the Moskva and Oka rivers, which are used mostly for entertainment. The North River Terminal, built in 1937, is the main hub for long-range river routes. There are three freight ports serving Moscow.\nSharing system.\nMoscow has different vehicle sharing options that are sponsored by the local government. There are several car sharing companies which are in charge of providing cars to the population. To drive the automobiles, the user has to book them through the app of the owning company. In 2018 the mayor Sergey Sobyanin said Moscow's car sharing system has become the biggest in Europe in terms of vehicle fleet. Every day about 25,000 people use this service. In the end of the same year Moscow carsharing became the second in the world in therms of fleet with 16.5K available vehicles. Another sharing system is bike sharing (\"Velobike\") of a fleet formed by 3000 traditional and electrical bicycles. The \"Delisamokat\" is a new sharing service that provides electrical scooters.\nFuture development.\nIn 1992, the Moscow government began planning a projected new part of central Moscow, the Moscow International Business Center, with the goal of creating a zone, the first in Russia, and in all of Eastern Europe, that will combine business activity, living space and entertainment. Situated in Presnensky District and located at the Third Ring, the Moscow City area is under intense development. The construction of the MIBC takes place on the Krasnopresnenskaya embankment. The whole project takes up to . The area is the only spot in downtown Moscow that can accommodate a project of this magnitude. Today, most of the buildings there are old factories and industrial complexes.\nThe Federation Tower, completed in 2016, is the second-tallest building in Europe. It is planned to include a water park and other recreational facilities; business, office, entertainment, and residential buildings, a transport network and a new site for the Moscow government. The construction of four new metro stations in the territory has been completed, two of which have opened and two others are reserved for future metro lines crossing MIBC, some additional stations were planned.\nMajor thoroughfares through MIBC are the Third Ring and Kutuzovsky Prospekt.\nThree metro stations were initially planned for the Filyovskaya Line. The station Delovoi Tsentr opened in 2005 and was later renamed Vystavochnaya in 2009. The branch extended to the Mezhdunarodnaya station in 2006, and all work on the third station, Dorogomilovskaya (between Kiyevskaya and Delovoi Tsentr), has been postponed. There are plans to extend the branch as far as the Savyolovskaya station, on the Serpukhovsko-Timiryazevskaya Line.\nThe cellphone service provider MTS announced on 5 March 2021, that they would begin the country's first pilot 5G network in Moscow.\nMedia.\nMoscow is home to nearly all of Russia's nationwide television networks, radio stations, newspapers, and magazines.\nNewspapers.\nEnglish-language media includes \"The Moscow Times\". \"The Moscow News\" was the oldest English-language weekly newspaper Russia. , \"Vedomosti\" and \"Novaya Gazeta\" are Russian-language media headquartered in Moscow. and \"Vedomosti\" are among the country's oldest Russian-language business newspapers.\nTV and radio.\nOther media in Moscow include the \"Echo of Moscow\", the first Soviet and Russian private news radio and information agency, and NTV, one of the first privately owned Russian television stations. The total number of radio stations in Moscow in the FM band is near 50.\nMoscow television networks:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMoscow radio stations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nMoscow is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCooperation agreements.\nMoscow has cooperation agreements with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19006", "revid": "48221080", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19006", "title": "Mediterranean Sea", "text": "Sea between Africa, Asia, and Europe\nThe Mediterranean Sea ( ) is an intercontinental sea situated between Europe, Asia, and Africa. It is surrounded by the Mediterranean basin and almost completely enclosed by land: on the east by the Levant in West Asia, on the north by Anatolia in West Asia and Southern Europe, and on the south by North Africa. To its west it is connected to the Atlantic Ocean via the Strait of Gibraltar that separates the Iberian Peninsula in Europe from Morocco in Africa by only ; additionally, it is connected to the Black Sea through the Bosporus strait that intersects Turkey in the northeast and the Red Sea via the Suez Canal in the southeast.\nThe Mediterranean Sea covers an area of about , representing 0.7% of the global ocean surface; it includes fifteen marginal seas, including the Aegean, Adriatic, Tyrrhenian, and Marmara. Geological evidence indicates that around 5.9 million years ago, the Mediterranean was cut off from the Atlantic and was partly or completely desiccated over a period of some 600,000 years during the Messinian salinity crisis before being refilled by the Zanclean flood about 5.3 million years ago.\nThe history of the Mediterranean region is crucial to understanding the origins and development of many modern societies; it is sometimes described as an \"incubator of Western civilization\". and saw the emergence of some of the earliest and most advanced civilisations, including those of Egypt, Greece, and the Fertile Crescent. The Levant in the Eastern Mediterranean was among the first regions in the world to display permanent human habitation as early as 12,000 BC. The Mediterranean Sea was an important route for merchants, travellers, and migrants in antiquity, facilitating trade and cultural exchange between various peoples as well as colonisation and conquest. The Roman Empire maintained nautical hegemony over the sea for centuries and is the only state to have ever controlled all of its coast.\nThe Mediterranean Sea has an average depth of and the deepest recorded point is in the Calypso Deep in the Ionian Sea. It lies between latitudes 30\u00b0 and 46\u00b0 N and longitudes 6\u00b0 W and 36\u00b0 E. Its west\u2013east length, from the Strait of Gibraltar to the Gulf of Alexandretta, on the southeastern coast of Turkey, is about . The north\u2013south length varies greatly between different shorelines and whether only straight routes are considered. Also including longitudinal changes, the shortest shipping route between the multinational Gulf of Trieste and the Libyan coastline of the Gulf of Sidra is about . The water temperatures are mild in winter and warm in summer and give name to the Mediterranean climate type due to the majority of precipitation falling in the cooler months. Its southern and eastern coastlines are lined with hot deserts not far inland, but the immediate coastline on all sides of the Mediterranean tends to have strong maritime moderation.\nThe countries surrounding the Mediterranean and its marginal seas in clockwise order are Spain, France, Monaco, Italy, Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Albania, Greece, Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Palestine (Gaza Strip), Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco; Cyprus and Malta are island countries in the sea. In addition, Northern Cyprus (de facto state) and two overseas territories of the United Kingdom (Akrotiri and Dhekelia, and Gibraltar) also have coastlines along the Mediterranean Sea. The drainage basin encompasses a large number of other countries, the Nile being the longest river ending in the Mediterranean Sea. The Mediterranean Sea encompasses a vast number of islands, some of them of volcanic origin. The two largest islands, in both area and population, are Sicily and Sardinia.\nHistory.\nAncient civilisations.\nMajor ancient civilisations were located around the Mediterranean. The sea provided routes for trade, colonisation, and war, as well as food (from fishing and the gathering of other seafood) for numerous communities throughout the ages. The earliest advanced civilisations in the Mediterranean were the Egyptians and the Minoans, who traded extensively with each other. Around 1200 BC the eastern Mediterranean was greatly affected by the Bronze Age Collapse, which resulted in the destruction of many cities and trade routes.\nTwo other notable Mediterranean civilisations in classical antiquity are the Greek city-states and Phoenicians, both of whom extensively colonised the coastlines of the Mediterranean.\nDarius I of Persia, who conquered Ancient Egypt, built a canal linking the Red Sea to the Nile, and thus the Mediterranean. Darius's canal was wide enough for two triremes to pass each other with oars extended and required four days to traverse.\nFollowing the Punic Wars in the 3rd and 2nd centuries BC, the Roman Republic defeated the Carthaginians to become the preeminent power in the Western Mediterranean region. When Augustus founded the Roman Empire, the Romans referred to the Mediterranean as \"Mare Nostrum\" (\"Our Sea\"). For the next 400 years, the Roman Empire completely controlled the Mediterranean Sea and virtually all its coastal regions from Gibraltar to the Levant, giving the lake the nickname \"Roman Lake\".\nMiddle Ages and empires.\nThe Western Roman Empire collapsed around 476 AD. The east was again dominant as Roman power still existed on in the Byzantine Empire formed in the 4th century from the eastern half of the Roman Empire. During that time, another power arose in the 7th century, and with it the religion of Islam, which soon swept across from the east; at its greatest extent, the Arabs, under the Umayyads, controlled the Iberian Peninsula, making a new phase of art and culture in the region.\nA variety of foodstuffs, spices and crops were introduced to the western Mediterranean's Spain and Sicily during Arab rule, via the commercial networks of the Islamic world. These include sugarcane, rice, cotton, alfalfa, oranges, lemons, apricots, spinach, eggplants, carrots, saffron and bananas. The Arabs also continued extensive cultivation and production of olive oil (the Spanish words for 'oil' and 'olive'\u2014\"aceite\" and \"aceituna\", respectively\u2014are derived from the Arabic \"al-zait\", meaning 'olive juice'), and pomegranates (the heraldic symbol of Granada) from classical Greco-Roman times.\nThe Arab invasions disrupted the trade relations between Western and Eastern Europe while disrupting trade routes with Eastern Asian Empires. This, however, had the indirect effect of promoting trade across the Caspian Sea. The export of grains from Egypt was re-routed towards the Eastern world. Products from East Asian empires, like silk and spices, were carried from Egypt to ports like Venice and Constantinople by sailors and Jewish merchants. The Viking raids further disrupted the trade in western Europe and brought it to a halt. However, the Norsemen developed the trade from Norway to the White Sea, while also trading in luxury goods from Spain and the Mediterranean. The Byzantines in the mid-8th century retook control of the area around the north-eastern part of the Mediterranean. Venetian ships from the 9th century armed themselves to counter the harassment by Arabs while concentrating trade of Asian goods in Venice.\nThe Fatimids maintained trade relations with the Italian city-states like Amalfi and Genoa before the Crusades, according to the Cairo Geniza documents. A document dated 996 mentions Amalfian merchants living in Cairo. Another letter states that the Genoese had traded with Alexandria. The caliph al-Mustansir had allowed Amalfian merchants to reside in Jerusalem about 1060 in place of the Latin hospice.\nThe Crusades led to the flourishing of trade between Europe and the \"outremer\" region. Genoa, Venice and Pisa created colonies in regions controlled by the Crusaders and came to control the trade with the Orient. These colonies also allowed them to trade with the Eastern world. Though the fall of the Crusader states and attempts at banning of trade relations with Muslim states by the Popes temporarily disrupted the trade with the Orient, it however continued. Europe started to revive, however, when there was gradual centralisation of state power in the Renaissance of the 12th century.\nOttoman power based in Anatolia continued to grow, and in 1453 extinguished the Byzantine Empire with the Conquest of Constantinople. Hayreddin Barbarossa, the Ottoman captain is a symbol of this domination with the victory of the Battle of Preveza (1538), opening up Tripoli and the eastern Mediterranean to Ottoman rule. As the naval prowess of the European powers increased, they confronted Ottoman expansion in the region when the Battle of Lepanto (1571) damaging the power of the Ottoman Navy. This was the last naval battle to be fought primarily between galleys.\nThe Barbary pirates of Northwest Africa preyed on Christian shipping and coastlines in the Western Mediterranean Sea. According to Robert Davis, from the 16th to 19th centuries, pirates captured 1 million to 1.25 million Europeans as slaves.\nThe development of oceanic shipping began to affect the entire Mediterranean. Once, most of the trade between Western Europe and the East was passing through the region, but after the 1490s the development of a sea route to the Indian Ocean allowed the importation of Asian spices and other goods through the Atlantic ports of western Europe.\nThe sea remained strategically important. British mastery of Gibraltar ensured their influence in Africa and Southwest Asia. Especially after the naval battles of Abukir (1799, Battle of the Nile) and Trafalgar (1805), the British had for a long time strengthened their dominance in the Mediterranean. Wars included Naval warfare in the Mediterranean during World War I and Mediterranean theatre of World War II.\nWith the opening of the lockless Suez Canal in 1869, the flow of trade between Europe and Asia changed fundamentally. The fastest route now led through the Mediterranean towards East Africa and Asia. This led to a preference for the Mediterranean countries and their ports like Trieste with direct connections to Central and Eastern Europe experienced a rapid economic rise. In the 20th century, the 1st and 2nd World Wars as well as the Suez Crisis and the Cold War led to a shift of trade routes to the European northern ports, which changed again towards the southern ports through European integration, the activation of the Silk Road and free world trade.\n21st century and migrations.\n Satellite image of the Mediterranean Sea at night\nIn 2013, the Maltese president described the Mediterranean Sea as a \"cemetery\" due to the large number of migrants who drowned there after their boats capsized. European Parliament president Martin Schulz said in 2014 that Europe's migration policy \"turned the Mediterranean into a graveyard\", referring to the number of drowned refugees in the region as a direct result of the policies. An Azerbaijani official described the sea as \"a burial ground ... where people die\".\nFollowing the 2013 Lampedusa migrant shipwreck, the Italian government decided to strengthen the national system for the patrolling of the Mediterranean Sea by authorising \"Operation Mare Nostrum\", a military and humanitarian mission in order to rescue the migrants and arrest the traffickers of immigrants. In 2015, more than one million migrants crossed the Mediterranean Sea into Europe.\nItaly was particularly affected by the European migrant crisis. Between 2013 and 2018, over 700,000 migrants landed in Italy, mainly sub-Saharan Africans.\nGeography.\nThe Mediterranean Sea connects:\nThe coastline length is about .\nThe long artificial Suez Canal in the southeast connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea without ship lock, because the water level is essentially the same. This separated Africa and Asia.\nMarginal seas.\nThe Mediterranean Sea includes 15 marginal seas:\nNote 1: The International Hydrographic Organization defines the area as generic Mediterranean Sea, in the Western Basin. It does not recognise the label Sea of Sardinia.\nNote 2: Thracian Sea and Myrtoan Sea are seas that are part of the Aegean Sea.\nNote 3: The Black Sea is not considered part of it.\nExtent.\nThe International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Mediterranean Sea as follows: Stretching from the Strait of Gibraltar in the west to the entrances to the Dardanelles and the Suez Canal in the east, the Mediterranean Sea is bounded by the coasts of Europe, Africa, and Asia and is divided into two deep basins:\nHydrography.\nThe drainage basin of the Mediterranean Sea is particularly heterogeneous and extends much further than the Mediterranean region. Its size has been estimated between , depending on whether non-active parts (deserts) are included or not. The longest river ending in the Mediterranean Sea is the Nile, which takes its sources in equatorial Africa. The basin of the Nile constitutes about two-thirds of the Mediterranean drainage basin and encompasses areas as high as the Ruwenzori Mountains. Among other important rivers in Africa, are the Moulouya and the Chelif, both on the north side of the Atlas Mountains. In Asia, are the Ceyhan and Seyhan, both on the south side of the Taurus Mountains. In Europe, the largest basins are those of the Rh\u00f4ne, Ebro, Po, and Maritsa. The basin of the Rh\u00f4ne is the largest and extends up as far north as the Jura Mountains, encompassing areas even on the north side of the Alps. The basins of the Ebro, Po, and Maritsa, are respectively south of the Pyrenees, Alps, and Balkan Mountains, which are the major ranges bordering Southern Europe.\nTotal annual precipitation is significantly higher on the European part of the Mediterranean basin, especially near the Alps (the 'water tower of Europe') and other high mountain ranges. As a consequence, the river discharges of the Rh\u00f4ne and Po are similar to that of the Nile, despite the latter having a much larger basin. These are the only three rivers with an average discharge of over . Among large natural fresh bodies of water are Lake Victoria (Nile basin), Lake Geneva (Rh\u00f4ne), and the Italian Lakes (Po). While the Mediterranean watershed is bordered by other river basins in Europe, it is essentially bordered by endorheic basins or deserts elsewhere.\nThe following countries are in the Mediterranean drainage basin while \"not\" having a coastline on the Mediterranean Sea:\nCoastal countries.\nThe following countries have a coastline on the Mediterranean Sea:\nExclusive economic zone.\nExclusive economic zones in Mediterranean Sea:\nSubdivisions.\nThe International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) divides the Mediterranean into a number of smaller waterbodies, each with their own designation (from west to east):\nLargest islands.\nThe Mediterranean Sea encompasses about 10,000 islands and islets, of which about 250 are permanently inhabited. In the table below are listed the ten largest by population.\nClimate.\nMuch of the Mediterranean coast has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate. The Mediterranean basin has a climate characterised by mild wet winters, and calm, dry and hot summers. Although they are rare, tropical cyclones occasionally form in the Mediterranean Sea, typically in September\u2013November.\nSeabed.\nThe Mediterranean Sea has numerous underwater geological features formed by the subduction of the African Plate beneath the Eurasian Plate. The sea is divided naturally into western and eastern regions by the Malta Escarpment that runs from the island of Sicily to the African coast.\nThe western Mediterranean region may be separated into three main underwater basins:\nThe eastern Mediterranean region may also be subdivided into the following underwater basins:\nUntil the 1960s, the Mediterranean was believed to be the primary remaining portion of the earlier (200 million years old) Mesozoic Tethys Ocean, which once encircled the Eastern Hemisphere. However, since the late 20th century, research using the theory of seafloor spreading has indicated that most of the current Mediterranean seafloor is not a portion of the Tethys sea floor. Some researchers consider the Ionian Basin, to the east of the Malta Escarpment, to be the remnant of the Tethys Ocean. Over the course of the last 44 million years, the continental plates of Africa and Eurasia have converged and receded, resulting in the current tectonically active basin and its surrounding mountain chains. According to the interpretation of geologic data, there are currently several major places where Africa and Eurasia collide, causing land submergence, mountain building, and volcanism.\nSediment cores drilled in 1970 and 1975 led to theories that about 6 million years ago, the Mediterranean was around below the current sea level and included arid deserts blanketed with evaporite salts. It was thought that Gibraltar's high ridges prevented Atlantic waters from entering until roughly 5.5 million years ago, when they broke through and flooded the Mediterranean. According to more recent seismic and microfossil research, the seafloor was never entirely dry. Rather, approximately 5 million years ago, the seafloor was made up of many basins with varying topography and sizes, spanning in depth from . Salts were likely accumulated on the bottom of highly salinised waters of widely differing depths. The uncertainty of the timing and nature of sea-bottom salt formation and evidence from later seismic research and core samples has been the subject of intense scientific debate.\nMalta Escarpment.\nThe Malta Escarpment is a undersea limestone escarpment that stretches south from Sicily's eastern coast to the Maltese islands' eastern coast and beyond, primarily formed due to tectonic activities. There are more than 500 undersea canyons along the cliffs, which can reach heights of in some locations. Rich biological communities may be found in the canyons, which also serve as channels for contaminants and nutrients due to underwater currents. These deep valleys are special due to the fact that they were not carved out by surface rivers. Underwater landslides are among the natural hazards found on the Malta Escarpment. The University of Malta, UK National Oceanography Centre, New Zealand National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research, University College Dublin and Italy's Istituto Nazionale di Oceanografia e Geofisica collaborated on a recent study financed by the European Union that focused on the Escarpment.\nOceanography.\nEvaporation greatly exceeds precipitation and river runoff in the Mediterranean, a fact that is central to the water circulation within the basin. Evaporation is especially high in its eastern half, causing the water level to decrease and salinity to increase eastward. The average salinity in the basin is 38 PSU at depth.\nThe temperature of the water in the deepest part of the Mediterranean Sea is .\nThe net water influx from the Atlantic Ocean is ca. or . Without this Atlantic water, the sea level of the Mediterranean Sea would fall at a rate of about per year.\nIn oceanography, it is sometimes called the \"Eurafrican Mediterranean Sea\", the \"European Mediterranean Sea\" or the \"African Mediterranean Sea\" to distinguish it from mediterranean seas elsewhere, like the Baltic Sea, and the North-east Atlantic Ocean.\nGeneral circulation.\nWater circulation in the Mediterranean can be attributed to the surface waters entering from the Atlantic through the Strait of Gibraltar (and also low salinity water entering the Mediterranean from the Black Sea through the Bosphorus). The cool and relatively low-salinity Atlantic water circulates eastwards along the North African coasts. A part of the surface water does not pass the Strait of Sicily, but deviates towards Corsica before exiting the Mediterranean. The surface waters entering the eastern Mediterranean Basin circulate along the Libyan and Israeli coasts. Upon reaching the Levantine Sea, the surface water, having warmed and increased its salinity from its initial Atlantic state, is now denser and sinks to form the Levantine Intermediate Waters (LIW). Most of the water found anywhere between deep in the Mediterranean originates from the LIW.\nLIW are formed along the coasts of Turkey and circulate westwards along the Greek and south Italian coasts. LIW are the only waters passing the Sicily Strait westwards. After the Strait of Sicily, the LIW waters circulate along the Italian, French and Spanish coasts before exiting the Mediterranean through the depths of the Strait of Gibraltar. Deep water in the Mediterranean originates from three main areas: the Adriatic Sea, from which most of the deep water in the eastern Mediterranean originates, the Aegean Sea, and the Gulf of Lion. Deep water formation in the Mediterranean is triggered by strong winter convection fuelled by intense cold winds like the Bora. When new deep water is formed, the older waters mix with the overlaying intermediate waters and eventually exit the Mediterranean. The residence time of water in the Mediterranean is approximately 100 years, making the Mediterranean especially sensitive to climate change.\nOther events affecting water circulation.\nBeing a semi-enclosed basin, the Mediterranean experiences transitory events that can affect the water circulation on short time scales. In the mid-1990s, the Aegean Sea became the main area for deep water formation in the eastern Mediterranean after particularly cold winter conditions. This transitory switch in the origin of deep waters in the eastern Mediterranean was termed Eastern Mediterranean Transient (EMT) and had major consequences on water circulation of the Mediterranean.\nAnother example of a transient event affecting the Mediterranean circulation is the periodic inversion of the North Ionian Gyre, which is an anticyclonic ocean gyre observed in the northern part of the Ionian Sea, off the Greek coast. The transition from anticyclonic to cyclonic rotation of this gyre changes the origin of the waters fuelling it; when the circulation is anticyclonic (most common), the waters of the gyre originate from the Adriatic Sea. When the circulation is cyclonic, the waters originate from the Levantine Sea. These waters have different physical and chemical characteristics, and the periodic inversion of the North Ionian Gyre (called Bimodal Oscillating System or BiOS) changes the Mediterranean circulation and biogeochemistry around the Adriatic and Levantine regions.\nClimate change.\nBecause of the short residence time of its waters, the Mediterranean Sea is considered a hot-spot for climate change records, registering indeed marked increases in temperature across the entire water column since the 1950s. According to climate projections, the decrease in precipitation over the region will lead to more evaporation, ultimately increasing marine salinity. As a result of both temperature and salinity increases, the Mediterranean Sea is likely to become more stratified by the end of the 21st century, with notable consequences on water circulation and biogeochemistry. The stratification and warming have already led the eastern Mediterranean to become a net source of CO2 to the atmosphere. \nHuman-induced climate change appears to play a growing role in the development of marine heatwaves that have become a prominent subject of research in recent years, particularly in the Mediterranean where a number of areas in both western and eastern sub-basins now experience peaks of temperatures, along with more frequent, more intense, more prolonged warming events than ever seen on record. These events, mainly driven by a combination of oceanic and atmospheric factors, are often triggered by high pressure systems that will reduce cloud cover and increase solar absorption by the sea surface. Their impacts on marine ecosystems, such as mass mortality in benthic communities, coral bleaching events, disruptions in fishery catches and shifts in species distributions, can be devastating. Extreme warming can lead to biodiversity loss and presents an existential threat to some habitats while making conditions more hospitable to invasive tropical species.\nBiogeochemistry.\nIn spite of its great biodiversity, concentrations of chlorophyll and nutrients in the Mediterranean Sea are very low, making it one of the most oligotrophic ocean regions in the world. The Mediterranean Sea is commonly referred to as an LNLC (Low-Nutrient, Low-Chlorophyll) area. The Mediterranean Sea fits the definition of a desert in which its nutrient contents are low, making it difficult for plants and animals to develop.\nThere are steep gradients in nutrient concentrations, chlorophyll concentrations and primary productivity in the Mediterranean. Nutrient concentrations in the western part of the basin are about double the concentrations in the eastern basin. The Alboran Sea, close to the Strait of Gibraltar, has a daily primary productivity of about 0.25 g C (grams of carbon) m\u22122 day\u22121 whereas the eastern basin has an average daily productivity of 0.16 g C m\u22122 day\u22121. For this reason, the eastern part of the Mediterranean Sea is termed \"ultraoligotrophic\". The productive areas of the Mediterranean Sea are few and small. High (i.e. more than 0.5 grams of Chlorophyll \"a\" per cubic metre) productivity occurs in coastal areas, close to the river mouths which are the primary suppliers of dissolved nutrients. The Gulf of Lion has a relatively high productivity because it is an area of high vertical mixing, bringing nutrients to the surface waters that can be used by phytoplankton to produce Chlorophyll \"a\".\nPrimary productivity in the Mediterranean is also marked by an intense seasonal variability. In winter, the strong winds and precipitation over the basin generate vertical mixing, bringing nutrients from the deep waters to the surface, where phytoplankton can convert it into biomass. However, in winter, light may be the limiting factor for primary productivity. Between March and April, spring offers the ideal trade-off between light intensity and nutrient concentrations in surface for a spring bloom to occur. In summer, high atmospheric temperatures lead to the warming of the surface waters. The resulting density difference virtually isolates the surface waters from the rest of the water column and nutrient exchanges are limited. As a consequence, primary productivity is very low between June and October.\nOceanographic expeditions uncovered a characteristic feature of the Mediterranean Sea biogeochemistry: most of the chlorophyll production does not occur on the surface, but in sub-surface waters between 80 and 200 metres deep. Another key characteristic of the Mediterranean is its high nitrogen-to-phosphorus ratio (N:P). Redfield demonstrated that most of the world's oceans have an average N:P ratio around 16. However, the Mediterranean Sea has an average N:P between 24 and 29, which translates a widespread phosphorus limitation.\nBecause of its low productivity, plankton assemblages in the Mediterranean Sea are dominated by small organisms such as picophytoplankton and bacteria.\nGeology.\nThe geologic history of the Mediterranean Sea is complex. Underlain by oceanic crust, the sea basin was once thought to be a tectonic remnant of the ancient Tethys Ocean; it is now known to be a structurally younger basin, called the Neotethys, which was first formed by the convergence of the African Plate and Eurasian Plate during the Late Triassic and Early Jurassic. Because it is a near-landlocked body of water in a normally dry climate, the Mediterranean is subject to intensive evaporation and the precipitation of evaporites. The Messinian salinity crisis started about six million years ago (mya) when the Mediterranean became landlocked, and then essentially dried up. There are salt deposits accumulated on the bottom of the basin of more than a million cubic kilometres\u2014in some places more than three kilometres thick.\nScientists estimate that the sea was last filled about 5.3 million years ago (mya) in less than two years by the Zanclean flood. Water poured in from the Atlantic Ocean through a newly breached gateway now called the Strait of Gibraltar at an estimated rate of about three orders of magnitude (one thousand times) larger than the current flow of the Amazon River.\nThe Mediterranean Sea has an average depth of and the deepest recorded point is in the Calypso Deep in the Ionian Sea. The coastline extends for . A shallow submarine ridge (the Strait of Sicily) between the island of Sicily and the coast of Tunisia divides the sea in two main subregions: the Western Mediterranean, with an area of about ; and the Eastern Mediterranean, of about . Coastal areas have submarine karst springs or s, which discharge pressurised groundwater into the water from below the surface; the discharge water is usually fresh, and sometimes may be thermal.\nMessinian salinity crisis.\nDuring Mesozoic and Cenozoic times, as the northwest corner of Africa converged on Iberia, it lifted the Betic-Rif mountain belts across southern Iberia and northwest Africa. There the development of the intramontane Betic and Rif basins created two roughly parallel marine gateways between the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea. Dubbed the Betic and Rifian corridors, they gradually closed during the middle and late Miocene: perhaps several times. In the late Miocene the closure of the Betic Corridor triggered the so-called \"Messinian salinity crisis\" (MSC), characterised by the deposition of a thick evaporitic sequence \u2013 with salt deposits up to 2\u00a0km thick in the Levantine sea \u2013 and by a massive drop in water level in much of the Basin. This event was for long the subject of acute scientific controversy, now much appeased, regarding its sequence, geographic range, processes leading to evaporite facies and salt deposits. The start of the MSC was recently estimated astronomically at 5.96 mya, and it persisted for some 630,000 years until about 5.3 mya; see Animation: Messinian salinity crisis, at right.\nAfter the initial drawdown and re-flooding, there followed more episodes\u2014the total number is debated\u2014of sea drawdowns and re-floodings for the duration of the MSC. It ended when the Atlantic Ocean last re-flooded the basin\u2014creating the Strait of Gibraltar and causing the Zanclean flood\u2014at the end of the Miocene (5.33 mya). Some research has suggested that a desiccation-flooding-desiccation cycle may have repeated several times, which could explain several events of large amounts of salt deposition. Recent studies, however, show that repeated desiccation and re-flooding is unlikely from a geodynamic point of view.\nDesiccation and exchanges of flora and fauna.\nThe present-day Atlantic gateway, the Strait of Gibraltar, originated in the early Pliocene via the Zanclean Flood. As mentioned, there were two earlier gateways: the Betic Corridor across southern Spain and the Rifian Corridor across northern Morocco. The Betic closed about 6 mya, causing the Messinian salinity crisis (MSC); the Rifian or possibly both gateways closed during the earlier Tortonian times, causing a \"Tortonian salinity crisis\" (from 11.6 to 7.2 mya), long before the MSC and lasting much longer. Both \"crises\" resulted in broad connections between the mainlands of Africa and Europe, which allowed migrations of flora and fauna\u2014especially large mammals including primates\u2014between the two continents. The Vallesian crisis indicates a typical extinction and replacement of mammal species in Europe during Tortonian times following climatic upheaval and overland migrations of new species.\nToday, evaporation of surface seawater (output) is more than the supply (input) of fresh water by precipitation and coastal drainage systems, causing the salinity of the Mediterranean to be much higher than that of the Atlantic\u2014so much so that the saltier Mediterranean waters sink below the waters incoming from the Atlantic, causing a two-layer flow across the Strait of Gibraltar: that is, an outflow \"submarine current\" of warm saline Mediterranean water, counterbalanced by an inflow surface current of less saline cold oceanic water from the Atlantic. In the 1920s, Herman S\u00f6rgel proposed the building of a hydroelectric dam (the Atlantropa project) across the Straits, using the inflow current to provide a large amount of hydroelectric energy. The underlying energy grid was also intended to support a political union between Europe and, at least, the Maghreb part of Africa (compare Eurafrika for the later impact and Desertec for a later project with some parallels in the planned grid).\nPaleoclimate.\nBecause of its latitude and its landlocked position, the Mediterranean is especially sensitive to astronomically induced climatic variations, which are well documented in its sedimentary record. Since the Mediterranean is subject to the deposition of eolian dust from the Sahara during dry periods, whereas riverine detrital input prevails during wet ones, the Mediterranean marine sapropel-bearing sequences provide high-resolution climatic information. These data have been employed in reconstructing astronomically calibrated time scales for the last 9 Ma of the Earth's history, helping to constrain the time of past geomagnetic reversals.\nBiodiversity.\nUnlike the vast multidirectional ocean currents in open oceans within their respective oceanic zones; biodiversity in the Mediterranean Sea is stable due to the subtle but strong locked nature of currents which is favourable to life, even the smallest macroscopic type of volcanic life form. The stable marine ecosystem of the Mediterranean Sea and sea temperature provides a nourishing environment for life in the deep sea to flourish while assuring a balanced aquatic ecosystem excluded from any external deep oceanic factors. It is estimated that there are more than 17,000 marine species in the Mediterranean Sea with generally higher marine biodiversity in coastal areas, continental shelves, and decreases with depth.\nAs a result of the drying of the sea during the Messinian salinity crisis, the marine biota of the Mediterranean is derived primarily from the Atlantic Ocean. The North Atlantic is considerably colder and more nutrient-rich than the Mediterranean, and the marine life of the Mediterranean has had to adapt to its differing conditions in the five million years since the basin was reflooded later.\nThe Alboran Sea is a transition zone between the two seas, containing a mix of Mediterranean and Atlantic species. The Mediterranean monk seals live in the Aegean Sea in Greece.\nThere was a resident population of orcas in the Mediterranean until the 1980s, when they went extinct, probably due to long-term PCB exposure. There are still annual sightings of orca vagrants.\nEnvironmental issues.\nFor 4,000 years, human activity has transformed most parts of Mediterranean Europe, and the \"humanisation of the landscape\" overlapped with the appearance of the present Mediterranean climate. The image of a simplistic, environmental determinist notion of a Mediterranean paradise on Earth in antiquity, which was destroyed by later civilisations, dates back to at least the 18th century and was for centuries fashionable in archaeological and historical circles. Based on a broad variety of methods, e.g. historical documents, analysis of trade relations, floodplain sediments, pollen, tree-ring and further archaeometric analyses and population studies, Alfred Thomas Grove's and Oliver Rackham's work on \"The Nature of Mediterranean Europe\" challenges this common wisdom of a Mediterranean Europe as a \"Lost Eden\", a formerly fertile and forested region, that had been progressively degraded and desertified by human mismanagement. The belief stems more from the failure of the recent landscape to measure up to the imaginary past of the classics as idealised by artists, poets and scientists of the early modern Enlightenment.\nThe historical evolution of climate, vegetation and landscape in southern Europe from prehistoric times to the present is much more complex and underwent various changes. For example, some of the deforestation had already taken place before the Roman age. While in the Roman age large enterprises such as the latifundia took effective care of forests and agriculture, the largest depopulation effects came with the end of the empire. The major deforestation might have taken place in modern times\u2014the later usage patterns were also quite different e.g. in southern and northern Italy. Also, the climate has usually been unstable and there is evidence of various ancient and modern \"Little Ice Ages\", and plant cover accommodated to various extremes and became resilient to various patterns of human activity.\nEven Grove considered that human activity could be the cause of climate change. Modern science has been able to provide clear evidence of this. The wide ecological diversity typical of Mediterranean Europe is predominantly based on human behaviour, as it is and has been closely related to human usage patterns. The diversity range was enhanced by the widespread exchange and interaction of the longstanding and highly diverse local agriculture, intense transport and trade relations, and the interaction with settlements, pasture and other land use. The greatest human-induced changes, however, came after World War II, in line with the \"1950s syndrome\" as rural populations throughout the region abandoned traditional subsistence economies. Grove and Rackham suggest that the locals left the traditional agricultural patterns and instead became scenery-setting agents for tourism. This resulted in more uniform, large-scale formations.[] Among further current important threats to Mediterranean landscapes are overdevelopment of coastal areas, abandonment of mountains and, as mentioned, the loss of variety via the reduction of traditional agricultural occupations.\nNatural hazards.\nThe Mediterranean region is one of the most geologically active maritime area of the globe, sitting on a complex tectonic boundary zone between the European and African plates. The geology of the region, with the presence of plate boundaries and active faults, makes it prone to quite frequent earthquakes, tsunamis and submarine landslides with can have devastating consequences in densely populated coastal areas. In addition climate change now intensifies the frequency and impacts of storm surges and coastal flooding, putting additional human lives and property at risk.\nEarthquakes are relatively frequent in the Mediterranean Basin, starting in the Mediterranean 70 million years ago. They are still ongoing. From the boundary of tectonic plates, the Mediterranean territory is called two distinct parts: the Eastern Mediterranean (from Italy to Turkey), which is characterised by intense seismicity with earthquakes whose magnitude can rise to 7.5 Richter with more than 350 recorded tsunamis, and the Western Mediterranean. During the 20th century, 198,548 earthquake victims were recorded.\nVolcanic eruptions are not uncommon either and left their mark in historical and archaeological records. The largest include the Thera eruption, dated around 1600 BC, and the eruptions of Mount Vesuvius in 217 BC and AD 79 - the latter famously known for the destruction and the burying of the ancient cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum. In the same region the Phlegraean Fields west of Naples constitute one of the most significant volcanic systems in the world, still very active. In the same general area, volcanoes like Mt. Etna and Stromboli are considered in a state of permanent activity, with frequent eruptions and lava emissions through the past 1500 years.\nTsunamis, usually triggered by earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and submarine landslides, have caused a number of documented disasters in the Mediterranean Basin in the past 2500 years. Historical examples include the 365 and 1303 tsunamis in the Hellenic Arc, more recently the disastrous 1908 event that destroyed the cities of Messina and Reggio Calabria, and the large tsunami that occurred off the Algerian margin in 2003.\nOn the diplomatic front, the experience of coastal countries and regional authorities is leading to exchange[] at the international level with the cooperation of NGOs, states, regional and municipal authorities. The Greek\u2013Turkish earthquake diplomacy is a quite positive example of natural hazards leading to improved relations between traditional rivals in the region after earthquakes in \u0130zmit and Athens in 1999. The European Union Solidarity Fund (EUSF) was set up to respond to major natural disasters and express European solidarity to disaster-stricken regions within all of Europe. The largest amount of funding requests in the EU relates to forest fires, followed by floods and earthquakes. Forest fires, whether human-made or natural, are a frequent and dangerous hazard in the Mediterranean region. Tsunamis are also an often-underestimated hazard in the region. For example, the 1908 Messina earthquake and tsunami took more than 123,000 lives in Sicily and Calabria and were among the deadliest natural disasters in modern Europe.\nInvasive species.\nInvasive species have become a major component of the Mediterranean ecosystem and have serious impacts on the Mediterranean ecology, endangering a number of local and endemic Mediterranean species. A first look at some groups of marine species shows that over 70% of exotic decapods and some 2/3 of exotic fishes found in the Mediterranean are of Indo-Pacific origin, introduced from the Red Sea via the Suez Canal. This makes the Canal the first pathway of arrival of alien species into the Mediterranean. The impacts of some Lessepsian species have proven to be considerable, mainly in the Levantine basin of the Mediterranean, where they are replacing native species and becoming a familiar sight.\nAccording to definitions by the Mediterranean Science Commission and the International Union for Conservation of Nature, and to Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and Ramsar Convention terminologies, they are alien species, as they are non-native (non-indigenous) to the Mediterranean Sea, and are found outside their normal, non-adjacent area of distribution. When these species succeed in establishing populations in the Mediterranean Sea, compete with and begin to replace native species they are \"Alien Invasive Species\", as they are an agent of change and a threat to the native biodiversity. In the context of CBD, \"introduction\" refers to the movement by human agency, indirect or direct, of an alien species outside of its natural range (past or present). The Suez Canal, being an artificial (human-made) canal, is a human agency. Lessepsian migrants are therefore \"introduced\" species (indirect, and unintentional). Whatever wording is chosen, they represent a threat to the native Mediterranean biodiversity, because they are non-indigenous to this sea. In recent years, the Egyptian government's announcement of its intentions to deepen and widen the Canal raised concerns from marine biologists, fearing that such an act will only worsen the invasion of Red Sea species into the Mediterranean, and lead to even more species passing through the Canal.\nArrival of new tropical Atlantic species.\nIn recent decades, the arrival of exotic species from the tropical Atlantic has become noticeable. In many cases this reflects an expansion \u2013 favoured by a warming trend of sub-tropical Atlantic waters, and also by a fast-growing maritime traffic \u2013 of the natural range of species that now enter the Mediterranean through the Strait of Gibraltar. While not as intense as Lessepsian migration, the process is of importance and is therefore receiving increased levels of scientific coverage.\nSea-level rise.\nBy 2100 the overall level of the Mediterranean could rise between as a result of the effects of climate change. This could have adverse effects on populations across the Mediterranean:\nCoastal ecosystems also appear to be threatened by sea level rise, especially enclosed seas such as the Baltic, the Mediterranean and the Black Sea. These seas have only small and primarily east\u2013west movement corridors, which may restrict northward displacement of organisms in these areas. Sea level rise for the next century (2100) could be between and temperature shifts of a mere in the deep sea are sufficient to induce significant changes in species richness and functional diversity.\nPollution.\nPollution in this region has been extremely high in recent years. The United Nations Environment Programme has estimated that of sewage, of mineral oil, of mercury, of lead and of phosphates are dumped into the Mediterranean each year. The Barcelona Convention aims to 'reduce pollution in the Mediterranean Sea and protect and improve the marine environment in the area, thereby contributing to its sustainable development.'\nMany marine species have been almost wiped out because of the sea's pollution. One of them is the Mediterranean monk seal which is considered to be among the world's most endangered marine mammals.\nThe Mediterranean is also plagued by marine debris. A 1994 study of the seabed using trawl nets around the coasts of Spain, France and Italy reported a particularly high mean concentration of debris; an average of 1,935 items per km2 ().&lt;ref name=\"nep.org/regionalseas/ma\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nShipping.\nApproximately of oil are transported annually in the Mediterranean Sea (more than 20% of the world total), with around 250\u2013300 oil tankers crossing the sea every day. An important destination is the Port of Trieste, the starting point of the Transalpine Pipeline, which covers 40% of Germany's oil demand (100% of the federal states of Bavaria and Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg), 90% of Austria and 50% of the Czech Republic. Accidental oil spills happen frequently with an average of 10 spills per year. A major oil spill could occur at any time in any part of the Mediterranean.\nTourism.\nThe coast of the Mediterranean has been used for tourism since ancient times, as the Roman villa buildings on the Amalfi Coast or in Barcola show. From the end of the 19th century, in particular, the beaches became places of longing for many Europeans and travellers. From then on, and especially after World War II, mass tourism to the Mediterranean began with all its advantages and disadvantages. While initially, the journey was by train and later by bus or car, today the plane is increasingly used.\nTourism is today one of the most important sources of income for many Mediterranean countries, despite the human-made geopolitical conflicts in the region. The countries have tried to extinguish rising human-made chaotic zones that might affect the region's economies and societies in neighbouring coastal countries, and shipping routes. Naval and rescue components in the Mediterranean Sea are considered to be among the best due to the rapid cooperation between various naval fleets. Unlike the vast open oceans, the sea's closed position facilitates effective naval and rescue missions, considered the safest and regardless of any human-made or natural disaster.\nTourism is a source of income for small coastal communities, including islands, independent of urban centres. However, tourism has also played a major role in the degradation of the coastal and marine environment. Rapid development has been encouraged by Mediterranean governments to support the large numbers of tourists visiting the region, but this has caused serious disturbance to marine habitats by erosion and pollution in many places along the Mediterranean coasts.\nTourism often concentrates in areas of high natural wealth, causing a serious threat to the habitats of endangered species such as sea turtles and monk seals. Reductions in natural wealth may reduce the incentive for tourists to visit.\nOverfishing.\nFish stock levels in the Mediterranean Sea are alarmingly low. The European Environment Agency says that more than 65% of all fish stocks in the region are outside safe biological limits. Some of the most important fisheries are threatened.[] There are clear indications that catch size and quality have declined, often dramatically, and in many areas, larger and longer-lived species have disappeared entirely from commercial catches.\nMarine heatwaves.\nA study showed that climate change-related exceptional marine heatwaves in the Mediterranean Sea during 2015\u20132019 resulted in widespread mass sealife die-offs in five consecutive years.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19007", "revid": "37481612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19007", "title": "Mercury", "text": "Mercury most commonly refers to:\nMercury or The Mercury may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\n*List of Mercury vehicles\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "19009", "revid": "608885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19009", "title": "Milgram experiment", "text": "Series of social psychology experiments\nIn the early 1960s, a series of social psychology experiments were conducted by Yale University psychologist Stanley Milgram, who intended to measure the willingness of study participants to obey an authority figure who instructed them to perform acts conflicting with their personal conscience. Participants were led to believe that they were assisting a fictitious experiment, in which they had to administer electric shocks to a \"learner\". These fake electric shocks gradually increased to levels that would have been fatal had they been real.\nThe experiments unexpectedly found that a very high proportion of subjects would fully obey the instructions, with every participant going up to 300 volts, and 65% going up to the full 450 volts. Milgram first described his research in a 1963 article in the \"Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology\" and later discussed his findings in greater depth in his 1974 book, \"\".\nThe experiments began in August 1961 at Yale University, three months after the start of the trial of German Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann in Jerusalem. Milgram devised his psychological study to explain the psychology of genocide and answer the popular contemporary question: \"Could it be that Eichmann and his million accomplices in the Holocaust were just following orders? Could we call them all accomplices?\"\nWhile the experiment was repeated many times around the globe, with fairly consistent results, both its interpretations as well as its applicability to the Holocaust are disputed.\nProcedure.\nThree individuals took part in each session of the experiment:\nThe subject and the actor arrived at the session together. The experimenter told them that they were taking part in \"a scientific study of memory and learning\", to see what the effect of punishment is on a subject's ability to memorize content. Also, he always clarified that the payment for their participation in the experiment was secured regardless of its development. The subject and actor drew slips of paper to determine their roles. Unknown to the subject, both slips said \"teacher\". The actor would always claim to have drawn the slip that read \"learner\", thus guaranteeing that the subject would always be the \"teacher\".\nNext, the teacher and learner were taken into an adjacent room where the learner was strapped into what appeared to be an electric chair. The experimenter, dressed in a lab coat in order to appear to have more authority, told the participants this was to ensure that the learner would not escape. In a later variation of the experiment, the confederate would eventually plead for mercy and yell that he had a heart condition. At some point prior to the actual test, the teacher was given a sample electric shock from the electroshock generator in order to experience firsthand what the shock that the learner would supposedly receive during the experiment would feel like.\nThe teacher and learner were then separated so that they could communicate, but not see each other. The teacher was then given a list of word pairs that he was to teach the learner. The teacher began by reading the list of word pairs to the learner. The teacher would then read the first word of each pair and read four possible answers. The learner would press a button to indicate his response. If the answer was incorrect, the teacher would administer a shock to the learner, with the voltage increasing in 15-volt increments for each wrong answer (if correct, the teacher would read the next word pair). The volts ranged from 15 to 450. The shock generator included verbal markings that vary from \"Slight Shock\" to \"Danger: Severe Shock\".\nThe subjects believed that for each wrong answer the learner was receiving actual shocks. In reality, there were no shocks. After the learner was separated from the teacher, the learner set up a tape recorder integrated with the electroshock generator, which played previously recorded sounds for each shock level. As the voltage of the fake shocks increased, the learner began making audible protests, such as banging repeatedly on the wall that separated him from the teacher. In every condition the learner makes/says a predetermined sound or word. When the highest voltages were reached, the learner fell silent.\nIf at any time the teacher indicated a desire to halt the experiment, the experimenter was instructed to give specific verbal prods. The prods were, in this order:\nProd 2 could only be used if prod 1 was unsuccessful. If the subject still wished to stop after all four successive verbal prods, the experiment was halted. Otherwise, the experiment was halted after the subject had elicited the maximum 450-volt shock three times in succession.\nThe experimenter also had prods to use if the teacher made specific comments. If the teacher asked whether the learner might suffer permanent physical harm, the experimenter replied, \"Although the shocks may be painful, there is no permanent tissue damage, so please go on.\" If the teacher said that the learner clearly wants to stop, the experimenter replied, \"Whether the learner likes it or not, you must go on until he has learned all the word pairs correctly, so please go on.\"\nPredictions.\nBefore conducting the experiment, Milgram polled fourteen Yale University senior-year psychology majors to predict the behavior of 100 hypothetical teachers. All of the poll respondents believed that only a very small fraction of teachers (the range was from zero to 3 out of 100, with an average of 1.2) would be prepared to inflict the maximum voltage. Milgram also informally polled his colleagues and found that they, too, believed very few subjects would progress beyond a very strong shock. He also reached out to honorary Harvard University graduate Chaim Homnick, who noted that this experiment would not be concrete evidence of the Nazis' innocence, due to the fact that \"poor people are more likely to cooperate\". Milgram also polled forty psychiatrists from a medical school, and they believed that by the tenth shock, when the victim demands to be free, most subjects would stop the experiment. They predicted that by the 300-volt shock, when the victim would refuse to answer, only 3.73 percent of the subjects would still continue, and they believed that \"only a little over one-tenth of one percent of the subjects would administer the highest shock on the board.\"\nMilgram suspected before the experiment that the obedience exhibited by Nazis reflected of a distinct German character, and planned to use the American participants as a control group before using German participants, expected to behave closer to the Nazis. However, the unexpected results stopped him from conducting the same experiment on German participants.\nResults.\nSubjects were uncomfortable administering the shocks, and displayed varying degrees of tension and stress. These signs included sweating, trembling, stuttering, biting their lips, groaning, and digging their fingernails into their skin, and some were even having nervous laughing fits or seizures. 14 of the 40 subjects showed definite signs of nervous laughing or smiling. Every participant paused the experiment at least once to question it. Most continued after being assured by the experimenter. Some said they would refund the money they were paid for participating.\nMilgram summarized the experiment in his 1974 article \"The Perils of Obedience\", writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The legal and philosophic aspects of obedience are of enormous importance, but they say very little about how most people behave in concrete situations. I set up a simple experiment at Yale University to test how much pain an ordinary citizen would inflict on another person simply because he was ordered to by an experimental scientist. Stark authority was pitted against the subjects' [participants'] strongest moral imperatives against hurting others, and, with the subjects' [participants'] ears ringing with the screams of the victims, authority won more often than not. The extreme willingness of adults to go to almost any lengths on the command of an authority constitutes the chief finding of the study and the fact most urgently demanding explanation.\nOrdinary people, simply doing their jobs, and without any particular hostility on their part, can become agents in a terrible destructive process. Moreover, even when the destructive effects of their work become patently clear, and they are asked to carry out actions incompatible with fundamental standards of morality, relatively few people have the resources needed to resist authority.\nThe original Simulated Shock Generator and Event Recorder, or \"shock box\", is located in the Archives of the History of American Psychology.\nMilgram, and other psychologists, subsequently later performed variations of the experiment throughout the world, with similar results. Milgram later investigated the effect of the experiment's locale on obedience levels by using an unregistered, backstreet office in a bustling city, in contrast to the respectable environment of Yale University. The level of obedience dropped from 65% to 47%, suggesting that scientific credibility could very well play a larger role than just authority. A more telling variable was the proximity of the learner to the teacher: when they were together in the same room, obedience level dropped to 40%. Another variation tested the subjects' willingness to cooperate when part of a larger group.\nThomas Blass of the University of Maryland, Baltimore County performed a meta-analysis on the results of repeated performances of the experiment. He found that while the percentage of participants who are prepared to inflict fatal voltages ranged from 28% to 91%, there was no significant trend over time and the average percentage for US studies (61%) was close to the one for non-US studies (66%).\nThe participants who refused to administer the final shocks neither insisted that the experiment be terminated, nor left the room to check the health of the victim as per Milgram's notes.\nMilgram created a documentary film titled \"Obedience\" showing the experiment and its results. He also produced a series of five social psychology films, some of which dealt with his experiments.\nCritical reception.\nEthics.\nMilgram's experiment raised immediate controversy about the research ethics of scientific experimentation because of the extreme emotional stress and inflicted insight suffered by the participants. On June 10, 1964, the \"American Psychologist\" published a brief but influential article by Diana Baumrind titled \"Some Thoughts on Ethics of Research: After Reading Milgram's 'Behavioral Study of Obedience.'\" She argued that even though Milgram had obtained informed consent, he was still ethically responsible to ensure their well-being. When participants displayed signs of distress such as sweating and trembling, the experimenter should have stepped in and halted the experiment. Baumrind's criticisms of the treatment of human participants in Milgram's studies stimulated a thorough revision of the ethical standards of psychological research.\nMilgram vigorously defended the experiment. He conducted a survey of former participants in which 84% said they were \"glad\" or \"very glad\" to have participated; 15% chose neutral responses (92% of all former participants responding). In his 1974 book \"\", Milgram described receiving offers of assistance, requests to join his staff, and letters of thanks from former participants. Six years later (at the height of the Vietnam War), one of the participants in the experiment wrote to Milgram, explaining why he was glad to have participated despite the stress:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While I was a subject in 1964, though I believed that I was hurting someone, I was totally unaware of why I was doing so. Few people ever realize when they are acting according to their own beliefs and when they are meekly submitting to authority\u00a0... To permit myself to be drafted with the understanding that I am submitting to authority's demand to do something very wrong would make me frightened of myself\u00a0... I am fully prepared to go to jail if I am not granted Conscientious Objector status. Indeed, it is the only course I could take to be faithful to what I believe. My only hope is that members of my board act equally according to their conscience\u00a0...\nIn contrast, critics such as Gina Perry argued that participants were not properly debriefed, leading to lasting emotional harm, and that many participants in fact criticized the ethics of the study in their responses to the questionnaire.\nApplicability to the Holocaust.\nMilgram sparked direct critical response in the scientific community by claiming in his book that \"a common psychological process is centrally involved in both [his laboratory experiments and Nazi Germany] events.\" James Waller, chair of Holocaust and Genocide Studies at Keene State College, formerly chair of Whitworth College Psychology Department, argued that Milgram experiments \u201cdo not correspond well\u201d to the Holocaust events: His points were as follows:\nIn the opinion of Thomas Blass\u2014who is the author of a scholarly monograph on the experiment (\"The Man Who Shocked The World\") published in 2004\u2014the historical evidence pertaining to actions of the Holocaust perpetrators speaks louder than words:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My own view is that Milgram's approach does not provide a fully adequate explanation of the Holocaust. While it may well account for the dutiful destructiveness of the dispassionate bureaucrat who may have shipped Jews to Auschwitz with the same degree of routinization as potatoes to Bremerhaven, it falls short when one tries to apply it to the more zealous, inventive, and hate-driven atrocities that also characterized the Holocaust.\nValidity.\nIn a 2004 issue of the journal \"Jewish Currents\", Joseph Dimow, a participant in the 1961 experiment at Yale University, wrote about his early withdrawal as a \"teacher\", suspicious \"that the whole experiment was designed to see if ordinary Americans would obey immoral orders, as many Germans had done during the Nazi period.\"\nIn 2012, Australian psychologist Gina Perry investigated Milgram's data and writings and concluded that Milgram had manipulated the results, and that there was a \"troubling mismatch between (published) descriptions of the experiment and evidence of what actually transpired.\" She wrote that \"only half of the people who undertook the experiment fully believed it was real and of those, 66% disobeyed the experimenter\". She described her findings as \"an unexpected outcome\" that \"leaves social psychology in a difficult situation.\"\nIn a book review critical of Gina Perry's findings, Nestar Russell and John Picard take issue with Perry for not mentioning that \"there have been well over a score, not just several, replications or slight variations on Milgram's basic experimental procedure, and these have been performed in many different countries, with several different settings and using different types of victims. And most, although certainly not all, of these experiments have tended to lend weight to Milgram's original findings.\"\nInterpretations.\nMilgram elaborated two theories:\nAlternative interpretations.\nIn his book \"Irrational Exuberance\", Yale finance professor Robert J. Shiller argues that other factors might be partially able to explain the Milgram experiments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[People] have learned that when experts tell them something is all right, it probably is, even if it does not seem so. (In fact, the experimenter was indeed correct: it was all right to continue giving the \"shocks\"\u2014even though most of the subjects did not suspect the reason.)\nIn a 2006 experiment, a computerized avatar was used in place of the learner receiving electrical shocks. Although the participants administering the shocks were aware that the learner was unreal, the experimenters reported that participants responded to the situation physiologically \"as if it were real\".\nAnother explanation of Milgram's results invokes belief perseverance as the underlying cause. What \"people cannot be counted on is to realize that a seemingly benevolent authority is in fact malevolent, even when they are faced with overwhelming evidence which suggests that this authority is indeed malevolent. Hence, the underlying cause for the subjects' striking conduct could well be conceptual, and not the alleged 'capacity of man to abandon his humanity ... as he merges his unique personality into larger institutional structures.\"'\nThis last explanation receives some support from a 2009 episode of the BBC science documentary series \"Horizon\", which involved replication of the Milgram experiment. Of the twelve participants, only three refused to continue to the end of the experiment. Speaking during the episode, social psychologist Clifford Stott discussed the influence that the idealism of scientific inquiry had on the volunteers. He remarked: \"The influence is ideological. It's about what they believe science to be, that science is a positive product, it produces beneficial findings and knowledge to society that are helpful for society. So there's that sense of science is providing some kind of system for good.\"\nBuilding on the importance of idealism, some recent researchers suggest the \"engaged followership\" perspective. Based on an examination of Milgram's archive, in a recent study, social psychologists Alexander Haslam, Stephen Reicher and Megan Birney, at the University of Queensland, discovered that people are less likely to follow the prods of an experimental leader when the prod resembles an order. However, when the prod stresses the importance of the experiment for science (i.e. \"The experiment requires you to continue\"), people are more likely to obey. The researchers suggest the perspective of \"engaged followership\": that people are not simply obeying the orders of a leader, but instead are willing to continue the experiment because of their desire to support the scientific goals of the leader and because of a lack of identification with the learner.\nA neuroscientific study found that with a virtual \"learner\", with subjects informed beforehand that the image they would see receiving shocks was not a real person, watching this virtual learner receive electric shocks did not activate the areas typically activated with empathic response.\nReplications and variations.\nMilgram's variations.\nIn \"\" (1974), Milgram describes 19 variations of his experiment, some of which had not been previously reported.\nSeveral experiments varied the distance between the participant (teacher) and the learner. Generally, when the participant was physically closer to the learner, the participant's compliance decreased. In the variation where the learner's physical immediacy was closest\u2014where the participant had to hold the learner's arm onto a shock plate\u201430 percent of participants completed the experiment. The participant's compliance also decreased if the experimenter was physically farther away (Experiments 1\u20134). For example, in Experiment 2, where participants received telephonic instructions from the experimenter, compliance decreased to 21 percent. Some participants deceived the experimenter by pretending to continue the experiment.\nIn Experiment 8, an all-female contingent was used; previously, all participants had been men. Obedience did not significantly differ, though the women communicated experiencing higher levels of stress.\nExperiment 10 took place in a modest office in Bridgeport, Connecticut, purporting to be the commercial entity \"Research Associates of Bridgeport\" without apparent connection to Yale University, to eliminate the university's prestige as a possible factor influencing the participants' behavior. In those conditions, obedience dropped to 47.5 percent, though the difference was not statistically significant.\nMilgram also combined the effect of authority with that of conformity. In those experiments, the participant was joined by one or two additional \"teachers\" (also actors, like the \"learner\"). The behavior of the participants' peers strongly affected the results. In Experiment 17, when two additional teachers refused to comply, only four of 40 participants continued in the experiment. In Experiment 18, the participant performed a subsidiary task (reading the questions via microphone or recording the learner's answers) with another \"teacher\" who complied fully. In that variation, 37 of 40 continued with the experiment.\nIn addition to these procedural variations, Milgram's work also illuminates the psychological processes highlighting obedience. Participants were observed frequently entering an \u201cagentic state,\u201d considering themselves as mere instruments executing the experimenter's will and therefore weakening personal responsibility.\nThis shift was coupled with marked psychological evidence by nervous laughter, sweating, and internal conflict\u2014which emphasizes the tension between hierarchical compliance and individual ethical standards. Such theoretical insights laid the basement for contemporary models of destructive obedience by revealing how authoritative contexts can reshape perceptions of agency and culpability.\nReplications.\nAround the time of the release of \"Obedience to Authority\" in 1973\u20131974, a version of the experiment was conducted at La Trobe University in Australia. As reported by Perry in her 2012 book \"Behind the Shock Machine\", some of the participants experienced long-lasting psychological effects, possibly due to the lack of proper debriefing by the experimenter.\nIn 2002, the British artist Rod Dickinson created \"The Milgram Re-enactment\", an exact reconstruction of parts of the original experiment, including the uniforms, lighting, and rooms used. An audience watched the four-hour performance through one-way glass windows. A video of this performance was first shown at the CCA Gallery in Glasgow in 2002.\nA partial replication of the experiment was staged by British illusionist Derren Brown and broadcast on UK's Channel 4 in \"The Heist \"(2006).\nAnother partial replication of the experiment was conducted by Jerry M. Burger in 2006 and broadcast on the Primetime series \"Basic Instincts\". Burger noted that \"current standards for the ethical treatment of participants clearly place Milgram's studies out of bounds.\" In 2009, Burger was able to receive approval from the institutional review board by modifying several of the experimental protocols, including halting the experiment after the 150-volt switch and having the learner directly tell the participant within a few seconds of the end of the experiment that they had not received any shocks. Burger found obedience rates virtually identical to those reported by Milgram in 1961\u201362, even while meeting current ethical regulations of informing participants. In addition, half the replication participants were female, and their rate of obedience was virtually identical to that of the male participants. Burger also included a condition in which participants first saw another participant refuse to continue. However, participants in this condition obeyed at the same rate as participants in the base condition.\nIn the 2010 French documentary \"Le Jeu de la Mort\" (\"The Game of Death\"), researchers recreated the Milgram experiment with an added critique of reality television by presenting the scenario as a game show pilot. Volunteers were given \u20ac40 and told that they would not win any money from the game, as this was only a trial. Only 16 of 80 \"contestants\" (teachers) chose to end the game before delivering the highest-voltage punishment.\nThe experiment was performed on \"Dateline NBC\" on an episode airing April 25, 2010.\nThe Discovery Channel aired the \"How Evil are You?\" segment of \"Curiosity\" on October 30, 2011. The episode was hosted by Eli Roth, who produced results similar to the original Milgram experiment, though the highest-voltage punishment used was 165 volts, rather than 450 volts. Roth added a segment in which a second person (an actor) in the room would defy the authority ordering the shocks, finding more often than not, the subjects would stand up to the authority figure in this case.\nOther variations.\nCharles Sheridan at the University of Missouri and Richard King at the University of California, Berkeley hypothesized that some of Milgram's subjects may have suspected that the victim was faking, so they repeated the experiment with a real victim: a \"cute, fluffy puppy\" that was given real, albeit apparently harmless, electric shocks. Their findings were similar to those of Milgram: Seven out of 13 of the male subjects and all 13 of the female subjects obeyed throughout. Many subjects showed high levels of distress during the experiment and some openly wept. In addition, Sheridan and King found that the duration for which the shock button was pressed decreased as the shocks got higher, meaning that for higher shock levels, subjects were more hesitant.\nAnother variation by psychologist Don Mixon in the early 1970s tested his theory that vagueness played a key role in the initial Milgram results. The maximum shock in the original experiment and all subsequent replications are simply labeled \"XXX\" as opposed to \"lethal\". He designed a replication of the experiment where it was implied that the shocks could be dangerous and cause harm to the learner saying, \"The learner's health is irrelevant.\" Mixon found that obedience rates fell to a very low percentage.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19011", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19011", "title": "Miocene", "text": "First epoch of the Neogene Period\nThe Miocene ( ) is the first geological epoch of the Neogene Period and extends from about https:// 5.333 (Ma). The Miocene was named by Scottish geologist Charles Lyell and comes from Ancient Greek \u03bc\u03b5\u03af\u03c9\u03bd (\"me\u00ed\u014dn\"), meaning \"less\", and \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9\u03bd\u03cc\u03c2 (\"kain\u00f3s\"), meaning \"new, recent\", and thus, means \"less recent\", because it has 18% fewer modern marine invertebrates than the Pliocene has. The Miocene followed the Oligocene and preceded the Pliocene.\nAs Earth went from the Oligocene through the Miocene and into the Pliocene, the climate slowly cooled towards a series of ice ages. The Miocene boundaries are not marked by distinct global events but by regionally defined transitions from the warmer Oligocene to the cooler Pliocene Epoch.\nDuring the Early Miocene, Afro-Arabia collided with Eurasia, severing the connection between the Mediterranean and Indian Oceans and enabling the interchange of fauna between the continents, including the dispersal of proboscideans and hominoids into Eurasia. During the late Miocene, the connections between the Atlantic and Mediterranean closed, causing the Mediterranean Sea to almost completely evaporate. This event is referred to as the \"Messinian salinity crisis\". Then, at the Miocene\u2013Pliocene boundary, the Strait of Gibraltar opened, and the Mediterranean refilled. That event is referred to as the \"Zanclean flood\".\nAlso during the early Miocene (specifically the Aquitanian and Burdigalian Stages), the apes first evolved, began diversifying, and became widespread throughout the Old World. Around the end of this epoch, the ancestors of humans had split away from the ancestors of the chimpanzees and had begun following their own evolutionary path during the final Messinian Stage (7.5\u20135.3 Ma) of the Miocene. As in the Oligocene before it, grasslands continued to expand, and forests to dwindle. In the seas of the Miocene, kelp forests made their first appearance and soon became one of Earth's most productive ecosystems.\nThe plants and animals of the Miocene were recognizably modern. Mammals and birds were well established. Whales, pinnipeds, and kelp spread.\nThe Miocene is of particular interest to geologists and palaeoclimatologists because major phases of the geology of the Himalaya occurred during that epoch, affecting monsoonal patterns in Asia, which were interlinked with glacial periods in the northern hemisphere.\nSubdivisions.\nThe Miocene faunal stages from youngest to oldest are typically named according to the International Commission on Stratigraphy:\nRegionally, other systems are used, based on characteristic land mammals; some of them overlap with the preceding Oligocene and following Pliocene Epochs:\nPaleogeography.\nContinents continued to drift toward their present positions. Of the modern geologic features, only the land bridge between South America and North America was absent, although South America was approaching the western subduction zone in the Pacific Ocean, causing both the rise of the Andes and a southward extension of the Meso-American peninsula.\nMountain building took place in western North America, Europe, and East Asia. Both continental and marine Miocene deposits are common worldwide with marine outcrops common near modern shorelines. Well studied continental exposures occur in the North American Great Plains and in Argentina.\nThe global trend was towards increasing aridity caused primarily by global cooling reducing the ability of the atmosphere to absorb moisture, particularly after 7 to 8 million years ago. Uplift of East Africa in the late Miocene was partly responsible for the shrinking of tropical rain forests in that region, and Australia got drier as it entered a zone of low rainfall in the Late Miocene.\nEurasia.\nThe Indian Plate continued to collide with the Eurasian Plate, creating new mountain ranges and uplifting the Tibetan Plateau, resulting in the rain shadowing and aridification of the Asian interior. The Tian Shan experienced significant uplift in the Late Miocene, blocking westerlies from coming into the Tarim Basin and drying it as a result.\nAt the beginning of the Miocene, the northern margin of the Arabian plate, then part of the African landmass, collided with Eurasia; as a result, the Tethys seaway continued to shrink and then disappeared as Africa collided with Eurasia in the Turkish\u2013Arabian region. The first step of this closure occurred 20 Ma, reducing water mass exchange by 90%, while the second step occurred around 13.8 Ma, coincident with a major expansion of Antarctic glaciers. This severed the connection between the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea and formed the present land connection between Afro-Arabia and Eurasia. The subsequent uplift of mountains in the western Mediterranean region and a global fall in sea levels combined to cause a temporary drying up of the Mediterranean Sea (known as the Messinian salinity crisis) near the end of the Miocene.\nThe Paratethys underwent a significant transgression during the early Middle Miocene. Around 13.8 Ma, during a global sea level drop, the Eastern Paratethys was cut off from the global ocean by the closure of the B\u00e2rlad Strait, effectively turning it into a saltwater lake. From 13.8 to 13.36 Ma, an evaporite period similar to the later Messinian salinity crisis in the Mediterranean ensued in the Central Paratethys, cut off from sources of freshwater input by its separation from the Eastern Paratethys. From 13.36 to 12.65 Ma, the Central Paratethys was characterised by open marine conditions, before the reopening of the B\u00e2rlad Strait resulted in a shift to brackish-marine conditions in the Central Paratethys, causing the Badenian-Sarmatian Extinction Event. As a result of the B\u00e2rlad Strait's reopening, the lake levels of the Eastern Paratethys dropped as it once again became a sea.\nThe Fram Strait opened during the Miocene and acted as the only throughflow for Atlantic Water into the Arctic Ocean until the Quaternary period. Due to regional uplift of the continental shelf, this water could not move through the Barents Seaway in the Miocene.\nThe modern day Mekong Delta took shape after 8 Ma. Geochemistry of the Qiongdongnan Basin in the northern South China Sea indicates the Pearl River was a major source of sediment flux into the sea during the Early Miocene and was a major fluvial system as in the present.\nSouth America.\nDuring the Oligocene and Early Miocene, the coast of northern Brazil, Colombia, south-central Peru, central Chile and large swathes of inland Patagonia were subject to a marine transgression. The transgressions in the west coast of South America are thought to be caused by a regional phenomenon while the steadily rising central segment of the Andes represents an exception. While there are numerous registers of Oligocene\u2013Miocene transgressions around the world it is doubtful that these correlate.\nIt is thought that the Oligocene\u2013Miocene transgression in Patagonia could have temporarily linked the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, as inferred from the findings of marine invertebrate fossils of both Atlantic and Pacific affinity in La Cascada Formation. Connection would have occurred through narrow epicontinental seaways that formed channels in a dissected topography.\nThe Antarctic Plate started to subduct beneath South America 14 million years ago in the Miocene, forming the Chile Triple Junction. At first the Antarctic Plate subducted only in the southernmost tip of Patagonia, meaning that the Chile Triple Junction lay near the Strait of Magellan. As the southern part of Nazca Plate and the Chile Rise became consumed by subduction the more northerly regions of the Antarctic Plate begun to subduct beneath Patagonia so that the Chile Triple Junction advanced to the north over time. The asthenospheric window associated to the triple junction disturbed previous patterns of mantle convection beneath Patagonia inducing an uplift of ca. 1\u00a0km that reversed the Oligocene\u2013Miocene transgression.\nAs the southern Andes rose in the Middle Miocene (14\u201312 million years ago) the resulting rain shadow originated the Patagonian Desert to the east.\nAustralia.\nFar northern Australia was monsoonal during the Miocene. Although northern Australia is often believed to have been much wetter during the Miocene, this interpretation may be an artefact of preservation bias of riparian and lacustrine plants; this finding has itself been challenged by other papers. Western Australia, like today, was arid, particularly so during the Middle Miocene.\nClimate.\nClimates remained moderately warm, although the slow global cooling that eventually led to the Pleistocene glaciations continued. Although a long-term cooling trend was well underway, there is evidence of a warm period during the Miocene when the global climate rivalled that of the Oligocene. The climate of the Miocene has been suggested as a good analogue for future warmer climates caused by anthropogenic global warming, with this being especially true of the global climate during the Middle Miocene Climatic Optimum (MMCO), because the last time carbon dioxide levels were comparable to projected future atmospheric carbon dioxide levels resulting from anthropogenic climate change was during the MMCO. The Ross Sea margin of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet (EAIS) was highly dynamic during the Early Miocene.\nThe Miocene began with the Early Miocene Cool Event (Mi-1) around 23 million years ago, which marked the start of the Early Miocene Cool Interval (EMCI). This cool event occurred immediately after the Oligocene-Miocene Transition (OMT) during a major expansion of Antarctica's ice sheets, but was not associated with a significant drop in atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. Both continental and oceanic thermal gradients in mid-latitudes during the Early Miocene were very similar to those in the present. Global cooling caused the East Asian Summer Monsoon (EASM) to begin to take on its modern form during the Early Miocene. From 22.1 to 19.7 Ma, the Xining Basin experienced relative warmth and humidity amidst a broader aridification trend.\nThe EMCI ended 18 million years ago, giving way to the Middle Miocene Warm Interval (MMWI), the warmest part of which was the MMCO that began 16 million years ago. As the world transitioned into the MMCO, carbon dioxide concentrations varied between 300 and 500 ppm. Global annual mean surface temperature during the MMCO was about 18.4\u00a0\u00b0C. MMCO warmth was driven by the activity of the Columbia River Basalts and enhanced by decreased albedo from the reduction of deserts and expansion of forests. Climate modelling suggests additional, currently unknown, factors also worked to create the warm conditions of the MMCO. The MMCO saw the expansion of the tropical climatic zone to much larger than its current size. The July ITCZ, the zone of maximal monsoonal rainfall, moved to the north, increasing precipitation over southern China whilst simultaneously decreasing it over Indochina during the EASM. Western Australia was at this time characterised by exceptional aridity. In Antarctica, average summer temperatures on land reached 10\u00a0\u00b0C. In the oceans, the lysocline shoaled by approximately half of a kilometre during warm phases that corresponded to orbital eccentricity maxima. The MMCO ended around 14 million years ago, when global temperatures fell in the Middle Miocene Climate Transition (MMCT). Abrupt increases in opal deposition indicate this cooling was driven by enhanced drawdown of carbon dioxide via silicate weathering. The MMCT caused a sea surface temperature (SST) drop of approximately 6\u00a0\u00b0C in the North Atlantic. The drop in benthic foraminiferal \u03b418O values was most noticeable in the waters around Antarctica, suggesting cooling was most intense there. Around this time the Mi3b glacial event (a massive expansion of Antarctic glaciers) occurred. The East Antarctic Ice Sheet (EAIS) markedly stabilised following the MMCT. The intensification of glaciation caused a decoherence of sediment deposition from the 405 kyr eccentricity cycle. \nThe MMWI ended about 11 Ma, when the Late Miocene Cool Interval (LMCI) started. A major but transient warming occurred around 10.8-10.7 Ma. During the Late Miocene, the Earth's climate began to display a high degree of similarity to that of the present day. The 173 kyr obliquity modulation cycle governed by Earth's interactions with Saturn became detectable in the Late Miocene. By 12 Ma, Oregon was a savanna akin to that of the western margins of the Sierra Nevada of northern California. Central Australia became progressively drier, although southwestern Australia experienced significant wettening from around 12 to 8 Ma. The South Asian Winter Monsoon (SAWM) underwent strengthening ~9.2\u20138.5\u202fMa. From 7.9 to 5.8 Ma, the East Asian Winter Monsoon (EAWM) became stronger synchronously with a southward shift of the subarctic front. Greenland may have begun to have large glaciers as early as 8 to 7 Ma, although the climate for the most part remained warm enough to support forests there well into the Pliocene. Zhejiang, China was noticeably more humid than today. In the Great Rift Valley of Kenya, there was a gradual and progressive trend of increasing aridification, though it was not unidirectional, and wet humid episodes continued to occur. Between 7 and 5.3 Ma, temperatures dropped sharply again in the Late Miocene Cooling (LMC), most likely as a result of a decline in atmospheric carbon dioxide and a drop in the amplitude of Earth's obliquity, and the Antarctic ice sheet was approaching its present-day size and thickness. Ocean temperatures plummeted to near-modern values during the LMC; extratropical sea surface temperatures dropped substantially by approximately 7\u20139\u00a0\u00b0C. 41 kyr obliquity cycles became the dominant orbital climatic control 7.7 Ma and this dominance strengthened 6.4 Ma. Benthic \u03b418O values show significant glaciation occurred from 6.26 to 5.50 Ma, during which glacial-interglacial cycles were governed by the 41 kyr obliquity cycle. A major reorganisation of the carbon cycle occurred approximately 6 Ma, causing continental carbon reservoirs to no longer expand during cold spells, as they had done during cold periods in the Oligocene and most of the Miocene. At the end of the Miocene, global temperatures rose again as the amplitude of Earth's obliquity increased, which caused increased aridity in Central Asia. Around 5.5 Ma, the EAWM underwent a period of rapid intensification.\nLife.\nLife during the Miocene Epoch was mostly supported by the two newly formed biomes, kelp forests and grasslands. Grasslands allow for more grazers, such as horses, rhinoceroses, and hippos. Ninety-five percent of modern plants existed by the end of this epoch. Modern bony fish genera were established. A modern-style latitudinal biodiversity gradient appeared ~15 Ma.\nFlora.\nThe coevolution of gritty, fibrous, fire-tolerant grasses and long-legged gregarious ungulates with high-crowned teeth, led to a major expansion of grass-grazer ecosystems. Herds of large, swift grazers were hunted by predators across broad sweeps of open grasslands, displacing desert, woodland, and browsers.\nThe higher organic content and water retention of the deeper and richer grassland soils, with long-term burial of carbon in sediments, produced a carbon and water vapor sink. This, combined with higher surface albedo and lower evapotranspiration of grassland, contributed to a cooler, drier climate. C4 grasses, which are able to assimilate carbon dioxide and water more efficiently than C3 grasses, expanded to become ecologically significant near the end of the Miocene between 6 and 7 million years ago, although they did not expand northward during the Late Miocene. The expansion of grasslands and radiations among terrestrial herbivores correlates to fluctuations in CO2. One study, however, has attributed the expansion of grasslands not to a CO2 drop but to the increasing seasonality and aridity, coupled with a monsoon climate, which made wildfires highly prevalent compared to before. The Late Miocene expansion of grasslands had cascading effects on the global carbon cycle, evidenced by the imprint it left in carbon isotope records.\nCycads between 11.5 and 5 million years ago began to rediversify after previous declines in variety due to climatic changes, and thus modern cycads are not a good model for a \"living fossil\". Eucalyptus fossil leaves occur in the Miocene of New Zealand, where the genus is not native today, but have been introduced from Australia.\nFauna.\nBoth marine and continental fauna were fairly modern, although marine mammals were less numerous. Only in isolated South America and Australia did widely divergent fauna exist.\nIn Eurasia, genus richness shifted southward to lower latitudes from the Early to the Middle Miocene. Europe's large mammal diversity significantly declined during the Late Miocene.\nIn the Early Miocene, several Oligocene groups were still diverse, including nimravids, entelodonts, and three-toed equids. As in the previous Oligocene Epoch, oreodonts were still diverse, only to disappear in the earliest Pliocene. During the later Miocene mammals were more modern, with easily recognizable canids, bears, red pandas, procyonids, equids, beavers, deer, camelids, and whales, along with now-extinct groups like borophagine canids, certain gomphotheres, three-toed horses, and hornless rhinos like \"Teleoceras\" and \"Aphelos.\" The late Miocene also marks the extinction of the last-surviving members of the hyaenodonts. Islands began to form between South and North America in the Late Miocene, allowing ground sloths like \"Thinobadistes\" to island-hop to North America. The expansion of silica-rich C4 grasses led to worldwide extinctions of herbivorous species without high-crowned teeth. Mustelids diversified into their largest forms as terrestrial predators like \"Ekorus\", \"Eomellivora\", and \"Megalictis\" and bunodont otters like \"Enhydriodon\" and \"Sivaonyx\" appeared. Eulipotyphlans were widespread in Europe, being less diverse in Southern Europe than farther north due to the aridity of the former.\nUnequivocally-recognizable dabbling ducks, plovers, typical owls, cockatoos and crows appear during the Miocene. By the epoch's end, all or almost all modern bird groups are believed to have been present; the few post-Miocene bird fossils which cannot be placed in the evolutionary tree with full confidence are simply too badly preserved, rather than too equivocal in character. Marine birds reached their highest diversity ever in the course of this epoch.\nThe youngest representatives of Choristodera, an extinct order of aquatic reptiles that first appeared in the Middle Jurassic, are known from the Miocene of Europe, belonging to the genus \"Lazarussuchus,\" which had been the only known surviving genus of the group since the beginning of the Eocene.\nThe last known representatives of the archaic primitive mammal order Meridiolestida, which dominated South America during the Late Cretaceous, are known from the Miocene of Patagonia, represented by the mole-like \"Necrolestes.\"\nThe youngest known representatives of metatherians (the broader grouping to which marsupials belong) in Europe, Asia and Africa are known from the Miocene, including the European herpetotheriid \"Amphiperatherium,\" the peradectids \"Siamoperadectes\" and \"Sinoperadectes\" from Asia, and the possible herpetotheriid \"Morotodon\" from the late Early Miocene of Uganda.\nApproximately 100 species of apes lived during this time, ranging throughout Africa, Asia and Europe and varying widely in size, diet, and anatomy. Due to scanty fossil evidence it is unclear which ape or apes contributed to the modern hominid clade, but molecular evidence indicates this ape lived between 18 and 13 million years ago. The first hominins (bipedal apes of the human lineage) appeared in Africa at the very end of the Miocene, including \"Sahelanthropus\", \"Orrorin\", and an early form of \"Ardipithecus\" (\"A. kadabba\"). The chimpanzee\u2013human divergence is thought to have occurred at this time. The evolution of bipedalism in apes at the end of the Miocene instigated an increased rate of faunal turnover in Africa. In contrast, European apes met their end at the end of the Miocene due to increased habitat uniformity.\nThe expansion of grasslands in North America also led to an explosive radiation among snakes. Previously, snakes were a minor component of the North American fauna, but during the Miocene, the number of species and their prevalence increased dramatically with the first appearances of vipers and elapids in North America and the significant diversification of Colubridae (including the origin of many modern genera such as \"Nerodia\", \"Lampropeltis\", \"Pituophis\" and \"Pantherophis\").\nArthropods were abundant, including in areas such as Tibet where they have traditionally been thought to be undiverse. Neoisopterans diversified and expanded into areas they previously were absent from, such as Madagascar and Australia.\nOceanic.\nIn the oceans, brown algae, called kelp, proliferated, supporting new species of sea life, including otters, fish and various invertebrates.\nCorals suffered a significant local decline along the northeastern coast of Australia during the Tortonian, most likely due to warming seawater.\nCetaceans attained their greatest diversity during the Miocene, with over 20 recognized genera of baleen whales in comparison to only six living genera. This diversification correlates with emergence of gigantic macro-predators such as megatoothed sharks and raptorial sperm whales. Prominent examples are \"O. megalodon\" and \"L. melvillei\". Other notable large sharks were \"O. chubutensis\", \"Isurus hastalis\", and \"Hemipristis serra\".\nCrocodilians also showed signs of diversification during the Miocene. The largest form among them was a gigantic caiman \"Purussaurus\" which inhabited South America. Another gigantic form was a false gharial \"Rhamphosuchus\", which inhabited modern age India. A strange form, \"Mourasuchus\" also thrived alongside \"Purussaurus\". This species developed a specialized filter-feeding mechanism, and it likely preyed upon small fauna despite its gigantic size.\nThe youngest members of Sebecidae, a clade of large terrestrial predatory crocodyliformes distantly related to modern crocodilians, from which they likely diverged over 180 million years ago, are known from the Miocene of South America.\nThe last Desmostylians thrived during this period before becoming the only extinct marine mammal order.\nThe pinnipeds, which appeared near the end of the Oligocene, became more aquatic. A prominent genus was \"Allodesmus\". A ferocious walrus, \"Pelagiarctos\" may have preyed upon other species of pinnipeds including \"Allodesmus\".\nFurthermore, South American waters witnessed the arrival of \"Megapiranha paranensis\", which were considerably larger than modern age piranhas.\nNew Zealand's Miocene fossil record is particularly rich. Marine deposits showcase a variety of cetaceans and penguins, illustrating the evolution of both groups into modern representatives. The early Miocene Saint Bathans Fauna is the only Cenozoic terrestrial fossil record of the landmass, showcasing a wide variety of not only bird species, including early representatives of clades such as moa, kiwi and adzebills, but also a diverse herpetofauna of sphenodontians, crocodiles and turtles as well as a rich terrestrial mammal fauna composed of various species of bats and the enigmatic Saint Bathans Mammal.\nMicrobiota.\nMicrobial life in the igneous crust of the Fennoscandian Shield shifted from being dominated by methanogens to being primarily composed of sulphate-reducing prokaryotes. The change resulted from fracture reactivation during the Pyrenean-Alpine orogeny, enabling sulphate-reducing microbes to permeate into the Fennoscandian Shield via descending surficial waters.\nDiatom diversity was inversely correlated with carbon dioxide levels and global temperatures during the Miocene. Most modern lineages of diatoms appeared by the Late Miocene.\nOceans.\nThere is evidence from oxygen isotopes at Deep Sea Drilling Program sites that ice began to build up in Antarctica about 36 Ma during the Eocene. Further marked decreases in temperature during the Middle Miocene at 15 Ma probably reflect increased ice growth in Antarctica. It can therefore be assumed that East Antarctica had some glaciers during the early to mid Miocene (23\u201315 Ma). Oceans cooled partly due to the formation of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, and about 15 million years ago the ice cap in the Southern Hemisphere started to grow to its present form. The Greenland ice cap developed later, in the Middle Pliocene time, about 3 million years ago.\nMiddle Miocene disruption.\nThe \"Middle Miocene disruption\" refers to a wave of extinctions of terrestrial and aquatic life forms that occurred following the Miocene Climatic Optimum (18 to 16 Ma), around 14.8 to 14.5 million years ago, during the Langhian Stage of the mid-Miocene. A major and permanent cooling step occurred between 14.8 and 14.1 Ma, associated with increased production of cold Antarctic deep waters and a major expansion of the East Antarctic ice sheet. The closure of the Indonesian Throughflow, which caused an accumulation of warm water in the western Pacific that then spread eastward and reduced upwelling in the eastern Pacific, may also have been responsible. A Middle Miocene \u03b418O increase, that is, a relative increase in the heavier isotope of oxygen, has been noted in the Pacific, the Southern Ocean and the South Atlantic. Barium and uranium became enriched in seafloor sediments.\nImpact event.\nA large impact event occurred either during the Miocene (23\u20135.3\u00a0Ma) or the Pliocene (5.3\u20132.6\u00a0Ma). The event formed the Karakul crater (52\u00a0km diameter) in Tajikistan, which is estimated to have an age of less than 23\u00a0Ma or less than 5\u00a0Ma.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19012", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19012", "title": "Monarch", "text": "Person at the head of a monarchy\nA monarch () is a head of state for life or until abdication, and therefore the head of state of a monarchy. A monarch usually exercises the highest authority and power in the state. Usually, a monarch either personally inherits the lawful right to exercise the state's sovereign rights (often referred to as \"the throne\" or \"the crown\") or is selected by an established process from a family or cohort eligible to provide the nation's monarch. Alternatively, an individual may proclaim oneself monarch, or even usurp power, as many Ancient Greek tyrants did. If a young child is crowned the monarch, then a regent is often appointed to govern until the monarch reaches the requisite adult age to rule.\nCharacteristics.\nMonarchs, as such, bear a variety of titles \u2013 king or queen, prince or princess (e.g., Sovereign Prince of Monaco), emperor or empress (e.g., Emperor of China, Emperor of Ethiopia, Emperor of Japan, Emperor of India), archduke, duke or grand duke (e.g., Grand Duke of Luxembourg), emir (e.g., Emir of Qatar), sultan (e.g., Sultan of Oman), or pharaoh.\nMonarchy is political or sociocultural in nature, and is generally (but not always) associated with hereditary rule. Most monarchs, both historically and in the present day, have been born and brought up within a royal family (whose rule over a period of time is referred to as a dynasty) and trained for future duties. Different systems of succession have been used, such as proximity of blood (male preference or absolute), primogeniture, agnatic seniority, Salic law, etc. While traditionally most monarchs have been male, female monarchs have also ruled, and the term queen regnant refers to a ruling monarch, as distinct from a queen consort, the wife of a reigning king.\nIn an elective monarchy, the monarch is elected but otherwise serves as any other monarch. Historical examples of elective monarchy include the Holy Roman Emperors (chosen by prince-electors, but often coming from the same dynasty) and the free election of kings of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. Modern examples include the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (lit. \"He Who is Made Lord') of Malaysia, who is appointed by the Conference of Rulers every five years or after the king's death, and the pope of the Roman Catholic Church, who serves as sovereign of the Vatican City State and is elected to a life term by the College of Cardinals.\nIn recent centuries, many states have abolished the monarchy and become republics. Advocacy of government by a republic is called republicanism, while advocacy of monarchy is called monarchism. A principal advantage of hereditary monarchy is the immediate continuity of national leadership, as illustrated in the classic phrase \"The [old] King is dead. Long live the [new] King!\". In cases where the monarch serves mostly as a ceremonial figure (e.g., most modern constitutional monarchies), real leadership does not depend on the monarch.\nSuccession.\nHereditary succession within one patrilineal family has been most common (but see the Rain Queen), with a preference for children over siblings, and sons over daughters. In Europe, some people practiced equal division of land and regalian rights among sons or brothers, as in the Germanic states of the Holy Roman Empire, until after the medieval era and sometimes (e.g., Ernestine duchies) into the 19th century. Other European realms practiced one or another form of primogeniture, in which a lord was succeeded by his eldest son or, if he had none, by his brother, his daughters or sons of daughters.\nThe system of tanistry practiced among Celtic tribes was semi-elective and gave weight also to ability and merit.\nThe Salic law, practiced in France and in the Italian territories of the House of Savoy, stipulated that only men could inherit the crown. In most fiefs, in the event of the demise of all legitimate male members of the patrilineage, a female of the family could succeed (semi-Salic law). In most realms, daughters and sisters were eligible to succeed a ruling kinsman before more distant male relatives (male-preference primogeniture), but sometimes the husband of the heiress became the ruler, and most often also received the title, \"jure uxoris\". Spain today continues this model of succession law, in the form of cognatic primogeniture. In more complex medieval cases, the sometimes conflicting principles of proximity and primogeniture battled, and outcomes were often idiosyncratic.\nAs the average life span increased, the eldest son was more likely to reach majority age before the death of his father, and primogeniture became increasingly favored over proximity, tanistry, seniority, and election.\nIn 1980, Sweden became the first monarchy to declare \"equal primogeniture\", \"absolute primogeniture\" or \"full cognatic primogeniture\", meaning that the eldest child of the monarch, whether female or male, ascends to the throne. Other nations have since adopted this practice: Netherlands in 1983, Norway in 1990, Belgium in 1991, Denmark in 2009, and Luxembourg in 2011. The United Kingdom adopted absolute (equal) primogeniture on April 25, 2013, following agreement by the prime ministers of the sixteen Commonwealth Realms at the 22nd Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.\nIn some monarchies, such as Saudi Arabia, succession to the throne usually first passes to the monarch's next eldest brother and so on through his other brothers, and only after them to the monarch's children (\"agnatic seniority\"). In some other monarchies (e.g., Jordan), the monarch chooses who will be his successor within the royal family, who need not necessarily be his eldest son.\nLastly, some monarchies are elective (UAE, Malaysia, Holy See and Cambodia), meaning that the monarch is elected instead of assuming office due to direct inheritance. Rules and laws regarding election vary country to country.\nWhatever the rules of succession, there have been many cases of a monarch being overthrown and replaced by a usurper who would often install his own family on the throne.\nExamples of monarchs.\nA series of pharaohs ruled Ancient Egypt over the course of three millennia (c.\u20093150 BC to 31 BC) until it was conquered by the Roman Empire.\nAs part of the Scramble for Africa, seven European countries invaded and colonized most of the African continent.\nThe concept of monarchy existed in the Americas long before the arrival of European colonialists. When the Europeans arrived they referred to these tracts of land within territories of different aboriginal groups to be kingdoms, and the leaders of these groups were often referred to by the Europeans as Kings, particularly hereditary leaders.\nThe first local monarch to emerge in North America after colonization was Jean-Jacques Dessalines, who declared himself Emperor of Haiti on September 22, 1804. Haiti again had an emperor, Faustin I from 1849 to 1859. In South America, Brazil had a royal house ruling as emperor between 1822 and 1889, under emperors Pedro I and Pedro II.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "19013", "revid": "50464812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19013", "title": "Monarchy", "text": "Form of government ruled by a monarch, or a polity with this form of government\nA monarchy is a hereditary form of government in which political power is legally passed on to the family members of the monarch, a head of state who rules for life. While monarchs gain their power depending on specific succession laws, they can also gain their authority via election.\nMonarchies were the most common form of government until the 20th century, when republics replaced many monarchies, notably at the end of World War I. As of 2025[ [update]], forty-three sovereign nations in the world have a monarch, including fifteen Commonwealth realms that share King Charles III as their head of state. Other than that, there is a range of sub-national monarchical entities. Most of the modern monarchies are constitutional monarchies, retaining under a constitution unique legal and ceremonial roles for monarchs exercising limited or no political power, similar to heads of state in a parliamentary republic.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"monarch\" first appeared in the mid-15th century as monark, meaning \u201ca supreme governor for life, a sole or autocratic ruler of a state.\u201d It comes from the Old French monarche (14th century, Modern French monarque) and directly from the Late Latin monarcha, which in turn derives from the Greek monarkh\u0113s, meaning \u201cone who rules alone\u201d (see monarchy). The term \"monarchy\" dates back to the mid-14th century, when it referred to a kingdom or territory ruled by a monarch, and by the late 14th century it also meant rule by a single person with supreme power. It comes from Old French monarchie (13th century), meaning \u201csovereignty\u201d or \u201cabsolute power,\u201d which was borrowed from Late Latin monarchia and ultimately from Greek monarkhia, \u201cabsolute rule,\u201d literally \u201cruling of one,\u201d from monos (\u201calone\u201d) and arkhein (\u201cto rule\u201d).\nHistory.\nThe similar form of societal hierarchy known as chiefdom or tribal kingship is prehistoric. Chiefdoms provided the concept of state formation, which started with civilizations such as Mesopotamia, Ancient Egypt and the Indus Valley civilization. In some parts of the world, chiefdoms became monarchies. Some of the oldest recorded and evidenced monarchies were Narmer, Pharaoh of Ancient Egypt c.\u20093100 BCE, and Enmebaragesi, a Sumerian King of Kish c.\u20092600 BCE.\nFrom the earliest records, monarchs could be directly hereditary, while others were elected from among eligible members. With the Egyptian, Chinese, Indian, Mesopotamian, Sudanic, reconstructed Proto-Indo-European religion, and others, the monarch held sacral functions directly connected to sacrifice and was sometimes identified with having divine ancestry, possibly establishing a notion of the divine right of kings.\nPolybius identified monarchy as one of three \"benign\" basic forms of government (monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy), opposed to the three \"malignant\" basic forms of government (tyranny, oligarchy, and ochlocracy). The monarch in classical antiquity is often identified as \"king\" or \"ruler\" (translating \"archon\", \"basileus\", \"rex\", \"tyrannos\", etc.) or as \"queen\" (\"basilinna\", \"basilissa\", \"basileia\" or \"basilis\"; \"regina\"). Polybius originally understood monarchy as a component of republics, but since antiquity monarchy has contrasted with forms of republic, where executive power is wielded by free citizens and their assemblies. The 4th-century BCE Hindu text \"Arthasastra\" laid out the ethics of monarchism. In antiquity, some monarchies were abolished in favour of such assemblies in Rome (Roman Republic, 509 BCE), and Athens (Athenian democracy, 500 BCE).\nBy the 17th century, monarchy was challenged by evolving parliamentarism e.g. through regional assemblies (such as the Icelandic Commonwealth, the Swiss \"Landsgemeinde\" and later \"Tagsatzung\", and the High Medieval communal movement linked to the rise of medieval town privileges) and by modern anti-monarchism e.g. of the temporary overthrow of the English monarchy by the Parliament of England in 1649, the American Revolution of 1776 and the French Revolution of 1789. One of many opponents of that trend was Elizabeth Dawbarn, whose anonymous \"Dialogue between Clara Neville and Louisa Mills, on Loyalty\" (1794) features \"silly Louisa, who admires liberty, Tom Paine and the US, [who is] lectured by Clara on God's approval of monarchy\" and on the influence women can exert on men.\nSince then advocacy of the abolition of a monarchy or respectively of republics has been called republicanism, while the advocacy of monarchies is called monarchism. As such republics have become the opposing and alternative form of government to monarchy, despite some having seen infringements through lifelong or even hereditary heads of state, such as in North Korea.\nWith the rise of republicanism, a diverse division between republicanism developed in the 19th-century politics (such as anti-monarchist radicalism) and conservative or even reactionary monarchism. In the following 20th century many countries abolished the monarchy and became republics, especially in the wake of World War I and World War II.\nToday forty-three sovereign nations in the world have a monarch, including fifteen Commonwealth realms that have Charles III as the head of state. Most modern monarchs are constitutional monarchs, who retain a unique legal and ceremonial role but exercise limited or no political power under a constitution. Many are so-called crowned republics, surviving particularly in small states.\nIn some nations, however, such as Morocco, Qatar, Liechtenstein, and Thailand, the hereditary monarch has more political influence than any other single source of authority in the state.\nAccording to a 2020 study, monarchy arose as a system of governance because of an efficiency in governing large populations and expansive territories during periods when coordinating such populations was difficult. The authors argue that monarchy declined as an efficient regime type with innovations in communications and transportation technology, as the efficiency of monarchy relative to other regime types declined.\nAccording to a 2023 study, monarchy has persisted as a regime type because it can accommodate demands for democratization better than other forms of autocratic rule: \"Monarchies can democratize without destabilizing the leadership through transitioning to a democratic constitutional monarchy. The prospect of retaining the ruler appeals to opposition groups who value both democracy and stability, but it also has implications for their ability to organize and sustain mass protest.\"\nCharacteristics and role.\nMonarchies are associated with hereditary reign, in which monarchs reign for life and the responsibilities and power of the position pass to their child or another member of their family when they die. Most monarchs, both historically and in the modern-day, have been born and brought up within a royal family, the centre of the royal household and court. Growing up in a royal family (called a dynasty when it continues for several generations), future monarchs are often trained for their expected future responsibilities as monarch.\nDifferent systems of hereditary succession have been used, such as proximity of blood, primogeniture, and agnatic seniority (Salic law). While most monarchs in history have been male, many female monarchs also have reigned. The term \"queen regnant\" refers to a ruling monarch, while \"queen consort\" refers to the wife of a reigning king. Rule may be hereditary in practice without being considered a monarchy: there have been some family dictatorships (and also political families) in many democracies.\nSome monarchies are not hereditary. In an elective monarchy, monarchs are elected or appointed by some body (an electoral college) for life or a defined period. Four elective monarchies exist today: Cambodia, Malaysia and the United Arab Emirates are 20th-century creations, while one (the papacy) is ancient.\nA self-proclaimed monarchy is established when a person claims the monarchy without any historical ties to a previous dynasty. There are examples of republican leaders who have proclaimed themselves monarchs: Napoleon I of France declared himself Emperor of the French and ruled the First French Empire after having held the title of First Consul of the French Republic for five years from his seizing power in the coup of 18 Brumaire. President Jean-B\u00e9del Bokassa of the Central African Republic declared himself Emperor of the Central African Empire in 1976. Yuan Shikai, the first formal President of the Republic of China, crowned himself Emperor of the short-lived \"Empire of China\" a few years after the Republic of China was founded.\nSuccession.\nHereditary monarchies.\nIn a hereditary monarchy, the position of monarch is inherited according to a statutory or customary order of succession, usually within one royal family tracing its origin through a historical dynasty or bloodline. This usually means that the heir to the throne is known well in advance of becoming monarch to ensure a smooth succession.\nPrimogeniture, in which the eldest child of the monarch is first in line to become monarch, is the most common system in hereditary monarchy. The order of succession is usually affected by rules on gender. Historically \"agnatic primogeniture\" or \"patrilineal primogeniture\" was favoured, that is inheritance according to seniority of birth among the sons of a monarch or head of family, with sons and their male issue inheriting before brothers and their male issue, to the total exclusion of females and descendants through females from succession. This complete exclusion of females from dynastic succession is commonly referred to as application of the Salic law. Another variation on agnatic primogeniture was the so-called semi-Salic law, or \"agnatic-cognatic primogeniture\", which allowed women to succeed only at the extinction of all the male descendants in the male line of the particular legislator.\nBefore primogeniture was enshrined in European law and tradition, kings would often secure the succession by having their successor (usually their eldest son) crowned during their own lifetime, so for a time there would be two kings in coregency\u2014a senior king and a junior king. Examples were Henry the Young King of England and the early Direct Capetians in France. Sometimes, however, primogeniture can operate through the female line.\nIn 1980, Sweden became the first monarchy to declare equal (full cognatic) primogeniture, meaning that the eldest child of the monarch, whether female or male, ascends to the throne. Other kingdoms (such as the Netherlands in 1983, Norway in 1990, Belgium in 1991, Denmark in 2009, and Luxembourg in 2011) have since followed suit. The United Kingdom adopted absolute (equal) primogeniture (subject to the claims of existing heirs) on April 25, 2013, following agreement by the prime ministers of the sixteen Commonwealth Realms at the 22nd Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.\nOther hereditary systems of succession included tanistry, which is semi-elective and gives weight to merit and Agnatic seniority. In some monarchies, such as Saudi Arabia, succession to the throne first passes to the monarch's next eldest brother, and only after that to the monarch's children (agnatic seniority). On June 21, 2017, King Salman of Saudi Arabi revolted against this style of monarchy and elected his son to inherit the throne.\nElective monarchies.\nIn an elective monarchy, monarchs are elected or appointed by somebody (an electoral college) for life or a defined period, but then reign like any other monarch. There is no popular vote involved in elective monarchies, as the elective body usually consists of a small number of eligible people. Historical examples of elective monarchy are the Holy Roman Emperors (chosen by prince-electors but often coming from the same dynasty) and the free election of kings of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. For example, Pepin the Short (father of Charlemagne) was elected King of the Franks by an assembly of Frankish leading men; nobleman Stanis\u0142aw August Poniatowski of Poland was an elected king, as was Frederick I of Denmark. Gallic and Germanic peoples also had elective monarchies.\nThe Pope of the Roman Catholic Church (who rules as Sovereign of the Vatican City State) is elected for life by the College of Cardinals. In the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, the Prince and Grand Master is elected for life tenure by the Council Complete of State from within its members. In Malaysia, the federal king, called the Yang di-Pertuan Agong or Paramount Ruler, is elected for a five-year term from among and by the hereditary rulers (mostly sultans) of nine of the federation's constitutive states, all on the Malay peninsula. The United Arab Emirates also chooses its federal leaders from among emirs of the federated states. Furthermore, Andorra has a unique constitutional arrangement as one of its heads of state is the President of the French Republic in the form of a Co-Prince. In New Zealand, the Maori King, head of the Kingitanga Movement, is elected by a council of Maori elders at the funeral of their predecessor, which is also where their coronation takes place. All of the Heads of the Maori King Movement have been descendants of the first Maori King, Potatau Te Wherowhero, who was elected and became King in June 1858.\nUsurpation.\nAnother way monarchs have historically gained royal power is by seizing it, either by force or other illegitimate measures. Historically usurpation has usually happened via a coup or by fraudulently claiming be a descendant of a ruler that they may or may not be related to. According to Herodotus, this was done by someone impersonating Smerdis in order to seize the throne of Cyrus the Great after his death.\nOther ways of succession.\nBy accession.\nThe legitimacy and authorities of monarchs are often proclaimed and recognized through occupying and being invested with insignia, seats, deeds and titles, like in the course of coronations.\nThis is especially employed to legitimize and settle disputed successions, changes in ways of succession, status of a monarch (e.g. as in the case of the \"privilegium maius\" deed) or new monarchies altogether (e.g. as in the case of the coronation of Napoleon I).\nSuccession crisis.\nIn cases of succession challenges, it can be instrumental for pretenders to secure or install legitimacy through the above, for example proof of accession like insignia, through treaties or a claim of a divine mandate to rule (e.g. by Hong Xiuquan and his Taiping Heavenly Kingdom).\nCurrent monarchies.\nCurrently, there are several countries in the world with a monarch as head of state. They fall roughly into the following categories:\nCommonwealth realms.\nKing Charles III is, separately, monarch of fifteen Commonwealth realms (Antigua and Barbuda, the Commonwealth of Australia, the Commonwealth of the Bahamas, Belize, Canada, Grenada, Jamaica, New Zealand, the Independent State of Papua New Guinea, the Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the Solomon Islands, Tuvalu and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland). They evolved out of the British Empire into fully independent states within the Commonwealth of Nations that retain the King as head of state.\nOther European constitutional monarchies.\nThe Principality of Andorra, the Kingdom of Belgium, the Kingdom of Denmark, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Kingdom of Norway, the Kingdom of Spain, and the Kingdom of Sweden are fully democratic states in which the monarch has a limited or largely ceremonial role.\nAndorra is unique among all existing monarchies, as it is a diarchy, with the co-princes being shared by the president of France and the bishop of Urgell.\nEuropean semi-constitutional monarchies.\nA semi-constitutional monarchy is a monarchy where the monarch rules according to a democratic constitution but still retains substantial powers. The Principality of Liechtenstein and the Principality of Monaco are European semi-constitutional monarchies. For example, the 2003 Constitution referendum gave the Prince of Liechtenstein the power to veto any law that the \"Landtag\" (parliament) proposes, while the Landtag can veto any law that the Prince tries to pass. The prince can appoint or dismiss any elective member or government employee. The prince of Monaco has simpler powers; he cannot appoint or dismiss any elective member or government employee to or from his or her post, but he can elect the minister of state, government council and judges.\nMonarchies in the Muslim world.\nThe monarchies of the Kingdom of Bahrain, the Brunei Darussalam, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, the State of Kuwait, Malaysia, the Kingdom of Morocco, the Sultanate of Oman, the State of Qatar, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates generally retain far more powers than their European or Commonwealth counterparts. Brunei, Oman, and Saudi Arabia are absolute monarchies; Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar and United Arab Emirates are classified as mixed, meaning there are representative bodies but the monarch retains most of his powers. Jordan, Malaysia, and Morocco are constitutional monarchies.\nEast and Southeast Asian constitutional monarchies.\nThe Kingdom of Bhutan, the Kingdom of Cambodia, the Kingdom of Thailand, and Japan are constitutional monarchies where the monarch has a limited or merely ceremonial role. Bhutan made the change in 2008. Cambodia had its own monarchy after independence from the French colonial empire, but it was deposed after the Khmer Rouge came into power. The monarchy was subsequently restored in the peace agreement of 1993. Thailand transitioned into a constitutional monarchy over the course of the 20th century. Japan has had a monarchy, an emperor, according to legend, since Emperor Jimmu (reigned 660\u2013585 BCE), making it the world's oldest existing monarchy. After their defeat in the Second World War, Japan was forced into limiting the power of the Emperor, giving almost all of it to the National Diet.\nOther monarchies.\nEswatini is unique among these monarchies, often being considered a diarchy: the King, or Ngwenyama, rules alongside his mother, the Ndlovukati, as dual heads of state. This was originally intended to provide a check on political power. The Ngwenyama, however, is considered the administrative head of state, while the Ndlovukati is considered the spiritual and national head of state, a position which more or less has become symbolic in recent years.\nThe Pope is the absolute monarch of the Vatican City State (a separate entity from the Holy See) by virtue of his position as head of the Roman Catholic Church and Bishop of Rome; he is an elected rather than a hereditary ruler, and does not have to be a citizen of the territory prior to his election by the cardinals.\nIn Samoa, the position of head of state is described in Part III of the 1960 Samoan constitution. At the time the constitution was adopted, it was anticipated that future heads of state would be chosen from among the four Tama a 'Aiga \"royal\" paramount chiefs. However, this is not required by the constitution, and, for this reason, Samoa can be considered a republic rather than a constitutional monarchy. However, each member of the Samoan parliament, except for the two seats reserved for non-Samoans, must be a \"matai\", a member of the hereditary political system known as the Fa\u02bbamatai.\nThe ruling Kim family in North Korea (Kim Il Sung, Kim Jong Il and Kim Jong Un) has been described as a \"de facto\" absolute monarchy or a \"hereditary dictatorship\". In 2013, Clause 2 of Article 10 of the new edited Ten Fundamental Principles of the Korean Workers' Party states that the party and revolution must be carried \"eternally\" by the \"Baekdu (Kim's) bloodline\". This though does not mean it is a \"de jure\" absolute monarchy, as the country's official name is the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The al-Assad family, which ruled Syria from 1971 to 2024, was similarly categorised as such.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19014", "revid": "26937909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19014", "title": "Musical Genres/Hip", "text": ""}
{"id": "19015", "revid": "26937909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19015", "title": "Musical Genres/Rap", "text": ""}
{"id": "19016", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19016", "title": "Musical Genres/Hip Hop", "text": ""}
{"id": "19018", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19018", "title": "Mouthpiece", "text": "Mouthpiece may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "19019", "revid": "49793640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19019", "title": "Mr. T", "text": "American actor and former professional wrestler (born 1952)\nMr. T (born Laurence Tureaud; May 21, 1952) is an American actor and retired professional wrestler. He is known for his roles as B. A. Baracus in the 1980s television series \"The A-Team\" and as boxer Clubber Lang in the 1982 film \"Rocky III\". He is also known for his distinctive hairstyle inspired by Mandinka warriors in West Africa, his copious gold jewelry, his tough-guy persona and his catchphrase \"I pity the fool!\", first uttered as Clubber Lang in \"Rocky III\", then turned into a trademark used in slogans or titles, like the reality show \"I Pity the Fool\" in 2006.\nEarly life, family and education.\nTureaud was born in Chicago, Illinois, the youngest son in a family with twelve children. He and his four sisters and seven brothers grew up in a three-room apartment in the Robert Taylor Homes, public housing. His father, Nathaniel Tureaud, was a minister. After his father left when Lawrence was five years old, he shortened his name to Lawrence Tero. In 1970, he legally changed his last name to T. His new name, Mr. T, was based upon his childhood impressions regarding the lack of respect from white people for his family. T recalls:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I think about my father being called \"boy\", my uncle being called \"boy\", my brother, coming back from Vietnam and being called \"boy\". So I questioned myself: \"What does a black man have to do before he's given respect as a man?\" So when I was 18 years old, when I was old enough to fight and die for my country, old enough to drink, old enough to vote, I said I was old enough to be called a man. I self-ordained myself Mr. T, so the first word out of everybody's mouth is \"Mr.\"\nTureaud attended Dunbar Vocational High School, where he was on the school's football and wrestling teams. He also studied martial arts. During high school, he was the citywide wrestling champion two years in a row. \nHe won a football scholarship to Prairie View A&amp;M University, where he majored in mathematics, but was expelled after his first year.\nEarly career.\nAfter Tureaud left Prairie View A&amp;M, he worked as a gym instructor for a government program in Chicago. He later said it was here that he discovered a gift for helping children. Thereafter, he enlisted in the United States Army in 1975 and served in the Military Police Corps. After his discharge in the late 1970s, he tried out for the Green Bay Packers of the National Football League, but failed to make the team due to a knee injury.\nTureaud worked as a bouncer at the Rush Street night club Dingbats Discotheque. It was at this time that he created the persona of Mr. T. He began wearing gold neck chains and other jewelry as a result of customers losing the items or leaving them behind at the night club after a fight. A banned customer, or one reluctant to risk a confrontation by going back inside, could return to claim his property from Mr. T who would wear it conspicuously in front of the establishment. Along with controlling the violence as a doorman, Tureaud was mainly hired to keep out drug dealers and users. Tureaud has claimed that as a bouncer, he was in over 200 fights and was sued a number of times, but won each case.\nHe eventually parlayed his job as a bouncer into a career as a bodyguard that lasted almost ten years. As his reputation grew, he was contracted to guard, among others, clothes designers, models, judges, politicians, athletes and millionaires. His clients included celebrities Steve McQueen, Michael Jackson, LeVar Burton, and Diana Ross, and boxers Muhammad Ali, Joe Frazier, and Leon Spinks. With his reputation as Mr. T, Tureaud attracted strange offers and was frequently approached with odd commissions, including tracking runaway teenagers, locating missing persons, debt collection, and assassination requests.\nWhile he was in his late twenties, Tureaud won two tough-man competitions consecutively. The first aired as \"Sunday Games\" on NBC-TV under the contest of \"America's Toughest Bouncer\" which included throwing a stuntman, and breaking through a wooden door. For the first event, Tureaud came in third place. For the end, two finalists squared off in a boxing ring for a two-minute round to declare the champion. Making it to the ring as a finalist, he had as his opponent a Honolulu bouncer, Tutefano Tufi. Within twenty seconds Mr. T gave the Tufi a bloody nose, and later a bloody mouth. T won the match and thus the competition. The second competition was aired under a new name, \"Games People Play\", on NBC-TV. When interviewed by Bryant Gumbel before the final boxing match, Mr T. said, \"I just feel sorry for the guy who I have to box. I just feel real sorry for him.\" This fight was scheduled to last three rounds, but Mr. T finished it in less than 54 seconds. The line, \"I don't hate him but... I pity the fool\" in the movie \"Rocky III\" was written by Sylvester Stallone, who is reputed to have been inspired by the interview.\nActing roles and other work.\nWhile reading \"National Geographic\", Mr. T first noticed the unusual hairstyle for which he is now famous, on a Mandinka warrior. He decided that adoption of the style would be a powerful statement about his African origin. It was a simpler, safer, and more permanent visual signature than his gold chains, rings, and bracelets.\nIn 1980, Mr. T was spotted by Sylvester Stallone while taking part in NBC's \"America's Toughest Bouncer\" competition, a segment of NBC's \"Games People Play\". Although his role in \"Rocky III\" was originally intended as just a few lines, Mr. T was eventually cast as Clubber Lang, the primary antagonist. His catchphrase \"I pity the fool!\" comes from the film; when asked if he hates Rocky, Lang replies, \"No, I don't hate Balboa, but I pity the fool.\" He subsequently appeared in another boxing film, \"Penitentiary 2\", and on an episode of the Canadian sketch comedy series \"Bizarre\", where he fights and eats Super Dave Osborne, before accepting a television series role on \"The A-Team\". He appeared in an episode of the NBC sitcom \"Silver Spoons\", reprising his old role as bodyguard to the character Ricky Stratton (played by Ricky Schroder).\nIn \"The A-Team\", he played Sergeant Bosco \"B. A.\" Baracus, an ex-Army commando on the run with three other members from the United States government \"for a crime they didn't commit.\" As well as the team's tough guy, B. A. was a mechanical genius, but afraid of flying. When asked at a press conference whether he was as stupid as B. A. Baracus, Mr. T observed quietly, \"It takes a smart guy to play dumb.\" The series was a major hit, and B. A. Baracus in particular quickly became a cult character and the de facto star of the show, reportedly sparking tensions with seasoned actor George Peppard, although Mr. T always maintained that these were unfounded rumors. Mr. T was reported to be earning $80,000 a week for his role in \"The A-Team\".\nHis role in \"The A-Team\" led to him making an appearance in the sitcom \"Diff'rent Strokes\" in the sixth season opener \"Mr. T and Mr. t\" (1983), in which an episode of \"The A-Team\" is supposedly filmed in the family's penthouse apartment.\nAlso in 1983, a Ruby-Spears-produced cartoon called \"Mister T\" premiered on NBC. The \"Mister T\" cartoon starred Mr. T as his alter ego, the owner of a gym where a group of gymnasts trained. He helped them with their training, but they also helped him solve mysteries and fight crime in \"Scooby-Doo\"-style scenarios; thirty episodes were produced. Each episode was bookended by Mr. T himself, presenting the theme of the episode, and then a closing statement on a lesson for children, based on the events of the episode.\nThe only feature film that can be called a Mr. T vehicle, \"DC Cab\", was also released in 1983. It features an ensemble cast, many of whom were publicized figures from other areas of show business: comics Paul Rodriguez, Marsha Warfield, singer Irene Cara, bodybuilders David and Peter Paul (the \"Barbarian Brothers\") \u2014 but who had only modest acting experience. Despite the wide range of performers, and more seasoned actors such as Adam Baldwin as the protagonist Albert, as well as Gary Busey and Max Gail, Mr. T was top billed and the central figure in the film's publicity, with him literally towering over the other characters on the film's poster. While the film, featuring the ensemble as a ragtag taxi company trying to hustle their way to solvency and respectability, performed modestly at the box office, its $16 million take exceeded its $12 million budget, it received mixed reviews critically. Janet Maslin, writing for \"The New York Times\", described it as \"a musical mob scene, a raucous, crowded movie that's fun as long as it stays wildly busy, and a lot less interesting when it wastes time on plot or conversation.\" Roger Ebert praised the movie's \"mindless, likable confusion\" and criticized its \"fresh off the assembly line\" plot. It was the second feature for prolific director Joel Schumacher.\nIn 1984, Mr. T made a motivational video, \"Be Somebody... or Be Somebody's Fool!\". He gives helpful advice to children throughout the video; for example, he teaches them how to understand and appreciate their origins, how to dress fashionably without buying designer labels, how to make tripping up look like breakdancing, how to control their anger, and how to deal with peer pressure. The video is roughly one hour long, but contains 30 minutes of singing, either by the group of children accompanying him, or by Mr. T himself. He sings \"Treat Your Mother Right (Treat Her Right)\", and also raps a song about growing up in the ghetto and praising God. The raps in this video were written by Ice-T. Due to its unintentionally comic nature, many clips have been made from this video and shared as Internet memes. Also in 1984, he played the protagonist of the TV movie \"The Toughest Man in the World\", as Bruise Brubaker, a bouncer also leading a sports center for teenagers, who takes part in a strong man championship to get funds for the center. He also released a rap mini-album, \"Mr. T's Commandments\" (Columbia/CBS Records) the same year. It features seven songs, including the title theme for the aforementioned TV film. In much the same tone as his motivational video, it instructed children to stay in school and to stay away from drugs. He followed it up the same year with a second album, titled \"Mr. T's Be Somebody... or Be Somebody's Fool!\" (MCA), featuring music from the eponymous film.\nDuring those busy years, he made numerous appearances in television shows, most notably hosting the 15th episode of the 10th season of \"Saturday Night Live\", along with Hulk Hogan, both of whom were featured in \"Rocky III\". Mr. T had previously appeared on Saturday Night Live (season 8) in October 1982, fresh from his role in \"Rocky III\", in a recurring skit by Eddie Murphy called \"Mr. Robinson Neighborhood\" (making a reference to one of his lines in the movie : \"Hello boys and girls. The new word for today... is PAIN.\").\nOn January 19, 1985, he introduced Rich Little at the nationally televised 50th Presidential Inaugural Gala, the day before the second inauguration of Ronald Reagan.\nIn 1988, after the cancellation of \"The A-Team\", Mr. T starred in the syndicated Canadian television series \"T. and T\". Earning $15,000 for personal appearances, by the end of the 1990s, he was appearing only in the occasional commercial, largely because of health problems.\nSome time during the 1990s, Mr. T would be in Eric \"Butterbean\" Esch's corner in the boxing matches during one of the Toughman Contests. He has frequently appeared on the TBN Christian television network.\nIn 2002, Mr. T appeared as a bartender in the video for \"Pass the Courvoisier, Part II\" by Busta Rhymes featuring Sean Combs and Pharrell Williams. In the 2009 animated film \"Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs\", Mr. T provided the voice for Officer Earl Devereaux, the town's athletic cop who loves his son very much. Mr. T was offered a cameo appearance in the film adaptation of \"The A-Team\", but he declined, whereas Dwight Schultz and Dirk Benedict both made cameos in the film. These scenes were shown after the credits, but were reinserted during the film in the Extended Cut. Although he was not disturbed at the mere prospect of an A-Team film being made without him, he strongly criticized the concept of having another actor copy his own very distinct appearance and style (including his haircut and gold chains) in the hope of attracting his nostalgic fanbase, and considered that asking him to do a cameo appearance in those conditions was disrespectful.\nStarting in 2011, Mr. T presented a clip show on BBC Three named \"World's Craziest Fools\". The show featured stories such as botched bank robberies and inept insurance fraudsters alongside fail videos. In 2015, it was announced that Mr. T would star in a do it yourself home improvement TV show, with interior designer Tiffany Brooks, on the DIY Network. The show, due sometime in 2015, was to be titled, \"I Pity the Tool\", as comical wordplay on his famous catchphrase, but only one episode was aired, for unknown reasons.\nOn March 1, 2017, Mr. T was revealed as one of the contestants who would compete on season 24 of \"Dancing with the Stars\". He was paired with professional dancer Kym Herjavec. On April 10, 2017, Mr. T and Herjavec were the third couple to be eliminated from the competition, finishing in 10th place. He vowed to donate the money received from this participation to the Saint Jude Children's Research Hospital and the Shriners Hospitals for Children.\nCommercials.\nMr. T has appeared in numerous TV commercials, including for Snickers, Atari, \"World of Warcraft\", MCI, Comcast and RadioShack. \"Forbes\" described him as \"one of the most enduring pitchmen in the business\". Mr. T has described himself as \"not really an actor, I'm a reactor; I'm a pitchman.\" At his peak, he was earning $5 million per year.\nMr. T performed in a video campaign for Hitachi Data Systems (HDS) that was created and posted on consumer video sites including YouTube and Yahoo! Video. According to Steven Zivanic, senior director and corporate communications of HDS, \"this campaign has not only helped the firm in its own area, but it has given the data storage firm a broader audience.\" In November 2007, Mr. T appeared in a television commercial for the online role playing game \"World of Warcraft\" with the phrase \"I'm Mr. T and I'm a Night Elf Mohawk\". A follow-up to this commercial appeared in November 2009 where he appeared promoting the \"mohawk grenade\" item, which appears in game and turns other players into Mr. T's likeness.\nIn 2008, Mr. T appeared on the American channel \"Shopping TV\", selling his Mr. T Flavorwave Oven. In 2009, ZootFly announced they had acquired the rights to the Mr. T Graphic Novel and were planning several video games based upon the work. The first (and only) game, \"Mr. T: The Videogame\", was to have Mr. T battle Nazis in various locations and guest star Wil Wright. It was planned to be available on the Xbox 360, PS3, Wii and PC platforms, however the game was cancelled for undisclosed reasons.\nThe same year, he appeared on commercials in the UK, Ireland, Australia, and New Zealand advertising the candy bar Snickers with the slogan \"Get Some Nuts!\" One of these commercials featured Mr. T on an army jeep calling a speed walker wearing yellow shorts \"a disgrace to the man race\" (a pun on the double meaning of the word \"race\") and firing Snickers bars at the man with a custom-made machine gun so that he starts \"running like a real man\". This commercial was pulled by Mars following a complaint by the US-based group Human Rights Campaign, although the advert had never been shown in the US. The group alleged that the commercial promoted the idea that violence against gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people \"is not only acceptable, but humorous\". Mr. T distanced himself from these accusations, insisting that he would never lend his name to such beliefs, and that he did not think the commercial was offensive to anyone, as all the commercials he appeared in had a similarly silly, over-the-top nature and were never intended to be taken seriously.\nIn 2010, Mr. T signed up as the spokesman for Gold Promise, a gold-buying company. According to an appraiser hired by Bloomberg Television's \"Taking Stock\", his trademark gold jewelry was worth around $43,000 in 1983, although some sources claim the gold jewelry was worth up to $300,000.\nIn 2015, he starred in a series of Fuze Iced Tea advertisements, stating, \"The only thing bolder than Fuze Iced Tea is ME!\" The brand, owned by The Coca-Cola Company, also briefly centered its social profiles and website around Mr. T.\nProfessional wrestling.\nWorld Wrestling Federation (1985-1987).\nMr. T entered the world of professional wrestling in 1985. He was Hulk Hogan's tag-team partner at the World Wrestling Federation's (WWF) \"WrestleMania I\", a match they won. Hulk Hogan wrote in his autobiography that Mr. T saved the main event of WrestleMania I between them and \"Rowdy\" Roddy Piper and \"Mr. Wonderful\" Paul Orndorff because when he arrived, security would not let his entourage into the building. Mr. T was ready to skip the show until Hogan personally talked him out of leaving. Piper said he and fellow wrestlers disliked Mr. T because he was an actor and had never paid his dues as a professional wrestler. Remaining with the WWF, Mr. T became a special \"WWF boxer\" in light of his character in \"Rocky III\". He took on \"Cowboy\" Bob Orton on the March 1, 1986, \"Saturday Night's Main Event V,\" on NBC. This boxing stunt culminated in another boxing match against Roddy Piper at \"WrestleMania 2\". As part of the build-up for the match, Piper attacked Mr. T's friend, dwarf wrestler the Haiti Kid on his \"Piper's Pit\" interview slot, shaving his head into a mohican style similar to that of Mr. T. Then Mr. T won the boxing match in Round 4 by disqualification after Piper attacked the referee and bodyslammed Mr. T. He returned to the World Wrestling Federation as a special guest referee in 1987 and a special referee enforcer confronting such stars as The Honky Tonk Man.\nWorld Class Championship Wrestling (1989).\nOn July 21, 1989, Mr. T. made an appearance in World Class Championship Wrestling (WCCW), seconding Kerry Von Erich. \nWorld Championship Wrestling (1994).\nFive years later, Mr. T reappeared in WCW, first appearing in Hulk Hogan's corner for his WCW world title match against Ric Flair at \"Bash at the Beach 1994\". He would next appear as a special referee for the Hogan\u2013Flair rematch in October 1994 at \"Halloween Havoc\", and then went on to wrestle again, defeating Kevin Sullivan at that year's \"Starrcade\". \nSporadic appearances (2001-present).\nAnother seven years later, Mr. T appeared in the front row of the November 19, 2001, episode of \"WWF Raw\". On April 5, 2014, at the Smoothie King Center in New Orleans, Mr. T was inducted by Gene Okerlund into the WWE Hall of Fame's celebrity wing. His acceptance speech, largely a tribute to his mother and motherhood rather than wrestling, ran long and was eventually interrupted by Kane.\nPersonal life.\nMr. T is a born-again Christian. Mr. T has three children with his wife: two daughters, one of whom is a comedian, and a son. Mr. T was sued by a man in 2014 saying that he was also Mr. T's son from outside his marriage. The lawsuit was dismissed in August 2014 due to the man's failure to pay the required fees.\nIn 1987, he angered the residents of Lake Forest, Illinois, by cutting down more than a hundred oak trees on his estate. The local newspaper referred to the incident as \"the Lake Forest Chain Saw Massacre\".\nIn 1995, he was diagnosed with a cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, or mycosis fungoides. Once in remission, he joked about the coincidence: \"Can you imagine that? Cancer with my name on it \u2013 personalized cancer!\" He wrote an as-yet-unpublished book on this experience, called \"Cancer Saved My Life (Cancer Ain't For No Wimps)\". He made a direct reference to it as he performed a waltz to the song \"Amazing Grace\" in \"Dancing with the Stars\".\nHe stopped wearing virtually all his gold, one of his identifying marks, after helping with the clean-up after Hurricane Katrina in 2005. He said, \"As a Christian, when I saw other people lose their lives and lose their land and property\u00a0... I felt that it would be a sin before God for me to continue wearing my gold. I felt it would be insensitive and disrespectful to the people who lost everything, so I stopped wearing my gold.\"\nMr. T often refers to himself in the third person. He also frequently talks in rhymes. He cites Muhammad Ali as his \"childhood hero\" and his main inspiration with regard to style and mannerisms.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19020", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19020", "title": "Morphology", "text": "Morphology, from the Greek and meaning \"study of shape\", may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "19021", "revid": "40744516", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19021", "title": "Malm\u00f6", "text": "City in Sk\u00e5ne County, Sweden\nMalm\u00f6 is the third-largest city in Sweden, after Stockholm and Gothenburg, and the seventh-largest city in the Nordic region. Located on the \u00d6resund strait on the southwestern coast of Sweden, it is the largest city in Scania, with a municipal population of 365,644 in 2024, and is the gubernatorial seat of Sk\u00e5ne County. Malm\u00f6 received its city privileges in 1353, and today Malm\u00f6's metropolitan region is home to over 700,000 people. \nMalm\u00f6 is the site of Sweden's only fixed direct link to continental Europe, the \u00d6resund Bridge, completed in 2000. The bridge connects Sweden to Denmark, and carries both road and rail traffic. The \u00d6resund Region, which includes Malm\u00f6 and Copenhagen, is home to four million people. \nThe city was one of the earliest and most-industrialised in Scandinavia, and the birthplace of several of Scandinavia's largest industrial groups, such as Kockums, Skanska, and Scania AB. The city has undergone a major transformation in the 21st century, and today, Malm\u00f6 is characterised by many small and medium-sized companies in biotech, logistics, IT, construction, and real estate markets. It also is home to Malm\u00f6 University and other higher education facilities. \nMalm\u00f6 contains many historic buildings and parks, and is a commercial centre for the western part of Scania. It is home to Malm\u00f6 FF, the Swedish football club with the most national championship wins, and the only Nordic club to have reached the final of the European Cup.\nThe city was Sweden's fastest-growing in 2020, and the population increased by 3,800 inhabitants during 2021. As of 2024, almost half the municipal population of Malm\u00f6 had a foreign background. Malm\u00f6 is expected to have a population of 500,000 by 2050.\nMalm\u00f6 has a mild climate for the latitude and, normally, average high temperatures remain above freezing in winter, with prolonged snow cover being rare.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\n1275\u20131658 (Denmark).\nThe earliest written mention of Malm\u00f6 as a city dates from 1275. It is thought to have been founded shortly before that date, as a fortified quay or ferry berth of the Danish Archbishop of Lund, to the north-east. Its original name was \"Malmhaug\" (with alternative spellings), meaning \"Gravel pile\" or \"Ore Hill\".\nIn the 15th century, Malm\u00f6 became one of Denmark's largest and most visited cities, reaching a population of approximately 5,000 inhabitants. It became the most important city around the \u00d6resund, with the German Hanseatic League frequenting it as a marketplace, and was notable for its flourishing herring fishery. In 1437, King Eric of Pomerania (King of Denmark from 1396 to 1439) granted the city's arms: argent with a griffin gules, based on Eric's arms from Pomerania. The griffin's head as a symbol of Malm\u00f6 extended to the entire province of Sk\u00e5ne from 1660.\nIn 1434, a new citadel was constructed at the beach south of the town. This fortress, known today as \"Malm\u00f6hus\", did not take its current form until the mid-16th century. Several other fortifications were constructed, making Malm\u00f6 Sweden's most fortified city, but only Malm\u00f6hus remains.\nLutheran teachings spread during the 16th century Protestant Reformation, and Malm\u00f6 became one of the first cities in Scandinavia to fully convert (1527\u20131529) to this Protestant denomination.\n1658 onwards (Sweden).\nIn the 17th century, Malm\u00f6 and the Sk\u00e5neland region came under control of Sweden following the Treaty of Roskilde with Denmark, signed in 1658. Fighting continued, however; in June 1677, 14,000 Danish troops laid siege to Malm\u00f6 for a month, but were unable to defeat the Swedish troops holding it.\nBy the dawn of the 18th century, Malm\u00f6 had about 3,000 inhabitants. However, owing to the wars of Charles XII of Sweden (reigned 1697\u20131718) and to bubonic plague epidemics, the population dropped to 1,800 by 1727. The population did not grow much until the modern harbour was constructed in 1775. The city started to expand and the population in 1800 was 4,000. 15 years later, it had increased to 6,000.\nIn 1840, Frans Henrik Kockum founded the workshop from which the Kockums shipyard eventually developed as one of the largest shipyards in the world. The Southern Main Line was built between 1856 and 1864; this enabled Malm\u00f6 to become a centre of manufacture, with major textile and mechanical industries. In 1870, Malm\u00f6 overtook Norrk\u00f6ping to become Sweden's third-most populous city, and by 1900 Malm\u00f6 had strengthened this position with 60,000 inhabitants. Malm\u00f6 continued to grow through the first half of the 20th century. The population had swiftly increased to 100,000 by 1915 and to 200,000 by 1952.\n1900\u20131969.\nIn 1914 (15 May to 4 October), Malm\u00f6 hosted the Baltic Exhibition. The large park Pildammsparken was arranged and planted for this large event. The Russian part of the exhibition was never taken down, owing to the outbreak of World War I.\nOn 18 and 19 December 1914, the \"Three Kings Meeting\" was held in Malm\u00f6. After a somewhat disturbed period (1905\u20131914), which included the dissolution of the Swedish-Norwegian Union, King Oscar II was replaced with King H\u00e5kon VII in Norway, who was the younger brother of the Danish King Christian X. As Oscar died in 1907, and his son Gustav V became the new King of Sweden, the tensions within Scandinavia were still unresolved, but during this historical meeting, the Scandinavian Kings found internal understanding, as well as a common line about remaining neutral in the ongoing war.\nWithin sports, Malm\u00f6 has mostly been associated with football. IFK Malm\u00f6 participated in the first edition of Allsvenskan in 1924\u201325, but from the mid-1940s Malm\u00f6 FF started to rise, and ever since it has been one of the most prominent clubs within Swedish football. They have finished first in Allsvenskan (series winners) a record 27 times and have been crowned Swedish champions a record 24 times (most recently in 2024).\n1970\u20131999.\nBy 1971, Malm\u00f6's population reached 265,000 inhabitants, but this was the peak which would stand for more than 30 years. (Svedala was, for a few years in the early 1970s, a part of Malm\u00f6 municipality.)\nBy the mid-1970s Sweden experienced a recession that hit the industrial sector especially hard; shipyards and manufacturing industries suffered, which led to high unemployment in many cities of Sk\u00e5ne. Kockums shipyard had become a symbol of Malm\u00f6 as its largest employer and, when shipbuilding ceased in 1986, confidence in the future of Malm\u00f6 plummeted among politicians and the public. In addition, many middle-class families moved into one-family houses in surrounding municipalities such as Vellinge Municipality, Lomma Municipality and Staffanstorp Municipality, which profiled themselves as the suburbs of the upper-middle class. By 1985, Malm\u00f6 had lost 37,000 inhabitants and the population was down to 225,500.\nThe Swedish financial crises of the early 1990s exacerbated Malm\u00f6's decline as an industrial city; between 1990 and 1995 Malm\u00f6 lost about 27,000 jobs and its economy was seriously strained. In 1994, the city had a financial deficit of 1.3 billion Swedish krona (SEK), the highest financial deficit ever by any municipality in Sweden. However, from 1994 under the leadership of the then mayor Ilmar Reepalu, the city of Malm\u00f6 started to create a new economy as a centre of culture and knowledge. Malm\u00f6 reached bottom in 1995, but that same year marked the commencement of the massive \u00d6resund Bridge road, railway and tunnel project, connecting it to Copenhagen and to the rail lines of Europe. The new Malm\u00f6 University opened in 1998 on Kockums' former dockside.\n2000s and later.\nFurther redevelopment of the now disused south-western harbour followed; a city architecture exposition (Bo01) was held in the area in 2001, and its buildings and villas form the core of a new city district. Designed with attractive waterfront vistas, it was intended to attract, and has been successful in attracting, the urban middle-class.\nSince 1974, the Kockums Crane had been a landmark in Malm\u00f6 and a symbol of the city's manufacturing industry, but in 2002 it was disassembled and moved to South Korea. In 2005, Malm\u00f6 gained a new landmark with completion of Turning Torso, the tallest skyscraper in Scandinavia. Although the transformation from a city with its economic base in manufacturing has returned growth to Malm\u00f6, the new types of jobs have largely benefited the middle and upper classes.\nIn its 2015 and 2017 reports, Police in Sweden placed the Roseng\u00e5rd and the S\u00f6dra Sofielund/Seved district in the most severe category of urban areas with high crime rates. In 2023, however, the situation in S\u00f6dra Sofielund/Seved was deemed as improving, and it was re-categorised to a risk area, the less severe category.\nMalm\u00f6 is currently growing fast and detailed work is being planned near the Malm\u00f6 Central Station, in a district called Nyhamnen. Nyhamnen will provide 9,000 new housings, two larger buildings for offices and courts. It is expected to be complete around 2040\u20132050.\nThe Middle Eastern crisis (2023\u2013present) has had an impact in Malm\u00f6, which has a large population with roots in the region. Following the 2023 Hamas-led attack on Israel, public celebrations were reported in Malm\u00f6, leading to the suspension of cooperation between the Jewish community and the Islamic Academy. During Eurovision 2024, which was held in Malm\u00f6, demonstrations were held in the city against Israel's participation. SVT reported in 2024 that Palestinian flags had become more prominent in the cityscape, and a roundabout in M\u00f6llev\u00e5ngen, previously nicknamed \"the drug roundabout,\" has been renamed by some locals as the \"Gaza Roundabout.\"\nGeography.\nMalm\u00f6 is located at 13\u00b000' east and 55\u00b035' north, near the southwestern tip of Sweden, in Sk\u00e5ne County.\nThe city is part of the transnational \u00d6resund Region and, since 2000, has been linked by the \u00d6resund Bridge across the \u00d6resund to Copenhagen, Denmark. The bridge opened on 1 July 2000, and measures (the whole link totalling 16\u00a0km), with pylons reaching vertically. Apart from the Helsingborg-Helsing\u00f8r ferry links further north, most ferry connections have been discontinued.\nClimate.\nMalm\u00f6, like the rest of southern Sweden, has an oceanic climate (Cfb). Despite its northern location, the climate is mild compared to other locations at similar latitudes, mainly because of the influence of the Gulf Stream and also its westerly position on the Eurasian landmass. Owing to its northern latitude, daylight lasts 17 hours 31 minutes in midsummer, but only around seven hours in midwinter. According to data from 2002 to 2014 Falsterbo, to the south of the city, received an annual average of 1,895 hours of sunshine while Lund, to the north, received 1,803 hours. The sunshine data in the weather box is based on the data for Falsterbo.\nSummers are mild with average high temperatures of and lows of around . Heat waves during the summer arise occasionally. Winters are fairly cold and windy, with temperatures steady between , but it rarely drops below .\nRainfall is light to moderate throughout the year with 169 wet days. Snowfall occurs mainly in December through March, but snow covers do not remain for a long time, and some winters are free of snow.\nTransport.\nAir.\nMalm\u00f6 Airport, also known as Sturup Airport, is located approximately east of central Malm\u00f6 in Svedala Municipality. It primarily serves domestic routes, charter flights, and low-cost carriers.\nFor international travel, Copenhagen Airport is more commonly used and is accessible from Malm\u00f6 Central Station by train in approximately 20 minutes.\nRail.\nMalm\u00f6 is served by seven railway stations, the main one being Malm\u00f6 Central Station. Via the City Tunnel, Malm\u00f6 Central is connected to Triangeln and Hyllie stations, where all regional and local trains also stop. From Hyllie, the line links to the \u00d6resund line and the \u00d6resund Bridge, connecting Malm\u00f6 to Copenhagen. The remaining stations Sv\u00e5gertorp, Persborg, Roseng\u00e5rd and \u00d6sterv\u00e4rn are located on the city's outskirts and are exclusively served by local trains.\nLong distance and regional trains.\nThere are several regular long distance trains departing from Malm\u00f6 Central Station. SJ operates X 2000trains to Stockholm and Gothenburg and night trains to Stockholm, Hamburg and Berlin. Sn\u00e4llt\u00e5get runs day trains to Stockholm and night trains to \u00c5re in northern Sweden, to Hamburg, Berlin and Dresden in Germany and to Salzburg and Innsbruck in Austria. Lastly, Vy operates trains to Oslo, Norway.\u00d6resund trains connect Malm\u00f6 to Copenhagen, and Copenhagen Airport via the \u00d6resund Bridge, taking approximately 40 minutes and running as frequently as every 10 minutes during rush hour or hourly at night. On the Swedish side, the trains continue northeast towards Lund, before branching towards different destinations, such as Gothenburg, Kalmar and Karlskrona.\nLocal trains.\nInterurban trains called P\u00e5gat\u00e5gen connect Malm\u00f6 to smaller localities in Scania, such as Ystad and Trelleborg. Within Malm\u00f6, a service known as the Malm\u00f6pendeln operates every 30 minutes on a circular route calling at all stations in Malm\u00f6, before continuing to Lomma or K\u00e4vlinge. This service started in December 2018 and carried about 600,000 passengers in 2024, a figure which was lower than originally expected.\nProposed metro.\nThe \u00d6resund Metro is a proposed rapid transit network linking Malm\u00f6 with the existing Copenhagen Metro through a tunnel under the \u00d6resund. It is a project that has been proposed since 2012. A metro station can be placed in the Galeonen which is a sub-area located in the far north of V\u00e4stra hamnen. The Galeon is the only larger area in V\u00e4stra hamnen that is not planned yet and Malm\u00f6's general plan states that the expansion of the area is expected to take place 2032 to 2041. The connection between Malm\u00f6 and Copenhagen will take approximately 20 minutes instead of 40 minutes by the \u00d6resund Bridge. The construction cost is estimated at 4\u00a0billion euros with a construction period of 6\u20137 years.\nRoad network.\nThe motorway system has been incorporated with the \u00d6resund Bridge; the European route E20 goes over the bridge and then, together with the European route E6 follows the Swedish west coast from Malm\u00f6\u2013Helsingborg to Gothenburg. E6 goes further north along the west coast and through Norway to the Norwegian town Kirkenes at Barents Sea. The European route to J\u00f6nk\u00f6ping\u2013Stockholm (E4) starts at Helsingborg. Main roads in the directions of V\u00e4xj\u00f6\u2013Kalmar, Kristianstad\u2013Karlskrona, Ystad (E65), and Trelleborg start as freeways.\nMalm\u00f6 has of bike paths; approximately 40% of all commuting is done by bicycle.\nBuses.\nMalm\u00f6 has an extensive network of buses within the city, and is also the destination of many regional bus lines from the rest of Sk\u00e5ne. The bus network replaced the tram network that existed from 1887 to 1973.\nPorts.\nThe city has two industrial harbours; one is still in active use and is the largest Nordic port for car imports. It also has two marinas: the publicly owned Limhamn Marina () and the private Lagunen (), both offering a limited number of guest docks.\nMunicipality.\nMalm\u00f6 Municipality is an administrative unit defined by geographical borders, consisting of the \"City of Malm\u00f6\" and its immediate surroundings.\nMalm\u00f6 (\"Malm\u00f6 t\u00e4tort\") consists of the urban part of the municipality together with the small town of Arl\u00f6v in Burl\u00f6v Municipality. Both municipalities also include smaller urban areas and rural areas, such as the suburbs of Oxie and \u00c5karp. \"Malm\u00f6 t\u00e4tort\" is to be distinguished from \"Malm\u00f6 stad\" (the city of Malm\u00f6), which is a semi-official name of Malm\u00f6 Municipality.\nThe leaders in Malm\u00f6 created a commission for a socially sustainable Malm\u00f6 in November 2010. The commissions were tasked with providing evidence-based strategies for reducing health inequalities and improve living conditions for all citizens of Malm\u00f6, especially for the most vulnerable and disadvantaged and issued its final report in December 2013.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;Malm\u00f6 has a young population by Swedish standards, with almost half of the population under the age of 35 (48.2%).\nAfter 1971, Malm\u00f6 had 265,000 inhabitants, but the population then dropped to 229,000 by 1985. It then began to rise again, and had passed the previous record by the 1 January 2003 census, when it had 265,481 inhabitants. The total population of the urban area was 280,415 in December 2010. On 27 April 2011, the population of Malm\u00f6 reached the 300,000 mark. In 2017 the total population of the city was 316,588 inhabitants out of a municipal total of 338,230. In 2016 Malm\u00f6 served as a primary entry point for the majority of migrants heading to Sweden. \nMalm\u00f6 is a diverse city with inhabitants from 179 different nationalities. In 2019, approximately 55.5%, up from 17% in 1986, of the population of Malm\u00f6 municipality (190,849 residents) had at least one parent born abroad. The statistics from 2020 show that 120,517 are foreign born, 43,740 are born in Sweden and have two foreign parents, 30,878 are born in Sweden with one Swedish parent and one foreign parent and 152,813 are born with two Swedish parents. The Middle East, Horn of Africa, former Yugoslavia and Denmark are the main sources of immigration.\nGreater Malm\u00f6 is one of Sweden's three officially recognized metropolitan areas (\"storstadsomr\u00e5den\") and since 2005 is defined as the municipality of Malm\u00f6 and 11 other municipalities in the southwestern corner of Sk\u00e5ne County. As of 2024[ [update]], its population was recorded as 780,035. The region covers an area of . The municipalities included, apart from Malm\u00f6, are Burl\u00f6v, Esl\u00f6v, H\u00f6\u00f6r, K\u00e4vlinge, Lomma, Lund, Skurup, Staffanstorp, Svedala, Trelleborg and Vellinge. Together with Lund, Malm\u00f6 is the region's economic and education hub.\nReligion.\nIn Malm\u00f6, as in the rest of Sweden, there are no official statistics on religious beliefs, however some institutions share figures on their membership.\nThe largest religion in Malm\u00f6 is Christianity and the Church of Sweden has the largest membership base, with a total of 125,697 in 2019, corresponding to 36% of its population. There are several Catholic communities in Malm\u00f6, one being the Church of Our Saviour with 7,500 members.\nIslam is the second-largest religion, as approximately 50,000 or 14% of the city's inhabitants have a Muslim background, according to Malm\u00f6's Islamic Center. Furthermore, school absenteeism during Eid al-Fitr has ranged from one third of pupils in 2024 to one quarter in 2025, compared to 8% during the average school day. Malm\u00f6 Mosque was opened in 1984 and is managed by the Islamic Center. Mahmood Mosque opened in 2016, and serves the Ahmadiyya community.\nMalm\u00f6 has one synagogue, Malm\u00f6 Synagogue, and two congregations: one orthodox and one egalitarian. The Jewish community has a membership of 500.\nEconomy.\nIn 2022, Malm\u00f6\u2019s gross regional product (GRP) amounted to 240.2 billion Swedish krona (SEK). This represents a 54.7% increase in real terms since 2016, well above the growth rates for both Scania (36.2%) and Sweden (33.2%). GRP per capita was 671,991 SEK, higher than the regional and national averages. As of 2023, the city's largest employment sectors are business services (35,710 employees) healthcare and social services (28,956) and motor vehicle services (26,029). Other large sectors include education, information and communications, and public administration. \nThe economy of Malm\u00f6 was traditionally based on shipbuilding and manufacturing, with the Kockums shipyard as its largest employer. A recession between 1973 and 1975 brought prolonged stagnation, leading to high unemployment and population decline, while Kockums shipyard's closure in 1986 further deepened the crisis. During the Swedish financial crisis in the early 1990s, conditions worsened further, leading to a loss of 27,000 jobs. From the mid-1990s, Malm\u00f6 began recovering as it shifted towards education, services, and urban redevelopment. Notably, the \u00d6resund Bridge, built between 1995 and 2000, allowed for deeper economic integration with Denmark.\nEmployment in Malm\u00f6 has grown steadily since the mid-1990s, supported by population growth and redevelopment and as of 2022, 209,678 people had their workplace in the city. Malm\u00f6 functions as a regional employment hub, with 82,248 people commuting in for work, compared to 47,760 commuting out. Nonetheless, unemployment has remained high since the 2010s, amid fast population growth, and as of July 2025 it stood at 12.3%, the second highest rate in Sweden.\nEntrepreneurship in Malm\u00f6 is relatively high compared with the national average. In 2024, the city saw 12.6 new companies per 1,000 inhabitants aged 16\u201364, compared with 11.1 in Scania and 10.9 in Sweden.\nSince the early 2000s, Malm\u00f6 has attracted a growing number of companies opening offices or relocating operations to the city. Over 70 large and medium-sized firms have established headquarters or regional offices, often moving from smaller towns in southern Sweden. Key factors include proximity to Copenhagen Airport, access to a larger pool of skilled workers and availability of modern office space in districts such as Hyllie and V\u00e4stra hamnen. Among the largest relocations are three companies founded by Ingvar Kamprad: Inter IKEA, Ingka and Ikano Bank, which collectively employ over 4,200 people in Malm\u00f6.\nEducation.\nMalm\u00f6 has the country's ninth-largest school of higher education, Malm\u00f6 University, established in 1998. It has 1,600 employees and 24,000 students (2014).\nIn addition nearby Lund University (established in 1666) has some educational facilities located in Malm\u00f6:\nThe United Nations World Maritime University is also located in Malm\u00f6. The World Maritime University (WMU) operates under the auspices of the International Maritime Organization (IMO), a specialized agency of the United Nations. WMU thus enjoys the status, privileges and immunities of a UN institution in Sweden.\nCulture.\nFilm and television.\nA striking depiction of Malm\u00f6 (in the 1930s) was made by Bo Widerberg in his debut film (transl.\u2009'Raven's End') (1963), largely shot in the shabby Korpen working-class district in Malm\u00f6. With humour and tenderness, it depicts the tensions between classes and generations. The movie was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film in 1965. In 2017, the film (transl.\u2009'While We Live') was awarded the prize for best film by an African living abroad at the Africa Movie Academy Awards. It was filmed in Malm\u00f6 and Gambia, and deals with identity, integration and everyday racism.\nThe cities of Malm\u00f6 and Copenhagen are, with the \u00d6resund Bridge, the main locations in the television series \"The Bridge\" (, ).\nTheatre.\nIn 1944, Malm\u00f6 Stadsteater (Malm\u00f6 Municipal Theatre) was established with a repertoire comprising stage theatre, opera, musical, ballet, musical recitals and experimental theatre. In 1993 it was split into three units, Dramatiska Teater (Dramatical Theatre), Malm\u00f6 Musikteater (Music Theatre) and Sk\u00e5nes Dansteater (Sk\u00e5ne Dance Theatre) and the name was abandoned. The ownership of the last two were transferred to Region Sk\u00e5ne in 2006 Dramatiska Teatern regained its old name. In the 1950s Ingmar Bergman was the Director and Chief Stage Director of Malm\u00f6 Stadsteater and many of his actors, like Max von Sydow and Ingrid Thulin became known through his films. Later stage directors include Staffan Valdemar Holm and G\u00f6ran Stangertz. Malm\u00f6 Musikteater were renamed Malm\u00f6 Operan and plays operas and musicals, classics as newly composed, on one of Scandinavia's large opera scenes with 1,511 seats. Sk\u00e5nes dansteater is active and plays contemporary dance repertory and present works by Swedish and international choreographers in their house in Malm\u00f6 harbor.\nSince the 1970s the city has also been home to independent theatre groups and show or musical companies. It also hosts a rock\u2013dance\u2013dub culture; in the 1960s The Rolling Stones played the Klubb Bongo, and in recent years stars like Morrissey, Nick Cave, B.B. King and Pat Metheny have made repeated visits.\nThe Cardigans debuted in Malm\u00f6 and recorded their albums there. On 7 January 2009 CNN Travel broadcast a segment called \"MyCity_MyLife\" featuring Nina Persson taking the camera to some of the sites in Malm\u00f6 that she enjoys.\nThe Rooseum Centre for Contemporary Art, founded in 1988 by the Swedish art collector and financier Fredrik Roos and housed in a former power station which had been built in 1900, was one of the foremost centres for contemporary art in Europe during the 1980s and 1990s. By 2006, most of the collection had been sold off and the museum was on a time-out; by 2010 Rooseum had been dismantled and a subsidiary of the National Museum of Modern Art inaugurated in its place.\nMusic.\nMalm\u00f6 has hosted the Eurovision Song Contest three times, in 1992, 2013 and 2024. It is the only non-capital city to do so.\nBig Slap is a music festival, held annually since 2013 at Pildammsparken. The 2022 edition of Big Slap featured Justin Bieber, the biggest concert in Malm\u00f6's history.\nMalm\u00f6 is the home of several bands, including CC &amp; Lee, Fews, LeGrand, Nasty Idols, Royal Republic, Spunsugar and Timeless Miracle.\nMuseums.\nMalm\u00f6 Art Museum () is a municipal and regional museum that primarily consists of the city's art collection. The museum also features exhibitions on natural history. Malm\u00f6 Museum also has an aquarium. Malm\u00f6hus Castle is also operated as a part of the museum.\nThe Malmo Technology and Maritime Museum (Teknikens och sj\u00f6fartens hus) houses various industrial exhibits, as well as aircraft, boats and a submarine. Temporary exhibitions are primarily shown at Slottsholmen and at the Technology and Maritime Museum ().\nModerna Museet Malm\u00f6 was opened in December 2009 in the old Rooseum building. It is a part of the Moderna Museet, with independent exhibitions of modern and contemporary art. The collection of Moderna Museet holds key pieces of, among others, Marcel Duchamp, Louise Bourgeois, Pablo Picasso, Niki de Saint Phalle, Salvador Dal\u00ed, Carolee Schneemann, Henri Matisse and Robert Rauschenberg\nMalm\u00f6 Konsthall is one of the largest exhibition halls in Europe for contemporary art, opened in 1975.\nArchitecture.\nMalm\u00f6's oldest building is St. Peter's Church (). It was built in the early 14th century in Baltic Brick Gothic probably after St Mary's Church in L\u00fcbeck. The church is built with a nave, two aisles, a transept and a tower. Its exterior is characterized above all by the flying buttresses spanning its airy arches over the aisles and ambulatory. The tower, which fell down twice during the 15th century, got its current look in 1890. Another major church of significance is the Church of Our Saviour, Malm\u00f6, which was founded in 1870.\nAnother old building is Tunneln, to the west of Sankt Petri Church, which also dates back to around 1300.\nThe oldest parts of Malm\u00f6 were built between 1300 and 1600 during its first major period of expansion. The central city's layout, as well as some of its oldest buildings, are from this time. Many of the smaller buildings from this time are typical Scanian: two-story urban houses that show a strong Danish influence.\nRecession followed in the ensuing centuries. The next expansion period was in the mid 19th century and led to the modern stone and brick city. This expansion lasted into the 20th century and can be seen by a number of Art Nouveau buildings, among those in the Malm\u00f6 synagogue. Malm\u00f6 was relatively late to be influenced by modern ideas of functionalist tenement architecture in the 1930s.\nAround 1965, the government initiated the so-called Million Programme, intending to offer affordable apartments in the outskirts of major Swedish cities. But this period also saw the reconstruction (and razing) of much of the historical city centre.\nSince the late 1990s, Malm\u00f6 has seen a more cosmopolitan architecture. (the Western Harbor), like most of the harbors to the north of the city centre, was industrial. In 2001 its reconstruction began as an urban residential neighbourhood, with 500 residential units, most were part of the exhibition Bo01. The exhibition had two main objectives: develop self-sufficient housing units in terms of energy and greatly diminish phosphorus emissions. Among the new building's towers were the Turning Torso, a skyscraper with a twisting design, tall, the majority of which is residential. It became Malm\u00f6's new landmark. The most recent addition (2015) is the new development of Malm\u00f6 Live. This new building features a hotel, a concert hall, congress hall and a sky bar in the centre of Malm\u00f6. Point Hyllie is a new commercial tower that began construction in 2018.\nOther sights.\nThe beach \"Ribersborg\", by locals usually called \"Ribban\", south-west of the harbor area, is a man-made shallow beach, stretching along Malm\u00f6's coastline. Despite Malm\u00f6's chilly climate, it is sometimes referred to as the \"Copacabana of Malm\u00f6\". It is the site of Ribersborgs open-air bath, opened in the 1890s.\nThe long boardwalk at the Western Harbor, and , has become a favorite summer hang-out for the people of Malm\u00f6 and is a popular place for bathing. The harbor is particularly popular with Malm\u00f6's vibrant student community and has been the scene of several impromptu outdoor parties and gatherings.\nAnnual events.\nIn the third week of August each year a festival, , fills the streets of Malm\u00f6 with different kinds of cuisines and events.\nBUFF International Film Festival, an international children and young people's film festival, is held in Malm\u00f6 every March.\nNordisk Panorama Film Festival, a film festival for short and documentary films by filmmakers from the Nordic countries, is held every September.\nMalm\u00f6 Arab Film Festival (MAFF), the largest Arabic film festival in Europe, is held in Malm\u00f6.\nThe Conference is an international two-day gathering in Malm\u00f6 with 1000 participants. Speakers from all over the world, representing a wide range of disciplines are invited. The first edition of The Conference was in 2011 and before that it was called Moving Images (started 2005).\nThe Nordic Game conference takes place in Malm\u00f6 every April/May. The event consists of conference itself, recruitment expo and game expo and attracts hundreds of \"gamedev\" (game development) professionals every year.\nMalm\u00f6 also hosts other 3rd party events that cater to all communities that reside in Malm\u00f6, including religious and political celebrations.\nMedia.\n, founded in 1870, is Malm\u00f6's largest daily newspaper. It has an average circulation of 130,000. Its main competitor is the regional daily , which has a circulation of 34,000. The tabloid still has a minimal editorial staff but is today just a version of a Stockholm tabloid. The Social Democratic was edited and printed at Malm\u00f6 between 1887 and 2000.\nIn addition to these, a number of free-of-charge papers, generally dealing with entertainment, music and fashion have local editions (for instance \"City\", \"Rodeo\", \"Metro\" and ). Malm\u00f6 is also home to the Egmont Group's Swedish magazine operations. A number of local and regional radio and TV broadcasters are based in the Greater Malm\u00f6 area.\nSports.\nFootball.\nMalm\u00f6 is home to several football teams. Malm\u00f6 FF, who play in the top-level Allsvenskan league, had their most successful periods in the 1970s and 1980s, when they won the league several times. In 1979, they advanced to the final of the European Cup, defeating AS Monaco, Dynamo Kiev, Wis\u0142a Krak\u00f3w and Austria Wien. In the final, played at the Munich Olympic Stadium against Nottingham Forest, they lost by a single goal scored by Trevor Francis just before half time. To date, they are the only Swedish football club to have reached the final of the competition. Bosse Larsson and Zlatan Ibrahimovi\u0107 began their football careers at Malm\u00f6 FF. A second football team, IFK Malm\u00f6, played in Sweden's top flight for about 20 years. The club's greatest achievement was reaching the quarterfinal in the European Cup. In the 2023 Regular Season, IFK Malm\u00f6 ranked last in the S\u00f6dra G\u00f6taland section of the fourth tier of the Swedish football league system, Division 2.\nFC Roseng\u00e5rd (former LdB Malm\u00f6) and Malm\u00f6 FF (women) are playing in the top level in Damallsvenskan, women's football league. FC Roseng\u00e5rd girls have won the league 10 times and the national cup title 5 times. In 2014, they reached the semi-final in Champions League, which they ultimately went on to lose to the German side 1. FFC Frankfurt. Brazilian football player Marta, widely regarded the best female football player of all time, played in FC Roseng\u00e5rd between 2014 and 2017.\nMalm\u00f6 Stadion was inaugurated for the opening match of the 1958 FIFA World Cup. The then world champions, West Germany, defeated Argentina 3\u20131 in front of a crowd of 31,156. A further two games in the cup were decided at the stadium.\nOther sports.\nMalm\u00f6 has athletes competing in a variety of sport.\nIce hockey.\nThe most notable other sports team is the ice hockey team Malm\u00f6 Redhawks. They were the creation of millionaire Percy Nilsson and quickly rose to the highest rank in the early to mid-1990s and won two Swedish championships, but for a number of years found themselves residing outside of the top flight. As of the 2015/2016 season they are once again competing in the top flight SHL league.\nHandball.\nA first division handball team, HK Malm\u00f6, attracts a fair amount of attendance.\nRugby.\nRugby union team, Malm\u00f6 RC, founded in 1954, have won 6 national championships. The club has teams for men, women and juniors.\nGaelic football.\nGaelic football has also been introduced to Malm\u00f6. The men of Malm\u00f6 G.A.A. have won the Scandinavian Championships twice and the women once.\nOther team and individual sports.\nOther notable team sports are baseball, American football and Australian football. Among non-team sports, badminton and athletics are the most popular, together with East Asian martial arts and boxing. Basketball is also fairly a big sport in the city, including the clubs Malbas and SF Srbija among others.\nWomen are permitted by the city council to swim topless in public swimming pools. Everyone must wear bathing attire, but covering of the breasts is not mandatory.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nMalm\u00f6 has relations with the following cities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19022", "revid": "49251492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19022", "title": "Measurement", "text": "Process of assigning numbers to objects or events\nMeasurement is the quantification of attributes of an object or event, which can be used to compare with other objects or events. In other words, measurement is a process of determining how large or small a physical quantity is as compared to a basic reference quantity of the same kind.\nThe scope and application of measurement are dependent on the context and discipline. In natural sciences and engineering, measurements do not apply to nominal properties of objects or events, which is consistent with the guidelines of the International Vocabulary of Metrology (VIM) published by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM). However, in other fields such as statistics as well as the social and behavioural sciences, measurements can have multiple levels, which would include nominal, ordinal, interval and ratio scales.\nMeasurement is a cornerstone of trade, science, technology and quantitative research in many disciplines. Historically, many measurement systems existed for the varied fields of human existence to facilitate comparisons in these fields. Often these were achieved by local agreements between trading partners or collaborators. Since the 18th century, developments progressed towards unifying, widely accepted standards that resulted in the modern International System of Units (SI). This system reduces all physical measurements to a mathematical combination of seven base units. The science of measurement is pursued in the field of metrology.\nMeasurement is defined as the process of comparison of an unknown quantity with a known or standard quantity.\nMethodology.\nThe measurement of a property may be categorised by the following criteria: type, magnitude, unit, and uncertainty. They enable unambiguous comparisons between measurements.\nStandardisation of measurement units.\nMeasurements most commonly use the International System of Units (SI) as a comparison framework. The system defines seven fundamental units: kilogram, metre, candela, second, ampere, kelvin, and mole. All of these units are defined without reference to a particular physical object which would serve as a standard. Artefact-free definitions fix measurements at an exact value related to a physical constant or other invariable natural phenomenon, in contrast to reliance on standard artefacts which are subject to deterioration or destruction. Instead, the measurement unit can only ever change through increased accuracy in determining the value of the constant it is tied to.\nThe first proposal to tie an SI base unit to an experimental standard independent of fiat was by Charles Sanders Peirce (1839\u20131914), who proposed to define the metre in terms of the wavelength of a spectral line. This directly influenced the Michelson\u2013Morley experiment; Michelson and Morley cite Peirce, and improve on his method.\nStandards.\nWith the exception of a few fundamental quantum constants, units of measurement are derived from historical agreements. Nothing inherent in nature dictates that an inch has to be a certain length, nor that a mile is a better measure of distance than a kilometre. Over the course of human history, however, first for convenience and then out of necessity, standards of measurement evolved so that communities would have certain common benchmarks. Laws regulating measurement were originally developed to prevent fraud in commerce.\nUnits of measurement are generally defined on a scientific basis, overseen by governmental or independent agencies, and established in international treaties, pre-eminent of which is the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM), established in 1875 by the Metre Convention, overseeing the International System of Units (SI). For example, the metre was redefined in 1983 by the CGPM in terms of the speed of light, the kilogram was redefined in 2019 in terms of the Planck constant and the international yard was defined in 1960 by the governments of the United States, United Kingdom, Australia and South Africa as being \"exactly\" 0.9144 metres.\nIn the United States, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), a division of the United States Department of Commerce, regulates commercial measurements. In the United Kingdom, the role is performed by the National Physical Laboratory (NPL), in Australia by the National Measurement Institute, in South Africa by the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, and in India by the National Physical Laboratory of India.\nUnits and systems.\nA unit is a known or standard quantity in terms of which other physical quantities are measured.\nImperial and US customary systems.\nBefore SI units were widely adopted around the world, the British systems of English units and later imperial units were used in Britain, the Commonwealth and the United States. The system came to be known as U.S. customary units in the United States and is still in use there and in a few Caribbean countries. These various systems of measurement have at times been called \"foot-pound-second\" systems after the Imperial units for length, weight and time even though the tons, hundredweights, gallons, and nautical miles, for example, have different values in the U.S. and imperial systems. Many Imperial units remain in use in Britain, which has officially switched to the SI system, with a few exceptions such as road signs, where road distances are shown in miles (or in yards for short distances) and speed limits are in miles per hour. Draught beer and cider must be sold by the imperial pint, and milk in returnable bottles can be sold by the imperial pint. Many people measure their height in feet and inches and their weight in stone and pounds, to give just a few examples. Imperial units are used in many other places: for example, in many Commonwealth countries that are considered metricated, land area is measured in acres and floor space in square feet, particularly for commercial transactions (rather than government statistics). Similarly, gasoline is sold by the gallon in many countries that are considered metricated.\nMetric system.\nThe metric system is a decimal system of measurement based on its units for length, the metre and for mass, the kilogram. It exists in several variations, with different choices of base units, though these do not affect its day-to-day use. Since the 1960s, the International System of Units (SI) is the internationally recognised metric system. Metric units of mass, length, and electricity are widely used around the world for both everyday and scientific purposes.\nInternational System of Units.\nThe International System of Units (abbreviated as SI from the French language name \"Syst\u00e8me International d'Unit\u00e9s\") is the modern revision of the metric system. It is the world's most widely used system of units, both in everyday commerce and in science. The SI was developed in 1960 from the metre\u2013kilogram\u2013second (MKS) system, rather than the centimetre\u2013gram\u2013second (CGS) system, which, in turn, had many variants. The SI units for the seven base physical quantities are:\nIn the SI, base units are the simple measurements for time, length, mass, temperature, amount of substance, electric current and light intensity. Derived units are constructed from the base units: for example, the watt, i.e. the unit for power, is defined from the base units as m2\u00b7kg\u00b7s\u22123. Other physical properties may be measured in compound units, such as material density, measured in kg\u00b7m\u22123.\nConverting prefixes.\nThe SI allows easy multiplication when switching among units having the same base but different prefixes. To convert from metres to centimetres it is only necessary to multiply the number of metres by 100, since there are 100 centimetres in a metre. Inversely, to switch from centimetres to metres one multiplies the number of centimetres by 0.01 or divides the number of centimetres by 100.\nLength.\nA ruler or rule is a tool used in, for example, geometry, technical drawing, engineering, and carpentry, to measure lengths or distances or to draw straight lines. Strictly speaking, the \"ruler\" is the instrument used to rule straight lines and the calibrated instrument used for determining length is called a \"measure\", however common usage calls both instruments \"rulers\" and the special name \"straightedge\" is used for an unmarked rule. The use of the word \"measure\", in the sense of a measuring instrument, only survives in the phrase \"tape measure\", an instrument that can be used to measure but cannot be used to draw straight lines. As can be seen in the photographs on this page, a two-metre carpenter's rule can be folded down to a length of only 20 centimetres, to easily fit in a pocket, and a five-metre-long tape measure easily retracts to fit within a small housing.\nTime.\nTime is an abstract measurement of elemental changes over a non-spatial continuum. It is denoted by numbers and/or named periods such as hours, days, weeks, months and years. It is an apparently irreversible series of occurrences within this non spatial continuum. It is also used to denote an interval between two relative points on this continuum.\nMass.\n\"Mass\" refers to the intrinsic property of all material objects to resist changes in their momentum. \"Weight\", on the other hand, refers to the downward force produced when a mass is in a gravitational field. In free fall (no net gravitational forces) objects lack weight but retain their mass. The Imperial units of mass include the ounce, pound, and ton. The metric units gram and kilogram are units of mass.\nOne device for measuring weight or mass is called a weighing scale or, often, simply a \"scale\". A spring scale measures force but not mass, a balance compares weight; both require a gravitational field to operate. Some of the most accurate instruments for measuring weight or mass are based on load cells with a digital read-out, but require a gravitational field to function and would not work in free fall.\nEconomics.\nThe measures used in economics are physical measures, nominal price value measures and real price measures. These measures differ from one another by the variables they measure and by the variables excluded from measurements.\nSurvey research.\nIn the field of survey research, measures are taken from individual attitudes, values, and behavior using questionnaires as a measurement instrument. As all other measurements, measurement in survey research is also vulnerable to measurement error, i.e. the departure from the true value of the measurement and the value provided using the measurement instrument. In substantive survey research, measurement error can lead to biased conclusions and wrongly estimated effects. In order to get accurate results, when measurement errors appear, the results need to be corrected for measurement errors.\nExactness designation.\nThe following rules generally apply for displaying the exactness of measurements:\nDifficulties.\nSince accurate measurement is essential in many fields, and since all measurements are necessarily approximations, a great deal of effort must be taken to make measurements as accurate as possible. For example, consider the problem of measuring the time it takes an object to fall a distance of one metre (about 39\u00a0in). Using physics, it can be shown that, in the gravitational field of the Earth, it should take any object about 0.45 second to fall one metre. However, the following are just some of the sources of error that arise:\nAdditionally, other sources of experimental error include:\nScientific experiments must be carried out with great care to eliminate as much error as possible, and to keep error estimates realistic.\nDefinitions and theories.\nClassical definition.\nIn the classical definition, which is standard throughout the physical sciences, \"measurement\" is the determination or estimation of ratios of quantities. Quantity and measurement are mutually defined: quantitative attributes are those possible to measure, at least in principle. The classical concept of quantity can be traced back to John Wallis and Isaac Newton, and was foreshadowed in Euclid's Elements.\nRepresentational theory.\nIn the representational theory, \"measurement\" is defined as \"the correlation of numbers with entities that are not numbers\". The most technically elaborated form of representational theory is also known as additive conjoint measurement. In this form of representational theory, numbers are assigned based on correspondences or similarities between the structure of number systems and the structure of qualitative systems. A property is quantitative if such structural similarities can be established. In weaker forms of representational theory, such as that implicit within the work of Stanley Smith Stevens, numbers need only be assigned according to a rule.\nThe concept of measurement is often misunderstood as merely the assignment of a value, but it is possible to assign a value in a way that is not a measurement in terms of the requirements of additive conjoint measurement. One may assign a value to a person's height, but unless it can be established that there is a correlation between measurements of height and empirical relations, it is not a measurement according to additive conjoint measurement theory. Likewise, computing and assigning arbitrary values, like the \"book value\" of an asset in accounting, is not a measurement because it does not satisfy the necessary criteria.\nThree type of representational theory\nTheory.\nAll data are inexact and statistical in nature. Thus the definition of measurement is: \"A set of observations that reduce uncertainty where the result is expressed as a quantity.\" This definition is implied in what scientists actually do when they measure something and report both the mean and statistics of the measurements. In practical terms, one begins with an initial guess as to the expected value of a quantity, and then, using various methods and instruments, reduces the uncertainty in the value. In this view, unlike the positivist representational theory, all measurements are uncertain, so instead of assigning one value, a range of values is assigned to a measurement. This also implies that there is not a clear or neat distinction between estimation and measurement.\nQuantum mechanics.\nIn quantum mechanics, a measurement is an action that determines a particular property (such as position, momentum, or energy) of a quantum system. Quantum measurements are always statistical samples from a probability distribution; the distribution for many quantum phenomena is discrete, not continuous. Quantum measurements alter quantum states and yet repeated measurements on a quantum state are reproducible. The measurement appears to act as a filter, changing the quantum state into one with the single measured quantum value. The unambiguous meaning of the quantum measurement is an unresolved fundamental problem in quantum mechanics; the most common interpretation is that when a measurement is performed, the wavefunction of the quantum system \"collapses\" to a single, definite value.\nBiology.\nIn biology, there is generally no well established theory of measurement. However, the importance of the theoretical context is emphasised. Moreover, the theoretical context stemming from the theory of evolution leads to articulate the theory of measurement and historicity as a fundamental notion.\nAmong the most developed fields of measurement in biology are the measurement of genetic diversity and species diversity.\nMeasurement in Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) is the systematic method of observing and recording behavior. It allows behavior analysts to quantify progress, track interventions, and make data-driven decisions. There are three types of ABA measurement: Continuous Measurement, Discontinuous Measurement, and Permanent Product Recording. Continuous measurement records every instance of a behavior during observation. Discontinuous measurement samples behavior instead of recording every occurrence. Permanent products measure tangible outcomes of behavior rather than the behavior itself.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19023", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19023", "title": "Malden Island", "text": "Island in the central Pacific Ocean\nMalden Island, sometimes called Independence Island in the 19th century, is a low, arid, uninhabited atoll in the central Pacific Ocean, about in area. It is one of the Line Islands belonging to the Republic of Kiribati. The lagoon is entirely enclosed by land, though it is connected to the sea by underground channels, and is quite salty.\nThe island is chiefly notable for its ancient stone architecture, its once-extensive deposits of phosphatic guano (exploited by Australian interests from c. 1860\u20131927), its former use as the site of the first British H-bomb tests (Operation Grapple, 1957), and its current importance as a protected area for breeding seabirds.\nThe island is designated as the \"Malden Island Wildlife Sanctuary\". In 2014 the Kiribati government established a fishing exclusion zone around each of the southern Line Islands (Caroline (commonly called Millennium), Flint, Vostok, Malden, and Starbuck).\nGeography.\nMalden Island is located south of the equator, south of Honolulu, Hawaii, and more than west of the coast of South America. The nearest land is uninhabited Starbuck Island, to the southwest. The closest inhabited place is Tongareva (Penrhyn Island), to the southwest. The nearest airport is on Kiritimati (Christmas Island), to the northwest. Other nearby islands (all uninhabited) include Jarvis Island, to the northwest, Vostok Island, to the south-southeast, and Caroline (Millennium) Island, to the southeast.\nThe island has roughly the shape of an equilateral triangle, with on a side, aligned with the southwest side running northwest to southeast. The west and south corners are slightly truncated, shortening the north, east and southwest coasts to about , and adding shorter west and south coasts about 1 to 2 km (\u00bd\u20131 mi) in length. A large, mostly shallow, irregularly shaped lagoon, containing a number of small islets, fills the east central part of the island. The lagoon is entirely enclosed by land, but only by relatively narrow strips along its north and east sides. It is connected to the sea by underground channels, and is quite salty. Most of the land area of the island lies to the south and west of the lagoon. The total area of the island is about .\nThe island is very low, no more than above sea level at its highest point. The highest elevations are found along a rim that closely follows the coastline. The interior forms a depression that is only a few metres above sea level in the western part and is below sea level (filled by the lagoon) in the east central part. Because of this topography, the ocean cannot be seen from much of Malden's interior.\nThere is no standing fresh water on Malden Island, though a fresh water lens may exist.\nA continuous heavy surf falls all along the coast, forming a narrow white to gray sandy beach. Except on the west coast, where the white sandy beach is more extensive than elsewhere, a strip of dark gray coral rubble, forming a series of low ridges parallel to the coast, lies within the narrow beach, extending inward to the island rim.\nFlora and fauna.\nBecause of Malden's isolation and aridity, its vegetation is extremely limited. Sixteen species of vascular plants have been recorded, of which nine are indigenous.The island is largely covered in stunted \"Sida fallax\" scrub, low herbs and grasses. Few, if any, of the clumps of stunted \"Pisonia grandis\" once found on the island still survive. Coconut palms planted by the guano diggers did not thrive, although a few dilapidated trees may still be seen. Introduced weeds, including the low-growing woody vine \"Tribulus cistoides\", now dominate extensive open areas, providing increased cover for young sooty terns.\nMalden is an important breeding island for about a dozen species including masked boobies (\"Sula dactylatra\"), red-footed booby (\"Sula sula\"), tropicbirds (\"Phaethontidae\"), great frigatebird (\"Fregata minor\"), lesser frigatebird (\"Fregata ariel\"), grey-backed tern (\"Onychoprion lunata\"), red-tailed tropicbird (\"Phaethon rubricauda\") and sooty terns (\"sterna fuscata\"). It is also an important winter-stop for the bristle-thighed curlew (\"Numenius tahitiensis\"), a migrant from Alaska, and other migratory seabirds (nineteen species in all).\nTwo kinds of lizards, the mourning gecko (\"Lepidodactylus lugubris\") and snake-eyed skink (\"Cryptoblepharus boutonii\"), are present on Malden, together with brown libellulid dragonfly.\nCats, pigs, goats and house mice were introduced to Malden during the guano-digging period. While the goats and pigs have all died off, feral cats and house mice are still present. Small numbers of green turtles nest on the beaches, and hermit crabs abound.\nHistory.\nDiscovery.\nThe earliest documented sighting of Malden Island by Europeans was on 25 March 1825, by Captain Samuel Bunker (1796\u20131874) of the whaler \"Alexander\" of Nantucket. Bunker's journal for that day mentioned that \"it proved to be an island seen by the \"Sarah Ann\" of London and the \"Independence\" of Nantucket, Capt. Whippey\". They were also whaling vessels. That logbook extract may explain several things: why Malden Island was once known as \"Independence Island\", Sarah Ann Island (a phantom island), and that Bunker was not the first European to see the island. He could not land, and sailed on the next day.\nOn 30 July 1825, the island was seen again by Captain The 7th Lord Byron (a cousin of the famous poet). Byron, commanding the British warship HMS \"Blonde\", was returning to London from a special mission to Honolulu to repatriate the remains of the young king and queen of Hawaii, who had died of measles during a visit to Britain. The island was named after Lieutenant Charles Robert Malden, navigator of the \"Blonde\", who sighted the island and briefly explored it. Andrew Bloxam, naturalist of the \"Blonde\", and James Macrae, a botanist travelling for the Royal Horticultural Society, joined in exploring the island and recorded their observations. Malden may have been the island sighted in 1823 by another captain, William Clark of the whaling vessel \"Winslow\".\nEarly history.\nAt the time of its discovery by Europeans, Malden had no population. However, extensive archaeological sites on the island point to occupation by Polynesian people in the past. Sites on the island are consistent with pre-contact Polynesian architecture of the wider region and are noted to be especially similar in form to architectural forms in Tonga.\nThese sites are clustered along the northwest and south beach ridges. A total of 21 archaeological sites have been catalogued on the island. The sites include temple platforms, called marae, house sites, and graves. Due to the nature of early archaeological classification of sites at the time of classification, these sites are composed of irregular groups of above ground architecture and should not be taken as representative given a lack of more intensive subterranean investigation. Comparisons with stone structures on Tuamotu atolls show that a population of between 100 and 200 people could have produced all of the Malden structures. Marae of a similar type are found on Raivavae, one of the Austral Islands. However, no studies have been conducted on the agricultural potential of the island to corroborate this.\nWhalers and guano diggers.\nIn the first half of the 19th century, during the heyday of American whaling in the central Pacific, Malden was visited on a number of occasions by American whalers.\nIn 1918, schooner \"Annie Larsen\", infamous for her role in the Hindu\u2013German Conspiracy, was stranded at Malden Island.\nMalden was claimed by the U.S. Guano Company under the Guano Islands Act of 1856, which authorized citizens to take possession of uninhabited islands under the authority of the United States for the purpose of removing guano, a valuable agricultural fertilizer. Before the American company could begin their operations, the island was occupied by an Australian company under British licence. This company and its successors exploited the island continuously from the 1860s through 1927.\nWriter Beatrice Grimshaw, a visitor to Malden in the guano-digging era, decried the \"glaring barrenness of the bit island\", declaring that \"...shade, coolness, refreshing fruit, pleasant sights and sounds: there are none. For those who live on the island, it is the scene of an exile which has to be endured somehow or other\". She described Malden as containing \"a little settlement fronted by a big wooden pier, and a desolate plain of low greyish-green herbage, relieved here and there by small bushes bearing insignificant yellow flowers\". Water for settlers was produced by large distillation plants, since no fresh-water wells could be successfully dug on the island.\nThe five or six European supervisors on the island were given \"a row of little tin-roofed, one-storeyed houses above the beach\", while the native labourers from Niue Island and Aitutaki were housed in \"big, barn-like shelters\". Grimshaw described these edifices as being \"large, bare, shady buildings fitted with wide shelves, on which the men spread their mats and pillows to sleep\". Their food consisted of \"rice, biscuits, yams, tinned beef, and tea, with a few cocoanuts for those who may fall sick\". Food for the white supervisors consisted of \"tinned food of various kinds, also bread, rice, fowls, pork, goat, and goat's milk\", but vegetables were hard to come by.\nIndentured labourers on Malden were contracted for one year, paid ten shillings per week plus room and board, and repatriated to their home islands when their contracts expired. Salaries for the supervisors were described as \"quite high\". Some labourers were prisoners, sentenced by New Zealand resident agents. Work hours were 5\u00a0am to 5\u00a0pm, with one hour and 45 minutes given off for meals.\nThe guano diggers constructed a unique railroad on Malden Island, with cars powered by large sails. Laborers pushed empty carts from the loading area up the tramway to the digging pits, where they were loaded with guano. At the end of the day, the sails were unfurled, and the train cars whisked back to the settlement by the prevailing southeastern winds. While cars were known to jump the tracks more than once during these excursions, the system seems to have worked fairly well. Railroad handcars were also used. This tramway remained in use on Malden as late as 1924, and its roadbed still exists on the island today.\nAlthough guano digging continued on Malden through the early 1920s, all human activity on the island had ceased by the early 1930s. No further human use seems to have been made of Malden until 1956.\nBritish nuclear testing.\nIn 1956, the United Kingdom selected Malden as the \"instrumentation site\" for Operation Grapple its first series of thermonuclear (H-bomb) weapons tests, based at Kiritimati (Christmas Island). In 1957, between May 15 and June 19, three thermonuclear devices with yields ranging between 200\u2013720 kt were detonated at high altitude a short distance offshore. British officials insisted that Malden should not be called a \"target island\". The airstrip constructed on the island by the Royal Engineers in 1956\u201357 remained usable in July 1979. Multiple people were invited to observe these tests including future governor general and president of Fiji Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau.\nMalden Island today.\nMalden was incorporated in the British Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony in 1972, and included in the portion of the colony which became the Republic of Kiribati in 1979. The U.S. continued to dispute British sovereignty, based on its nineteenth century \"Guano Act\" claims, until after Kiribati became independent. On 20 September 1979, representatives of the United States and Kiribati met on Tarawa Atoll in the Gilberts group of Kiribati, and signed a treaty of friendship between their two nations (commonly referred to as the Treaty of Tarawa of 1979) by which the United States recognized Kiribati's sovereignty over Malden and thirteen other islands in the Line and Phoenix Islands groups. This treaty entered into force on 23 September 1983.\nThe main value of the island to Kiribati lies in the resources of the exclusive economic zone which surrounds it, particularly the rich tuna fisheries. Gypsum deposits on the island itself are extensive, but do not appear to be economically viable under foreseeable market conditions, mainly due to cost of transportation. Some revenue has been realized from ecotourism; the \"World Discoverer\", an adventure cruise ship operated by \"Society Expeditions\", visited the island once or twice annually for several years in the mid-1990s.\nMalden was reserved as a wildlife sanctuary and closed area, and was officially designated as the \"Malden Island Wildlife Sanctuary\", on 29 May 1975, under the 1975 Wildlife Conservation Ordinance. The principal purpose of this reservation was to protect the large breeding populations of seabirds. This sanctuary is administered by the Wildlife Conservation Unit of the Ministry of Line and Phoenix Islands Development, headquartered on Kiritimati. There is no resident staff at Malden, and occasional visits by foreign yachtsmen and fishermen cannot be monitored from Kiritimati. A fire in 1977, possibly caused by visitors, threatened breeding seabirds; this remains a potential threat, particularly during periods of drought.\nThe island is now an important cultural and archaeological site including 21 archaeological sites, marae, and polynesian grave sites.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19025", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19025", "title": "Monopoly/game", "text": ""}
{"id": "19026", "revid": "49873355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19026", "title": "Mater lectionis", "text": "Letters to indicate vowels in some Semitic languages\nA mater lectionis ( , ; , pl. matres lectionis ; original ) is any consonant letter that is used to indicate a vowel, primarily in the writing of Semitic languages such as Arabic, Hebrew and Syriac. The letters that do this in Hebrew are \"aleph\" , \"he\" , \"vav\" and \"yud\" , with the latter two in particular being more often vowels than they are consonants. In Arabic, the \"matres lectionis\" (though they are much less often referred to thus) are \"\u02bealif\" , \"w\u0101w\" and \"y\u0101\u02be\" .\nThe original value of the \"matres lectionis\" corresponds closely to what are called in modern linguistics \"glides\" or \"semivowels\".\nOverview.\nBecause the scripts used to write some Semitic languages lack vowel letters, unambiguous reading of a text might be difficult. Therefore, to indicate vowels (mostly long), consonant letters are used. For example, in the Hebrew construct-state form \"b\u0113t\", meaning \"the house of\", the middle letter in the spelling acts as a vowel, but in the corresponding absolute-state form \"bayit\" (\"house\"), which is spelled the same, the same letter represents a genuine consonant. \"Matres lectionis\" are extensively employed only in Hebrew, Aramaic, Syriac and Arabic, but the phenomenon is also found in the Ugaritic, Moabite, South Arabian and Phoenician alphabets.\nOrigins and development.\nHistorically, the practice of using \"matres lectionis\" seems to have originated when and diphthongs, written with the \"yod\" and the \"waw\" consonant letters respectively, monophthongized to simple long vowels and . This epiphenomenal association between consonant letters and vowel sounds was then seized upon and used in words without historic diphthongs.\nIn general terms, it is observable that early Phoenician texts have very few \"matres lectionis\", and that during most of the 1st millennium BCE, Hebrew and Aramaic were quicker to develop \"matres lectionis\" than Phoenician. However, in its latest period of development in North Africa (referred to as \"Punic\"), Phoenician developed a very full use of \"matres lectionis\", including the use of the letter \"ayin\" &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e2\u200e, also used for this purpose much later in Yiddish orthography.\nIn pre-exilic Hebrew, there was a significant development of the use of the letter \"he\" to indicate word final vowels other than \"\u012b\" and \"\u016b\". This was probably inspired by the phonological change of the third-person singular possessive suffix from &gt; &gt; in most environments. However, in later periods of Hebrew, the orthography was changed so word-final \"\u014d\" was no longer written with , except in a few archaically-spelled proper names, such as Solomon and Shiloh . The difference between the spelling of the third-person singular possessive suffix (as attached to singular nouns) with in early Hebrew versus with in later Hebrew has become an issue in the authentication of the Jehoash Inscription.\nAccording to Sass (5), already in the Middle Kingdom there were some cases of \"matres lectionis\", i.e. consonant graphemes which were used to transcribe vowels in foreign words, namely in Punic (Jensen 290, Naveh 62), Aramaic, and Hebrew (, , ; sometimes even \"aleph\" ; Naveh 62). Naveh (ibid.) notes that the earliest Aramaic and Hebrew documents already used \"matres lectionis\". Some scholars argue that the Greeks must therefore have borrowed their alphabet from the Arameans. However, the practice has older roots, as the Semitic cuneiform alphabet of Ugarit (13th century BC) already had \"matres lectionis\" (Naveh 138).\nUsage in different languages.\nHebrew.\nThe earliest method of indicating some vowels in Hebrew writing was to use the consonant letters \"yod\" , \"waw\" , \"he\" , and \"aleph\" of the Hebrew alphabet to also write long vowels in some cases. Originally, and were only used as matres lectiones at the end of words, and and were used mainly to write the original diphthongs and as well as sequences ( surrounded by two vowels, which sometimes simplified to plain long vowels). Gradually, as it was found to be insufficient for differentiating between similar nouns, and were also inserted to mark some long vowels of non-diphthongal origin.\nIf words can be written with or without \"matres lectionis\", spellings that include the letters are called \"mal\u0113\" (Hebrew) or \"plene\" (Latin), meaning \"full\", and spellings without them are called \"\u1e25aser\" or \"defective\". In some verb forms, \"matres lectionis\" are almost always used. Around the 9th century CE it was decided that the system of \"matres lectionis\" did not suffice to indicate the vowels precisely enough for purposes of liturgical recitation of Biblical texts so a supplemental vowel pointing system (\"niqqud\", diacritic symbols indicating vowel pronunciation and other important phonological features not written by the traditional basic consonantal orthography) joined \"matres lectionis\" as part of the Hebrew writing system.\nIn some words in Hebrew, there is a choice of whether to use a \"mater lectionis\" or not, and in modern printed texts \"matres lectionis\" are sometimes used even for short vowels, which is considered to be grammatically incorrect according to traditional norms, though instances are found as far back as Talmudic times. Such texts from Judaea and Galilee were noticeably more inclined to \"mal\u0113\" spellings than texts from Babylonia. Similarly, in the Middle Ages, Ashkenazi Jews tended to use \"mal\u0113\" spellings under the influence of European languages, but Sephardi Jews tended to use \"\u1e25aser\" spellings under the influence of Arabic.\nMost commonly, \"yod\" indicates \"i\" or \"e\", while \"waw\" indicates \"o\" or \"u\". \"Aleph\" was not systematically developed as a \"mater lectionis\" in Hebrew (unlike in Aramaic and Arabic), but it is occasionally used to indicate an \"a\" vowel. (However, a silent , indicating an original glottal stop consonant sound that has become silent in some contexts in Hebrew pronunciation, can occur after almost any vowel.) At the end of a word, \"he\" can also be used to indicate that the vowel \"a\" or \"e\" should be pronounced.\nExamples:\nArabic.\nIn Arabic, there is no choice, and the almost invariable rule is that a long vowel is written with a \"mater lectionis\" and a short vowel with a diacritic symbol, but the Uthmanic orthography, the one in which the Quran is traditionally written and printed, has some differences, which are not always consistent. Also, under influence from orthography of European languages, transliterating of vowels in borrowed words into Arabic is usually done using \"matres lectionis\" in place of diacritics, even when the vowel transliterated is short or when words from another Semitic language, such as Hebrew, are transliterated. That phenomenon is augmented by the neglect of diacritics in most printed forms since the beginning of mechanical printing.\nThe name given to the three \"matres lectionis\" by traditional Arabic grammar is (, 'consonants of softness and lengthening'), or (, 'causal consonants' or 'consonants of infirmity', because as in Greek grammar, words with 'accidents' were deemed to be afflicted, ill, in opposition to 'healthy' words without accidents).\nInformal orthographies of spoken varieties of Arabic also use \"h\u0101\u02be\" to indicate a shorter version of \"alif\" in final position, a usage augmented by the ambiguity of the use of and \"t\u0101\u02be marb\u016b\u1e6dah\" in formal Arabic orthography. It is a formal orthography in other languages that use Arabic script, such as Kurdish alphabets.\nSyriac.\nSyriac-Aramaic vowels are classified into three groups: the \"alap\" (), the \"waw\" (), and the \"yod\" (). The \"mater lectionis\" was developed as early as the 6th century to represent long vowels, which were earlier denoted by a dot under the line. The most frequent ones are the \"yod\" and the \"waw\", while the \"alap\" is mostly restricted to some transliterated words.\nMandaic.\nIn the Mandaic alphabet, vowels are usually written out in full. The first letter, \"a\" (corresponding to \"alaph\"), is used to represent a range of open vowels. The sixth letter, \"wa\", is used for close back vowels (\"u\" and \"o\"), and the tenth letter, \"ya\" is used for close front vowels (\"i\" and \"e\"). These last two can also serve as the consonants \"w/v\" and \"y\". The eighth letter corresponds to the Semitic \"heth\", and is called \"eh\"; it is pronounced as a long \"i\"-vowel but is used only as a suffix for the third person singular. The sixteenth letter, \"e\" (Aramaic \"ayn\"), usually represents \"e\" at the beginning of a word or, when followed by \"wa\" or \"ya\", represents initial \"u\" or \"i\" respectively.\nInfluence on other languages.\nLater, in some adaptations of the Arabic alphabet (such those sometimes used for Kurdish and Uyghur) and of the Hebrew alphabet (such as those used for Judeo-Arabic, Yiddish and Judaeo-Spanish), \"matres lectionis\" were generally used for all or most vowels, thus in effect becoming vowel letters: see Yiddish orthography. This tendency was taken to its logical conclusion in fully alphabetic scripts such as Greek, Latin, and Cyrillic. Many of the vowel letters in such languages historically go back to \"matres lectionis\" in the Phoenician script. For example, the letter \u27e8i\u27e9 was originally derived from the consonant letter \"yod\". Similarly the vowel letters in the Avestan alphabet were adapted from \"matres lectionis\" in the version of the Aramaic alphabet adapted as the Pahlavi scripts.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19027", "revid": "1329099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19027", "title": "My Fair Lady", "text": "Stage musical by Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe\nMy Fair Lady is a musical with a book and lyrics by Alan Jay Lerner and music by Frederick Loewe. The story, based on George Bernard Shaw's 1913 play \"Pygmalion\" and on the 1938 film adaptation of the play, concerns Eliza Doolittle, a Cockney flower girl who takes speech lessons from professor Henry Higgins, a phonetician, so that she may pass as a lady. Despite his cynical nature and difficulty understanding women, Higgins grows attached to her.\nThe musical's 1956 Broadway production was a notable critical and popular success, winning six Tony Awards, including Best Musical. It set a record for the longest run of any musical on Broadway up to that time and was followed by a hit London production. Rex Harrison and Julie Andrews starred in both productions. Many revivals have followed, and the 1964 film version won the Academy Award for Best Picture.\nPlot.\nAct I.\nIn Edwardian London, Eliza Doolittle is a flower girl with a thick Cockney accent. The noted phonetician Professor Henry Higgins encounters Eliza at Covent Garden and laments the vulgarity of her dialect (\"Why Can't the English?\"). Higgins also meets Colonel Pickering, another linguist, and invites him to stay as his houseguest. Eliza and her friends wonder what it would be like to live a comfortable life (\"Wouldn't It Be Loverly?\").\nEliza's dustman father, Alfred P. Doolittle, stops by the next morning searching for money for a drink (\"With a Little Bit of Luck\"). Soon after, Eliza comes to Higgins's house, seeking elocution lessons so that she can get a job as an assistant in a florist's shop. Higgins wagers Pickering that, within six months, by teaching Eliza to speak properly, he will enable her to pass for a proper lady.\nEliza becomes part of Higgins's household. Though Higgins sees himself as a kindhearted man who merely cannot get along with women (\"I'm an Ordinary Man\"), to others he appears self-absorbed and misogynistic. Eliza endures Higgins's tyrannical speech tutoring. Frustrated, she dreams of different ways to kill him (\"Just You Wait\"). Higgins's servants lament the stressful atmosphere (\"The Servants' Chorus\").\nJust as Higgins is about to give up on her, Eliza suddenly recites one of her diction exercises in perfect upper-class style (\"The Rain in Spain\"). Though Mrs Pearce, the housekeeper, insists that Eliza go to bed, she declares she is too excited to sleep (\"I Could Have Danced All Night\").\nFor her first public tryout, Higgins takes Eliza to his mother's box at Ascot Racecourse (\"Ascot Gavotte\"). Though Eliza shocks everyone when she forgets herself while watching a race and reverts to foul language, she does capture the heart of Freddy Eynsford-Hill. Freddy calls on Eliza that evening, and he declares that he will wait for her in the street outside Higgins' house (\"On the Street Where You Live\").\nEliza's final test requires her to pass as a lady at the Embassy Ball. After more weeks of preparation, she is ready. (\"Eliza's Entrance\"). All the ladies and gentlemen at the ball admire her, and the Queen of Transylvania invites her to dance with the prince (\"Embassy Waltz\"). A Hungarian phonetician, Zoltan Karpathy, attempts to discover Eliza's origins. Higgins allows Karpathy to dance with Eliza.\nAct II.\nThe ball is a success; Karpathy has declared Eliza to be a Hungarian princess. Pickering and Higgins revel in their triumph (\"You Did It\"), failing to pay attention to Eliza. Eliza is insulted at receiving no credit for her success, packing up and leaving the Higgins house. As she leaves she finds Freddy, who begins to tell her how much he loves her, but she tells him that she has heard enough words; if he really loves her, he should show it (\"Show Me\").\nEliza and Freddy return to Covent Garden but she finds she no longer feels at home there. Her father is there as well, and he tells her that he has received a surprise bequest from an American millionaire, which has raised him to middle-class respectability, and now must marry his lover. Doolittle and his friends have one last spree before the wedding (\"Get Me to the Church on Time\").\nHiggins awakens the next morning. He finds himself out of sorts without Eliza. He wonders why she left after the triumph at the ball and concludes that men (especially himself) are far superior to women (\"A Hymn to Him\"). Col. Pickering is concerned about Eliza's well-being, calling the police as well as contacting an old chum he believes will help them track her down.\nHiggins despondently visits his mother's house, where he finds Eliza. Eliza declares she no longer needs Higgins (\"Without You\"). As Higgins walks home, he realizes he's grown attached to Eliza (\"I've Grown Accustomed to Her Face\"). At home, he sentimentally reviews the recording he made the day Eliza first came to him for lessons, hearing his own harsh words. Eliza suddenly appears in his home. In suppressed joy at their reunion, Professor Higgins scoffs and asks, \"Eliza, where the devil are my slippers?\"\nCharacters and original Broadway cast.\nThe original cast of the Broadway stage production:\nMusical numbers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBackground.\nIn the mid-1930s, film producer Gabriel Pascal acquired the rights to produce film versions of several of George Bernard Shaw's plays, \"Pygmalion\" among them. However, Shaw, having had a bad experience with \"The Chocolate Soldier\", a Viennese operetta based on his play \"Arms and the Man\", refused permission for \"Pygmalion\" to be adapted into a musical. After Shaw died in 1950, Pascal asked lyricist Alan Jay Lerner to write the musical adaptation. Lerner agreed, and he and his partner Frederick Loewe began work. But they quickly realised that the play violated several key rules for constructing a musical: the main story was not a love story, there was no subplot or secondary love story, and there was no place for an ensemble. Many people, including Oscar Hammerstein II, who, with Richard Rodgers, had also tried his hand at adapting \"Pygmalion\" into a musical and had given up, told Lerner that converting the play to a musical was impossible, so he and Loewe abandoned the project for two years.\nDuring this time, the collaborators separated, and Pascal died. Lerner had been trying to musicalize \"Li'l Abner\" when he read Pascal's obituary and found himself thinking about \"Pygmalion\" again. When he and Loewe reunited, everything fell into place. All of the insurmountable obstacles that had stood in their way two years earlier disappeared when the team realized that the play needed few changes apart from (according to Lerner) \"adding the action that took place between the acts of the play\". They then excitedly began writing the show. However, Chase Manhattan Bank was in charge of Pascal's estate, and the musical rights to \"Pygmalion\" were sought both by Lerner and Loewe and by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, whose executives called Lerner to discourage him from challenging the studio. Loewe decided, \"We will write the show without the rights, and when the time comes for them to decide who is to get them, we will be so far ahead of everyone else that they will be forced to give them to us.\" For five months Lerner and Loewe wrote, hired technical designers, and made casting decisions. The bank, in the end, granted them the musical rights.\nVarious titles were suggested for the musical. Dominic McHugh wrote: \"During the autumn of 1955, the show [was] typically referred to as \"My Lady Liza\", and most of the contracts refer to this as the title.\" Lerner preferred \"My Fair Lady\", relating both to one of Shaw's provisional titles for \"Pygmalion\" and to the final line of every verse of the nursery rhyme \"London Bridge Is Falling Down\". Recalling that the Gershwins' 1925 musical \"Tell Me More\" had been titled \"My Fair Lady\" in its out-of-town tryout, and also had a musical number under that title, Lerner made a courtesy call to Ira Gershwin, alerting him to the use of the title for the Lerner and Loewe musical.\nNo\u00ebl Coward was the first to be offered the role of Henry Higgins, but he turned it down, suggesting the producers cast Rex Harrison instead. After much deliberation, Harrison agreed to accept the part. Mary Martin was an early choice for the role of Eliza Doolittle, but declined the role. Young actress Julie Andrews was \"discovered\" and cast as Eliza after the show's creative team went to see her Broadway debut in \"The Boy Friend\". Moss Hart agreed to direct after hearing only two songs. The experienced orchestrators Robert Russell Bennett and Philip J. Lang were entrusted with the arrangements, and the show quickly went into rehearsal.\nThe musical's script used several scenes that Shaw had written especially for the 1938 film version of \"Pygmalion\", including the Embassy Ball sequence and the final scene of the 1938 film rather than the ending for Shaw's original play. The montage showing Eliza's lessons was also expanded, combining both Lerner's and Shaw's dialogue. The artwork on the original Broadway poster (and the sleeve of the cast recording) is by Al Hirschfeld, who drew the playwright Shaw as a heavenly puppetmaster pulling the strings on the Henry Higgins character, while Higgins in turn attempts to control Eliza Doolittle.\nProductions.\nOriginal Broadway production.\nThe musical had its pre-Broadway tryout at New Haven's Shubert Theatre. At the first preview Rex Harrison, who was unaccustomed to singing in front of a live orchestra, \"announced that under no circumstances would he go on that night...with those thirty-two interlopers in the pit\". He locked himself in his dressing room and came out little more than an hour before curtain time. The whole company had been dismissed but were recalled, and opening night was a success. \"My Fair Lady\" then played for four weeks at the Erlanger Theatre in Philadelphia, beginning on February 15, 1956.\nThe musical premiered on Broadway March 15, 1956, at the Mark Hellinger Theatre in New York City. It transferred to the Broadhurst Theatre and then The Broadway Theatre, where it closed on September 29, 1962, after 2,717 performances, a record at the time. Moss Hart directed and Hanya Holm was choreographer. In addition to stars Rex Harrison, Julie Andrews and Stanley Holloway, the original cast included Robert Coote, Cathleen Nesbitt, John Michael King, and Reid Shelton. Harrison was replaced by Edward Mulhare in November 1957 and Sally Ann Howes replaced Andrews in February 1958. By the start of 1959, it was the biggest grossing Broadway show of all-time with a gross of $10 million.\nThe \"Original Cast Recording\" was released by Columbia Records on April 2, 1956, and Columbia declared it to be \"the first long-playing recording in the industry's history to sell more than a million copies.\" It was the best-selling album in the United States in 1956.\nOriginal London production.\nThe West End production, in which Harrison, Andrews, Coote, and Holloway reprised their roles, opened on April 30, 1958, at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, where it ran for five and a half years (2,281 performances). Edwardian musical comedy star Zena Dare made her last appearance in the musical as Mrs. Higgins. Leonard Weir played Freddy. Harrison left the London cast in March 1959, followed by Andrews in August 1959 and Holloway in October 1959. The original London cast album (1959) was certified Gold in US.\n1970s revivals.\nThe first Broadway revival opened at the St. James Theatre 20 years after the original, on March 25, 1976, and ran there until December 5, 1976; it then transferred to the Lunt-Fontanne Theatre, running from December 9, 1976, until it closed on February 20, 1977, after a total of 377 performances and 7 previews. The director was Jerry Adler, with choreography by Crandall Diehl, based on the original choreography by Hanya Holm. Ian Richardson starred as Higgins, with Christine Andreas as Eliza, George Rose as Alfred P. Doolittle and Robert Coote recreating his role as Colonel Pickering. Both Richardson and Rose were nominated for the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Musical, with the award going to Rose.\nA Cameron MacKintosh revival opened at London's Adelphi Theatre in October 1979, following a national tour. Originated at the Haymarket Theatre Leicester, the production was created under a new agreement with The Arts Council to tour West End standard productions. It featured Tony Britton as Higgins, Liz Robertson as Eliza, Dame Anna Neagle as Higgins's mother, Peter Bayliss as Doolittle, Richard Caldicot as Pickering and Peter Land as Freddy. It was directed by Robin Midgley, with sets by Adrian Vaux, costumes by Tim Goodchild and choreography by Gillian Lynne. Britton and Robertson were both nominated for Olivier Awards.\n1981 and 1993 Broadway revivals.\nThe second Broadway revival of the original production opened at the Uris Theatre on August 18, 1981, and closed on November 29, 1981, after 119 performances and 5 previews. Rex Harrison recreated his role as Higgins, with Jack Gwillim as Pickering, Milo O'Shea as Doolittle, and Cathleen Nesbitt, at 93 years old reprising her role as Mrs. Higgins. The revival co-starred Nancy Ringham as Eliza. The director was Patrick Garland, with choreography by Crandall Diehl, recreating the original Hanya Holm dances.\nA new revival directed by Howard Davies opened at the Virginia Theatre on December 9, 1993, and closed on May 1, 1994, after 165 performances and 16 previews. The cast starred Richard Chamberlain as Higgins, Melissa Errico as Eliza and Paxton Whitehead as Pickering. Julian Holloway, son of Stanley Holloway, recreated his father's role of Alfred P. Doolittle. Donald Saddler was the choreographer.\n2001 London revival; 2003 Hollywood Bowl production.\nCameron Mackintosh produced a new production on March 15, 2001, at the Royal National Theatre, which transferred to the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane on July 21. Directed by Trevor Nunn, with choreography by Matthew Bourne, the musical starred Martine McCutcheon as Eliza and Jonathan Pryce as Higgins, with Dennis Waterman as Alfred P. Doolittle. This revival won three Olivier Awards: Outstanding Musical Production, Best Actress in a Musical (Martine McCutcheon) and Best Theatre Choreographer (Matthew Bourne), with Anthony Ward receiving a nomination for Set Design. In December 2001, Joanna Riding took over the role of Eliza, and in May 2002, Alex Jennings took over as Higgins, both winning Olivier Awards for Best Actor and Best Actress in a Musical respectively in 2003. In March 2003, Anthony Andrews and Laura Michelle Kelly took over the roles until the show closed on August 30, 2003.\nA UK tour of this production began September 28, 2005. The production starred Amy Nuttall and Lisa O'Hare as Eliza, Christopher Cazenove as Henry Higgins, Russ Abbot and Gareth Hale as Doolittle, and Honor Blackman and Hannah Gordon as Mrs. Higgins. The tour ended August 12, 2006.\nIn 2003 a production of the musical at the Hollywood Bowl starred John Lithgow as Higgins, Melissa Errico as Eliza, Roger Daltrey as Doolittle, Kevin Earley as Freddy, Lauri Johnson as Mrs. Pearce, Caroline Blakiston as Mrs. Higgins, and Paxton Whitehead as Colonel Pickering.\n2018 Broadway and 2022 London revival.\nA Broadway revival produced by Lincoln Center Theater and Nederlander Presentations Inc. began previews on March 15, 2018, at the Vivian Beaumont Theater and officially opened on April 19, 2018. It was directed by Bartlett Sher with choreography by Christopher Gattelli, scenic design by Michael Yeargan, costume design by Catherine Zuber and lighting design by Donald Holder. The cast included Lauren Ambrose as Eliza, Harry Hadden-Paton as Professor Henry Higgins, Diana Rigg as Mrs. Higgins, Norbert Leo Butz as Alfred P. Doolittle, Allan Corduner as Colonel Pickering, Jordan Donica as Freddy, and Linda Mugleston as Mrs. Pearce. Replacements included Rosemary Harris as Mrs. Higgins, Laura Benanti as Eliza, and Danny Burstein, then Alexander Gemignani, as Alfred P. Doolittle. The revival closed on July 7, 2019, after 39 previews and 509 regular performances. A North American tour of the production, starring Shereen Ahmed and Laird Mackintosh as Eliza and Higgins, opened in December 2019. Performances were suspended in March 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and resumed in September 2021. It is scheduled to run through August 2022.\nThe production was presented by the English National Opera at the London Coliseum with performances from May 7, 2022, and an official opening on May 18, for a 16-week run until August 27. It starred Amara Okereke as Eliza, with Hadden-Paton reprising the role of Higgins, Stephen K. Amos as Alfred P. Doolittle, Vanessa Redgrave as Mrs. Higgins, Malcolm Sinclair as Colonel Pickering, Maureen Beattie as Mrs. Pearce and Sharif Afifi as Freddy. Redgrave left the production early after contracting COVID-19. A UK and Ireland tour began in September 2022 starring Michael Xavier as Higgins, Charlotte Kennedy as Eliza, Adam Woodyatt as Alfred P. Doolittle, John Middleton as Colonel Pickering, Lesley Garrett as Mrs Pearce and Tom Liggins as Freddy.\nOther major productions.\nBerlin, 1961.\nA German translation of \"My Fair Lady\" opened on October 1, 1961, at the Theater des Westens in Berlin, starring Karin H\u00fcbner and Paul Hubschmid (and conducted, as was the Broadway opening, by Franz Allers). Coming at the height of Cold War tensions, just weeks after the closing of the East Berlin\u2013West Berlin border and the erection of the Berlin Wall, this was the first staging of a Broadway musical in Berlin since World War II. As such it was seen as a symbol of West Berlin's cultural renaissance and resistance. Lost attendance from East Berlin (now no longer possible) was partly made up by a \"musical air bridge\" of flights bringing in patrons from West Germany, and the production was embraced by Berliners, running for two years.\n2007 New York Philharmonic concert and US tour.\nIn 2007 the New York Philharmonic held a full-costume concert presentation of the musical. The concert had a four-day engagement lasting from March 7\u201310 at Lincoln Center's Avery Fisher Hall. It starred Kelsey Grammer as Higgins, Kelli O'Hara as Eliza, Charles Kimbrough as Pickering, and Brian Dennehy as Alfred Doolittle. Marni Nixon played Mrs. Higgins; Nixon had provided the singing voice of Audrey Hepburn in the film version.\nA U.S. tour of Mackintosh's 2001 West End production ran from September 12, 2007, to June 22, 2008. The production starred Christopher Cazenove as Higgins, Lisa O'Hare as Eliza, Walter Charles as Pickering, Tim Jerome as Alfred Doolittle and Nixon as Mrs. Higgins, replacing Sally Ann Howes.\n2008 Australian tour.\nAn Australian tour produced by Opera Australia commenced in May 2008. The production starred Reg Livermore as Higgins, Taryn Fiebig as Eliza, Robert Grubb as Alfred Doolittle and Judi Connelli as Mrs Pearce. John Wood took the role of Alfred Doolittle in Queensland, and Richard E. Grant played the role of Henry Higgins at the Theatre Royal, Sydney.\n2010 Paris revival.\nA new production was staged by Robert Carsen at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre du Ch\u00e2telet in Paris for a limited 27-performance run, opening December 9, 2010, and closing January 2, 2011. It was presented in English. The costumes were designed by Anthony Powell and the choreography was by Lynne Page. The cast was as follows: Sarah Gabriel / Christine Arand (Eliza Doolittle), Alex Jennings (Henry Higgins), Margaret Tyzack (Mrs. Higgins), Nicholas Le Prevost (Colonel Pickering), Donald Maxwell (Alfred Doolittle), and Jenny Galloway (Mrs. Pearce).\n2012 Sheffield production.\nA new production of \"My Fair Lady\" opened at Sheffield Crucible on December 13, 2012. Dominic West played Henry Higgins, and Carly Bawden played Eliza Doolittle. Sheffield Theatres' Artistic Director Daniel Evans was the director. The production ran until January 26, 2013.\n2016 Australian production.\nThe Gordon Frost Organisation, together with Opera Australia, presented a production at the Sydney Opera House from August 30 to November 5, 2016. It was directed by Julie Andrews and featured the set and costume designs of the original 1956 production by Smith and Beaton. The production sold more tickets than any other in the history of the Sydney Opera House. The show's opening run in Sydney was so successful that in November 2016, ticket pre-sales were released for a re-run in Sydney, with the extra shows scheduled between August 24 and September 10, 2017, at the Capitol Theatre. In 2017, the show toured to Brisbane from March 12 and Melbourne from May 11.\nThe cast featured Alex Jennings as Higgins (Charles Edwards for Brisbane and Melbourne seasons), Anna O'Byrne as Eliza, Reg Livermore as Alfred P. Doolittle, Robyn Nevin as Mrs. Higgins (later Pamela Rabe), Mark Vincent as Freddy, Tony Llewellyn-Jones as Colonel Pickering, Deidre Rubenstein as Mrs. Pearce, and David Whitney as Karpathy.\nCritical reception.\nAccording to Geoffrey Block, \"Opening night critics immediately recognized that \"My Fair Lady\" fully measured up to the Rodgers and Hammerstein model of an integrated musical\u00a0... Robert Coleman\u00a0... wrote 'The Lerner-Loewe songs are not only delightful, they advance the action as well. They are ever so much more than interpolations, or interruptions.'\" The musical opened to \"unanimously glowing reviews, one of which said 'Don't bother reading this review now. You'd better sit right down and send for those tickets\u00a0...' Critics praised the thoughtful use of Shaw's original play, the brilliance of the lyrics, and Loewe's well-integrated score.\"\nA sampling of praise from critics, excerpted from a book form of the musical, published in 1956.\nSteven Suskin wrote that the show was one of only eight musicals that opened on Broadway between 1943 and 1964 to \"unanimous raves from the major first-night newspaper critics\".\nThe reception from Shavians was more mixed, however. Eric Bentley, for instance, called it \"a terrible treatment of Mr. Shaw's play, [undermining] the basic idea [of the play]\", even though he acknowledged it as \"a delightful show\". \"My Fair Lady\" was later called \"the perfect musical\".\nAwards and nominations.\nOriginal Broadway production.\nSources: BroadwayWorld TheatreWorldAwards DramaCritics.org\n1976 Broadway revival.\nSources: BroadwayWorld Drama Desk\n1979 London revival.\nSource: Olivier Awards\n1981 Broadway revival.\nSource: BroadwayWorld\n1993 Broadway revival.\nSource: Drama Desk\n2001 London revival.\nSource: Olivier Awards\nAdaptations.\n1964 film.\nGeorge Cukor directed the 1964 film adaptation, with Harrison returning in the role of Higgins. The casting of Audrey Hepburn as Eliza created controversy among theatregoers, both because Andrews was regarded as perfect in the part and because Hepburn's singing voice was dubbed (by Marni Nixon). Jack L. Warner, the head of Warner Bros., wanted \"a star with a great deal of name recognition\", but since Andrews did not have any film experience, he deemed success more likely with an established movie star. (Andrews went on to star in \"Mary Poppins\" that same year for which she won both the Academy Award and the Golden Globe for Best Actress.) Lerner in particular disliked the film version of the musical, thinking it did not live up to the standards of Moss Hart's original direction. He was also unhappy with the casting of Hepburn as Eliza Doolittle and that the film was shot in its entirety at the Warner Bros. studio rather than, as he would have preferred, in London. Despite the controversy, \"My Fair Lady\" was considered a major critical and box-office success, and won eight Oscars, including Best Picture of the Year, Best Actor for Rex Harrison, and Best Director for George Cukor.\nCancelled 2008 film.\nColumbia Pictures planned a new adaptation in 2008. By 2011, John Madden had been signed to direct the film, and Emma Thompson had written a new screenplay, but the studio had shelved it by 2014.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19028", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19028", "title": "Martial arts film", "text": "Film genre\nMartial arts films are a subgenre of action films that feature martial arts combat between characters. These combats are usually the films' primary appeal and entertainment value, and often are a method of storytelling and character expression and development. Martial arts are frequently featured in training scenes and other sequences in addition to fights. Martial arts films commonly include hand-to-hand combat along with other types of action, such as stuntwork, chases, and gunfights. Sub-genres of martial arts films include kung fu films, wuxia, karate films, and martial arts action comedy films, while related genres include gun fu, jidaigeki and samurai films.\nNotable actors who have contributed to the genre include Bruce Lee, Jet Li, Jackie Chan, Jean-Claude Van Damme, Tony Jaa, Sammo Hung, Chuck Norris, Toshiro Mifune, Donnie Yen, Gordon Liu, Robin Shou, and Wesley Snipes, among others. Women have also played key roles in the genre, including such actresses as Cheng Pei-pei, Michelle Yeoh, Angela Mao, Zhang Ziyi, Josephine Siao, Cynthia Rothrock, and Kuo Hsiao-Chuang.\nHistory.\nThe first ever martial arts film was a Chinese film released in 1928, \"The Burning of the Red Lotus Temple\" (also translated as \"The Burning of the Red Lotus Monastery\"), a silent film directed by Chinese film director Zhang Shichuan and produced by the Mingxing Film Company. The film pioneered the martial arts film genre, and was the first kung fu action film ever created. The film is based on the popular Chinese novel \"The Romance of the Red Lotus Temple\", which is set in the Qing Dynasty and tells the story of a group of martial artists who band together to defend their temple from raiders. The film is notable for its action sequences and fight scenes, which were groundbreaking for the time and helped establish the martial arts film genre.\nBeginning in 1950 with Akira Kurosawa's \"Rashomon\", starring Toshiro Mifune, Japanese cinema produced a number of samurai films. These films influenced the subsequent Hong Kong kung fu films of Bruce Lee.\nAsian films are known to have a more minimalist approach to film based on their culture. Some martial arts films have only a minimal plot and amount of character development and focus almost exclusively on the action, while others have more creative and complex plots and characters along with action scenes. Films of the latter type are generally considered to be artistically superior films, but many films of the former type are commercially successful and well received by fans of the genre. One of the earliest Hollywood movies to employ the use of martial arts was the 1955 film \"Bad Day at Black Rock\", though the scenes of Spencer Tracy performed barely any realistic fight sequences, but composed mostly of soft knifehand strikes.\nMartial arts films contain many characters who are martial artists and these roles are often played by actors who are real martial artists. If not, actors frequently train in preparation for their roles or the action director may rely more on stylized action or film making tricks like camera angles, editing, doubles, undercranking, wire work and computer-generated imagery. Trampolines and springboards used to be used to increase the height of jumps. The minimalist style employs smaller sets and little space for improvised but explosive fight scenes, as seen by Jackie Chan's films. These techniques are sometimes used by real martial artists as well, depending on the style of action in the film.\nAccording to \"The New York Times\", in the 1960s Jimmy Wang Yu was \"the biggest star of Asian martial arts cinema until the emergence of Bruce Lee.\"\nDuring the 1970s and 1980s, the most visible presence of martial arts films was the hundreds of English-dubbed kung fu and ninja films produced by the Shaw Brothers, Godfrey Ho and other Hong Kong producers. These films were widely broadcast on North American television on weekend timeslots that were often colloquially known as \"Kung Fu Theater\", \"Black Belt Theater\" or variations thereof. Inclusive in this list of films are commercial classics like \"The Big Boss\" (1971), \"Drunken Master\" (1978) and \"One Armed Boxer\" (1972). Those films had a large impact on the spread of practice of traditional Chinese and Japanese martial arts in English-speaking countries.\nMartial arts films have been produced all over the world, but the genre has been dominated by Hong Kong action cinema, peaking from 1971 with the rise of Bruce Lee until the mid-1990s with a general decline in the industry, until it was revived close to the 2000s.\nOther notable figures in the genre include Jackie Chan, Jet Li, Sammo Hung, Yuen Biao, Donnie Yen, and Hwang Jang-lee.\nSonny Chiba, Etsuko Shihomi, and Hiroyuki Sanada starred in numerous karate and jidaigeki films from Japan during the 1970s and early 1980s. Hollywood has also participated in the genre with actors such as Chuck Norris, Sho Kosugi, Jean-Claude Van Damme, Steven Seagal, Brandon Lee (son of Bruce Lee), Wesley Snipes, Gary Daniels, Mark Dacascos, and Jason Statham. \nAccording to the American Film Institute, the success of \"Bloodsport\" (1988), starring Van Damme, helped the resurgence of the martial arts film genre in the United States. According to Van Damme, the film \"helped give the martial arts genre a boost but also foretold certain things like the Ultimate Fighting Championship and the idea of pitting different styles against each other.\"\nIn the 2000s, Thailand's film industry became an international force in the genre with the films of Tony Jaa and the cinema of Vietnam followed suit with \"The Rebel\" (2007) and \"Clash\" (2009). In more recent years, the Indonesian film industry has offered \"Merantau\" (2009) and \"\" (2011).\nThe Middle East has also participated in the genre with actors such as Youssef Mansour who became famous in the 1990s for his Egyptian films that relied on martial arts.\nWomen have also played key roles in the genre, including such actresses as Cheng Pei-pei, Michelle Yeoh, Angela Mao, Zhang Ziyi, Josephine Siao, Cynthia Rothrock, and Kuo Hsiao-Chuang. In addition, western animation has ventured into the genre with the most successful effort being the internationally hailed DreamWorks Animation film franchise \"Kung Fu Panda\", starring Jack Black and Angelina Jolie.\n\"The Matrix\" (1999), whose fight scenes were choreographed by Hong Kong fight choreographer Yuen Woo-ping, is considered revolutionary in American cinema for raising the standard of fight scenes in Western cinema.\nSubgenres.\nIn the Chinese-speaking world, martial arts films are commonly divided into two subcategories: the \"wuxia\" period films (\u6b66\u4fe0\u7247), and the more modern kung fu films (\u529f\u592b\u7247, best epitomized in the films of Bruce Lee). However, according to Hong Kong film director, producer, and movie writer Ronny Yu, wuxia movies are not to be confused with martial arts movies.\nKung fu films are a significant movie genre in themselves. Like westerns for Americans, they have become an identity of Chinese cinema. As the most prestigious movie type in Chinese film history, kung fu movies were among the first Chinese films produced and the \"wuxia\" period films (\u6b66\u4fe0\u7247) are the original form of Chinese kung fu films. The wuxia period films came into vogue due to the thousands of years popularity of wuxia novels (\u6b66\u4fe0\u5c0f\u8aaa). For example, the wuxia novels of Jin Yong and Gu Long directly led to the prevalence of wuxia period films. Outside of the Chinese speaking world the most famous wuxia film made was the Ang Lee film \"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon\" (2000), which was based on the Wang Dulu series of wuxia novels: it earned four Academy Awards, including one for Best Foreign Film.\nMartial arts westerns are usually American films inexpensively filmed in Southwestern United States locations, transposing martial arts themes into an \"old west\" setting; e.g., \"Red Sun\" with Charles Bronson and Toshiro Mifune.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19029", "revid": "4968133", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19029", "title": "Musical film", "text": "Film genre\nMusical film is a film genre in which songs by the characters are interwoven into the narrative, sometimes accompanied by dancing. The songs usually advance the plot or develop the film's characters, but in some cases, they serve merely as breaks in the storyline, often as elaborate \"production numbers\".\nThe musical film was a natural development of the stage musical after the emergence of sound film technology. Typically, the biggest difference between film and stage musicals is the use of lavish background scenery and locations that would be impractical in a theater. Musical films characteristically contain elements reminiscent of theater; performers often treat their song and dance numbers as if a live audience were watching. In a sense, the viewer becomes the diegetic audience, as the performer looks directly into the camera and performs to it.\nWith the advent of sound in the late 1920s, musicals gained popularity with the public and are exemplified by the films of Busby Berkeley, a choreographer known for his distinctive and elaborate set pieces featuring multiple showgirls. These lavish production numbers are typified by his choreographic work in \"42nd Street\", \"Gold Diggers of 1933\", \"Footlight Parade\" (all from 1933). During the 1930s, the musical films of Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers became massive cultural fixtures in the eyes of the American public. These films included, \"Top Hat\" (1935), \"Follow the Fleet\", \"Swing Time\" (both 1936), and \"Shall We Dance\" (1937). Victor Fleming's \"The Wizard of Oz\" (1939) would become a landmark film for movie musical as it experimented with new technology such as Technicolor.\nDuring the 1940s and 1950s, musical films from MGM musicals regularly premiered. These works included: \"Meet Me in St. Louis\" (1944), \"Easter Parade\" (1948), \"On the Town\" (1949), \"An American in Paris\" (1951), \"Singin' in the Rain\" (1952), \"The Band Wagon\" (1953), \"High Society\" (1956), and \"Gigi\" (1958). During this time, films outside the Arthur Freed unit at MGM included \"Holiday Inn\" (1942), \"White Christmas\" (1954), and \"Funny Face\" (1957) as well as \"Oklahoma!\" (1955), \"The King and I\" (1956), \"Carousel\", and \"South Pacific\" (1958). These films of the era typically relied on the star power of such film stars as Fred Astaire, Gene Kelly, Bing Crosby, Frank Sinatra, Judy Garland, Ann Miller, Kathryn Grayson, and Howard Keel. They also relied on film directors such as Stanley Donen and Vincente Minnelli as well as songwriters Comden and Green, Rodgers and Hammerstein, Irving Berlin, Cole Porter, and the Gershwin Brothers.\nDuring the 1960s, films based on stage musicals continued to be critical and box-office successes. These films included, \"West Side Story\" (1961), \"Gypsy\" (1962), \"The Music Man\" (1962), \"Bye Bye Birdie\" (1963), \"My Fair Lady\", \"Mary Poppins\" (both 1964), \"The Sound of Music\" (1965), \"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\", \"How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying\", \"Thoroughly Modern Millie\" (all 1967), \"Oliver!\", and \"Funny Girl\" (both 1968). In the 1970s, film culture and the changing demographics of filmgoers placed greater emphasis on gritty realism, while the pure entertainment and theatricality of classical-era Hollywood musicals was seen as old-fashioned. Despite this, \"Scrooge\" (1970), \"Willy Wonka &amp; the Chocolate Factory\" (1971), \"Fiddler on the Roof\" (1971), \"Cabaret\" (1972), \"1776\" (1972), Disney's \"Bedknobs and Broomsticks\" (1971), and \"Pete's Dragon\" (1977), as well as \"Grease\" and \"The Wiz\" (both 1978), were more traditional musicals closely adapted from stage shows and were strong successes with critics and audiences. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, musicals tended to be mainly coming from the Disney animated films of the period, from composers and lyricists, Howard Ashman, Alan Menken, and Stephen Schwartz. The Disney Renaissance started with 1989's \"The Little Mermaid\", then followed by \"Beauty and the Beast\" (1991), \"Aladdin\" (1992), \"The Lion King\" (1994), \"Pocahontas\" (1995), \"The Hunchback of Notre Dame\" (1996), \"Hercules\" (1997), and \"Mulan\" (1998).\nIn the 21st century, the musical genre has been rejuvenated with darker musicals, musical biopics, musical remakes, epic drama musicals and comedy drama musicals such as \"Moulin Rouge!\" (2001), \"Chicago\" (2002), \"The Phantom of the Opera\" (2004), \"Rent\" (2005), \"Dreamgirls\" (2006), \"Across the Universe\", \"Enchanted\", \"Hairspray\", ' (all 2007), \"Mamma Mia!\" (2008), \"Nine\" (2009), \"The Muppets\" (2011), \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" (2012), \"Into the Woods\" (2014), \"Descendants\" (2015)\", La La Land\" (2016), \"Beauty and the Beast\", \"The Greatest Showman\" (both 2017), \"Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again!\", \"A Star Is Born\", \"Mary Poppins Returns\", \"Bohemian Rhapsody\" (all 2018), \"Aladdin\", \"Rocketman\", \"The Lion King\" (all 2019), \"The Prom\" (2020), \"In the Heights\", \"Respect\", \"Dear Evan Hansen\", \"Cyrano\", \"Everybody's Talking About Jamie, Tick, Tick\u2026 Boom!, West Side Story\" (all 2021), \"Elvis\", \"Spirited\", \"Disenchanted\", \"Matilda the Musical\" (all 2022), \"The Little Mermaid\", \"Wonka\", \"The Color Purple\" (all 2023), \"Mean Girls\", \"Wicked\", ', ', \"A Complete Unknown\", \"Better Man\" (all 2024), \"Kiss of the Spider Woman\", \"Snow White\", \"Blue Moon\", ', \"\" (all 2025).\nHollywood musical films.\n1930\u20131950: The first classical sound era or First Musical Era.\nThe 1930s through the early 1950s are considered to be the golden age of the musical film, when the genre's popularity was at its highest in the Western world. Disney's \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\", the earliest Disney animated feature film, was a musical which won an honorary Oscar for Walt Disney at the 11th Academy Awards.\nThe first musicals.\nMusical short films were made by Lee de Forest in 1923\u201324. Beginning in 1926, thousands of Vitaphone shorts were made, many featuring bands, vocalists, and dancers. The earliest feature-length films with synchronized sound had only a soundtrack of music and occasional sound effects that played while the actors portrayed their characters just as they did in silent films: without audible dialogue. \"The Jazz Singer\", released in 1927 by Warner Brothers, was the first to include an audio track including non-diegetic music and diegetic music, but it had only a short sequence of spoken dialogue. This feature-length film was also a musical, featuring Al Jolson singing \"Dirty Hands, Dirty Face\", \"Toot, Toot, Tootsie\", \"Blue Skies\", and \"My Mammy\". Historian Scott Eyman wrote, \"As the film ended and applause grew with the houselights, Sam Goldwyn's wife Frances looked around at the celebrities in the crowd. She saw 'terror in all their faces', she said, as if they knew that 'the game they had been playing for years was finally over'.\" Still, only isolated sequences featured \"live\" sound; most of the film had only a synchronous musical score. In 1928, Warner Brothers followed this up with another Jolson part-talkie, \"The Singing Fool\", which was a blockbuster hit. Theaters scrambled to install the new sound equipment and to hire Broadway composers to write musicals for the screen. The first all-talking feature, \"Lights of New York\", included a musical sequence in a night club. The enthusiasm of audiences was so great that in less than a year all the major studios were making sound pictures exclusively. \"The Broadway Melody\" (1929) had a show-biz plot about two sisters competing for a charming song-and-dance man. Advertised by MGM as the first \"All-Talking, All-Singing, All-Dancing\" feature film, it was a hit and won the Academy Award for Best Picture for 1929. There was a rush by the studios to hire talent from the stage to star in lavishly filmed versions of Broadway hits. \"The Love Parade\" (Paramount 1929) starred Maurice Chevalier and newcomer Jeanette MacDonald, written by Broadway veteran Guy Bolton.\nWarner Brothers produced the first screen operetta, \"The Desert Song\" in 1929. They spared no expense and photographed a large percentage of the film in Technicolor. This was followed by the first all-color, all-talking musical feature which was entitled \"On with the Show\" (1929). The most popular film of 1929 was the second all-color, all-talking feature which was entitled \"Gold Diggers of Broadway\" (1929). This film broke all box office records and remained the highest-grossing film ever produced until 1939. Suddenly, the market became flooded with musicals, revues, and operettas. The following all-color musicals were produced in 1929 and 1930 alone: \"The Hollywood Revue of 1929\" (1929), \"The Show of Shows\" (1929), \"Sally\" (1929), \"The Vagabond King\" (1930), \"Follow Thru\" (1930), \"Bright Lights\" (1930), \"Golden Dawn\" (1930), \"Hold Everything\" (1930), \"The Rogue Song\" (1930), \"Song of the Flame\" (1930), \"Song of the West\" (1930), \"Sweet Kitty Bellairs\" (1930), \"Under a Texas Moon\" (1930), \"Bride of the Regiment\" (1930), \"Whoopee!\" (1930), \"King of Jazz\" (1930), \"Viennese Nights\" (1930), and \"Kiss Me Again\" (1930). In addition, there were scores of musical features released with color sequences.\nHollywood released more than 100 musical films in 1930, but only 14 in 1931. By late 1930, audiences had been oversaturated with musicals and studios were forced to cut the music from films that were then being released. For example, \"Life of the Party\" (1930) was originally produced as an all-color, all-talking musical comedy. Before it was released, however, the songs were cut out. The same thing happened to \"Fifty Million Frenchmen\" (1931) and \"Manhattan Parade\" (1932) both of which had been filmed entirely in Technicolor. Marlene Dietrich sang songs successfully in her films, and Rodgers and Hart wrote a few well-received films, but even their popularity waned by 1932. The public had quickly come to associate color with musicals and thus the decline in their popularity also resulted in a decline in color productions.\nBusby Berkeley.\nThe taste in musicals revived again in 1933 when director Busby Berkeley began to enhance the traditional dance number with ideas drawn from the drill precision he had experienced as a soldier during World War I. In films such as \"42nd Street\" and \"Gold Diggers of 1933\" (1933), Berkeley choreographed a number of films in his unique style. Berkeley's numbers typically begin on a stage but gradually transcend the limitations of theatrical space: his ingenious routines, involving human bodies forming patterns like a kaleidoscope, could never fit onto a real stage and the intended perspective is viewing from straight above.\nMusical stars.\nMusical stars such as Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers were among the most popular and highly respected personalities in Hollywood during the classical era; the Fred and Ginger pairing was particularly successful, resulting in a number of classic films such as \"Top Hat\" (1935), \"Swing Time\" (1936), and \"Shall We Dance\" (1937). Many dramatic actors gladly participated in musicals as a way to break away from their typecasting. For instance, the multi-talented James Cagney had originally risen to fame as a stage singer and dancer, but his repeated casting in \"tough guy\" roles and mob films gave him few chances to display these talents. Cagney's Oscar-winning role in \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\" (1942) allowed him to sing and dance, and he considered it to be one of his finest moments.\nMany comedies (and a few dramas) included their own musical numbers. The Marx Brothers' films included a musical number in nearly every film, allowing the Brothers to highlight their musical talents. Their final film, entitled \"Love Happy\" (1949), featured Vera-Ellen, considered to be the best dancer among her colleagues and professionals in the half century.\nSimilarly, the vaudevillian comedian W. C. Fields joined forces with the comic actress Martha Raye and the young comedian Bob Hope in Paramount Pictures musical anthology \"The Big Broadcast of 1938\". The film also showcased the talents of several internationally recognized musical artists including: Kirsten Flagstad (Norwegian operatic soprano), Wilfred Pelletier (Canadian conductor of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra), Tito Guizar (Mexican tenor), Shep Fields conducting his Rippling Rhythm Jazz Orchestra and John Serry Sr. (Italian-American concert accordionist). In addition to the Academy Award for Best Original Song (1938), the film earned an ASCAP Film and Television Award (1989) for Bob Hope's signature song \"Thanks for the Memory\".\nThe Freed Unit.\nDuring the late 1940s and into the early 1950s, a production unit at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer headed by Arthur Freed made the transition from old-fashioned musical films, whose formula had become repetitive, to something new. (However, they also produced technicolor remakes of such musicals as \"Show Boat\", which had previously been filmed in the 1930s.) In 1939, Freed was hired as associate producer for the film \"Babes in Arms\". Starting in 1944 with \"Meet Me in St. Louis\", the Freed Unit worked somewhat independently of its own studio to produce some of the most popular and well-known examples of the genre. The products of this unit include \"Easter Parade\" (1948), \"On the Town\" (1949), \"An American in Paris\" (1951), \"Singin' in the Rain\" (1952), \"The Band Wagon\" (1953) and \"Gigi\" (1958). Non-Freed musicals from the studio included \"Seven Brides for Seven Brothers\" in 1954 and \"High Society\" in 1956, and the studio distributed Samuel Goldwyn's \"Guys and Dolls\" in 1955.\nThis era saw musical stars become household names, including Judy Garland, Gene Kelly, Ann Miller, Donald O'Connor, Cyd Charisse, Mickey Rooney, Vera-Ellen, Jane Powell, Howard Keel, and Kathryn Grayson. Fred Astaire was also coaxed out of retirement for \"Easter Parade\" and made a permanent comeback.\nOutside MGM.\nThe other Hollywood studios proved themselves equally adept at tackling the genre at this time, particularly in the 1950s. Four adaptations of Rodgers and Hammerstein shows - \"Oklahoma!\", \"The King and I\", \"Carousel\", and \"South Pacific\" - were all successes, while Paramount Pictures released \"White Christmas\" and \"Funny Face\", two films which used previously written music by Irving Berlin and the Gershwins, respectively. Warner Bros. produced \"Calamity Jane\" and \"A Star Is Born\"; the former film was a vehicle for Doris Day, while the latter provided a big-screen comeback for Judy Garland, who had been out of the spotlight since 1950. Meanwhile, director Otto Preminger, better known for \"message pictures\", made \"Carmen Jones\" and \"Porgy and Bess\", both starring Dorothy Dandridge, who is considered the first African American A-list film star. Celebrated director Howard Hawks also ventured into the genre with \"Gentlemen Prefer Blondes\".\nIn the 1960s, 1970s, and continuing up to today, the musical film became less of a bankable genre that could be relied upon for sure-fire hits. Audiences for them lessened and fewer musical films were produced as the genre became less mainstream and more specialized.\nThe 1960s musical.\nIn the 1960s, the critical and box-office success of the films \"West Side Story\", \"Gypsy\", \"The Music Man\", \"Bye Bye Birdie\", \"My Fair Lady\", \"Mary Poppins\", \"The Sound of Music\", \"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\", \"The Jungle Book\", \"Thoroughly Modern Millie\", \"Oliver!\", and \"Funny Girl\" suggested that the traditional musical was in good health, while French filmmaker Jacques Demy's jazz musicals \"The Umbrellas of Cherbourg\" and \"The Young Girls of Rochefort\" were popular with international critics. However popular musical tastes were being heavily affected by rock and roll and the freedom and youth associated with it, and indeed Elvis Presley made a few films that have been equated with the old musicals in terms of form. \"A Hard Day's Night\" and \"Help!\", starring the Beatles, were audacious. Most of the musical films of the 1950s and 1960s such as \"Oklahoma!\" and \"The Sound of Music\" were straightforward adaptations or restagings of successful stage productions. The most successful musicals of the 1960s created specifically for film were \"Mary Poppins\" and \"The Jungle Book\", two of Disney's biggest hits of all time.\nThe phenomenal box-office performance of \"The Sound of Music\" gave the major Hollywood studios more confidence to produce lengthy, large-budget musicals. Despite the resounding success of some of these films, Hollywood also produced a large number of musical flops in the late 1960s and early 1970s which appeared to seriously misjudge public taste. The commercially and/or critically unsuccessful films included \"Camelot\", \"Finian's Rainbow\", \"Hello Dolly!\", \"Sweet Charity\", \"Doctor Dolittle\", \"Half a Sixpence\", \"The Happiest Millionaire\", \"Star!\", \"Darling Lili\", \"Goodbye, Mr. Chips\", \"Paint Your Wagon\", \"Song of Norway\", \"On a Clear Day You Can See Forever\", \"1776\", \"Man of La Mancha\", \"Lost Horizon\", and \"Mame\". Collectively and individually these failures affected the financial viability of several major studios.\n1970s.\nIn the 1970s, film culture and the changing demographics of filmgoers placed greater emphasis on gritty realism, while the pure entertainment and theatricality of classical-era Hollywood musicals was seen as old-fashioned. Despite this, \"Fiddler on the Roof\" and \"Cabaret\" were more traditional musicals closely adapted from stage shows and were strong successes with critics and audiences. Changing cultural mores and the abandonment of the Hays Code in 1968 also contributed to changing tastes in film audiences. The 1973 film of Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice's \"Jesus Christ Superstar\" was met with some criticism by religious groups but was well received. By the mid-1970s, filmmakers avoided the genre in favor of using music by popular rock or pop bands as background music, partly in hope of selling a soundtrack album to fans. \"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\" was originally released in 1975 and was a critical failure until it started midnight screenings in the 1980s where it achieved cult status. That same year also saw the premiere of the R&amp;B band Bloodstone's movie \"Train Ride to Hollywood\", but problems in distribution rendered it barely getting token theatrical release. The year 1976 saw the release of the low-budget comic musical, \"The First Nudie Musical\", released by Paramount. The 1978 film version of \"Grease\" was a smash hit; its songs were original compositions done in a 1950s pop style. However, the sequel \"Grease 2\" (released in 1982) bombed at the box-office. Films about performers which incorporated gritty drama and musical numbers interwoven as a diegetic part of the storyline were produced, such as \"Lady Sings the Blues\", \"All That Jazz\", and \"New York, New York\". Some musicals made in Britain experimented with the form, such as Richard Attenborough's \"Oh! What a Lovely War\" (released in 1969), Alan Parker's \"Bugsy Malone\" and Ken Russell's \"Tommy\" and \"Lisztomania\".\nA number of film musicals were still being made that were financially and/or critically less successful than in the musical's heyday. They include \"1776\", \"The Wiz\", \"At Long Last Love\", \"Mame\", \"Man of La Mancha\", \"Lost Horizon\",\" Godspell\", \"Phantom of the Paradise\", \"Funny Lady\" (Barbra Streisand's sequel to \"Funny Girl\"), \"A Little Night Music\", and \"Hair\" amongst others. The critical wrath against \"At Long Last Love\", in particular, was so strong that it was never released on home video. Fantasy musical films \"Scrooge\", \"The Blue Bird\", \"The Little Prince\", \"Willy Wonka &amp; the Chocolate Factory\", \"Pete's Dragon\", and Disney's \"Bedknobs and Broomsticks\" were also released in the 1970s, the latter winning the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects.\n1980s to 1990s.\nBy the 1980s, financiers grew increasingly confident in the musical genre, partly buoyed by the relative health of the musical on Broadway and London's West End. Productions of the 1980s and 1990s included \"The Apple\", \"Xanadu\", \"The Blues Brothers\", \"Annie\", \"Monty Python's The Meaning of Life\", \"The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas\", \"Victor/Victoria\", \"Footloose\", \"Fast Forward\", \"A Chorus Line\", \"Little Shop of Horrors\", \"Forbidden Zone\", \"Absolute Beginners\", \"Labyrinth\", \"Newsies\", \"Evita\", and \"Everyone Says I Love You\". However, \"Can't Stop the Music\", starring the Village People, was a calamitous attempt to resurrect the old-style musical and was released to audience indifference in 1980. \"Little Shop of Horrors\" was based on an off-Broadway musical adaptation of a 1960 Roger Corman film, a precursor of later film-to-stage-to-film adaptations, including \"The Producers\".\nMany animated films of the period \u2013 predominately from Disney \u2013 included traditional musical numbers. Howard Ashman, Alan Menken, and Stephen Schwartz had previous musical theater experience and wrote songs for animated films during this time, supplanting Disney workhorses the Sherman Brothers. Starting with 1989's \"The Little Mermaid\", the Disney Renaissance gave new life to the musical film. Other successful animated musicals included \"Aladdin\", \"The Hunchback of Notre Dame\", and \"Pocahontas\" from Disney proper, \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\" from Disney division Touchstone Pictures, \"The Prince of Egypt\" from DreamWorks, \"Anastasia\" from Fox and Don Bluth, Eight Crazy Nights from Columbia, and \"\" from Paramount and Warner Bros. \"Beauty and the Beast\", \"The Lion King\", and others were adapted for the stage after their blockbuster success.\n2000\u2013now: The second-classical era or New Musical Era.\n21st-century musicals or New Age.\nIn the 21st century, movie musicals were reborn with darker musicals, musical biopics, epic drama musicals and comedy drama musicals such as \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\", \"Moulin Rouge!\", \"Chicago\", \"Walk the Line\", \"Dreamgirls\", \"\", \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\", \"La La Land\", and \"West Side Story\"; all of which won the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture \u2013 Musical or Comedy in their respective years, while such films as \"The Phantom of the Opera\", \"Hairspray\", \"Mamma Mia!\", \"Nine\", \"Into the Woods\", \"The Greatest Showman\", \"Mary Poppins Returns\", \"Rocketman\", \"The Prom\", \"Cyrano\", \"Tick, Tick... Boom!\", \"Elvis\", \"The Color Purple\", and \"Wicked\" were only nominated. \"Chicago\" was also the first musical since \"Oliver!\" to win Best Picture at the Academy Awards.\nJoshua Oppenheimer's Academy Award-nominated documentary \"The Act of Killing\" may be considered a nonfiction musical.\nOne specific musical trend was the rising number of jukebox musicals based on music from various pop/rock artists on the big screen, some of which based on Broadway shows. Examples of Broadway-based jukebox musical films included \"Mamma Mia!\" (ABBA), \"Rock of Ages\", and \"Sunshine on Leith\" (The Proclaimers). Original ones included \"Across the Universe\" (The Beatles), \"Moulin Rouge!\" (various pop hits), \"Idlewild\" (Outkast) and \"Yesterday\" (The Beatles).\nDisney also returned to musicals with \"High School Musical\", \"Enchanted\", \"The Princess and the Frog\", \"Tangled\", \"Winnie the Pooh\", \"The Muppets\", \"Frozen\", \"Muppets Most Wanted\", \"Into the Woods\", \"Moana\", \"Mary Poppins Returns\", \"Frozen 2\", \"Stargirl\", \"Encanto\", \"Better Nate Than Ever\", \"Hollywood Stargirl\", \"Disenchanted\", \"Wish\", \"Moana 2\" and '. Following a string of successes with live action fantasy adaptations of several of their animated features, Disney produced a live action version of \"Beauty and the Beast\", the first of this live action fantasy adaptation pack to be an all-out musical, and features new songs as well as new lyrics to both the Gaston number and the reprise of the title song. Bill Condon, who directed \"Dreamgirls\", directed \"Beauty and the Beast\". The second film of this live action fantasy adaptation pack to be an all-out musical was \"Aladdin\" and features new songs. The third film of this live action fantasy adaptation pack to be an all-out musical was \"The Lion King\" and features new songs. The fourth film of this live action fantasy adaptation pack to be an all-out musical was \"The Little Mermaid\" and features new songs with lyrics by Lin-Manuel Miranda, replacing Ashman. Pixar also produced \"Coco\", the first computer-animated musical film by the company. Other animated musical films include \"Happy Feet\", \"Rio\", \"Happy Feet Two\", \"Dr. Seuss' The Lorax\", \"Rio 2\", \"The Book of Life\", \"Trolls\", \"Sing\", ', \"Smallfoot\", \"UglyDolls\", \"Trolls World Tour\", \"Over the Moon\", \"Vivo\", \"Sing 2\", \"The Bob's Burgers Movie\", \"Under the Boardwalk\", \"Trolls Band Together\", \"Leo\", \"Thelma the Unicorn\", \"Spellbound\", \"KPop Demon Hunters\", \"Smurfs\" and \"The Twits\".\nBiopics about music artists and showmen were also big in the 21st century. Examples include \"8 Mile\" (Eminem), \"Ray\" (Ray Charles), \"Walk the Line\" (Johnny Cash and June Carter), (\u00c9dith Piaf), \"Notorious\" (Biggie Smalls), \"Jersey Boys\" (The Four Seasons) \"Love &amp; Mercy\" (Brian Wilson), ' (TLC), ' (Aaliyah), \"Get on Up\" (James Brown), \"Whitney\" and ' (Whitney Houston), \"Straight Outta Compton\" (N.W.A), \"The Greatest Showman\" (P. T. Barnum), \"Bohemian Rhapsody\" (Freddie Mercury), \"The Dirt\" (M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce), \"Judy\" (Judy Garland), \"Rocketman\" (Elton John), \"Respect\" (Aretha Franklin), \"Elvis\" (Elvis Presley), \"A Complete Unknown\" (Bob Dylan) and ' (Bruce Springsteen). Grossing over $900 million at the box office \"Bohemian Rhapsody\" is the most commercially successful musical biopic.\nDirector Damien Chazelle created a musical film called \"La La Land\", starring Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone. It was meant to reintroduce the traditional jazz style of song numbers with influences from the Golden Age of Hollywood and Jacques Demy's French musicals while incorporating a contemporary/modern take on the story and characters with balances in fantasy numbers and grounded reality. It received 14 nominations at the 89th Academy Awards, tying the record for most nominations with \"All About Eve\" (1950) and \"Titanic\" (1997), and won the awards for Best Director, Best Actress, Best Cinematography, Best Original Score, Best Original Song, and Best Production Design.\nLive! television events.\nIn 2013, NBC produced \"The Sound of Music Live!\" as part of their effort for expanded live entertainment events, which became an annual tradition of adaptations of stage musicals, created specifically as live television events. The following years featured \"Peter Pan Live!\", \"The Wiz Live!\", \"Hairspray Live!\", \"Jesus Christ Superstar Live!\", \"Dr. Seuss' The Grinch Musical Live!\", and \"Annie Live!\". ABC and Fox also produced similar events, including \"Grease Live!\", \"A Christmas Story Live!\", \"\", and \"The Little Mermaid Live!\".\nIndian musical films.\nAn exception to the decline of the musical film is Indian cinema, especially the Bollywood film industry based in Mumbai (formerly Bombay), where most of films have been, and still are, musicals. The majority of films produced in the Tamil industry, based in Chennai (formerly Madras), the Sandalwood industry, based in Bangalore, the Telugu industry, based in Hyderabad, and the Malayalam industry are also musicals.\nDespite this exception of almost every Indian movie being a musical and India producing the most movies in the world (formed in 1913), the first Bollywood film to be a complete musical, \"Dev D\" (directed by Anurag Kashyap), came in 2009. The second musical film to follow was \"Jagga Jasoos\" (directed by Anurag Basu), in 2017.\nEarly sound films (1930s\u20131940s).\nBollywood musicals have their roots in the traditional musical theatre of India, such as classical Indian musical theatre, Sanskrit drama, and Parsi theatre. Early Bombay filmmakers combined these Indian musical theatre traditions with the musical film format that emerged from early Hollywood sound films. Other early influences on Bombay filmmakers included Urdu literature and the \"Arabian Nights\".\nThe first Indian sound film, Ardeshir Irani's \"Alam Ara\" (1931), was a major commercial success. There was clearly a huge market for talkies and musicals; Bollywood and all the regional film industries quickly switched to sound filming.\nIn 1937, Ardeshir Irani, of \"Alam Ara\" fame, made the first colour film in Hindi, \"Kisan Kanya\". The next year, he made another colour film, a version of \"Mother India\". However, colour did not become a popular feature until the late 1950s. At this time, lavish romantic musicals and melodramas were the staple fare at the cinema.\nGolden Age (late 1940s\u20131960s).\nFollowing India's independence, the period from the late 1940s to the early 1960s is regarded by film historians as the \"Golden Age\" of Hindi cinema. Some of the most critically acclaimed Hindi films of all time were produced during this period. Examples include \"Pyaasa\" (1957) and \"Kaagaz Ke Phool\" (1959), directed by Guru Dutt and written by Abrar Alvi, \"Awaara\" (1951) and \"Shree 420\" (1955), directed by Raj Kapoor and written by Khwaja Ahmad Abbas, and \"Aan\" (1952), directed by Mehboob Khan and starring Dilip Kumar. These films expressed social themes mainly dealing with working-class life in India, particularly urban life in the former two examples; \"Awaara\" presented the city as both a nightmare and a dream, while \"Pyaasa\" critiqued the unreality of city life.\nMehboob Khan's \"Mother India\" (1957), a remake of his earlier \"Aurat\" (1940), was the first Indian film to be nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, which it lost by a single vote. \"Mother India\" was also an important film that defined the conventions of Hindi cinema for decades.\nIn the 1960s and early 1970s, the industry was dominated by musical romance films with \"romantic hero\" leads, the most popular being Rajesh Khanna. Other actors during this period include Shammi Kapoor, Jeetendra, Sanjeev Kumar, and Shashi Kapoor, and actresses like Sharmila Tagore, Mumtaz, Saira Banu, Helen and Asha Parekh.\nClassic Bollywood (1970s\u20131980s).\nBy the start of the 1970s, Hindi cinema was experiencing thematic stagnation, dominated by musical romance films. The arrival of screenwriter duo Salim\u2013Javed, consisting of Salim Khan and Javed Akhtar, marked a paradigm shift, revitalizing the industry. They began the genre of gritty, violent, Bombay underworld crime films in the early 1970s, with films such as \"Zanjeer\" (1973) and \"Deewaar\" (1975).\nThe 1970s was also when the name \"Bollywood\" was coined, and when the quintessential conventions of commercial Bollywood films were established. Key to this was the emergence of the masala film genre, which combines elements of multiple genres (action, comedy, romance, drama, melodrama, musical). The masala film was pioneered in the early 1970s by filmmaker Nasir Hussain, along with screenwriter duo Salim-Javed, pioneering the Bollywood blockbuster format. \"Yaadon Ki Baarat\" (1973), directed by Hussain and written by Salim-Javed, has been identified as the first masala film and the \"first\" quintessentially \"Bollywood\" film. Salim-Javed went on to write more successful masala films in the 1970s and 1980s. Masala films launched Amitabh Bachchan into the biggest Bollywood movie star of the 1970s and 1980s. A landmark for the masala film genre was \"Amar Akbar Anthony\" (1977), directed by Manmohan Desai and written by Kader Khan. Manmohan Desai went on to successfully exploit the genre in the 1970s and 1980s.\nAlong with Bachchan, other popular actors of this era included Feroz Khan, Mithun Chakraborty, Naseeruddin Shah, Jackie Shroff, Sanjay Dutt, Anil Kapoor and Sunny Deol. Actresses from this era included Hema Malini, Jaya Bachchan, Raakhee, Shabana Azmi, Zeenat Aman, Parveen Babi, Rekha, Dimple Kapadia, Smita Patil, Jaya Prada and Padmini Kolhapure.\nNew Bollywood (1990s\u2013present).\nIn the late 1980s, Hindi cinema experienced another period of stagnation, with a decline in box office turnout, due to increasing violence, decline in musical melodic quality, and rise in video piracy, leading to middle-class family audiences abandoning theaters. The turning point came with \"Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak\" (1988), directed by Mansoor Khan, written and produced by his father Nasir Hussain, and starring his cousin Aamir Khan with Juhi Chawla. Its blend of youthfulness, wholesome entertainment, emotional quotients and strong melodies lured family audiences back to the big screen. It set a new template for Bollywood musical romance films that defined Hindi cinema in the 1990s.\nThe period of Hindi cinema from the 1990s onwards is referred to as \"New Bollywood\" cinema, linked to economic liberalisation in India during the early 1990s. By the early 1990s, the pendulum had swung back toward family-centric romantic musicals. \"Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak\" was followed by blockbusters such as \"Maine Pyar Kiya\" (1989), \"Chandni\" (1989), \"Hum Aapke Hain Kaun\" (1994), \"Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge\" (1995), \"Raja Hindustani\" (1996), \"Dil To Pagal Hai\" (1997), \"Pyaar To Hona Hi Tha\" (1998) and \"Kuch Kuch Hota Hai\" (1998). A new generation of popular actors emerged, such as Aamir Khan, Aditya Pancholi, Ajay Devgan, Akshay Kumar, Salman Khan (Salim Khan's son), and Shahrukh Khan, and actresses such as Madhuri Dixit, Sridevi, Juhi Chawla, Meenakshi Seshadri, Manisha Koirala, Kajol, and Karisma Kapoor.\nSince the 1990s, the three biggest Bollywood movie stars have been the \"Three Khans\": Aamir Khan, Shah Rukh Khan, and Salman Khan. Combined, they have starred in most of the top ten highest-grossing Bollywood films. The three Khans have had successful careers since the late 1980s, and have dominated the Indian box office since the 1990s, across three decades.\nInfluence on Western films (2000s\u2013present).\nBaz Luhrmann stated that his successful musical film \"Moulin Rouge!\" (2001) was directly inspired by Bollywood musicals. The film pays homage to India, incorporating an Indian-themed play and a Bollywood-style dance sequence with a song from the film \"China Gate\". The critical and financial success of \"Moulin Rouge!\" renewed interest in the then-moribund Western live action musical genre, and subsequently films such as \"Chicago\", \"The Producers\", \"Rent\", \"Dreamgirls\", and \"Hairspray\" were produced, fueling a renaissance of the genre.\n\"The Guru\" and \"The 40-Year-Old Virgin\" also feature Indian-style song-and-dance sequences; the Bollywood musical \"Lagaan\" (2001) was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film; two other Bollywood films \"Devdas\" (2002) and \"Rang De Basanti\" (2006) were nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language; and Danny Boyle's Academy Award winning \"Slumdog Millionaire\" (2008) also features a Bollywood-style song-and-dance number during the film's end credits, \"Tallika\" (2022) was the first movie with Maximum Genres of Music Composed by Maharaja and registered as a World Record Holder in Music,\nSpanish musical films.\nSpain has a history and tradition of musical films that were made independent of Hollywood influence. The first films arise during the Second Spanish Republic of the 1930s and the advent of sound films. A few zarzuelas (Spanish operetta) were even adapted as screenplays during the silent era. The beginnings of the Spanish musical were focused on romantic Spanish archetypes: Andalusian villages and landscapes, gypsies, \"bandoleros\", and copla and other popular folk songs included in story development. These films had even more box-office success than Hollywood premieres in Spain. The first Spanish film stars came from the musical genre: Imperio Argentina, Estrellita Castro, Flori\u00e1n Rey (director) and, later, Lola Flores, Sara Montiel and Carmen Sevilla. The Spanish musical started to expand and grow. Juvenile stars appear and top the box-office. Marisol, Joselito, Pili &amp; Mili, and Roc\u00edo D\u00farcal were the major figures of musical films from the 1960s to 1970s. Due to Spanish transition to democracy and the rise of \"Movida culture\", the musical genre fell in production and box-office, only saved by Carlos Saura and his flamenco musical films.\nSoviet musical film under Stalin.\nUnlike the musical films of Hollywood and Bollywood, popularly identified with escapism, the Soviet musical was first and foremost a form of propaganda. Vladimir Lenin said that cinema was \"the most important of the arts\". His successor, Joseph Stalin, also recognized the power of cinema in efficiently spreading Communist Party doctrine. Films were widely popular in the 1920s, but it was foreign cinema that dominated the Soviet filmgoing market. Films from Germany and the U.S. proved more entertaining than Soviet director Sergei Eisenstein's historical dramas. By the 1930s it was clear that if the Soviet cinema was to compete with its Western counterparts, it would have to give audiences what they wanted: the glamour and fantasy they got from Hollywood. The musical film, which emerged at that time, embodied the ideal combination of entertainment and official ideology.\nA struggle between laughter for laughter's sake and entertainment with a clear ideological message would define the golden age of the Soviet musical of the 1930s and 1940s. Then-head of the film industry Boris Shumyatsky sought to emulate Hollywood's conveyor belt method of production, going so far as to suggest the establishment of a Soviet Hollywood.\n\"The Jolly Fellows\".\nIn 1930, the esteemed Soviet film director Sergei Eisenstein went to the United States with fellow director Grigori Aleksandrov to study Hollywood's filmmaking process. The American films greatly impacted Aleksandrov, particularly the musicals. He returned in 1932, and in 1934 directed \"The Jolly Fellows\", the first Soviet musical. The film was light on plot and focused more on the comedy and musical numbers. Party officials at first met the film with great hostility. Aleksandrov defended his work by arguing the notion of laughter for laughter's sake. Finally, when Aleksandrov showed the film to Stalin, the leader decided that musicals were an effective means of spreading propaganda. Messages like the importance of collective labor and rags-to-riches stories would become the plots of most Soviet musicals.\n\"Movies for the Millions\".\nThe success of \"The Jolly Fellows\" ensured a place in Soviet cinema for the musical format, but immediately Shumyatsky set strict guidelines to make sure the films promoted Communist values. Shumyatsky's decree \"Movies for the Millions\" demanded conventional plots, characters, and montage to successfully portray Socialist Realism (the glorification of industry and the working class) on film.\nThe first successful blend of a social message and entertainment was Aleksandrov's \"Circus\" (1936). It starred his wife, Lyubov Orlova (an operatic singer who had also appeared in \"The Jolly Fellows\") as an American circus performer who has to immigrate to the USSR from the U.S. because she has a mixed-race child, whom she had with a black man. Amidst the backdrop of lavish musical productions, she finally finds love and acceptance in the USSR, providing the message that racial tolerance can only be found in the Soviet Union.\nThe influence of Busby Berkeley's choreography on Aleksandrov's directing can be seen in the musical number leading up to the climax. Another, more obvious reference to Hollywood is the Charlie Chaplin impersonator who provides comic relief throughout the film. Four million people in Moscow and Leningrad went to see \"Circus\" during its first month in theaters.\nAnother of Aleksandrov's more-popular films was \"The Bright Path\" (1940). This was a reworking of the fairytale \"Cinderella,\" set in the contemporary Soviet Union. The Cinderella of the story was again Orlova, who by this time was the most popular star in the USSR. It was a fantasy tale, but the moral of the story was that a better life comes from hard work. Whereas in \"Circus\", the musical numbers involved dancing and spectacle, the only type of choreography in \"Bright Path\" is the movement of factory machines. The music was limited to Orlova's singing. Here, work provided the spectacle.\nIvan Pyryev.\nThe other director of musical films was Ivan Pyryev. Unlike Aleksandrov, the focus of Pyryev's films was life on the collective farms. His films, \"Tractor Drivers\" (1939), \"The Swineherd and the Shepherd\" (1941), and his most famous, \"Cossacks of the Kuban\" (1949) all starred his wife, Marina Ladynina. Like in Aleksandrov's \"Bright Path\", the only choreography was the work the characters were doing on film. Even the songs were about the joys of working.\nRather than having a specific message for any of his films, Pyryev promoted Stalin's slogan \"life has become better, life has become more joyous.\" Sometimes this message was in stark contrast with the reality of the time. During the filming of \"Cossacks of the Kuban\", the Soviet Union was going through a postwar famine. In reality, the actors who were singing about a time of prosperity were hungry and malnourished. The films did, however, provide escapism and optimism for the viewing public.\n\"Volga-Volga\".\nThe most popular film of the brief era of Stalinist musicals was Alexandrov's 1938 film \"Volga-Volga\". The star, again, was Lyubov Orlova and the film featured singing and dancing, having nothing to do with work. It is the most unusual of its type. The plot surrounds a love story between two individuals who want to play music. They are unrepresentative of Soviet values in that their focus is more on their music than their jobs. The gags poke fun at the local authorities and bureaucracy. There is no glorification of industry since it takes place in a small rural village. Work is not glorified either, since the plot revolves around a group of villagers using their vacation time to go on a trip up the Volga and Moscow Canal to perform in Moscow. The film can be seen as a glorification of Moscow canal without any hint that the canal was built by Gulag prisoners.\n\"Volga-Volga\" followed the aesthetic principles of Socialist Realism rather than the ideological tenets. It became Stalin's favorite film and he gave it as a gift to President Roosevelt during WWII. It is another example of one of the films that claimed life is better. Released at the height of Stalin's purges, it provided escapism and a comforting illusion for the public.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19030", "revid": "45523345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19030", "title": "Motala Municipality", "text": "Motala Municipality () is a municipality in \u00d6sterg\u00f6tland County in southeast Sweden. Its seat is located in the city of Motala.\nIn 1971 Motala Municipality was formed by the amalgamation of the \"City of Motala\" with some of the adjacent rural municipalities. Three years later more entities were added, among them the former \"City of Vadstena\". In 1980 a new Vadstena Municipality was split off.\nGeographically, Motala is situated where Lake V\u00e4ttern drains into the river system of Motala str\u00f6m, which was of central importance to the massive industrialization of Sweden in the 19th century.\nLocalities.\nFigures as of 2000, from Statistics Sweden.\nThe population decreased by approximately 2% in most of the localities between the earlier census 1995 and the one in 2000.\nDemographics.\nThis is a demographic table based on Motala Municipality's electoral districts in the 2022 Swedish general election sourced from SVT's election platform, in turn taken from SCB official statistics.\nIn total there were 43,620 residents, including 33,347 Swedish citizens of voting age. 46.4% voted for the left coalition and 52.6% for the right coalition. Indicators are in percentage points except population totals and income.\nIndustry.\nThe largest employer is the municipality itself, employing circa 3,400 people. The next is the county council with 1,775.\nOf the private employers, Electrolux and Dometic have a total of 1,400; Autoliv 425; Hycop 325; Saab-Bofors Dynamics circa 300; And Motala Verkstad some 180. \nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2014 sister cities.\nMotala is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
