{"id": "14647", "revid": "41189209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14647", "title": "Economy of Indonesia", "text": "Indonesia has a mixed economy with dirigiste characteristics. It is one of the emerging market economies in the world and the largest in Southeast Asia. As an upper-middle income country and member of the G20, Indonesia is classified as a newly industrialized country. Indonesia is 17th largest economy in the world by nominal GDP and the 7th largest in terms of GDP (PPP). Indonesia's internet economy reached US$77 billion in 2022, and is expected to cross the US$130 billion mark by 2025.\nIndonesia depends on the domestic market and government budget spending and its ownership of state-owned enterprises (the central government owns https://). Indonesian state-owned companies have assets valued at more than https:// as of 2024.\nThe administration of prices of a range of basic goods (including rice and electricity) also plays a significant role in Indonesia's market economy. However, a mix of micro, medium and small companies contribute around 61.7% of the economy and significant major private-owned companies and foreign companies are also https://.\nIn the aftermath of the 1997 Asian financial crisis, the government took custody of a significant portion of private sector assets through the acquisition of nonperforming bank loans and corporate assets through the debt restructuring process, and the companies in custody were sold for privatization several years later. Since 1999, the economy has recovered, and growth accelerated to over 4\u20136% in the early 2000s. In 2012, Indonesia was the second fastest-growing G20 economy, behind China, and the annual growth rate fluctuated around 5% in the following years. Indonesia faced a recession in 2020 when the economic growth collapsed to \u22122.07% due to the COVID-19 pandemic, its worst economic performance since the 1997 crisis. In recent years Indonesia's manufacturing sector, long its growth engine, has shedded hundreds of thousands of jobs, with an estimated loss of 300,000 since 2023.\nIn 2022, gross domestic product expanded by 5.31%, due to the removal of COVID-19 restrictions as well as record-high exports driven by stronger commodity prices.\nHistory.\nSukarno era.\nIn the years immediately following the proclamation of Indonesian independence, both the Japanese occupation and the conflict between Dutch and Republican forces had crippled the country's production, with exports of commodities such as rubber and oil being reduced to 12 and 5% of their pre-WW2 levels, respectively. The first Republican government-controlled bank, the Indonesian State Bank (\"Bank Negara Indonesia\", BNI) was founded on 5 July 1946. It initially acted as the manufacturer and distributor of ORI (\"Oeang Republik Indonesia\"/Money of the Republic of Indonesia), a currency issued by the Republican Government which was the predecessor of Rupiah. Despite this, currency issued during the Japanese occupation and by Dutch authorities was still in circulation, and the simplicity of the ORI made its counterfeiting relatively easy, worsening matters. Between 1949 and 1960, Indonesia experienced several economic disruptions. The country's independence recognized by the Netherlands, the dissolution of the United States of Indonesia in 1950, the subsequent liberal democracy period, the nationalization of \"De Javasche Bank\" into the modern Bank Indonesia, and the takeover of Dutch corporate assets following the West New Guinea dispute, which all resulted in the devaluation of Dutch banknotes into half their value.\nDuring the guided democracy era in the 1960s, the economy deteriorated drastically as a result of political instability. The government was inexperienced in implementing macroeconomic policies, which resulted in severe poverty and hunger. By the time of Sukarno's downfall in the mid-1960s, the economy was in chaos with 1,000% annual inflation, shrinking export revenues, crumbling infrastructure, factories operating at minimal capacity, and negligible investment. Nevertheless, Indonesia's post-1960 economic improvement was considered remarkable when taking into consideration how few indigenous Indonesians in the 1950s had received a formal education under Dutch colonial policies.\nNew Order.\nFollowing President Sukarno's downfall, the New Order administration brought a degree of discipline to economic policy that quickly brought inflation down, stabilized the currency, rescheduled foreign debt, and attracted foreign aid and investment. (See Inter-Governmental Group on Indonesia and Berkeley Mafia). Indonesia was until recently Southeast Asia's only member of OPEC, and the 1970s oil price rise provided an export revenue windfall that contributed to sustained high economic growth rates, averaging over 7% from 1968 to 1981.\nWith high levels of regulation and dependence on declining oil prices, growth slowed to an average of 4.5% per annum between 1981 and 1988. A range of economic reforms was introduced in the late 1980s, including a managed devaluation of the rupiah to improve export competitiveness, and deregulation of the financial sector. Foreign investment flowed into Indonesia, particularly into the rapidly developing export-oriented manufacturing sector, and from 1989 to 1997, the Indonesian economy grew by an average of over 7%. GDP per capita grew 545% from 1970 to 1980 as a result of the sudden increase in oil export revenues from 1973 to 1979. High levels of economic growth masked several structural weaknesses in the economy. It came at a high cost in terms of weak and corrupt governmental institutions, severe public indebtedness through mismanagement of the financial sector, rapid depletion of natural resources, and culture of favors and corruption in the business elite.\nCorruption particularly gained momentum in the 1990s, reaching to the highest levels of the political hierarchy as Suharto became the most corrupt leader according to Transparency International. As a result, the legal system was weak, and there was no effective way to enforce contracts, collect debts, or sue for bankruptcy. Banking practices were very unsophisticated, with collateral-based lending the norm and widespread violation of prudential regulations, including limits on connected lending. Non-tariff barriers, rent-seeking by state-owned enterprises, domestic subsidies, barriers to domestic trade and export restrictions all created economic distortions.\nThe 1997 Asian financial crisis that began to affect Indonesia became an economic and political crisis. The initial response was to float the rupiah, raise key domestic interest rates, and tighten fiscal policy. In October 1997, Indonesia and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) reached an agreement on an economic reform program aimed at macroeconomic stabilization and the elimination of some of the country's most damaging economic policies, such as the National Car Program and the clove monopoly, both involving family members of Suharto. The rupiah remained weak, however, and Suharto was forced to resign in May 1998 after massive riots erupted. In August 1998, Indonesia and the IMF agreed on an Extended Fund Facility (EFF) under President B. J. Habibie that included significant structural reform targets. President Abdurrahman Wahid took office in October 1999, and Indonesia and the IMF signed another EFF in January 2000. The new program also has a range of economic, structural reform, and governance targets.\nThe effects of the crisis were severe. By November 1997, rapid currency depreciation had seen public debt reach US$60 billion, imposing severe strains on the government's budget. In 1998, real GDP contracted by 13.1%, and the economy reached its low point in mid-1999 with 0.8% real GDP growth. Inflation reached 72% in 1998 but slowed to 2% in 1999. The rupiah, which had been in the RP 2,600/USD1 range at the start of August 1997 fell to 11,000/USD1 by January 1998, with spot rates around 15,000 for brief periods during the first half of 1998. It returned to the 8,000/USD1 range at the end of 1998 and has generally traded in the Rp 8,000\u201310,000/USD1 range ever since, with fluctuations that are relatively predictable and gradual. However, the rupiah began devaluing past 11,000 in 2013, and as of November 2016 is around 13,000 Rp/USD1.\nReform era.\nSince an inflation target was introduced in 2000, the GDP deflator and the CPI have grown at an average annual pace of 10\u00be% and 9%, respectively, similar to the pace recorded in the two decades prior to the 1997 crisis, but well below the pace in the 1960s and 1970s. Inflation has also generally trended lower through the 2000s, with some of the fluctuations in inflation reflecting government policy initiatives such as the changes in fiscal subsidies in 2005 and 2008, which caused large temporary spikes in CPI growth.\nIn late 2004, Indonesia faced a 'mini-crisis' due to international oil prices rises and imports. The currency exchange rate reached Rp 12,000/USD1 before stabilizing. Under President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono (SBY), the government was forced to cut its massive fuel subsidies, which were planned to cost $14 billion in October 2005.\nAs of February 2007, the unemployment rate was 9.75%. Despite a slowing global economy, Indonesia's economic growth accelerated to a ten-year high of 6.3% in 2007. This growth rate was sufficient to reduce poverty from 17.8% to 16.6% based on the government's poverty line and reversed the recent trend towards jobless growth, with unemployment falling to 8.46% in February 2008. Unlike many of its more export-dependent neighbors, Indonesia has managed to skirt the recession helped by strong domestic demand (which makes up about two-thirds of the economy) and a government fiscal stimulus package of about 1.4% of GDP. After India and China, Indonesia was the third-fastest growing economy in the G20. With the $512 billion economy expanded 4.4% in the first quarter from a year earlier and last month, the IMF revised its 2009 Indonesia forecast to 3\u20134% from 2.5%. Indonesia enjoyed stronger fundamentals with the authorities implemented wide-ranging economic and financial reforms, including a rapid reduction in public and external debt, strengthening of corporate and banking sector balance sheets and reducing bank vulnerabilities through higher capitalization and better supervision.\nIn 2012, Indonesia's real GDP growth reached 6%, then it steadily decreased below 5% until 2015. After Joko Widodo succeeded SBY, the government took measures to ease regulations for foreign direct investments to stimulate the economy. Indonesia managed to increase their GDP growth slightly above 5% in 2016\u20132017. However, the government is currently still facing problems such as currency weakening, decreasing exports and stagnating consumer spending. The current unemployment rate for 2019 is at 5.3%.\nBetween 2019 and 2020, Indonesia's economy faced significant challenges due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The country's GDP contracted by 2.1% in 2020, marking its first annual decline in over two decades. This downturn was attributed to strict public health measures, including large-scale social restrictions (PSBB), which disrupted economic activities, particularly in major urban centers like Jakarta and West Java. Despite these challenges, the government implemented fiscal stimulus packages and social assistance programs to mitigate the pandemic's impact on vulnerable populations. By the third quarter of 2020, signs of recovery emerged, with the pace of economic contraction slowing to 3.5% year-over-year, driven by a partial rebound in consumption and investment.\nIn 2021, Indonesia's economy began to recover, recording a growth rate of 4.4%, supported by improved domestic demand and positive spillovers from a stronger global economy. The recovery was further bolstered by the government's efforts to accelerate the COVID-19 vaccination rollout and implement policies aimed at boosting economic activity. Growth accelerated to 5.0% in 2022, driven by reduced uncertainty and the assumption that the vaccine rollout would reach a critical mass of the population.\nIn October 2024, Prabowo Subianto assumed the presidency, inheriting an economy with steady growth but facing structural challenges. His administration introduced ambitious policies aimed at boosting economic growth to 8%, including a $28 billion annual free school meals program and plans to retire all fossil fuel power plants within 15 years. To fund these initiatives, the government implemented significant budget cuts totaling $18.8 billion, affecting various sectors such as public works, education, and health. These austerity measures led to public unrest and raised concerns about the potential impact on infrastructure projects and public services. Additionally, the presence of entrenched criminal networks, known as \"preman\", along with certain mass organizations (ormas), posed significant challenges to foreign investment and economic reforms. These groups have been involved in activities such as extortion, intimidation, and obstruction of industrial operations, particularly in key economic zones like Bekasi, Karawang, and Batam. Such actions have led to financial losses estimated up to $137.8 billion and have deterred potential investors, undermining efforts to create a conducive investment climate.\nBetween 2019 and 2025, the IDR experienced significant fluctuations influenced by both domestic and global factors. In 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the rupiah weakened sharply, reaching around Rp 16,500 per US dollar due to capital outflows and economic crash. As the economy began to recover in 2021 and 2022, the currency stabilized, trading between Rp 14,000 and Rp 15,000 per dollar. However, in 2023 and 2024, the rupiah faced renewed pressure, depreciating to levels around Rp 16,200 per dollar by April 2024. This depreciation was attributed to political uncertainties ahead of the presidential election and concerns over fiscal policies.\nIn 2025, the rupiah's performance remained volatile. Early in the year, it reached a five-year low, prompting Bank Indonesia to intervene in the foreign exchange market to stabilize the currency. The central bank maintained its benchmark interest rate at 5.75% in March to support the rupiah and control inflation. By May, with signs of stabilization, Bank Indonesia cut the rate to 5.50% to stimulate economic growth, as the rupiah had appreciated over 3% from its April lows.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132024 (with IMF staff estimates in 2025\u20132030; 1980-2018 are based on older October 2023 IMF World Economic Outlook database). Inflation under 5% is in green.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStructure.\nIndonesia's economy in 2023, as measured by Gross Domestic Product (GDP) at current market prices, reached IDR 20,892.4 trillion. The highest growth on the production side was Transportation and Storage at 13.96%. During 2023, the Indonesian economy continued to grow spatially. The group of provinces according to the islands, the provinces with the highest growth were Maluku and Papua, Sulawesi, and Kalimantan with growth (c-to-c) of 6.94%, 6.37% and 5.43%. Meanwhile, the group of provinces on Jawa Island which contributed 57.05% to the national economy recorded a growth of 4.96% (c-to-c).\nSectors.\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture is a key sector which contributed to 14.43% of GDP. Currently, there are around 30% of the land area used for agriculture and employed about 49 million people (41% of the total workforce). Primary agriculture commodities include rice, cassava (tapioca), peanuts, natural rubber, cocoa, coffee, palm oil, copra; poultry, beef, pork, and eggs. Palm oil production is vital to the economy as Indonesia is the world's biggest producer and consumer of the commodity, providing about half of the world's supply. Plantations in the country stretch across 6 million hectares as of 2007, with a replanting plan set for an additional 4.7 million to boost productivity in 2017. There are a number of negative social and environmental impacts of palm oil production in Southeast Asia.\nSeafood.\nIn 2015, the total production of seafood reached about 22.31 million metric tons, valued at around 18.10 billion US dollars. For capture of wild fish (both inland and marine), the production trend was steady in 2011\u20132015, while there was a steep increase in the production from aquaculture during the same period.\nIndonesia the second most productive country in the world after China.\nPalm Oil.\nPalm oil production is important to the economy of Indonesia as the country is the world's biggest producer and consumer of the commodity, providing about half of the world's supply. In 2016, Indonesia produced over of palm oil, and exported of it. Generating 4.5% of its GDP and giving employment to 3 million people.\nIn response to critiques on the industry by environmental and human rights group, efforts are made towards more sustainability of the industry. According to the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO), that applies to palm oils which are produced to increase the food supply while keeping in mind the goals to \"safeguard social interests, communities and workers\" or to \"protect the environment and wildlife\" for example.\nCoconut.\n18.5 million tons of coconut is produced each year in Indonesia, and become the largest producer in the world. From ancient folklore to traditional ceremonies, the coconut's symbolism permeates throughout Indonesian mythology and traditions. The tree embodies life-sustaining attributes, often referred to as \u201cThe Tree of Life,\u201d symbolizing fertility, replenishment and a connection to the divine\nIndustry.\nOil and mining.\nIndonesia was the only South East Asian member of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) until its suspension in 2009. The country currently remains a net oil importer despite its large petroleum production industry. In 1999, crude and condensate output averaged per day, and in 1998, the oil and gas sector including refining, contributed approximately 9% to GDP. As of 2005, crude oil and condensate output were per day. It indicates a substantial decline from the 1990s, due primarily to ageing oil fields and a lack of investment in oil production equipment. This decline in production has been accompanied by a substantial increase in domestic consumption, about 5.4% per year, leading to an estimated US$1.2 billion cost for importing oil in 2005. The state owns all petroleum and mineral rights. Foreign firms participate through production-sharing and work contracts. Oil and gas contractors are required to finance all exploration, production, and development costs in their contract areas and are entitled to recover operating, exploration, and development costs out of the oil and gas produced. Indonesia had previously subsidized fuel prices to keep prices low, costing US$7 billion in 2004. SBY has mandated a significant reduction of government subsidy of fuel prices in several stages. The government has stated that cuts in subsidies are aimed at reducing the budget deficit to 1% of GDP in 2005, down from around 1.6% last year. At the same time, the government has offered one-time subsidies for qualified citizens, to alleviate hardships.\nIndonesia is the world's largest tin market. Although mineral production traditionally centered on bauxite, silver, and tin, it is expanding its copper, nickel, gold, and coal output for export markets. In mid-1993, the Department of Mines and Energy reopened the coal sector to foreign investment, resulting in a joint venture between Indonesian coal producer and BP and Rio Tinto. Total coal production reached 74 million metric tons in 1999, including exports of 55 million tons, and in 2011, production was 353 million. As of 2014, Indonesia is the third-largest producer with a total output of 458 Mt and export of 382 Mt. At this rate, the reserves will be used up in 61 years until 2075. Not all of the productions can be exported due to Domestic Market Obligation (DMO) regulation, which should fulfill the domestic market. In 2012, the DMO was 24.72%. Starting from 2014, no low-grade coal exports are allowed, so the upgraded brown coal process that cranks up the calorie value of coal from 4,500 to 6,100 kcal/kg will be built in South Kalimantan and South Sumatra. Indonesia is also the world's largest producer of nickel, and the second-largest producer of cobalt in 2022.\nTwo US firms operate three copper/gold mines in Indonesia, with a Canadian and British firm holding significant other investments in nickel and gold, respectively. India's fortune groups like Vedanta Resources and Tata Group also have substantial mining operations in Indonesia. In 1998, the value of Indonesian gold and copper production was $1 billion and $843 million respectively. Receipts from gold, copper, and coal accounted for 84% of the $3 billion earned in 1998 by the mineral mining sector. With the addition of Alumina project that produces 5% of the world's alumina production, Indonesia would be the world's second-largest Alumina producer. The project will not make the ores to become aluminum, as there are 100 types of Alumina derivatives that can be developed further by other companies in Indonesia.\nJoko Widodo's administration continued the resource nationalism policy of SBY, nationalizing some assets controlled by multinational companies such as Freeport McMoRan, TotalEnergies and Chevron. In 2018, in a move aimed to cut imports, oil companies operating in Indonesia were ordered to sell their crude oil to state-owned Pertamina.\nRenewable energy.\nIndonesia has significant potential for developing renewable energy, however, the country continues to rely heavily on the use of fossil fuels in domestic electricity production. Continued investment in and reliance on fossil fuels, such as coal, may result in fossil fuels becoming stranded assets, leading to significant investments lost that the country could have received from renewable energy investors.\nConstruction.\nFor 2023, Construction sectors contribution to 9.92% of Indonesia GDP, value at Rp 2,072.4 Trillion IDR or $135.97 Billion USD\nThe expansion of the construction industry has been catalysed by major capital expenditure projects, and a key factor has been the government's Economic Programme and public-private partnership (PPP) mega-projects like Jakarta-Bandung High Speed Rail, Jakarta MRT, Jabodebek LRT, Trans-Java Toll Road, Trans-Sumatra Toll Road, Nusantara (city), and many more.\nManufacturing.\nIndonesia's manufacturing sector has historically played a key role in the country's economic development and now contributes to 20 percent of GDP.\nThe government has ambitious plans to propel the country into the top ten biggest economies in the world by 2030, with manufacturing at the heart of this goal. The main areas of production include textiles and garments, food and beverages (F&amp;B), electronics, automotive, and chemicals, with the majority of manufacturers in this sector consisting of micro, small, or medium-sized enterprises. The sector has posted a consistent four percent growth year-on-year since 2016 and registered 147 trillion rupiah (US$8.9 billion) in investments from January to September 2019.\nIndonesia recently became the 10th-largest manufacturing nation in the world. Its large manufacturing sector accounts for almost a quarter of the nation's total GDP and employs over a fifth of Indonesia's working age population (around 25 million workers). Put into perspective, Indonesia's manufacturing sector is now larger than the manufacturing sectors of the United Kingdom, Russia and Mexico. Industry sector (including manufacturing) which accounts for 21% of local workers (having become more prominent in recent years). Indonesia's labour pool is estimated at 120 million people, and is growing annually by approximately 2.4 million. As the economy has progressed beyond its predominantly agricultural base to a mixed composition, more workers \u2013 particularly women \u2013 are now employed in manufacturing and service-related professional industries.\nWith its rapidly growing middle class and competitive workforce, more foreign investors than ever before are taking advantage of Indonesia's strong manufacturing sector. However, the sector has significant challenges, including intense international competition, particularly from China, increasing labour costs, high transportation and logistics costs, difficulties getting credit, and varying levels of transparency and clarity in regulations.\nAutomotive industry.\nIn 2010, Indonesia sold 7.6 million motorcycles, which were mainly produced in the country with almost 100% local components. Honda led the market with a 50.95% market share, followed by Yamaha with 41.37%. In 2011, the retail car sales total was 888,335 units, a 19.26% increase from last year. Toyota dominated the domestic car market (35.34%), followed by Daihatsu and Mitsubishi Motors with 15.44% and 14.56%, respectively. Since 2011, some local carmakers have introduced some Indonesian national cars which can be categorized as Low-Cost Green Car (LCGC). In 2012, sales increased significantly by 24%, making it the first time that there were more than one million units in automobile sales.\nIn August 2014, Indonesia exported 126,935 Completely Build Up (CBU) vehicle units and 71,000 Completely Knock Down (CKD) vehicle units, while total production reached 878,000 vehicle units, constituting 22.5% of total output. Automotive export is more than double of its import. By 2020, it is predicted that the automotive exports will be the third after CPO and shoe export. In August 2015, Indonesia exported 123,790 motorcycles. In the same year, Yamaha Motor Company, which exported 82,641, announced to make Indonesia as a base of exporting of its products.\nIn 2017, the country produced almost 1.2 million motor vehicles, ranking it as the 18th largest producer in the world. Nowadays, Indonesian automotive companies can produce cars with a high ratio of local content (80%\u201390%).\nIn 2018, the country produced 1.34 million cars and exported 346,000 cars, mainly to the Philippines and Vietnam.\nDefense.\nIndonesia's defense industry has been shaped by the need for\nIndonesia has various companies, with their respective focus area on defence, such as PT Pindad, PT PAL, PT DI, , .\nAs of MEF 2025, Indonesia plans to produce $1 billion worth of Baykar Bayraktar TB3 and Baykar Bayraktar Ak\u0131nc\u0131 domestically. A contract to acquire 60 TB3s was signed. Minister of Defense of the Republic of Indonesia and the Turkish Defence Industry Agency signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for 48 KAANs at the Indo Defence Expo &amp; Forum 2024, Jakarta, on 11 June 2025. The total order is planned to be delivered with domestically produced engines in approximately 10 years after the effective signatures are obtained.\nServices.\nFinance, real estate and business.\nThere are 50 million small businesses in Indonesia, with online usage growth of 48% in 2010. Google announced that it would open a local office in Indonesia before 2012. According to Deloitte in 2011, Internet-related activities have generated 1.6% of the GDP. It is bigger than electronic and electrical equipment exports and liquefied natural gas at 1.51% and 1.45% respectively.\nUp to the end of June 2011, the fixed state assets were Rp 1,265 trillion ($128 billion). The value of state stocks was Rp 50 trillion ($5 billion) while other state assets were Rp 24 trillion ($2.4 billion).\nIn 2015, financial services covered Rp 7,2 trillion. Fifty domestic and foreign conglomerations held around 70.5%. Fourteen of it were vertical conglomerations, 28 were horizontal, and eight are mixed. Thirty-five entities are mainly in the bank industries, 13 were in non-bank industries and one each in special financial industries and capital market industries.\nOthers.\nThe Indonesian Textile Association has reported that in 2013, the textile sector is likely to attract investment of around $175 million. In 2012, the investment in this sector was $247 million, of which only $51 million was for new textile machinery. Exports from the textile sector in 2012 were $13.7 billion.\nIn 2011, Indonesia released 55,010 working visas for foreigners, an increase of 10% compared to 2010, while the number of foreign residents in Indonesia, excluding tourists and foreign emissaries was 111,752, rose by 6% compared to last year. Those who received visas for six months to one year were mostly Chinese, Japanese, South Koreans, Indians, Americans and Australians. A few of them were entrepreneurs who made new businesses. Malaysia is the most common destination of Indonesian migrant workers (including illegal workers). In 2010, according to a World Bank report, Indonesia was among the world's top ten remittance-receiving countries with a value totaling $7 billion. In May 2011, six million Indonesian citizens were working overseas, 2.2 million of whom reside in Malaysia and another 1.5 million in Saudi Arabia.\nRegional economies.\nGDP by provinces.\nThere are 34 provinces in Indonesia. Below are the top 15 provinces in Indonesia ranked by GDP in 2019:\nForeign economic relations.\nASEAN.\nUntil the end of 2010, intra-ASEAN trade was still low as trade involved mainly exports to countries outside the region, with the exception of Laos and Myanmar, whose foreign trade was ASEAN-oriented. In 2009, realised foreign direct investment (FDI) was US$37.9 billion and increased two-fold in 2010 to US$75.8 billion.\nThe ASEAN Framework Agreement on Trade in Services (AFAS) was adopted at the ASEAN Summit in Bangkok in December 1995. Under the agreement, member states enter into successive rounds of negotiations to liberalise trade in services with the aim of submitting increasingly higher levels of commitment. ASEAN has concluded seven packages of commitments under AFAS.\nMutual Recognition Agreements (MRAs) have been agreed upon by ASEAN for eight professions: physicians, dentists, nurses, architects, engineers, accountants, surveyors, and tourism professionals. Individuals in these professions will be free to work in any ASEAN states effective 31 December 2015.\nIn addition, six member states (Malaysia, Vietnam (2 exchanges), Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand, and Singapore) have collaborated on integrating their stock exchanges, which includes 70% of its transaction values with the goal to compete with international exchanges.\nSingle market will also include the ASEAN Single Aviation Market (ASEAN-SAM), the region's aviation policy geared towards the development of a unified and single aviation market in Southeast Asia. It was proposed by the ASEAN Air Transport Working Group, supported by the ASEAN Senior Transport Officials Meeting, and endorsed by the ASEAN Transport Ministers. It is expected to liberalise air travel between member states allowing ASEAN airlines to benefit directly from the growth in air travel, and also free up tourism, trade, investment, and service flows. This policy supersedes existing unilateral, bilateral, and multilateral air services agreements among member states which are inconsistent with its provisions.\nJapan.\nIndonesia and Japan signed the Indonesia\u2013Japan Economic Partnership Agreement (IJEPA), which had come into effect on 1 July 2008. The agreement was Indonesia's first bilateral free-trade agreement to ease the cross-border flow of goods and people as well as investment between both countries. In 2012, there were between 1,200 and 1,300 Japanese corporates operating in Indonesia, with some 12,000 Japanese nationals living in Indonesia. Japan has been investing in Indonesia for decades, particularly in the automotive, electronic goods, energy, and mining sectors. Prior to the formation of the Indonesian Republic, the Japanese had viewed Indonesia as an important source of natural resources. The Japanese need of natural resources was among the reasons that led the nation to advance further to the south in their military conquests during World War II. Today Indonesia is Japan's major supplier for natural rubber, liquefied natural gas, coal, minerals, paper pulp, seafood such as shrimp and tuna, and coffee. Traditionally Indonesia has been regarded as a major market of Japanese automotive and electronic goods. For Japanese businesses, Indonesia has been a location for low-cost manufacturing operations as well as being the source of various natural resources required by those operations. Approximately 1,000 Japanese companies operate in Indonesia which employ approximately 300,000 people. Major Japanese factories are concentrated east of Jakarta with high concentrations in Bekasi, Cikarang and Karawang, West Java.\nChina.\nTrade with China has increased since the 1990s, and in 2014, China became Indonesia's second-largest export destination after Japan. Trade between China and Indonesia is on the rise, especially after the implementation of ACFTA since early 2010. Indeed, while in 2003 trade between Indonesia and China reached only US$3.8 billion, in 2010 it multiplied almost 10 times and reached US$36.1 billion. China's transformation into Fastest growing country in the 21st century has led to an increase of foreign investments in the bamboo network, a network of overseas Chinese businesses operating in the markets of Southeast Asia that share common family and cultural ties. However the free trade with China has caused much anxiety in Indonesia, since inflows of cheap products from China could harm Indonesian industry. Indonesian private sector and civil society organizations vigorously lobbied the Indonesian government and members of parliament, insisting that Indonesia should either pull out of the agreement or renegotiate its terms with Beijing.\nChina has remained on top of Indonesia's key major trading partners, serving as the country's largest export and import market. China serves as Indonesia's largest export destination after overtaking Japan and United States, reaching US$16.8 billion. China is also Indonesia's most important source of imports, reaching US$30.8 billion, or 22.7% of Indonesian imports in 2016. The balance however was in favour of China as Indonesia booked a trade deficit of US$14 billion in 2016.\nFrom China's perspective, since 2010 ASEAN as a whole has become its fourth-largest trading partner after the European Union, Japan and the United States. Among ASEAN member countries, Indonesia was China's fourth-largest trading partner, which, according to data as of May 2010 from the Ministry of Commerce of the People's Republic of China, amounted to US$12.4 billion, after Malaysia (US$22.2 billion), Singapore (US$17.9 billion) and Thailand (US$15.7 billion). With China's economic rise, Indonesia has been intensifying its trade relationship with China to counterbalance its ties with the West. By 2020, China had become Indonesia's largest export destination.\nSouth Korea.\nIn the past, the relations were only developed around trade and investments, such as the forestry and garment sectors. Today the cooperation has been expanded to a number of mega projects and advanced industries. With US$27 billion in bilateral trade, South Korea became the fourth biggest trading partner of Indonesia in 2012. It became the third-biggest foreign investor in Indonesia, with US$1.94 billion in investment.\nThere are large numbers of South Korean companies that have been investing and operating in Indonesia, such as Miwon (Daesang Corporation), Lotte, Yong Ma, Hankook, Samsung, LG, Kia and Hyundai. In 2011, Hankook announced a US$353 million investment into a production plant located in Bekasi, West Java, Indonesia.\nIn 2019, trade between Indonesia and South Korea was worth $15.65 billion, and between 2015 and 2019 South Korean companies invested nearly $7 billion in Indonesia. In December 2020, Indonesia and South Korea signed a comprehensive economic partnership. It is equivalent to a free trade agreement, though focuses on a broader scope of economic cooperation. Under the deal, Indonesia will scrap 94.8% of tariffs on South Korean products while South Korea will scrap 95.8% of tariffs on Indonesian products.\nUnited States.\nAt the beginning of the post-Suharto era, US exports to Indonesia in 1999 totaled $2 billion, down significantly from $4.5 billion in 1997. The main exports were construction equipment, machinery, aviation parts, chemicals, and agricultural products. US imports from Indonesia in 1999 totaled $9.5 billion and consisted primarily of clothing, machinery and transportation equipment, petroleum, natural rubber, and footwear. Financial assistance to Indonesia is coordinated through the Consultative Group on Indonesia (CGI) formed in 1989. It includes 19 donor countries and 13 international organizations that meet annually to coordinate donor assistance. In 2019, as Indonesia's share of global trade exceeded 0.5 percent, the United States Trade Representatives decided not to classify Indonesia as a \"developing country.\" Despite a revocation of this status, the Indonesian government has assured that this would not change the current Generalized System of Preferences facilities that Indonesia had enjoyed from the United States.\nEuropean Union.\nThe EU and Indonesia have built robust commercial relations, with bilateral trade amounting to approximately \u20ac25 billion in 2012 resulting in a sizeable \u20ac5.7 billion trade surplus for Indonesia with the EU. In the past few years trade between EU and Indonesia has been marked by an upward trend. Whereas total trade was worth almost \u20ac16 billion in 2009, by 2011 it had already reached \u20ac23.5 billion. For the EU, Indonesia is the 24th largest import source (share 0.9%) and the 30th largest export destination (share 0.6%). Inside the ASEAN-region, Indonesia ranks fourth in terms of total trade. The EU is Indonesia's 4th largest trading partner after Japan, China and Singapore, representing almost 10% of its total external trade. The EU is the second largest investor in the Indonesian economy.\nIndonesia mostly exports to the EU agricultural products and processed resources, mainly palm oil, fuels and mining products, textiles and furniture. EU exports to Indonesia consist mainly of high-tech machinery and transport equipment, chemicals and various manufactured goods. Essentially, trade flows between Indonesia and the EU complement each other.\nAfter negotiations on a free trade agreement with ASEAN got increasingly difficult, the EU began pursuing negotiations with individual ASEAN states. The EU and Indonesia are currently working towards an ambitious Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement covering trade, investment and services.\nIndia.\nOn 25 January 2011, after talks by Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and visiting President of Indonesia Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, India and Indonesia had signed business deals worth billions of dollars and set an ambitious target of doubling trade over the next five years. India also has further economic ties with Indonesia through its free trade agreement with ASEAN, of which Indonesia is a member. The two countries target to achieve bilateral trade of $25 billion by 2015, with cumulative Indian investments of $20 billion in Indonesia.\nMacro-economic trend.\nThis is a chart of trend of Indonesia's GDP at market prices by the IMF with figures in millions of rupiah.\nFor purchasing power parity comparisons, the exchange rate for 1 US dollar is set at 3,094.57 rupiah.\nAverage net wage in Indonesia varies by sector. In February 2017 the electricity, gas, and water sector has the highest average net wage, while the agriculture sector has the lowest.\nInvestment.\nSince the late 1980s, Indonesia has made significant changes to its regulatory framework to encourage economic growth. This growth was financed mostly from private investment, both foreign and domestic. US investors dominated the oil and gas sector and undertook some of Indonesia's largest mining projects. In addition, the presence of US banks, manufacturers, and service providers expanded, especially after the industrial and financial sector reforms of the 1980s. Other major foreign investors included India, Japan, the UK, Singapore, the Netherlands, Qatar, Hong Kong, Taiwan and South Korea.\nThe 1997 crisis made continued private financing imperative but problematic. New foreign investment approvals fell by almost two-thirds between 1997 and 1999. The crisis further highlighted areas where additional reform was needed. Frequently cited areas for improving the investment climate were the establishment of a functioning legal and judicial system, adherence to competitive processes, and adoption of internationally acceptable accounting and disclosure standards. Despite improvements of laws in recent years, Indonesia's intellectual property rights regime remains weak, and lack of effective enforcement is a significant concern. Under Suharto, Indonesia had moved towards the private provision of public infrastructure, including electric power, toll roads, and telecommunications. The 1997 crisis brought to light a severe weakness in the process of dispute resolution, however, particularly in the area of private infrastructure projects. Although Indonesia continued to have the advantages of a large labour force, abundant natural resources and modern infrastructure, private investment in new projects largely ceased during the crisis.\nAs of 28 June 2010, the Indonesia Stock Exchange had 341 listed companies with a combined market capitalization of $269.9 billion. As of November 2010, two-thirds of the market capitalization was in the form of foreign funds, and only around 1% of the population have stock investments. Efforts are further being made to improve the business and investment environment. Within the World Bank's Doing Business Survey, Indonesia rose to 122 out of 178 countries in 2010, from 129 in the previous year. Despite these efforts, the rank is still below regional peers, and an unfavorable investment climate persists. For example, potential foreign investors and their executive staff cannot maintain their own bank accounts in Indonesia, unless they are tax-paying local residents (paying tax in Indonesia for their worldwide income).\nFrom 1990 to 2010, Indonesian companies have been involved in 3,757 mergers and acquisitions as either acquirer or target with a total known value of $137 billion. In 2010, 609 transactions were announced, which is a new record. Numbers had increased by 19% compared to 2009. The value of deals in 2010 was US$17 billion, which is the second-highest number ever. In 2012, Indonesia realized total investments of $32.5 billion, surpassing its annual target $25 billion, as reported by Investment Coordinating Board (BKPM) on 22 January. The primary investments were in the mining, transport and chemicals sectors. In 2011, the Indonesian government announced a new \"Masterplan\" (known as the \"MP3EI\", or \"Masterplan Percepatan dan Perluasan Pembangunan Ekonomi Indonesia\", the \"Masterplan to Accelerate and Expand Economic Development in Indonesia\"). The aim was to encourage increased investment, particularly in infrastructure projects across Indonesia.\nIndonesia regained its investment grade rating from Fitch Rating in late 2011, and from Moody's Rating in early 2012, after losing it in the 1997 crisis, during which Indonesia spent more than Rp. 450 trillion ($50 billion) to bail out lenders from banks. Fitch raised Indonesia's long-term and local currency debt rating to BBB\u2212 from BB+ with both ratings is stable. Fitch also predicted that the economy would grow at least 6% on average per year through 2013, despite a less conducive global economic climate. Moody's raised Indonesia's foreign and local currency bond ratings to Baa3 from Ba1 with a stable outlook. In May 2017, S&amp;P Global raised Indonesia's investment grade from BB+ to BBB\u2212 with a stable outlook, due to the economy experiencing a rebound in exports and strong consumer spending during early 2017.\nForeign Direct Investment (FDI).\nIndonesia's foreign direct investment surged 44.2% on a yearly basis in 2022, with the base metals sector drawing in the biggest inflows. Indonesia's received 654.4 trillion rupiah worth of FDI last year, or equivalent to $45.6 billion in the investment ministry's official calculation, which assumes an exchange rate of 14,350 to the dollar. The data excludes investment in the banking and oil and gas sectors. Foreign direct investment in base metals and mining reached $11 billion and $5.1 billion, respectively, last year, the biggest recipients of FDI. The biggest sources were Singapore, China and Hong Kong. Total investment, including from domestic sources, reached 1,207.2 trillion rupiah ($81.02 billion), roughly in line with the government's target. FDI in the final quarter of last year was up 43.3% on an annual basis, amounting to 175.2 trillion rupiah in rupiah terms, or $12.2 billion in the official U.S. dollar equivalent.\nList of the 10 largest foreign investment origin countries in Indonesia :\nForeign direct investment into Indonesia (excluding investment in banking and the oil and gas sectors) increased 20.2 percent year-on-year to a new record peak of IDR 177 trillion (US$11.96 billion) in the Q1 of 2023, amid efforts by the government to ease business and licensing rules. Singapore (US$4.3 billion) was the biggest source of investment, followed by Hong Kong (US$1.5 billion), China (US$1.2 billion), and Japan (US$1 billion) while base metals were the biggest recipient amid efforts to boost investment in processed minerals. In total, Indonesia recorded IDR 328.9 trillion of foreign and domestic investment during the first quarter, up 16.5 percent from a year earlier, boosted by a rise in investment in base metals, transportation, and the mining sector. For 2023, the government has set a target to draw IDR 1,400 trillion (US$95.5 billion) of investment from domestic and foreign sources.\nLargest Indonesian companies.\nFortune Global 500.\nIndonesia has 2 company that rank in the Fortune Global 500 ranking for 2025.\nForbes Global 2000.\nIndonesia has 12 companies that rank in the Forbes Global 2000 ranking for 2025.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPublic expenditure.\nIn 2015, total public spending was Rp 1,806 trillion (US$130.88 billion, 15.7% of GDP). Government revenues, including those from state-owned enterprises (BUMN), totaled Rp 1,508 trillion (US$109.28 billion, 13.1% of GDP) resulting in a deficit of 2.6%. Since the 1997 crisis that caused an increase in debt and public subsidies and a decrease in development spending, Indonesia's public finances have undergone a major transformation. As a result of a series macroeconomic policies, including a low budget deficit, Indonesia is considered to have moved into a situation of financial resources sufficiency to address development needs. Decentralization, enacted during the Habibie administration, has changed the manner of government spending, which has resulted in around 40% of public funds being transferred to regional governments by 2006.\nIn 2005, rising international oil prices led to the government's decision of slashing fuel subsidies. It led to an extra US$10 billion for government spending on development, and by 2006, there were an additional 5 billion due to steady growth, and declining debt service payments. It was the country's first \"fiscal space\" since the revenue windfall during the 1970s oil boom. Due to decentralization and fiscal space, Indonesia has the potential to improve the quality of its public services. Such potential also enables the country to focus on further reforms, such as the provision of targeted infrastructure. Careful management of allocated funds has been described as Indonesia's main issue in public expenditure.\nIn 2018, President Joko Widodo substantially increased the amount of debt by taking foreign loans. Indonesia has increased the debt by Rp 1,815 trillion compared to his predecessor, SBY. He has insisted that the loan is used for productive long-term projects such as building roads, bridges, and airports. Finance Minister Sri Mulyani also stated that despite an increase of foreign loans and debt, the government has also increased the budget for infrastructure development, healthcare, education, and budget given to regencies and villages. The government is insisting that foreign debt is still under control, and complying with relevant laws that limit debt to be under 60% of GDP.\nRegional performance.\nBased on the regional administration implementation performance evaluation of 2009, by order, the best performance were:\nBased on JBIC Fiscal Year 2010 survey (22nd Annual Survey Report) found that in 2009, Indonesia has the highest satisfaction level in net sales and profits for Japanese companies.\nWealth.\nNational net wealth.\nNational net wealth, also known as national net worth, is the total sum of the value of a nation's assets minus its liabilities. It refers to the total value of net wealth possessed by the citizens of a nation at a set point in time. This figure is an important indicator of a nation's ability to take on debt and sustain spending and is influenced not only by real estate prices, equity market prices, exchange rates, liabilities and incidence in a country of the adult population but also by human resources, natural resources and capital and technological advancements, which may create new assets or render others worthless in the future. According to Credit Suisse, Indonesia has national net wealth of approximately $3.199 trillion, or about 0.765% of world net wealth, placing Indonesia at 17th, above Russia, Brazil, and Sweden.\nHigh-net-worth individuals.\nAccording to Asia Wealth Report, Indonesia has the highest growth rate of high-net-worth individuals (HNWI) predicted among the 10 largest Asian economies. The 2015 Knight Frank Wealth Report reported that in 2014 there were 24 individuals with a net worth above US$1 billion. 18 of them lived in Jakarta while the others were spread among other large cities in Indonesia. 192 persons can be categorized as centimillionaires with over US$100 million of wealth and 650 persons as high-net-worth individuals whose wealth exceeded US$30 million.\nChallenges.\nEmbezzlement and corrupt bureaucracy.\nCorruption is pervasive in the Indonesian government, affecting many fields that are central to barrier the country's economic development from local governments, the police, the private sector even various ministerial institutions which are close to the president. It is related to problems of human capacities and technical resources remains a major challenge in merging effectiveness and integrity in public administration, especially in regencies and cities. A 2018 World Economic Forum survey reports that corruption is the most problematic issue regarding doing business in Indonesia, as well as inefficient government bureaucracy policies. The survey also showed that 70% of entrepreneurs believe that corruption has grown in Indonesia, while low trust in the private sector is a major obstacle to foreign investment in the country.\nIn 2019, a controversial bill regarding the anti-corruption body (Corruption Eradication Commission (KPK)) reduced the commission's effectiveness in tackling widespread corruption problems and stripped its independence was passed despite massive protests across the country. There were 26 points in the revised law that crippled the commission and might further undermine efforts to eradicate corruption in Indonesia.\nLabour unrest.\nAs of 2011, labour militancy was growing with a major strike at the Grasberg mine, the world's largest gold mine as well as the second-largest copper mine, and numerous strikes elsewhere. A common issue was the attempts by foreign-owned enterprises to evade Indonesia's strict labour laws by calling their employees' contract workers. \"The New York Times\" expressed concern that Indonesia's cheap labor advantage might be lost. However, a large pool of the unemployed who will accept substandard wages and conditions remains available. One factor in the increase of militancy is increased awareness via the Internet of prevailing wages in other countries, and the generous profits foreign companies are making in Indonesia.\nOn 1 September 2015, thousands of workers in Indonesia staged large demonstrations across the country in pursuit of higher wages and improved labour laws. Approximately 35,000 people rallied in total. They demanded a 22% to 25% increase in the minimum wage by 2016 and lower prices on essential goods, including fuel. The unions also want the government to ensure job security and ensure the fundamental rights of the workers.\nIn 2020, thousands of workers across the country held a massive march to protest against the Omnibus Law on Job Creation that included several controversial rules, which revised minimum wages, lowered severance pay, relaxed firing rules, among other disadvantaging regulations for labors and factory workers.\nInequality.\nEconomic disparity and the flow of natural resource profits to Jakarta has led to discontent and contributed to separatist movements in areas such as Aceh and Papua. Geographically, the poorest fifth regions account for just 8% of consumption, while the wealthiest fifth account for 45%. While there are new laws on decentralization that may address the problem of uneven growth and satisfaction partially, there are many hindrances in putting this new policy into practice. At a 2011 Makassar Indonesian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (Kadin) meeting, Disadvantaged Regions Minister said there are 184 regencies classified as disadvantaged areas, with around 120 in eastern Indonesia. 1% of Indonesia's population has 49.3% of the country's $1.8 trillion wealth, down from 53.5%. However, it is ranked fourth after Russia (74.5%), India (58.4%) and Thailand (58%).\nInflation.\nInflation has long been a problem in Indonesia. Because of political turmoil, the country once suffered hyperinflation, with 1,000% annual inflation between 1964 and 1967, resulting in severe poverty and hunger. Even though the economy recovered quickly during the first decade of the New Order administration (1970\u20131981), never once was the inflation less than 10% annually. The inflation slowed during the mid-1980s; however, the economy was also languid due to the decrease in oil price that reduced its export revenue dramatically. The economy was again experiencing rapid growth between 1989 and 1997 due to the improving export-oriented manufacturing sector. Still, the inflation rate was higher than economic growth, and this caused a widening gap among Indonesians. Inflation peaked in 1998 during the 1997 crisis at over 58%, causing poverty to rise to the levels of the 1960s. During the economic recovery and growth in recent years, the government has been trying to lower the inflation rate. However, it seems that inflation has been affected by global fluctuation and domestic market competition. As of 2010, the inflation rate was approximately 7%, when its economic growth was 6%. To date, inflation is affecting the Indonesian lower middle class, especially those who are not able to afford food after price hikes. At the end of 2017, Indonesia's inflation rate was 3.61%, or higher than the government-set forecast of 3.0\u20133.5%. In more recent years, the Bank of Indonesia has been successful in maintaining core inflation within its target band of 2.0-4.0%.\nProductivity.\nSlow pace of productivity growth has become a limiting constraint on economic growth. Indonesia has the lowest rate of productivity growth among Asian peers. This has been particularly acute in the manufacturing sector, where the rate of value added per worker has almost halved since 2004. Moreover, manufacturing has declined as a share of GDP since 2004, shrinking from 24% to 18%. Manufacturing is critical to the growth of developing economies, and it may contribute to Indonesia's slow GDP growth compared to regional peers.\nUnderinvestment.\nRecent analyses highlight persistent underinvestment as a major structural constraint. Indonesia's capital formation, public and private, remains low relative to regional peers, and human-capital development has not kept pace with high demands of high-value added manufacturing. These factors contribute to modest GDP growth relative to peers.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14648", "revid": "4156945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14648", "title": "Communications in Indonesia", "text": " \nCommunications in Indonesia has a complex history due to the need to reach an extended archipelago of over 17,500 islands. The once important non-electronic communication methods of the past have given way to a considerable telecommunications infrastructure in contemporary Indonesia.\nHistory.\nIn the sixteenth century the Dutch Empire colonised Indonesia, constructing an elaborate communication system, both within Indonesia and to other countries. The first connection to Australia was an undersea telegraph cable that was completed on 18 November 1871, connecting Java to Darwin, and eventually to the Australian Overland Telegraph Line across Australia.\nAfter independence, Indonesia started to develop its own communication systems, generally following the rest of the world. The construction of communication towers and launch of the Palapa series of communication satellites was done during the New Order period.\nInfrastructure.\nA number of lines connect Indonesia to international communication routes. For example, the SEA-ME-WE 3 optical submarine telecommunications cable lands at both Medan and Jakarta connecting Europe with South eastern Asia (several countries up to Japan) and Australia (Perth).\nMedia.\nPrint.\nIndonesia has a long list of print media, in the form of newspapers and magazines. Some, such as Kompas, Media Indonesia, Koran Sindo and Koran Tempo are circulated daily and are relatively simple to obtain. Others are island- or city-specific, and are usually not distributed to other regions.\nInternet.\nBy June 2011, all sub-districts in Indonesia will be connected to the Internet.\nRegulatory environment in Indonesia.\nThe media in Indonesia is regulated by the Ministry of Communications and Informatics.\nLIRNEasia's Telecommunications Regulatory Environment (TRE) index, which summarises stakeholders' perception on certain TRE dimensions, provides insight into how conducive the environment is for further development and progress. The most recent survey was conducted in July 2008 in eight Asian countries, including Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Maldives, Pakistan, Thailand, and the Philippines. The tool measured seven dimensions: i) market entry; ii) access to scarce resources; iii) interconnection; iv) tariff regulation; v) anti-competitive practices; and vi) universal services; vii) quality of service, for the fixed, mobile and broadband sectors.\nBelow-average scores received in all sectors and across dimensions reflect general dissatisfaction of the TRE in Indonesia. However, this does not mean that respondents have ignored recent developments. The relatively healthy growth in mobile sector is reflected in the higher TRE scores received by the sector for most dimensions, when compared to the fixed sector. On average, the mobile sector scores best, with fixed and broadband following.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14649", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14649", "title": "Transport in Indonesia", "text": " \nIndonesia's transport system has been shaped over time by the economic resource base of an archipelago with thousands of islands, and the distribution of its more than 200 million people concentrated mainly on a single island, Java.\nAll modes of transport play a role in the country's transport system and are generally complementary rather than competitive. Road transport is predominant, with a total system length of in 2020. The railway system has five unconnected networks in Java, Sumatra and Sulawesi primarily dedicated to transport bulk commodities and long-distance passenger traffic.\nSea transport is extremely important for economic integration, as well as for domestic and foreign trade. It is well developed, with each of the major islands having at least one significant port city. The role of inland waterways is relatively minor and is limited to certain areas of Eastern Sumatra and Kalimantan.\nThe function of air transport is significant, particularly where land or water transport is deficient or non-existent. It is based on an extensive domestic airline network in which all major cities can be reached by passenger plane.\nWater transport.\nMerchant marine vessels.\nBecause Indonesia encompasses a sprawling archipelago, maritime shipping provides essential links between different parts of the country. Boats in common use include large container ships, a variety of ferries, passenger ships, sailing ships, and smaller motorised vessels. The traditional wooden pinisi vessel is still widely used as the inter-island freight service within Indonesian archipelago. Main pinisi traditional harbours are Sunda Kelapa in Jakarta and harbour in Makassar.\nFrequent ferry services cross the straits between nearby islands, especially in the chain of islands stretching from Sumatra through Java to the Lesser Sunda Islands. On the busy crossings between Sumatra, Java, and Bali, multiple car ferries run frequently twenty-four hours per day. There are also international ferry services between across the Straits of Malacca between Sumatra and Malaysia, and between Singapore and nearby Indonesian islands, such as Batam. Ferry services are operated by state-owned ASDP Indonesia Ferry and several private operators.\nA network of passenger ships makes longer connections to more remote islands, especially in the eastern part of the archipelago. The national shipping line, Pelni, provides passenger service to ports throughout the country on a two to four week schedule. These ships generally provide the least expensive way to cover long distances between islands. Smaller privately run boats provide service between islands.\nOn some islands, major rivers provide a key transportation link in the absence of good roads. On Kalimantan, longboats running on the rivers are the only way to reach many inland areas.\nWaterways.\nIndonesia has of navigable waterways (as of 2005[ [update]]), of which about one half are on Kalimantan, and a quarter each on Sumatra and Papua. Waterways are highly needed because the rivers on these islands are not wide enough to hold medium-sized ships. In addition to this, roads and railways are not good options since Kalimantan and Papua are not like Java, which is a highly developed island. With the current length of waterways, Indonesia ranked seventh on the countries with longest waterways.\nPorts and harbours.\nMajor ports and harbours include Bitung, Cilacap, Cirebon, Jakarta, Kupang, Palembang, Semarang, Surabaya, and Makassar. Ports are managed by the various Indonesia Port Corporations, of which there are four, numbered I through IV. Each has jurisdiction over various regions of the country, with I in the west and IV in the east. Port of Tanjung Priok in Jakarta is the Indonesia's busiest port, handling over 5.20 million TEUs.\nA two-phase \"New Tanjung Priok\" extension project is currently underway, which will triple the existing annual capacity when fully operational in 2023. In 2015, ground breaking of the strategic North Sumatra's Kuala Tanjung Port has been completed. It is expected to accommodate 500,000 TEUs per year, overtaking Johor's Tanjung Pelepas Port and could even compete with the port of Singapore.\nList of ship accidents and incidents in Indonesia.\nThis list is a list of ship accidents and incidents sorted by year, from most recent.\nRoads and highways.\nA wide variety of vehicles are used for transportation on Indonesia's roads. Bus services are available in most areas connected to the road network. Between major cities, especially on Sumatra, Java, and Bali, services are frequent and direct; many express services are available with no stops until the final destination.\nIntercity bus.\nThe intercity bus service has become the major provider of land transportation service connecting Indonesian cities, either within an island or inter-island connected through ferry crossings. The intercity bus operator companies are called P.O. ( in Indonesian) with several major companies operating mainly in Java and Sumatra. The longest intercity bus service in Indonesia is a route operated by P.O. Antar Lintas Sumatera (ALS) connecting Medan in North Sumatra and Jember in East Java. It is a week long bus travel covering a distance of 2,920 kilometers.\nThe surge of intercity bus travel in Indonesia took place after the completion of Trans-Java highway section connecting Jakarta and Surabaya in 2018. During this time, some intercity bus services began operating fleet of double decker busses.\nCity bus.\nSome major cities has urban transit bus service, or a more sophisticated form of bus rapid transit (BRT). There are usually also bus services of various kinds such as the Kopaja in Jakarta. The largest one, Transjakarta system in Jakarta, is the longest bus rapid transit system in the world that boasts some in 13 corridors and 10 cross-corridor routes and carrying 430,000 passengers daily in 2016. Other cities such as Yogyakarta (Trans Jogja), Surabaya (Suroboyo Bus &amp; Trans Semanggi Suroboyo), Palembang, Bandung (Trans Metro Pasundan), Surakarta (Batik Solo Trans), Denpasar, Pekanbaru, Semarang (Trans Semarang), Makassar, Bogor, Padang, and Batam also have BRT systems in place without segregated lanes.\nCity bus in Surabaya.\nSurabaya has a number of public transportation services in the form of regular city bus by several bus companies, both owned by BUMN and private, which operate in accordance with the route permit from the Surabaya City Transportation Agency or the East Java Traffic and Road Transportation Agency (DLLAJ). The service has been operating since July 20, 1975, replacing the function of tram as the main public transportation at that time.\nIn the early 2010s, the population of regular city buses continued to decline along with the number of units that were no longer roadworthy and the emergence of various online transportation services in this city. The existence of regular city buses has also been eroded by the start of various road-based mass transportation (bus rapid transit) services in the city since mid-2015, such as (known as Trans Sidoarjo), Suroboyo Bus, Trans Semanggi Suroboyo and Trans Jatim. Until 2017, the population of regular city buses with various chassis and bodies reached 274 units spread across twenty different route lines.\nEarly September 2022, the state-owned operator Perum DAMRI officially stopped all operations of its regular city buses, so that all remaining regular city bus services were only operated by several private bus companies. There are a total of 38 buses from several bus companies such as PO Estraa Mandiri, PO Ladju, PO Akas NR, PO Dua Putra, etc., which provide services on two economy routes, two express routes and one AC express route. These routes connect Purabaya or Larangan in the south of the city with several public transportation infrastructures in the north of the city such as Bratang, Joyoboyo or Jembatan Merah Putih.\nHistory and development.\nTram feeder buses.\nCity bus services have been present in Surabaya as feeder buses or pick-up buses for tram passengers belonging to the Oost-Java Stoomtram Maatschappij (OJS) company since 1889. Many bus units were placed at several tram stop infrastructure such as Wonokromo Kota Station, Willemplein, and Ujung. As the golden age of trams faded, the Surabaya City Government began to stop all tram operations in 1969. As a result, tram feeder buses changed status to become the main mode of public transportation in the city.\nPioneer city bus of Perum DAMRI.\nAfter the tram operation stopped, the Surabaya City Government began a project to establish and procure regular city bus services bound to fixed routes, in collaboration with the pioneer operator Perum DAMRI. The regular city bus service by Perum DAMRI was officially launched on July 20, 1975, with twenty large buses produced by Robur. Along with the increasing public interest, Perum DAMRI began to increase the number of buses by fifty units in 1976 and 92 units in 1978. Until 1982, the city bus routes increased to nine and were served by 168 buses. The nine newest city bus routes are:\nDouble-decker buses.\nIn 1981, Perum DAMRI began operating five double-decker bus routes using buses produced by Leyland Motors. A year later, Perum DAMRI added two new routes, along with the inauguration of the patas class city bus service. By 1983, the number of double-decker bus routes had increased to ten different routes. After operating for eight years, all double-decker bus operations were stopped since 1989. One of the contributing factors was the infrastructure on arterial roads that still did not support the operation and affordability of double-decker bus transportation. All bus units belonging to the double-decker bus were finally replaced with regular buses.\nRMB Bus.\nOne form of improving regular city bus services from the Perum DAMRI operator in the early 2000s was the operation of new method route buses (RMB). The fundamental difference between RMB buses and other buses is that there are various improvements and improvements in service quality such as the addition of interior facilities, security systems, passenger capacity, departure schedules, distances between departures (\"headway\"), stopping points (stops), payment methods, crew competence, and payroll systems. The RMB bus was designed as a pilot project to improve the quality of other routes. This RMB bus is the beginning of the development of city buses with air conditioning (AC) facilities, so that later these bus units are better known as AC patas city buses.\nAC patas bus.\nAs of July 5, 2007, Perum DAMRI has begun to gradually rejuvenate regular patas class city buses using patas class units with facilities air conditioning (AC) and automatic doors. The initial stage was carried out by replacing twenty regular city buses on route P1 with city buses on route PAC1. Following on April 3, 2012, ten regular city buses on route P8 were also replaced with city buses on route PAC8.\nWomen's bus.\nAs of April 30, 2012, the Surabaya City Government in collaboration with Perum DAMRI began operating a special regular city bus service for women or called a women's bus. The service aims to minimize cases of sexual harassment and criminal acts against women in public transportation. The number of units provided by Perum DAMRI for the service is thirteen large buses. As of July 2, 2012, the women's bus began operating using six buses on the PAC1 route. Low passenger occupancy has resulted in the number of buses operating continuing to be reduced. Until July 13, 2012, only four women's buses were operating. Ineffective operations and the absence of feedback in the form of evaluations and long-term plans from the Surabaya City Government caused this service to slowly stop operating. The women's bus units began to function again as regular city buses by transporting passengers of various genders.\nBRT Trans Sidoarjo.\nPerum DAMRI in collaboration with the Sidoarjo Regency Government inaugurated the Trans Sidoarjo service (as part of the development of the Trans Gerbang Kertasusila agglomeration transportation) with a total of thirty large buses with a high deck design (\"highdeck\") assisted by the Ministry of Transportation of the Republic of Indonesia on September 21, 2015. Trans Sidoarjo is a transportation system based on Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) using fast, cheap and air-conditioned (AC) buses in the area around Sidoarjo. The Trans Sidoarjo route connects Purabaya Terminal with Porong Terminal via Toll Road, Terminal Larangan and Tanggulangin. Low passenger occupancy has caused Perum DAMRI to suffer losses, so it has gradually reduced the number of operating buses to ten units. Since the PPKM due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Trans Sidoarjo has stopped operating. In 2020, all Trans Sidoarjo bus units were converted to regular city bus routes PAC4 and PAC8.\nEnd of Perum DAMRI operations.\nBased on a copy of the letter from the Land Transportation Observation Center (BPTD), as of September 1, 2022, Perum DAMRI has officially stopped all UABK or regular city bus services in Surabaya on the three routes it owns. This operational cessation moment is twelve days after the inauguration of Trans Jatim on August 19, 2022, and two days before the fuel price increase on August 3, 2022. Previously, Perum DAMRI was the sole operator on two regular city bus routes from the Purabaya Terminal such as the P4/PAC4 and P8/PAC8 routes. In addition, Perum DAMRI is one of the regular city bus operators for the P3/PAC3 route from Terminal Larangan, together with PO Estraa Mandiri, PO Akas NR and PO Ladju.\nSeveral news reports from the mass media stated that Perum DAMRI will reactivate regular city bus services on the P4/PAC4 route on the Purabaya-Tanjung Perak route via the Toll Road which still has passenger occupancy. The route of the route is planned to be extended (extension) to Bangkalan Terminal. The discourse on extending the route had previously surfaced in 2009, but had not been realized. The discourse will be implemented at the end of 2022, when Perum DAMRI has received a grant in the form of 34 electric bus units produced by PT INKA after the G20 Summit in Bali ends.\nDifferences with modern city buses.\nBefore bus rapid transit (BRT) was present in Indonesia, all city bus services generally still adopted a conventional (regular) management system and were similar to intercity bus services. In 2004, it was only Transjakarta is present in Jakarta City as the first modern city bus service based on road-based mass transportation and implementing BRT standards on an integrated corridor network. The implementation of these standards is a differentiator between Transjakarta as a modern city bus with several services such as Kopaja, MetroMini, Koantas Bima, Kopami, Miniarta, Kowanbisata, etc. as regular city buses or non-corridor city buses that already existed. The success of the DKI Jakarta Provincial Government in organizing public transportation with the Transjakarta service has become a pilot model for several local governments in implementing modern city buses in other big cities such as Trans Jogja (2008), Trans Semarang (2009), Batik Solo Trans (2010), Trans Musi (2010), Trans Sarbagita (2011), etc. The local government has started implementing a modern city bus operational scheme by converting regular city buses into modern city buses, or maintaining the existence of regular city buses.\nIn comparison with other big cities in Indonesia, the development of urban bus modes in Surabaya is relatively static and slower. However, Surabaya is the only city in East Java that still maintains regular city bus services, after similar services in Jember City were deactivated in 2007\u20132008. In the period between 1975 and 2015, regular city buses were still one of the main modes of public transportation within the city (besides transportation city and public passenger cars) that are able to survive and dominate the route network connecting strategic points in the city such as Purabaya Terminal, Larangan Terminal (Sidoarjo), Joyoboyo Terminal, Bratang Terminal, Jembatan Merah Plaza (JMP), Semut Station, Tanjung Perak Port (Ujung Baru) and Tambak Osowilangon Terminal. However, the era of the glory of regular city buses began to decline and degrade since the 2010s, along with the start of the operation of online transportation services and several modern city bus services or BRT in this city such as (2015), Suroboyo Bus (2018), Trans Semanggi Suroboyo (2021) and Trans Jatim (2022). As of September 2022, the population of regular city buses has shrunk to less than fifty units, spread across only four routes such as routes D, F, P3/PAC3 and P5.\nRoute lines and service operators.\nService classes.\nRegular city bus services in Surabaya are divided into three levels of travel class based on differences in accommodation quality. The order of service classes from the lowest is economy, patas, and AC patas. Economy buses only have routes on arterial roads in the city, the fare is cheaper than the class above it, and can accommodate standing passengers (if the seat capacity is full). The express bus (an acronym for fast\u2013limited) has a route on arterial roads and toll roads in the city, travel time is faster than economy buses, and carries limited passengers according to the maximum seat capacity. While the AC express bus is an express bus with additional facilities in the form of Air conditioning (AC). Most of the AC express bus units in Surabaya are units owned by Perum DAMRI. Express bus units that are no longer roadworthy and are more than fifteen years old will be replaced with AC express bus units gradually.\nRoute list.\nThe Surabaya City Government began adding and adjusting regular city bus routes in the period 1991\u20131993. The route adjustments were made after several public infrastructures in the city were operated, such as the Purabaya Terminal, Tambak Osowilangon Terminal, Jalan Raya Ahmad Yani and Surabaya\u2013Gresik Toll Road. Based on data from the Surabaya City Transportation Agency, there was a decrease in the number of regular city bus route permits in the period 2009\u20132017. The total number of city bus route permits in 2009 was 426 units spread across 22 active routes, while the total number of regular city bus route permits in 2017 decreased by 36%, with details of 274 units spread across twenty active routes.\nOperator.\nUntil 2021, regular city bus service providers in Surabaya are divided into two types of operators, namely BUMN operators and private operators. BUMN operators refer to the city bus transportation units (UABK) by Perum DAMRI Surabaya Branch. While private operators refers to the operational cooperation (KSO) unit of several private bus companies in East Java, whose units are employed for the regular city bus division. Since 2015, all regular city bus operators have begun to form legal entities in the form of limited liability company (PT) to facilitate operational arrangements in the field. Early September 2022, all regular city bus services will be operated by only ten private bus companies. There are a total of 39 buses from the bus company, which provide services on two economy routes, two express routes and one AC express route.\nPerum DAMRI is the only regular city bus operator that implements a fixed salary system for bus crews, both drivers and conductors. In addition to Perum DAMRI, other operators implement a deposit system and profit sharing for bus crews. The crew gets their income based on the amount of money they have to deposit with the company. After the amount of money earned is reduced by the deposit, the remainder is divided among the crew.\nActive routes.\nAs of September 2022, there are four different travel routes on five active regular city bus routes in Surabaya. The seven routes consist of two economy bus routes, two express bus routes and three AC express bus routes. The five routes connect the southern end of the city such as Purabaya Terminal or Larangan Terminal with public transportation infrastructure in the north of the city such as Bratang Terminal and Jembatan Merah Plaza (JMP). The bus unit has an effective operational schedule between 05.00 and 17.00 WIB with a waiting time (\"headway\") of at least 25 minutes from each terminal and stopping point.\n}} Purabaya\u2013Bratang\n}} Purabaya\u2013JMP via Diponegoro\n}} Sidoarjo\u2013JMP via Toll\n}} Purabaya\u2013JMP via Toll\nInactive route.\nRegular city bus units in Surabaya have their own platforms or departure lanes at the Purabaya Terminal since the revitalization of the terminal building in March 2013. The number of platforms provided is ten lanes, adjusting to the number of regular city bus lanes with high passenger occupancy. The ten route lanes are still operating routinely in the period 2013\u20132020. However, all regular city bus units on all routes have stopped operating since the Surabaya City Government implemented large-scale social restrictions (PSBB) and enforcement of restrictions on community activities (PPKM) due to the COVID-19 pandemic in this city. Several routes have started to operate again since the Surabaya City Government began to lower the PPKM level and the Purabaya Terminal has started to be visited by intercity bus units. However, there are several routes that are experiencing an empty bus unit, so that several of these routes are no longer operated (inactive).\n}} Purabaya\u2013Ngagel\u2013Semut\n}} Purabaya\u2013Joyoboyo\n}} Purabaya\u2013Tanjung Perak via Darmo\n}} Purabaya\u2013Tanjung Perak via Toll Road\n}} Purabaya\u2013Osowilangon Pond via Diponegoro\n}} Purabaya\u2013Osowilangon via Toll Road\nBus unit specifications.\nIn general, almost all regular city buses in Surabaya (except for AC patas buses) have a similar uniform pattern (\"livery\") on the bus body. The uniform on the bus body uses a white base color and a special colored bumper according to the service class level. Some units even add large, eye-catching stickers of commercial product advertisements such as soft drinks, headache medicine, bird feed, footwear, furniture, beds, and so on.\nSince 2009, some of the regular city bus units owned by Perum DAMRI that are not roadworthy (over fifteen years old) have begun to be rejuvenated and replaced with AC patas buses. Since mid-2018, Perum DAMRI has replaced some of the bus units on its routes with buses provided by the Ministry of Transportation of the Republic of Indonesia for the 2014 budget year. The Hino RK8 R260 chassis buses and Laksana Discovery bodies are former Trans Sidoarjo units.\nUnlike Perum DAMRI, most of the regular city bus units owned by private operators use used buses with various specifications. Generally, bus units are obtained by utilizing used or rebuilt buses owned by operators, or buying used buses from other bus companies. This causes the fleets owned by private operators have a higher level of chassis and body type diversity than regular city bus units owned by Perum DAMRI which tend to be uniform.\nService payment system.\nThe payment system for city bus services in Surabaya mostly still uses a conventional system, namely payment with cash directly to the conductor on the bus. Perum DAMRI has also implemented a ticket system, namely payment is made by paying cash to the conductor which is then exchanged for a ticket as proof of payment.\nThe type of service tariff applied is a fixed tariff, which means that the tariff is the same for both short and long distances. The amount of city bus service tariffs on all routes is further regulated in Surabaya Mayor Regulation Number 76 of 2014. Constraints from several factors such as the rise of online transportation, rising fuel prices, decreasing number of daily passengers, and the effects of the implementation of PSBB and PPKM have made all operators start to adjust the amount of service rates several times.\nOther services.\nIntegrated bus.\nIn order to implement the Decree of the Minister of Transportation Number 35 of 2003, Perum DAMRI began opening city bus services as integrated buses in Surabaya since 2004. The integrated bus modes support intermodal connectivity (land, water and air transportation) with seamless, efficient and sustainable service characteristics (\"sustainable\"). Perum DAMRI in collaboration with PT Angkasa Pura I provides a bus service for connecting integrated modes infrastructure from Terminal 1 Domestic (T1) and Terminal 2 International (T2) Juanda International Airport using a special airport transportation unit (UAKB). In 2022, there are three travel routes on three integrated bus routes from Juanda Airport.\n}} Juanda (T1)\u2013Purabaya via Aloha\n}} Juanda (T1)\u2013Gresik via toll road\n}} Juanda (T1)\u2013Mojokerto via the toll road\nIntercity Bus.\nGerbangkertosusila Agglomeration.\nSince two type A passenger terminals were built in the Surabaya border area such as Bungurasih and Tambak Osowilangon in the 1990s, all intercity bus route permits began to be transferred to the two terminals. However, there are several intercity bus services in the Gerbangkertosusila agglomeration area that have route permits that cover the inner city area. This causes the intercity bus units to be able to pick up and drop off passengers at the same stops or stopping points as the overlapping regular city bus routes. The following are intercity bus routes in Surabaya that have crossing points in the inner city area.\nAcross Java\u2013Madura.\nSince the Suramadu Bridge began operating in 2010, several intercity bus routes within the province (AKDP) across Java\u2013Madura have begun adjusting their routes and passenger stops in the northern area of Surabaya City. According to a circular from the East Java Provincial Transportation Agency, intercity buses are permitted to cross the Suramadu Bridge without having to cross the Ujung\u2013Kamal crossing. Referring to the results of the agreement between the bus companies (PO) related to the local land transportation organization (organda), intercity buses are permitted to transport passengers on a limited basis and outside the operational schedule of city transportation (bemo) and regular city buses. Intercity buses can only pick up and drop off passengers from points such as Ujung Baru, Barunawati Park and Kedinding Lor.\nIncident.\nA series of traffic accidents due to a bus experiencing brake failure occurred on September 14, 2022, at the Taman Mayangkara red light, Wonokromo. This incident involved a regular city bus unit belonging to PO Indrapura 88 on route F on the Purabaya-JMP route via Diponegoro, which hit six motorbikes and one car. This incident claimed the lives of four men and a pregnant woman. All victims have been rushed and treated at the Islamic Hospital (RSI) Jemursari. Based on findings in the field, the active period of roadworthiness test of the bus unit has apparently expired since April 2022, even though the bus still has an active route permit from the Surabaya Transportation Agency. The temporary suspicion of the Surabaya Police Traffic Unit is that this incident was caused by the bus driver being less careful in maintaining a safe distance. In addition, there are indications that the bus unit's braking mechanism is not functioning optimally (failed) which causes a collision.\nList of bus accidents in Indonesia.\nBelow is a list of bus accidents that occurred in Indonesia that resulted in fatalities.\nTaxis and autorickshaws.\nMany cities and towns have some form of transportation for hire available as well such as taxis. Many cities also have motorised autorickshaws (\"bajaj\") of various kinds. Cycle rickshaws, called \"becak\" in Indonesia, are a regular sight on city roads and provide inexpensive transportation. They have been blamed for causing traffic congestion and, consequently, banned from most parts of Jakarta in 1972. Horse-drawn carts are found in some cities and towns.\nRidesharing companies have become serious competition to both taxicabs and motorcycle taxis (\"ojek\"), with the four providers being Gojek, Maxim, Anterin, Grab and others.\nMinibus.\nIn more remote areas, and between smaller towns, most services are provided with minibuses or minivans (\"angkot\"). Buses and vans are also the primary form of transportation within cities. Often, these are operated as share taxis, running semi-fixed routes.\nPrivate cars.\nDue to the increasing purchasing power of Indonesians, private cars are becoming more common especially in major cities. However the growth of the number of cars increasingly outpaces the construction of new roads, resulting in frequently crippling traffic jams in large parts in major cities especially in Jakarta, which often also happen on highways. Jakarta also has one of the worst traffic jams in the world.\nIndonesia has been gradually introducing an Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) since 2012. ITS Indonesia was formed on 26 April 2011.\nNational routes.\nIndonesia has about of paved highways and of unpaved highways (As of 2011[ [update]] estimate). Four of Indonesia's main highways are classified as parts of Asian Highway Network: AH2 section in Java and Bali, AH25 and AH151 in Sumatra, AH152 in Java and AH150 section in Kalimantan. Some of them has been numbered, currently only in Java and (partially) Sumatera.\nNational routes of Indonesia pass through the hearts of most main cities, and are designed to connect between city centres. They act as main inter-city route outside the tollways. A national route has to be passable by logistic trucks, while simultaneously handling the common traffic. National routes in Java are numbered, while those outside Java aren't. In some cities, even in crowded districts, national routes often form bypasses or ring roads (Indonesian: \"jalan lingkar\") around the city to prevent inter-city traffic entering the city center.\nMinistry of Public Works and People's Housing is responsible to these networks, except DKI Jakarta part from Jakarta Inner Ring Road to Jakarta Outer Ring Road. A national route can be revised if it serves unable to handle the traffic. It would usually be handled by the province/regional government.\nBelow were lists of some national routes in Indonesia:\nToll roads.\nAll expressways in Indonesia are toll roads, known locally as (lit. toll road). The first expressway in Indonesia is the Jagorawi Toll Road, opened in 1978. 2,386 kilometers of expressways are operating as of 2021. Over of expressways opened during the first term of President Joko Widodo, surpassing previous administrations. Since 2018, all expressways do not accept any cash tolls; all tolls must be paid with certain contactless money cards.\nThe high cost of building and maintaining a national highway system means that Indonesia has to outsource the construction and maintenance to private and state-owned companies. Indonesia has an extensive system of highways consisting of:\nLesser Sunda Islands.\nSerangan-Tanjung Benoa Toll Road: The toll road between Tanjung Benoa to Airport and from Airport to Serangan, all in direct line (not curve) is 12.7 kilometres and is equipped also with motorcycle lanes. The toll road is formally opened on 23 September 2013, about a week before APEC Summit in Bali is opened.\nRailways.\nIndonesia's main railways, operated by Kereta Api Indonesia and its subsidiaries, is used for both passenger and freight transport.\nThe majority of railways is located on Java. There are four separate railway networks on Sumatra: one in Aceh, one in North Sumatra (Aceh connection proposed to be finished in the 2020s), another in West Sumatra, and the final one in South Sumatra and Lampung. South Sulawesi has railway network in Barru Regency as the impact of Trans-Sulawesi Railway construction, the first phase includes 146 kilometers route from Makassar to Parepare, which was completed in November 2022 and has been operating ever since. There are no railways in other parts of Indonesia, although new networks are being developed on islands such as Kalimantan and Papua.\nThe inter-city rail network is complemented by local commuter rail services, particularly in Jakarta metropolitan area and Surabaya. In Jakarta, the KRL Commuterline service carries more than a million passengers a day. Urban rail networks are also exists in few cities. Palembang LRT began operations in 2018, the first of such kind. The Jakarta MRT and Jakarta LRT began operations in 2019, with the Greater Jakarta LRT system being constructed and it commenced official commercial operations on 28 August 2023, after 11 days of Indonesian Independence Day.\nThe government's plan to build a high-speed rail (HSR) was announced in 2015, the first in Indonesia and Southeast Asia. It is expected to connect the capital Jakarta with Bandung, covering a distance of around . Plans were also mentioned for its possible extension to Surabaya, the country's second largest city. In 2023, the Jakarta-Bandung High-Speed Rail construction partially finished and is set to start commercial operation starting October 2023. The Jakarta-Bandung HSR began trial operation with passengers on 7 September 2023 and commercial operations on 2 October 2023.\nPipelines.\nAs of 2013, Indonesia has pipelines for condensate , condensate/gas , gas , liquid petroleum gas , oil , oil/gas/water , refined products , and water .\nAir transport.\nAir transport in Indonesia serves as a critical means of connecting the thousands of islands throughout the archipelago. Indonesia is the largest archipelagic country in the world, extending from east to west and from north to south, comprising 13,466 islands, with 922 of those permanently inhabited. With an estimated population of over 255 million people \u2013 making it the world's fourth-most-populous country \u2013 and also due to the growth of the middle-class, the boom of low-cost carriers in the recent decade, and overall economic growth, many domestic travellers shifted from land and sea transport to faster and more comfortable air travel. Indonesia is widely regarded as an emerging market for air travel in the region. Between 2009 and 2014, the number of Indonesian air passengers increased from 27,421,235 to 94,504,086, an increase of over threefold.\nHowever, safety issues continue to be a persistent problem in Indonesian aviation. Several accidents have given Indonesia's air transport system the reputation of the least safe in the world. Indonesian aviation faces numerous challenges, including poorly maintained, outdated, and often overwhelmed infrastructure, the factor of human error, bad weather, haze problems caused by plantation fires, and volcanic ash spewed by numerous volcanoes that disrupts air transportation.\nThe Indonesian Air Force has 34,930 personnel equipped with 224 aircraft, among them 110 combat aircraft. The Indonesian Air Force possesses and operates numerous military air bases and military airstrips across the archipelago.\nThe International Air Transport Association (IATA) has predicted that Indonesia will become the world's sixth largest air travel market by 2034. Around 270 million passengers are predicted to fly from and within Indonesia by 2034.\nAirports.\nAs of 2013, there are 673 airports in Indonesia, 186 of those have paved runways, and 487 have unpaved runways. As of 2013, there are 76 heliports in Indonesia. Jakarta's Soekarno\u2013Hatta International Airport serves as the country's main air transportation hub as well as the nation's busiest. Since 2010, it has become the busiest airport in Southeast Asia, surpassing Suvarnabhumi and Changi airports. In 2017, it became the 17th busiest airport in the world with 62.1 million passengers.\nAirlines.\nIn Indonesia, there are 22 commercial scheduled airlines that carry more than 30 passengers, and 32 commercial scheduled airlines that transport 30 or less passengers, as well as chartered airlines. Some notable Indonesian airlines, among others, include Garuda Indonesia, the government-owned flag carrier of Indonesia, Lion Air, currently the largest private low-cost carrier airline in Indonesia, Sriwijaya Air, currently the largest medium service regional carrier in Indonesia, also the country's third largest carrier, and Indonesia AirAsia, the Indonesian branch of Malaysian-based AirAsia.\nMudik.\n\"Mudik\", or \"Pulang Kampung\", is an Indonesian term for the activity where migrants or migrant workers return to their hometown or village during or before major holidays, especially Lebaran (Eid al-Fitr). Although the mudik homecoming travel before Lebaran takes place in most Indonesian urban centers, the highlight is on the nation's largest urban agglomeration; Greater Jakarta, as millions of Jakartans exit the city by various means of transportation, overwhelming train stations and airports and also clogging highways, especially the Trans-Java toll road and Java's Northern Coast Road.\nIn 2023 it was estimated that the people that took annual \"mudik\" travel reached 123 million people. \nThe demand for train and airplane tickets usually spikes a month or two prior to Lebaran, prompting an unusually higher cost for tickets for highly sought days of departure. Some airlines might add extra flights or operate larger airplanes to deal with the surge in demand.\nIndonesian train operator Kereta Api Indonesia usually offers additional train trips or introduces longer trains with more cars in order to meet the demand. The private operators of intercity and interprovince buses usually charge higher ticket costs during this period. The impact is indeed tremendous as millions of buses, cars and motorcycles jam the roads and highways, causing kilometres of traffic jams each year.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14650", "revid": "50741897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14650", "title": "Indonesian National Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Indonesia\nThe Indonesian National Armed Forces (; abbreviated as TNI) are the military forces of the Republic of Indonesia. It consists of the Army (\"TNI-AD\"), Navy (\"TNI-AL\"), and Air Force (\"TNI-AU\"). The President of Indonesia is the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces. As of 2023[ [update]], it comprises approximately 404,500 military personnel including the Indonesian Marine Corps (), which is a branch of the Navy.\nInitially formed with the name of the People's Security Army (TKR), then later changed to the Republic of Indonesia Army (TRI) before changing again its name to the Indonesian National Armed Forces (TNI) to the present. The Indonesian Armed Forces were formed during the Indonesian National Revolution, when it undertook a guerrilla war along with informal militia. As a result of this, and the need to maintain internal security, the Armed forces including the Army, Navy, and Air Force has been organised along territorial lines, aimed at defeating internal enemies of the state and potential external invaders.\nUnder the 1945 Constitution, all citizens are legally entitled and obliged to defend the nation. Conscription is provided for by law, however the Forces have been able to maintain mandated strength levels without resorting to a draft.\nThe Indonesian armed forces (military) personnel does not include members of law enforcement and paramilitary personnel such as the Indonesian National Police (Polri) consisting of approximately 440,000+ personnel, Mobile Brigade Corps (Brimob) of around 42,000+ armed personnel, and the Indonesian College Students' Regiment or (Menwa) which is a collegiate military service consisting 26,000 trained personnel.\nHistory.\nBefore the formation of the Indonesian Republic, the military authority in the Dutch East Indies was held by the Royal Dutch East Indies Army (KNIL) and naval forces of the Royal Netherlands Navy (KM). Although both the KNIL and KM were not directly responsible for the formation of the future Indonesian armed forces, and mainly took the role of foe during Indonesian National Revolution in 1945 to 1949, the KNIL had also provided military training and infrastructure for some of the future TNI officers and other ranks. There were military training centers, military schools and academies in the Dutch East Indies. Next to Dutch volunteers and European mercenaries, the KNIL also recruited indigenous, especially Ambonese, Kai Islanders, Timorese, and Minahasan people. In 1940, with the Netherlands under German occupation and the Japanese pressing for access to Dutch East Indies oil supplies, the Dutch had opened up the KNIL to large intakes of previously excluded Javanese. Some of the indigenous soldiers that had enjoyed Dutch KNIL military academy education would later become important TNI officers, for example Suharto and Abdul Haris Nasution.\nIndonesian nationalism and militarism started to gain momentum and support in World War II during the Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies. To gain support from the Indonesian people in their war against the Western Allied force, Japan started to encourage and back Indonesian nationalistic movements by providing Indonesian youth with military training and weapons. On 3 October 1943, the Japanese military formed the Indonesian volunteer army called PETA (; Defenders of the Homeland). The Japanese intended for PETA to assist their forces and oppose a possible invasion by the Allies. The Japanese military training for Indonesian youth was originally meant to rally local support for the Empire of Japan but later became a significant resource for the Republic of Indonesia during the Indonesian National Revolution from 1945 to 1949. Many of these men who served in PETA, both officers and NCOs alike including Sudirman, formed the majority of the personnel that would compose the future armed forces.\nThe Indonesian Armed Forces started out as the People's Security Agency (, BKR), which was formed in the third PPKI meeting, on 29 August 1945. BKR united militias across the newly independent country to maintain civil order; it was more of a constabulary than an army. The decision to create a \"security agency\", and not an army, was taken to avoid the Allied forces seeing it as an armed revolution and invading in full force. One of the terms of surrender to Japan was to return the Asian colonies they had conquered to their previous rulers, certainly not to make them independent.\nWhen confrontations became sharp and hostile between Indonesia and the Allied forces, on 5 October 1945 the People's Security Forces (, TKR) was formed on the basis of existing BKR units; this was a move taken to formalize, unite, and organize the splintered pockets of independent troopers () across Indonesia, ensuing a more professional military approach, to contend with the Netherlands and the Allied force invaders.\nThe Indonesian armed forces have seen significant action since their establishment in 1945. Their first conflict was the 1945\u20131949 Indonesian National Revolution, in which the 1945 Battle of Surabaya was especially important as the baptism of fire of the young armed forces.\nIn January 1946, TKR renamed as the People's Safety Forces (, TKR), then succeeded by Armed Forces of the Republic of Indonesia (, TRI), in a further step to professionalize the armed forces and increase its ability to engage systematically.\nIn June 1947, the TRI, per a government decision, was renamed the Indonesian National Armed Forces (, TNI) which was a merger between the TRI and the independent paramilitary organizations () across Indonesia, becoming by 1950 the War Forces of the United States of Indonesia (, APRIS), by mid year the War Forces of the Republic of Indonesia (, APRI), also absolving native personnel from within both the former KNIL and KM within the expanded republic.\nAccording to the official website of Indonesian veterans, there were 863,432 people who joined the struggle for Indonesian independence and this included those who were members of the militia, police, intelligence and auxiliary and as of 2023, there are still 25,676 Indonesian National Revolution veterans alive.\nOn 21 June 1962, the name (TNI) was changed to (Armed Forces of the Republic of Indonesia, ABRI). The POLRI (Indonesian National Police) was integrated under the Armed Forces and changed its name to (Police Force), and its commander maintained the concurrent status of Minister of Defense and Security, reporting to the President, who is commander in chief. The commanding generals (later chiefs of staff) and the Chief of the National Police then all held ministerial status as members of the cabinet of the republic, while a number of higher-ranking officers were appointed to other cabinet posts. On 1 July 1969, the Police Force's name was reverted to \"POLRI\".\nAfter the fall of Suharto in 1998, the democratic and civil movement grew against the acute military role and involvements in Indonesian politics. As a result, the post-Suharto Indonesian military has undergone certain reforms, such as the revocation of the Dwifungsi doctrine and the terminations of military controlled business. The reforms also involved law enforcement in common civil society, which questioned the position of Indonesian police under the military corps umbrella. These reforms led to the separation of the police force from the military. In April 1999, the Indonesian National Police officially regained its independence and now is a separate entity from the armed forces proper. The official name of the Indonesian armed forces also changed from (ABRI) back to (TNI).\nFuture plans.\nAt the beginning of 2010, the Indonesian government sought to strengthen the TNI to achieve minimum standards of minimum strength called \"\" (Minimum Essential Force, or MEF). The MEF was divided into three strategic five-year plan stages, 2010\u20132014, 2015\u20132019, and 2020\u20132024. Initially the government budgeted Rp156\u00a0trillion (around US$16 billion at the time) for the provision of TNI's main weapon system equipment (known as , an abbreviation for or \"Main Weapons System\") in the MEF period 2010\u20132014.\nPhilosophy and doctrine.\nThe Indonesian military philosophy about the defense of the archipelago is summarily civilian-military defence, called \"Total People's Defense\", consisting of a three-stage war: a short initial period in which an invader would defeat a conventional Indonesian military, a long period of territorial guerrilla warfare followed by a final stage of expulsion, with the military acting as a rallying point for defense from grass-roots village level upwards. The doctrine relies on a close bond between villager and soldier to encourage the support of the entire population and enable the armed forces to manage all war-related resources.\nThe civilian population would provide logistical support, intelligence, and upkeep with some of the population that is armed forces-trained to join the guerrilla struggle against the aggressor. The armed forces regularly engage in large-scale community and rural development. The \"Armed Forces Enters the Village\" (AMD/TMMD) program, begun in 1983, is held three times annually to organize and assist construction and development of civilian village projects.\nThe current developments in Indonesia's defense policies are framed within the concept of achieving \"Minimum Essential Force\" or MEF by 2024. This concept of MEF was first articulated in Presidential Decree No. 7/2008 on General Policy Guidelines on State Defense Policy which came into effect on 26 January 2008. MEF is defined as a capability based defense and force level that can guarantee the attainment of immediate strategic defense interests, where the procurement priority is given to the improvement of minimum defense strength and/or the replacement of outdated main weapon systems/equipment. To achieve this aim, MEF had been restructured into a series of 3 strategic programs with timeframes from 2010 to 2014, 2015 to 2019 and 2020 to 2024 as well as spending of up to1.5\u20132% of the GDP.\nThe identity of the Indonesian National Armed forces is as defined by the Article 2 of the Law No 34/2004 on Indonesian National Armed forces is the TNI must aim to become the:\nOperations.\nThe military in Indonesia has evolved as an apparatus for defense based on political decisions. Indonesia has deployed forces in several UN peacekeeping operations, including in Lebanon and Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), and has sent over 24,000 peacekeeping personnel to UN missions since 1957.\nThe armed forces are tasked with military operations other than war, which include deterring radicalism and terrorism, securing critical infrastructure such as border controls, protecting dignitaries, providing disaster relief, and assisting the government in securing flight and maritime routes against hijacking, piracy, and trafficking.\nOrganization.\nThe Indonesian armed forces have long been organized around territorial commands. Following independence, seven were established by 1958. No central reserve formation was formed until 1961 (when the 1st Army Corps of the Army General Reserve, \"CADUAD\", the precursor of today's Kostrad was established). It was only after the attempted coup d'\u00e9tat of 1 October 1965 and General Suharto's rise to the presidency that it became possible to integrate the armed forces and begin to develop a joint operations structure.\nFollowing a decision in 1985, major reorganization separate the Ministry of Defense and Security from the ABRI (, the name of the armed forces used during the New Order) headquarters and staff. MoDS was made responsible for planning, acquisition, and management tasks but had no command or control of troop units. The ABRI Commander in chief retained command and control of all armed forces and continued by tradition to be the senior military officer in the country, while continuing to be a part of the cabinet.\nThe administrative structure of Ministry of Defense and Security consisted of a minister, deputy minister, secretary general, inspector general, three directorates-general and a number of functional centers and institutes. The minister, deputy minister, inspector general, and three directors general were retired senior military officers; the secretary general (who acted as deputy minister) and most functional center chiefs were, as is the case today, active-duty military officers, while employees and staff were personnel of the armed forces and of the civil service.\nThe 1985 reorganization also made significant changes in the armed forces chain of command. The four multi-service Regional Defense Commands (\"Kowilhans\") and the National Strategic Command (\"Kostranas\") were eliminated from the defense structure, establishing the Military Regional Command (\"Kodam\"), or area command, as the key organization for strategic, tactical, and territorial operations for all services. The chain of command flowed directly from the \"ABRI\" commander in chief to the ten \"Kodam\" commanders, and then to subordinate army territorial commands. The former territorial commands of the air force and navy were eliminated from the structure altogether, with each of those services represented on the \"Kodam\" staff by a senior liaison officer. The navy and air force territorial commands were replaced by operational commands. The air force formed two Operational Commands (\"Ko-Ops\") while the navy had its two Fleet Commands, the Western and Eastern Armadas. The air force's National Air Defense Command (\"Kohanudnas\") remained under the \"ABRI\" commander in chief. It had an essentially defensive function that included responsibility for the early warning system.\nAfter Suharto's presidential era collapsed in 1998, the Indonesian National Police was separated from the Armed Forces making the Indonesian Armed Forces under the direct auspices command of the Ministry of Defense and the Police Force under the direct auspices of the President of Indonesia. Before 1998, the Armed Forces of the Republic of Indonesia (the then name \"ABRI\") was composed of four service branches: Indonesian Army, Indonesian Navy, Indonesian Air Force, and the Indonesian National Police. Then after 1998 (After reformation from Soeharto), the Armed Forces' name, in 1999, was changed to TNI () literally meaning: \"The National Military of Indonesia\" and the independent Indonesian Police Force changed its name to POLRI () literally meaning: \"The National Police Force of Indonesia\". Now specifically, although the Armed Forces of Indonesia and the National Police of Indonesia has been separated, they still cooperate and conduct special duties and tasks together for the sake of the national security and integrity of Indonesia.\nOn 13 May 2018, Commander Hadi Tjahjanto reorganized the armed forces once more by inaugurating 4 new military units: Kostrad's 3rd Infantry Division, Navy's 3rd Fleet Command, Air Force's 3rd Air Force Operations Command, and Marine Force III. The new military units are intended to reduce response time against any threats and problems in Eastern Indonesia. He also officially renamed the Western and Eastern Fleet Commands to 1st and 2nd Fleet Commands.\nThe Indonesian National Armed Forces is structured into the following in accordance with Presidential Regulation No. 66/2019, later revised with Presidential Regulation No. 84/2025. The organization of the Indonesian National Armed Forces consists of Indonesian National Armed Forces General Headquarters () based in the Joint Armed Forces Headquarters in Cilangkap, East Jakarta, of which it oversee the headquarters of the three branch of the military:\nArmed Forces Headquarters Organization.\nLeadership elements.\nThe leadership elements of the Indonesian armed forces consist of the Commander of the Indonesian National Armed Forces () and the Deputy Commander of the Indonesian National Armed Forces, both position are held by four-star Generals/Admirals/Air Marshals appointed by and reporting directly to the President of Indonesia, who is the overall commander-in-chief of the armed forces. As of August 2025, the deputy commander of the armed forces is General Tandyo Budi Revita.\nPrincipal Operational Commands.\nThe Principal Operational Commands () are the centralized TNI forces which are under the command of the Armed Forces General Headquarters. Some of these commands are actually part of the three military branches (such as Kostrad and Koarmada RI, armed and trained by the Army and Navy, respectively), but these are operationally controlled by the Armed Forces General Headquarters.\nBranches.\nTNI has three service branches, the Army (TNI-AD), the Navy (TNI-AL), and the Air Force (TNI-AU). Each service branch is led by a Chief of Staff (Chief of Staff of the Army, Chief of Staff of the Navy, and Chief of Staff of the Air Force respectively) who is responsible for the administration and capability development for his/her own branch. These positions were previously called Commander or Panglima (for some period in 60s, it is a Minister-equivalent post) which was equipped with commanding authority until it was changed as Chief of Staffs (until now). In the present day, the Commander of The Indonesian National Armed Forces is the only military officer holding commanding authority for all the service branches under the overall authority of the President as Supreme Commander of the Forces.\nSpecial Forces Unit.\nIndonesian Military Special Forces\nIn the immediate aftermath of 2018 Surabaya bombings, President Widodo has agreed to revive the TNI Joint Special Operations Command (\"Koopsusgab\") to assist the National Police in antiterrorism operations under certain conditions. This joint force is composed of special forces of the National Armed Forces as mentioned above, and is under the direct control of the Commander of the National Armed Forces. In July 2019, President Widodo officially formed the Armed Forces Special Operations Command (\"Koopsus TNI\") which comprised 400 personnel each from Sat-81 Gultor of Kopassus, Denjaka, and Den Bravo of Kopasgat to conduct special operations to protect national interests within or outside Indonesian territory.\nReserves.\nThe Indonesian National Armed Forces Reserve Component (\"Komponen Cadangan TNI\", abbreviated into KOMCAD) is the military reserve force element of the Indonesian National Armed Forces.\nOn January 12, 2021, President Joko Widodo, as Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, issued \"Government Regulation Number 3 of 2021 implementing Law 23 on the Management of National Resources for Defense of the Nation\" which established the Reserve as a directly reporting unit under the General Headquarters, in order to supplement the \"Principal Component\", i.e. the Armed Forces and the National Police.\nUnder the regulation, the Reserve officially consists of army, naval, and air reserve forces. Membership in the reserve is voluntary for all citizens, even for members of the civil service.\nUniforms.\nThe Indonesian National Armed Forces have three types of uniforms worn by its personnel, which are general service uniforms, specialized service uniforms and branch-specific uniforms.\nGeneral service uniforms have three subtypes of uniform, which are dress uniform (/PDU), service uniform (/PDH) and field uniform (/PDL). Each uniform subtypes also consists of several categories, which are:\nEach branches of the national armed forces have different color in their general service uniforms.\nSpecialized service uniform consists of:\nBranch-specific uniforms consists of:\nOn 2 March 2022, the Army unveiled their field uniform with new camo pattern, called as \"\" (Army camo pattern), that is specific only to the Army. This camo is a variant of Multicam based on US Army OCP with local DPM color palette. A Desert/Arid variant intended to replace the older local Desert DPM Variant are also Present.\nOn 3 October 2025, the Indonesian National Armed Forces introduced a new field uniform featuring a digital camouflage pattern called \"sage green digital\", officially replacing the DPM camouflage that had been in use since 1982. The new pattern is planned to be adopted simultaneously on 5 October 2025, coinciding with the celebration of the National Armed Forces' 80th anniversary. Although the new camouflage design resembles a pattern previously developed for the Airborne Command (\"Loreng Linud\"), it has a distinctive coloration that can be detected, at least upon close examination.\nPersonnel.\nThe Indonesian armed forces are voluntary. The active military strength is 404,500 with 400,000 reserves with available manpower fit for military service of males aged between 16 and 49 is 75,000,000, with a further 4,500,000 new suitable for service annually.\nRank structures.\nIn the Indonesian Army, Navy (including Marine Corps), Air Force, and the Police Force, the rank consists of officer (), NCO () and enlisted (). The rank titles of the Marine Corps are the same as those of the Army, but it still uses the Navy's style insignia (for junior ratings and Marine Corps enlisted personnel, blue replaces the red colour stripe in all orders of uniform dress).\nSeven Commitments (\"Sapta Marga\").\nThe Seven Commitments is a pledge of loyalty and fidelity of the military personnel to the government and people of Indonesia and to the principles of nationhood.\nSoldier's Oath ().\nThe Soldier's Oath is a statement of determination expressed since the inception of the Indonesian National Armed Forces, and has become a value system for Indonesian National Armed Forces soldiers that is still upheld and preserved. The Soldier's Oath as an oath, is uttered during the inauguration ceremony for each student soldier to become a soldier of the Indonesian National Armed Forces.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14651", "revid": "46505507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14651", "title": "Foreign relations of Indonesia", "text": "Since independence, Indonesian foreign relations have adhered to a \"free and active\" foreign policy, seeking to play a role in regional affairs commensurate with its size and location but avoiding involvement in conflicts among major powers. During the presidency of Sukarno, Indonesia's foreign relations were marked by engagement with other newly independent nations in Asia and Africa, as exemplified by the Bandung Conference, the subsequent foundation of the Non-Aligned Movement and a confrontational attitude towards Western powers, justified by a belief in the CONEFO and opposition to what Sukarno termed as NEKOLIM (Neocolonialism and Imperialism).\nAfter a US-backed ouster of Sukarno and left-wing elements in 1965, Indonesian foreign policy underwent a major shift under the \"New Order\" government, as President Suharto moved away from the stridently anti-Western, anti-American posturing that characterised the latter part of the Sukarno era. Following Suharto's ouster in 1998, Indonesia's government has preserved the broad outlines of Suharto's independent, moderate foreign policy. Preoccupation with domestic problems has not prevented successive presidents from travelling abroad.\nIndonesia's relations with the international community were strained as a result of its invasion of neighbouring East Timor in December 1975, the subsequent annexation and occupation, the independence referendum in 1999, and the resulting violence afterwards. As one of the founding members of Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), established in 1967, and also as the largest country in Southeast Asia, Indonesia has put ASEAN as the cornerstone of its foreign policy and outlook. After the transformation from Suharto's regime to a relatively open and democratic country in the 21st century, Indonesia today exercises its influence to promote co-operation, development, democracy, security, peace and stability in the region through its leadership in ASEAN. Currently, Israel is the only UN member state that does not have formal diplomatic relations with Indonesia, although they maintain informal relations.\nIndonesia managed to play a role as a peacemaker in the 2008\u20132013 Cambodian\u2013Thai border crisis. Indonesia and other ASEAN member countries collectively have also played a role in encouraging the government of Myanmar to open up its political system and introduce other reforms more quickly.\nGiven its geographic and demographic size, rising capabilities and diplomatic initiatives, scholars have classified Indonesia as one of Asia-Pacific's middle powers.\nHistorical issues.\nThe foreign policy of Indonesia has evolved over time and has been shaped by various factors such as its historical context, geographic location, national interests, and leadership. Here is an overview of the historical context of Indonesia's foreign policy:\nSignificant international memberships.\nAssociation of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).\nA cornerstone of Indonesia's contemporary foreign policy is its participation in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), of which it was a founding member in 1967 with Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, and the Philippines. Since then, Brunei, Vietnam, Laos, Myanmar, and Cambodia also have joined ASEAN. While organised to promote shared economic, social, and cultural goals, ASEAN acquired a security dimension after Vietnam's liberation of Cambodia in 1979; this aspect of ASEAN expanded with the establishment of the ASEAN Regional Forum in 1994, which comprises 22 countries, including the US.\nThe Indonesian capital Jakarta is also the seat of ASEAN Secretariat. Other than serving their diplomatic missions for Indonesia, numerous of foreign embassies and diplomatic mission in Jakarta are also accredited to ASEAN. The presence of the ASEAN Headquarters has made Jakarta a diplomatic hub in Southeast Asia in some regards.\nIn the late 1990s and early 2000s, Indonesia's domestic troubles distracted it from ASEAN matters and consequently reduced its influence within the organisation. However, after the political and economic transformation, from the turmoil of 1998 \"Reformasi\" to the relatively open and democratic civil society with rapid economic growth in the 2010s, Indonesia returned to the region's diplomatic stage by assuming its leadership role in ASEAN in 2011. Indonesia is viewed to have weight, international legitimacy and global appeal to draw support and attention from around the world to ASEAN. Indonesia believes that ASEAN can contribute positively to the international community, by promoting economic development and co-operation, improving security, peace, the stability of ASEAN, and making the Southeast Asia region far from conflicts.\nIndonesia's bilateral relations with three neighbouring ASEAN members\u2014Malaysia, Singapore, and Vietnam\u2014are not without challenges. If not appropriately managed, it would result in mutual mistrust and suspicion, thus hindering bilateral and regional co-operation. In the era of rising Indonesia, which might assert its leadership role within ASEAN, the problem could become more significant. Nevertheless, the rise of Indonesia should be regarded in the sense of optimism. First, although Indonesia is likely to become assertive, the general tone of its foreign policy is mainly liberal and accommodating. The consolidation of the Indonesian democratic government played a key role and influence in ASEAN. The second, institutional web of ASEAN will sustain engagements and regular meetings between regional elites, thus deepening their mutual understanding and personal connections.\nNon-Aligned Movement (NAM).\nIndonesia is also a founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and chaired and hosted the 1992 Non-Aligned Movement Summit. Indonesia plays a crucial role in the organization, as a founder and in determining the direction of the Non-Aligned Movement. Indonesia led the NAM's position away from the rhetoric of North-South confrontation and instead advocated for expanded North-South cooperation in development. Indonesia continues to be a prominent leader of the Non-Aligned Movement and is generally constructive to the organization's progress.\nOrganization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).\nIndonesia has the world's largest Muslim population and is a member of OIC. It carefully considers the interests of Islamic solidarity in its foreign policy decisions but generally has been an influence for moderation in the OIC.\nAsia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC).\nIndonesia has been a strong supporter of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum. Indonesia has hosted two APEC summits, the 1994 APEC Summit and the 2013 APEC Summit. Indonesia emphasized the importance of trade and investment for the prosperity of APEC member countries. APEC members agreed to implement free trade in the region by 2010 for industrialized countries and 2020 for developing countries. As the largest economy in Southeast Asia, Indonesia also belongs to other economic groupings such as G20 and Developing 8 Countries (D-8).\nG20 major economies.\nIn 2008, Indonesia was admitted as a member of the G20, as the only ASEAN member state in the group. Through its membership in the global economic powerhouse that accounted of 85% of the global economy, Indonesia is keen to position itself as a mouthpiece for ASEAN countries, and as a representative of the developing world within the G20. Bali, Indonesia had played host to the 2022 G20 Summit.\nBRICS.\nIndonesia became a full member of BRICS in 6 January 2025. BRICS is an intergovernmental organization comprising ten countries \u2013 Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa, Egypt, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Iran and the United Arab Emirates.\nIGGI and CGI.\nAfter 1966, Indonesia welcomed and maintained close relations with the international donor community, particularly the United States, western Europe, Australia, and Japan, through the meetings of the Inter-Governmental Group on Indonesia (IGGI) and its successor, the Consultative Group on Indonesia (CGI), which coordinated substantial foreign economic assistance. Problems in Timor and Indonesia's reluctance to implement economic reform at times complicated Indonesia's relationship with donors. In 1992 the IGGI aid coordination group ceased to meet and the coordination activities were transferred to meetings arranged by the World Bank through the CGI. The CGI, in turn, ceased activities in 2007 when the Indonesian government suggested that an internationally organised aid coordination program was no longer needed.\nInternational disputes.\nIndonesia has numerous outlying and remote islands, some of which are inhabited by numerous pirate groups that regularly attack ships in the Strait of Malacca in the north, and illegal fishing crews known for penetrating Australian and Filipino waters. At the same time, Indonesian waters are the target of large-scale illegal fishing activities by foreign vessels.\nIndonesia has some present and historic territorial disputes with neighboring nations, such as:\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Indonesia maintains diplomatic relations with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14652", "revid": "31844116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14652", "title": "List of islands of Indonesia", "text": "The islands of Indonesia, also known as the Indonesian Archipelago () or Nusantara, may refer either to the islands composing the country of Indonesia or to the geographical groups which include its islands. Indonesia is the world's largest archipelagic state, stretching from Sumatra in Asia to the western part of New Guinea in Oceania.\nHistory.\nThe exact number of islands composing Indonesia varies among definitions and sources. According to the Law No 9/1996 on Maritime Territory of Indonesia, of 17,508 officially listed islands within the territory of the Republic of Indonesia. According to a geospatial survey conducted between 2007 and 2010 by the National Coordinating Agency for Survey and Mapping (Bakorsurtanal), Indonesia has 13,466 islands. However, according to earlier survey in 2002 by National Institute of Aeronautics and Space (LAPAN), the Indonesian archipelago has 18,307 islands, and according to the CIA \"World Factbook\", there are 17,508 islands. The discrepancy of the numbers of Indonesian islands is due to the earlier surveys including \"tidal islands\"; sandy cays and rocky reefs that appear during low tide and are submerged during high tide. As of 2023, 17,024 island have been named by Geospatial Information Agency and published in Indonesian Gazetteer.\nList of islands.\nThe following islands are listed by province:\nWestern New Guinea.\n\"Islands near the Indonesian half of New Guinea island.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14653", "revid": "3665380", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14653", "title": "Iran", "text": "Country in West Asia\nIran, officially the Islamic Republic of Iran and also known as Persia, is a country in West Asia. It borders Iraq to the west, Turkey, Azerbaijan, and Armenia to the northwest, the Caspian Sea to the north, Turkmenistan to the northeast, Afghanistan to the east, Pakistan to the southeast, and the Gulf of Oman and the Persian Gulf to the south. With a population of over 90 million, Iran ranks 17th globally in both geographic size and population and is the sixth-largest country in Asia. Iran is divided into five regions with 31 provinces. Tehran is the nation's capital, largest city, and financial center.\nHome to one of the world's oldest continuous major civilizations, most of Iran was first united as a nation by the Medes under Cyaxares in the 7th century BC and reached its territorial height in the 6th century BC, when Cyrus the Great founded the Achaemenid Empire. Alexander the Great conquered the empire in the 4th century BC. An Iranian rebellion in the 3rd century BC established the Parthian Empire, which later liberated the country. In the 3rd century CE, the Parthians were succeeded by the Sasanian Empire, who oversaw a golden age in the history of Iranian civilization. During this period, ancient Iran saw some of the earliest developments of writing, agriculture, urbanization, religion, and administration. Once a center for Zoroastrianism, the 7th century CE Muslim conquest brought about the Islamization of Iran. Innovations in literature, philosophy, mathematics, medicine, astronomy and art were renewed during the Islamic Golden Age and Iranian Intermezzo, a period during which Iranian Muslim dynasties ended Arab rule and revived the Persian language. This era was followed by Seljuk and Khwarazmian rule, Mongol conquests and the Timurid Renaissance from the 11th to 14th centuries.\nIn the 16th century, the native Safavid dynasty re-established a unified Iranian state with Twelver Shia Islam as the official religion, laying the framework for the modern state of Iran. During the Afsharid Empire in the 18th century, Iran was a leading world power, but it lost this status after the Qajars took power in the 1790s. The early 20th century saw the Persian Constitutional Revolution and the establishment of the Pahlavi dynasty by Reza Shah, who ousted the last Qajar Shah in 1925. Following the Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran in 1941, his son Mohammad Reza Pahlavi has rise to power. Attempts by Mohammad Mosaddegh to nationalize the oil industry led to the Anglo-American coup in 1953. The Iranian Revolution in 1979 overthrew the monarchy, and the Islamic Republic of Iran was established by Ruhollah Khomeini, the country's first supreme leader. In 1980, Iraq invaded Iran, sparking the eight-year-long Iran\u2013Iraq War, which ended in a stalemate. Iran has since been involved in proxy wars with Israel, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey; in 2025, Israeli strikes on Iran escalated tensions into the Iran\u2013Israel war.\nIran is an Islamic theocracy governed by elected and unelected institutions, with ultimate authority vested in the supreme leader. While Iran holds elections, key offices\u2014including the head of state and military\u2014are not subject to public vote. The Iranian government is authoritarian and has been widely criticized for its poor human rights record, including restrictions on freedom of assembly, expression, and the press, as well as its treatment of women, ethnic minorities, and political dissidents. International observers have raised concerns over the fairness of its electoral processes, especially the vetting of candidates by unelected bodies such as the Guardian Council. Iran maintains a centrally planned economy with significant state ownership in key sectors, though private enterprise exists alongside this. Iran is a middle power, due to its large reserves of fossil fuels (including the world's second largest natural gas supply and third largest proven oil reserves), its geopolitically significant location, and its role as the world's focal point of Shia Islam. Iran is a threshold state with one of the most scrutinized nuclear programs, which it claims is solely for civilian purposes; this claim has been disputed by Israel and the Western world. Iran is a founding member of the United Nations, OIC, OPEC, and ECO as well as a current member of the NAM, SCO, and BRICS. Iran has 29 UNESCO World Heritage Sites (the 10th-highest in the world) and ranks 4th in intangible cultural heritage or human treasures.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe earliest known presence of hominins in Iran dates to around 800,000 BP, in the Middle Paleolithic. Many Middle Paleolithic sites have been discovered, mainly in the Zagros Mountains in western Iran and some sites associated with Neanderthals. The Zarzian culture is documented in Iran during the Epipaleolithic (25,000\u201311,500 BP). Agriculture first appeared in Iran some 12,000 years ago alongside better-documented settlements in the Fertile Crescent. The Chogha Golan site featured early domestication of emmer wheat, The contemporary site of Ganj Dareh also features the earliest known domestication of goats around 10,000 years ago.\nThe ancient city of Susa, which would become the capital of Elam and later a capital city of the Achaemenid empire, was first settled in 4400\u20134200 BC, adjacent to the modern site of Shush, Iran. The Kura\u2013Araxes culture (c.\u20093400\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20092000 BC) existed in northwestern Iran and the Caucasus.\nAntiquity.\nIran is home to one of the world's oldest continuous major civilizations, with historical and urban settlements dating back to 4000 BC, including the Jiroft culture in southeastern Iran. Inscriptions in the Proto-Elamite script, which predates cuneiform, have been found from during the early third millennium BC. The western part of the Iranian plateau participated in the traditional ancient Near East with Elam (3200\u2013539 BC), and later with other peoples such as the Kassites, Mannaeans, and Gutians. The earliest Iranian peoples began to arrive from Central Asia in the 2nd millennium BCE.\nThe Median dynasty ruled the earliest Iranian state. In 612 BC, Cyaxares and the Babylonian king Nabopolassar invaded Assyria and destroyed Nineveh, the Assyrian capital, which led to the fall of the Neo-Assyrian Empire. The Medes later conquered and dissolved Urartu as well.\nAchaemenid Empire.\nThe Achaemenids united all Persian tribes under Cambyses I. Under his son, Cyrus the Great, the Achaemenids defeated the Medes and established the Achaemenid Empire, the largest-ever Iranian state. Cyrus conquered the Lydian and Neo-Babylonian empires, creating an empire far larger than Assyria. His son, Cambyses II (r.530\u2013522 BC), conquered the last major power of the region, ancient Egypt, causing the collapse of its twenty-sixth dynasty.\nAfter the death of Cambyses II, Darius the Great (r.522\u2013486) ascended the throne by overthrowing the Achaemenid monarch Bardiya. Darius' first capital was at Susa, and he started the building program at Persepolis. He improved the extensive road system, and during his reign the first recorded mentions are made of the Royal Road, a highway from Susa to Sardis.\nIn 499 BC, Athens supported a revolt in Miletus, resulting in the sacking of Sardis. This led to the Greco-Persian Wars, which lasted the first half of the 5th century BC. In the First Persian invasion of Greece, Persian general Mardonius re-subjugated Thrace and made Macedon a full part of Persia. Darius' successor Xerxes I (r.486\u2013465) launched the Second Persian invasion of Greece. At a crucial moment in the war, about half of mainland Greece was overrun by the Persians, including territories to the north of the Isthmus of Corinth. This was reversed by a Greek victory following the battles of Plataea and Salamis, during which Persia lost its footholds in Europe, and withdrew from it.\nThe empire entered a period of decline. From 334 BC to 331 BC, Alexander the Great defeated Darius III (r.336\u2013330 BC) in the battles of Granicus, Issus and Gaugamela, swiftly conquering the Achaemanid Empire by 331 BC. Alexander's empire collapsed after his death; his general, Seleucus I Nicator, tried to take control of Iran, Mesopotamia, Syria, and Anatolia. His empire was the Seleucid Empire.\nParthian and Sasanian empires.\nThe Arsacids of Parthia, initially Seleucid vassals, originated as leaders of the Iranian Parni tribe in the northeastern steppes. The Parthians gradually challenged Seleucid rule over Iran, eventually securing control through the 142 BC conquest of Babylonia. Although fighting continued, the death of Antiochus VII Sidetes in 129 BC marked the collapse of the Seleucid Empire, which then lingered on as a rump state in Syria until conquered by the Roman Empire in the 60s BC.\nThe Parthian Empire endured for five centuries, but civil wars destabilized it. Parthian power evaporated when Ardashir I revolted against the Arsacids and killed their last ruler, Artabanus IV, in 224 AD. Ardashir established the Sasanian Empire, which ruled Iran and much of Near East before the Muslim conquests of the 7th century AD.\nAt their zenith, the Sasanians controlled all of modern-day Iran and Iraq and parts of the Arabian Peninsula, as well as the Caucasus, the Levant, and parts of Central and South Asia. The strong economic conditions left by Parthians allowed the Sasanians to build a powerful and distinctive economic state whose reputation spread well beyond its political frontiers and time. The Sasanian Empire was characterized by a complex and centralized government bureaucracy and the revitalization of Zoroastrianism as a legitimizing and unifying ideal.\nMedieval period.\nAfter the fall of the Sasanian Empire in 651, the Arabs of the Umayyad Caliphate adopted many Persian customs, especially the administrative and the court mannerisms. Arab provincial governors were either Persianized Arameans or ethnic Persians; Persian remained the official language of the caliphate until the adoption of Arabic toward the end of the 7th century. However, Iran was still not entirely under Arab control; the Daylam region was under the control of the Daylamites, Tabaristan was under Dabuyid and Paduspanid control, and Mount Damavand under Masmughan control. Arabs had invaded these regions several times but the regions' inaccessible terrain prevented a decisive result. The most prominent ruler of the Dabuyids, Farrukhan the Great (r.712\u2013728), managed to hold his domains during his long struggle against the Arab general Yazid ibn al-Muhallab, who was defeated by a combined Daylamite\u2013Dabuyid army and forced to retreat from Tabaristan.\nIranian Intermezzo.\nAnti-Umayyad insurrections were supported by non-Arab Islamic converts, who were resentful over being relegated to lower social standing. In 747\u2013750, one of these insurrections grew into the Abbasid revolution, in which descendants of Muhammad's uncle, Abbas, overthrew the Umayyads. The political authority of the Abbasid caliphs diminished over the course of the 9th and 10th centuries. This led to the establishment of several independent Iranian dynasties, the ousting of Arab rulers from their scattered bastions across the country, and an Iranian cultural renaissance. The period between the collapse of Abbasid authority and the conquest of Iran by the Seljuk Turks in the 11th century is referred to as the \"Iranian Intermezzo.\"\nThe Iranian Intermezzo saw the rise and fall of several major and minor dynasties. Among the most important of these overlapping dynasties were the Tahirids in Khorasan (821\u2013873); the Saffarids in Sistan (861\u20131003); and the Samanids (819\u20131005), originally at Bukhara. The Samanids eventually ruled an area from central Iran to Pakistan. By early 10th century, the Abbasids almost lost control to the growing Iranian faction known as the Buyid dynasty (934\u20131062). Since much of the Abbasid administration had been Persian, the Buyids were quietly able to assume real power in Baghdad. The Buyids were defeated in the mid-11th century by the Seljuq Turks, who continued to exert influence over the Abbasids. From the empire's inception, the Seljuk rulers minted coins with the title \"\u0161\u0101h\u0101n\u0161\u0101h\" (lit.\u2009'King of Kings') in its Persian form, perhaps adopting it from the Buyids. The Seljuk Empire fractured after the death of Ahmad Sanjar in 1157.\nThe Islamization of Iran was a long process. As Persian Muslims consolidated their rule, the Muslim population rose from approximately 40% in the mid-9th century to close to 90% by the end of the 11th century. Historian Seyyed Hossein Nasr suggests that the rapid increase in conversion was aided by the Persian nationality of the rulers. Although Persians adopted the religion of their conquerors, over the centuries they worked to protect and revive their distinctive language and culture, a process known as Persianization. Arabs and Turks participated in this process.\nMongol invasions.\nIn the early 13th century, the Mongols reached Iran. Bukhara was conquered in 1220 and the Khwarazmian Empire was destroyed. During 1220\u201321 Bukhara, Samarkand, Herat, Tus and Nishapur were razed, and the whole populations were slaughtered. Over the following decades, further conquests followed, culminating in the fall of Baghdad and end of the Abbasid Caliphate's rule in 1258.\nAfter the death of M\u00f6ngke Khan, the Mongol Empire was fractured by civil war, both over the succession of the next Great Khan and between nomadic traditionalists and the new settled princes of China and the Middle East. Kublai Khan was eventually universally recognized, but the empire was irreversibly fragmented. In much of the southwest of the empire, including Iran, power fell to Hulegu Khan, who had been made a deputy there under M\u00f6ngke Khan. Hulegu was accepted as a legitimate ruler in Iran and was legitimized through a \"fatwa\" issued by the Shia scholar Ali ibn Tawus al-Hilli. Iran experienced a cultural renaissance under Ilkhanid rule. Ghazan Khan converted to Islam in the late 13th century, turning the state further away from the other Mongol realms.\nAfter Ghazan's nephew Abu Said died in 1335, the Ilkhanate lapsed into civil war and was divided between several petty dynasties \u2013 most prominently the Jalayirids, Muzaffarids, Sarbadars and Kartids. The mid-14th-century Black Death killed about 30% of the country's population.\nTimur and the rise of new powers.\nIran remained divided until the establishment of the Persianate Timurid dynasty in 1370. Its founder, Timur (r. 1370\u20131405), hailed from a Turkified tribe of Mongols. After establishing a power base in Transoxiana, Timur invaded Iran in 1381 and eventually conquered most of it. Timur's campaigns were known for their brutality; many people were slaughtered and several cities were destroyed. In 1387, Timur ordered the complete massacre of Isfahan, killing 70,000 people. The Timurids maintained control of most of Iran until 1452, when they lost the bulk of it to the Qara Qoyunlu, who were conquered in turn by the Aq Qoyunlu 1468. Uzun Hasan and his successors were the masters of Iran until the rise of the Safavids.\nEarly modern period.\nThe Safavid Empire, founded by Ismail I (r. 1505\u20131524), is often considered the beginning of modern Iranian history. While Safavid Iran predated the concept of the nation-state as such, it established the basis for the modern state of Iran. The Safavid dynastic period was one of the most important Iranian history, as it reunified Iran as a cohesive entity under native rule and established Shia Islam as the official religion. The Safavids ruled from 1501 to 1722, and experienced a brief restoration from 1729 to 1736.\nThe Safavid state had a complex bureaucratic system of checks and balances, which ensured transparency and prevented fraud. However, this system was intended not to equalize power between branches of government, but to ensure total power of the shah. Legitimized by his bloodline as a sayyid, or descendant of Muhammad, the shah monitored the actions of government officials through reports provided by the superintendent of each department. Jean Chardin, French merchant and eventual ambassador to Iran, wrote that the Safavid shahs ruled their land with an iron fist and often in a despotic manner.\nComplex rivalries in the region of Khorasan led to the Afghan Hotak dynasty invading Iran. In 1722, this conflict led to the collapse of the Safavid Empire after the siege of Isfahan. The brief interlude between 1722 and the rise of the Qajar dynasty in 1789\u20131796 was marked by widespread political turmoil in Iran and several rival attempts to establish power over the country. The Safavids failed to regain power and the Hotaks failed to establish control. The rival Afsharid and Zand dynasties were established by Nader Shah (r.1736\u20131747) and Karim Khan (r.1751\u20131779), respectively.\nNader Shah and the shifting balance of power.\nNader Shah has been described as \"the last great Asiatic military conqueror,\" and compared by some historians to Napoleon and Alexander the Great. His numerous campaigns created a great empire that, at its maximum extent, briefly encompassed all or part of modern-day Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Georgia, India, Iran, Iraq, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Oman, Pakistan, Uzbekistan, the North Caucasus, and the Persian Gulf. However, his military spending had a ruinous effect on the Iranian economy.\nNader Shah's death was followed by a period of anarchy in Iran as rival army commanders fought for power. Nader's own family, the Afsharids, lost all but a small domain in Khorasan. The Zand family seized control of much of Iran in the 1750s. The Zand rulers never proclaimed themselves to be \"shah\"s, but as regents of Iran.' They first staked their claim to power on behalf of the Safavid puppet Ismail III (r.1750\u20131773) and then on behalf of the Iranian people.'\nRise of the Qajar dynasty and foreign interference.\nThe Qajar dynasty gradually increased in power as they clashed with the Afsharids and the Zands for control of the land, culminating in Agha Mohammad Shah proclaiming himself ruler in 1789. Agha Mohammad defeated the Zand dynasty in 1794 and was officially crowned in 1796. Shortly thereafter, he captured and deposed the Afsharid Shahrokh Shah, reunifying Iran under a single ruler.\nIn the 19th century, Iran lost significant territories in the Caucasus to the Russian Empire following the Russo-Persian Wars. Meanwhile, Britain became involved in southern Iran to counter Russia's presence in the north, which posed a threat to British India. Amid this struggle for power, drought, shifting agricultural priorities, and poor governance culminated in the Great Persian Famine of 1870\u20131871. While the death toll is unknown, the famine killed a significant portion of Iran's population; between several hundred thousand and four million Iranians are believed to have died as a result.\n20th century up to the Iranian Revolution.\nConstitutional Revolution and the rise of the Pahlavi dynasty.\nThe Persian Constitutional Revolution between 1905 and 1911 led to the establishment of an Iranian parliament. After the 1921 coup d'\u00e9tat, the Qajar dynasty was replaced with the Pahlavi dynasty. The dynasty was founded by Reza Shah, who established an authoritarian government that valued nationalism, militarism, secularism and anti-communism combined with strict censorship and state propaganda. Reza Shah introduced many socio-economic reforms, reorganizing the army, government administration, and finances. Reza Shah ruled for almost 16 years until 1941, when he was forced to abdicate by the Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran.\nTo his supporters, his reign brought \"law and order, discipline, central authority, and modern amenities \u2013 schools, trains, buses, radios, cinemas, and telephones.\" However, his reign has been characterized as a corrupt police state which provided only surface level modernization.\nWorld War II and post-occupation instability.\nDue in part to Nazi Germany's invasion of the Soviet Union, the Iranian government expected Germany to win the war and establish a powerful force on the Russian-Iranian border. Iran rejected British and Soviet demands to expel German residents from its borders. In response, the two Allies invaded in August 1941 and easily overwhelmed the weak Iranian army in Operation Countenance. Iran became the major conduit of Allied Lend-Lease aid to the Soviet Union. The purpose was to secure Iranian oil fields and ensure Allied supply lines through the Persian Corridor. Iran remained officially neutral. Reza Shah was deposed during the subsequent occupation and replaced with his young son Mohammad Reza Pahlavi. At the 1943 Tehran Conference, the Allied \"Big Three\"\u2014Joseph Stalin, Franklin D. Roosevelt, and Winston Churchill\u2014issued the Tehran Declaration to guarantee the post-war independence and boundaries of Iran.\nMosaddegh and the Shah's rule.\nIn 1951, under Prime Minister Mohammad Mosaddegh, the Iranian parliament voted to nationalize the British-owned oil industry, leading to the Abadan Crisis. Despite British pressure, including an economic blockade, nationalization continued. Mosaddegh was removed from power in 1952 but was quickly re-appointed by the Shah, due to a popular uprising in support of the premier. He forced the Shah into a brief exile in August 1953 after a failed military coup by Imperial Guard Colonel Nematollah Nassiri.\nOn 19 August, a successful coup was headed by retired army general Fazlollah Zahedi, aided by the US (CIA) and the British (MI6), known as Operation Ajax and Operation Boot to the respective agencies. The coup\u2014with a black propaganda campaign against Mosaddegh \u2014 forced Mosaddegh from office. Mosaddegh was arrested and tried for treason. Found guilty, his sentence was reduced to house arrest on his family estate while his foreign minister, Hossein Fatemi, was executed. Zahedi succeeded him as prime minister and suppressed opposition to the Shah, specifically from the National Front and the communist Tudeh Party.\nFrom that time until the revolution, Iran was ruled as an autocracy under the Shah, with strong American support. Iran initiated economic, social, agrarian, and administrative reforms to modernize the country, which became known as the White Revolution. Many Islamic leaders criticized these initiatives, and the land reform had mixed results. By 1978, the Shah had become wildly unpopular among the Iranian people. Daily demonstrations destabilized the region, and the Shah established martial law to curb opposition. When hundreds of thousands of protestors persisted, security forces opened fire on the crowds in an incident that became known as Black Friday.\nIranian Revolution.\nThe protests against the Shah grew to include more than 10% of the country; it is rare for revolutions to involve even 1% of a country's population. Frustration with the Shah was so great that even secular and leftist groups supported Ayatollah Rohullah Khomeini, the leader of the revolution, despite sharing none of his political positions. Under increasing pressure, the Shah eventually fled Iran, charging the interim Regency Council with his duties until a new government was formed. Shapour Bakhtiar, the head of the Council, invited Khomeini to return from exile. However, upon return, Khomeini pledged to defeat the interim government led by Bakhtiar and claimed to support free democratic elections. Violence broke out between the two factions, ultimately leading Bakhtiar to flee Iran in disguise.\nOn 31 March 1979, a referendum was held on whether to transition from a government of monarchy to an Islamic republic. The referendum was approved by a massive margin. It mandated the creation of an assembly to draft the new theocratic constitution, whereby Khomeini became Supreme Leader in December 1979. Iran's modernizing, capitalist economy was replaced by populist Islamic economic and cultural policies. Industries were nationalized, laws and schools Islamized, and Western influence restricted.\nKhomeini, Iran-Iraq War, and leadership transition.\nThe shah, now out of power, went to the US to seek cancer treatment after other countries denied him entry. Supporters of the revolution feared that this was a step toward a coup to reinstate the Shah's reign. On 4 November 1979, Iranian students seized US embassy personnel, labeling the embassy a \"den of spies.\" 52 hostages were held for 444 days until January 1981.\nIraqi leader Saddam Hussein attempted to take advantage of the disorder of the revolution, the weakness of the Iranian military and the revolution's antagonism against Western governments. On 22 September 1980, the Iraqi army invaded Iran at Khuzestan, precipitating the Iran\u2013Iraq War. The attack took revolutionary Iran by surprise. Although Hussein's forces made early advances, Iranian forces pushed the Iraqi army back into Iraq by 1982. Khomeini sought to export the revolution westward into Iraq, especially to the country's Shi'a Arab majority. The war continued until 1988, when Khomeini \"drank the cup of poison\" and accepted a truce mediated by the UN. The war, which ended in a stalemate in 1988, killed approximately 500,000 people. During the war, Saddam extensively used chemical weapons against Iranians.\nKhamenei era.\nOn his deathbed in 1989, Khomeini appointed a 25-man Constitutional Reform Council which named Ali Khamenei as the next Supreme Leader, and made changes to Iran's constitution. A smooth transition followed Khomeini's death on 3 June 1989. While Khamenei lacked Khomeini's \"charisma and clerical standing\", he developed a network of supporters within Iran's armed forces and its economically powerful religious foundations.\nIn 1989, President Akbar Rafsanjani concentrated on a pro-business policy of rebuilding the economy, without breaking with the ideology of the revolution. He supported a free market, favoring privatization of state industries and a moderate position internationally. In 1997, Rafsanjani was succeeded by moderate reformist Mohammad Khatami, whose government advocated freedom of expression, constructive diplomatic relations with Asia and the European Union, and policy that supported a free market and foreign investment.\nThe 2005 presidential election brought conservative populist and nationalist candidate Mahmoud Ahmadinejad to power. He was known for his hardline views, nuclearization, and hostility towards Israel, Saudi Arabia, the UK, US and other states. He was the first president to be summoned by the parliament to answer questions regarding his presidency. In 2013, centrist and reformist Hassan Rouhani was elected president. He encouraged personal freedom, free access to information, and improved women's rights. He improved Iran's diplomatic relations through exchanging conciliatory letters. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action was reached in Vienna in 2015, between Iran, the P5+1 (UN Security Council + Germany) and the EU. The negotiations centered around ending the economic sanctions in exchange for Iran's restriction in producing enriched uranium. In 2018, the US under President Donald Trump withdrew from the deal and new sanctions were imposed. This nulled the economic provisions and brought Iran to nuclear threshold status. In 2020, IRGC general Qasem Soleimani, the 2nd-most powerful person in Iran, was assassinated by the US, heightening tensions between them. Iran retaliated against US airbases in Iraq, the largest ballistic missile attack ever on Americans; 110 sustained brain injuries. On 8 January, Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps shot down Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752, killing 176 civilians and leading to nation-wide protests. An international investigation led to the government admitting to the shootdown of the plane by a surface-to-air missile after three days of denial, calling it a \"human error\".\nHardliner Ebrahim Raisi lost a presidential bid in 2017, but he ran again in 2021, succeeding Rouhani. During Raisi's term, Iran intensified uranium enrichment, hindered international inspections, joined SCO and BRICS, supported Russia in its Ukraine invasion and restored diplomatic relations with Saudi Arabia. In April 2024, the Israeli airstrike on the Iranian consulate in Damascus killed an IRGC commander. Iran retaliated with UAVs, cruise and ballistic missiles; 9 hit Israel. It was the largest drone strike in history, biggest missile attack in Iranian history, its first ever direct attack on Israel and the first time since 1991 that Israel was directly attacked by a state force. Israel conducted another strike the same month. In May 2024, Raisi was killed in a helicopter crash, and Iran held a presidential election in June, when reformist and former Minister of Health, Masoud Pezeshkian, was elected. \nOn 1 October 2024, Iran launched 180 ballistic missiles at Israel in retaliation for assassinations of Ismail Haniyeh, Hassan Nasrallah and Abbas Nilforoushan. On 27 October, Israel struck Iranian military sites. In May 2025, the Iranian government ordered the mass deportation of an estimated 4 million Afghan migrants and refugees who were living in Iran.\nThe weakening of Iran's key allies and proxies since 2023 have left the Iranian government weakened and isolated. In early 2025, Iran was rapidly advancing its nuclear program. Analysts warned such activity exceeded any plausible civilian justification. Beginning in April, Iran and the US entered negotiations for a new nuclear agreement, but progress stalled. In June, IAEA found Iran non-compliant with its nuclear obligations; in response, Iran announced the activation of a new enrichment facility.\nOn 13 June 2025, Israel launched strikes across Iran, targeting nuclear facilities and killing many top members of Iran's military leadership. Iran retaliated with its own missile strikes, and hostilities resulted in a brief direct conflict between the two countries. On 22 June, the US struck the Iranian nuclear facilities of Fordow, Natanz, and Isfahan; Iran attacked U.S. bases in Qatar as a result. On 24 June, Israel and Iran agreed to a ceasefire after insistence from the US.\nGeography.\nIran has an area of . It is the sixth-largest country entirely in Asia and the second-largest in West Asia. It lies between latitudes 24\u00b0 and 40\u00b0 N and longitudes 44\u00b0 and 64\u00b0 E. It is bordered to the northwest by Armenia, the Azeri exclave of Nakhchivan, and the Republic of Azerbaijan; to the north by the Caspian Sea; to the northeast by Turkmenistan; to the east by Afghanistan and Pakistan; to the south by the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman; and to the west by Iraq and Turkey.\nIran is in a seismically active area. On average, an earthquake of magnitude 7.0 or higher occurs once every ten years. Most earthquakes are shallow-focus and can be very devastating, such as the 2003 Bam earthquake. Iran consists mostly of the Iranian Plateau, with its southwestern region on the Arabian plate. It is one of the world's most mountainous countries; its landscape is dominated by rugged mountain ranges that separate basins or plateaus. The populous western Iran is the most mountainous, with ranges such as the Caucasus, Zagros, and Alborz. Mount Damavand is the highest point, at , which is the highest volcano in Asia. Iran's mountains have impacted its politics and economics for centuries.\nNorthern Iran is covered by the lush lowland Caspian Hyrcanian forests, near the southern shores of the Caspian Sea. The east consists mostly of desert basins, such as the Kavir Desert, which is the country's largest desert, and the Lut Desert, as well as salt lakes. The Lut Desert is the hottest recorded spot on the Earth's surface, with 70.7\u00a0\u00b0C recorded in 2005. Large plains are found along the coast of the Caspian and at the north end of the Persian Gulf, where Iran borders the mouth of the Arvand river. Smaller, discontinuous plains are found along the remaining coast of the Persian Gulf, the Strait of Hormuz, and Gulf of Oman.\nClimate.\nIran's climate is diverse, ranging from arid and semi-arid, to subtropical along the Caspian coast and northern forests. On the north edge of Iran, temperatures rarely fall below freezing and the area remains humid. Summer temperatures rarely exceed . Annual precipitation is in the eastern plains and more than in the west. The UN Resident Coordinator for Iran has said that \"Water scarcity poses the most severe human security challenge in Iran today\".\nTo the west, settlements in the Zagros basin have lower temperatures and severe winters, with freezing average daily temperatures and heavy snowfall. The east and central basins are arid, with less than of rain and have occasional deserts. Average summer temperatures may reach . The southern coastal plains of the Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman have mild winters, and very humid and hot summers. The annual precipitation ranges from .\nBiodiversity.\nNearly 60% of Iran is mountainous, and less than 10% is forested. About 120 million hectares of forests and fields are government-owned for national exploitation. Iran's forests can be divided into five vegetation regions: the Hyrcanian region which forms the green belt of the north side of Iran; the Turan region, which are mainly scattered in the center of Iran; the Zagros region, which mainly contains oak forests in the west; the Persian Gulf region, which is scattered in the southern coastal belt; the Arasbarani region, which contains rare and unique species. More than 8,200 plant species are grown. The land covered by natural flora is four times that of Europe's. There are over 200 protected areas to preserve biodiversity and wildlife, with over 30 being the national parks.\nIran's living fauna includes 34 bat species, Indian grey mongoose, small Indian mongoose, golden jackal, Indian wolf, foxes, striped hyena, leopard, Eurasian lynx, brown bear and Asian black bear. Ungulate species include wild boar, urial, Armenian mouflon, red deer, and goitered gazelle. The critically endangered Asiatic cheetah survives only in Iran. Iran lost all its Asiatic lions and the extinct Caspian tigers by the early 20th century. Domestic ungulates are represented by sheep, goat, cattle, horse, water buffalo, donkey and camel. Iran is home to more than 570 bird species like pheasant, partridge, stork, eagles and falcons.\nGovernment and politics.\nSupreme Leader.\nThe Supreme Leader (), the \"Rahbar\", the Leader of the Revolution or Supreme Leadership Authority, is the head of state and is responsible for supervision of policy. The president has limited power compared to the \"Rahbar\". Key ministers are selected with the \"Rahbar\"'s agreement, who has the ultimate say on foreign policy. The \"Rahbar\" is directly involved in ministerial appointments for defense, intelligence and foreign affairs, and other top ministries after submission of candidates from the president.\nThe \"Rahbar\" directly controls regional policy, with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs tasks limited to protocol and ceremonial occasions. Ambassadors to Arab countries, for example, are chosen by the Quds Force, which reports to the Rahbar. The \"Rahbar\" can order laws to be amended. The Setad, a state-owned enterprise under the \"Rahbar\", was valued at $95bn in 2013, accounts of which are secret even to the parliament.\nThe \"Rahbar\" is the commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces, controls military intelligence and security operations, and has the sole power to declare war or peace. The \"Rahbar\" also appoints the heads of the judiciary, state radio and television networks, commanders of the police and military, and members of the Guardian Council.\nThe Assembly of Experts is responsible for electing the \"Rahbar\" and has the power to dismiss him on the basis of qualifications and popular esteem. To date, the Assembly of Experts has not challenged any of the \"Rahbar\"'s decisions nor attempted to dismiss him. The previous head of the judicial system, Sadiq Larijani, appointed by the \"Rahbar\", said that it is illegal for the Assembly of Experts to supervise the \"Rahbar\". Many believe the Assembly of Experts has become a ceremonial body without any real power. In February 2025, \"The New York Times\" reported that according to Karim Sadjadpour, an expert on Iran at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, there exists in the Islamic Republic of Iran two parallel systems. One which is ruled by the military and intelligence forces, who report to the \"Rahbar\", and \"who oversee the nuclear programme and regional proxies and are tasked with repression, hostage taking and assassinations\". The other ruled by diplomats and politicians \"who are authorized to speak to Western media and officials\" and have minimal knowledge of Iran's nuclear programme.\nThe political system is based on the country's constitution. According to International IDEA\u2019s Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Iran performs in the low range on overall democratic measures, with particular weaknesses in gender equality, freedom of association and assembly, and freedom of expression. Furthermore, Iran was ranked 158th in electoral democracy for year 2024 according to V-Dem Democracy Indices and was an electoral autocracy in the Regimes of the World classification. Juan Jos\u00e9 Linz wrote in 2000 \"the Iranian regime combines the ideological bent of totalitarianism with the limited pluralism of authoritarianism\".\nPresident.\nThe president is head of government and the second-highest-ranking authority after the Supreme Leader. The president is elected by universal suffrage for 4 years. Before elections, nominees to become a presidential candidate must be approved by the Guardian Council. The council's members are chosen by the Leader, with the Leader having the power to dismiss the president. The president can only be re-elected for one term. The president is the chairman of the Supreme National Security Council, and has the power to declare a state of emergency after passage by the parliament.\nThe president is responsible for the implementation of the constitution and for the exercise of executive powers in implementing the decrees and general policies as outlined by the \"Rahbar\", except for matters directly related to the \"Rahbar\", who has the final say. The president functions as the executive of affairs such as signing treaties and other international agreements, and administering national planning, budget, and state employment affairs, all as approved by the \"Rahbar\".\nThe president appoints ministers, subject to the approval of the Parliament and the \"Rahbar\", who can dismiss or reinstate any minister. The president supervises the Council of Ministers, coordinates government decisions, and selects government policies to be placed before the legislature. Eight vice presidents serve under the president, as well as a cabinet of 22 ministers, all appointed by the president.\nGuardian Council.\nPresidential and parliamentary candidates must be approved by the 12-member Guardian Council (all members of which are appointed by the Leader) or the Leader before running to ensure their allegiance. The Leader rarely does the vetting, but has the power to do so, in which case additional approval of the Guardian Council is not needed. The Leader can revert the decisions of the Guardian Council.\nThe constitution gives the council three mandates: veto power over legislation passed by the parliament, supervision of elections and approving or disqualifying candidates seeking to run in local, parliamentary, presidential, or Assembly of Experts elections. The council can nullify a law based on two accounts: being against sharia (Islamic law), or being against the constitution.\nSupreme National Security Council.\nThe Supreme National Security Council (SNSC) is at the top of the foreign policy decisions process. The council was formed during the 1989 Iranian constitutional referendum for the protection and support of national interests, the revolution, territorial integrity and national sovereignty. It is mandated by Article 176 of the Constitution to be presided over by the president.\nThe leader selects the secretary of the Supreme Council, and the council's decisions are effective after the leader confirms them. The SNSC formulates nuclear policy and would become effective if the Leader confirms them.\nLegislature.\nThe legislature, known as the Islamic Consultative Assembly, Iranian Parliament or \"Majles\", is a unicameral body comprising 290 members elected for four years. It drafts legislation, ratifies international treaties, and approves the national budget. All parliamentary candidates and legislation from the assembly must be approved by the Guardian Council. The Guardian Council can dismiss elected members of the parliament. The parliament has no legal status without the Guardian Council, and the Council holds absolute veto power over legislation.\nThe Expediency Discernment Council has the authority to mediate disputes between Parliament and the Guardian Council. It serves as an advisory body to the Supreme Leader, making it one of Iran's most powerful governing bodies. The Parliament has 207 constituencies, including the 5 reserved seats for religious minorities. The remaining 202 are territorial, covering one or more of Iran's counties.\nLaw.\nIran uses the sharia law (based on Ja'fari school) as its legal system, with elements of civil law. The Supreme Leader appoints the head of the Supreme Court and chief public prosecutor. There are several types of courts, including public courts that deal with civil and criminal cases, and revolutionary courts, which deal with certain offenses, such as crimes against national security. The decisions of the revolutionary courts are final and cannot be appealed.\nThe Chief Justice heads the judicial system and is responsible for its administration and supervision. He is the highest judge of the Supreme Court of Iran. The Chief Justice nominates candidates to serve as minister of justice, and the president selects one. The Chief Justice can serve for two five-year terms.\nThe Special Clerical Court handles crimes allegedly committed by clerics, although it has taken on cases involving laypeople. The Special Clerical Court functions independently of the regular judicial framework and is accountable only to the Rahbar. The Court's rulings are final and cannot be appealed. The Assembly of Experts, which meets for one week annually, comprises 86 \"virtuous and learned\" clerics elected by adult suffrage for 8-year terms.\nAdministrative divisions.\nIran is subdivided into thirty-one provinces ( \"ost\u00e2n\"), each governed from a local centre, usually the largest local city, which is called the capital (Persian: , \"markaz\") of that province. The provincial authority is headed by a governor-general ( \"ost\u00e2nd\u00e2r\"), who is appointed by the Minister of the Interior subject to the approval of the cabinet.\nForeign relations.\nIran maintains diplomatic relations with 165 countries, but not the United States and Israel\u2014a state which Iran derecognised in 1979. Iran has an adversarial relationship with Saudi Arabia due to different political ideologies. Iran and Turkey have been involved in modern proxy conflicts such as in Syria, Libya, and the South Caucasus. However, they have shared common interests, such as the issue of Kurdish separatism and the Qatar diplomatic crisis. Iran has a close and strong relationship with Tajikistan.\nIran formed the Axis of Resistance, a coalition of actors committed to countering the influence of the United States and Israel in the region. It most notably includes the Hezbollah in Lebanon, Islamic Resistance and Popular Mobilization Forces in Iraq, and the Houthi movement in Yemen. It sometimes includes Hamas and a variety of other Palestinian militant groups. Iran has deep economic relations and alliance with Iraq, Lebanon, and did with Syria, which was described as Iran's \"closest ally\". In December 2024, the fall of the Assad regime in Syria, a close ally of Iran, was a severe setback for the political influence of Iran in the region.\nRussia is a key trading partner, especially in regard to its excess oil reserves. Both share a close economic and military alliance and are subject to heavy sanctions by Western nations. Iran is the only country in Western Asia that has been invited to join the CSTO, the Russia-based international treaty organization that parallels NATO.\nRelations between Iran and China are strong economically; they have developed a friendly, economic and strategic relationship. In 2021, Iran and China signed a 25-year cooperation agreement that will strengthen the relations between the two countries and would include \"political, strategic and economic\" components. Iran-China relations dates back to at least 200 BC and possibly earlier. Iran is one of the few countries in the world that has a good relationship with both North and South Korea. Iran is a member of dozens of international organizations, including the G-15, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, IDA, NAM, IDB, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, OIC, OPEC, WHO, and the UN, and currently has observer status at the WTO.\nMilitary.\nThe military is organised under a unified structure, the Islamic Republic of Iran Armed Forces, comprising the Islamic Republic of Iran Army, which includes the Ground Forces, Air Defence Force, Air Force, and Navy; the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, which consists of the Ground Forces, Aerospace Force, Navy, Quds Force, and Basij; and the Police Command (Faraja), which serves an analogous function to a gendarme. While the IRIAF protects the country's sovereignty in a traditional capacity, the IRGC is mandated to ensure the integrity of the Republic against foreign interference, coups, and internal riots. In 2019, the United States under President Donald Trump officially labeled the Revolutionary Guard as a foreign terrorist organization. It is the first time that an element of a foreign state was designated as a terrorist organization. Since 1925, all male citizens aged 18 must serve around 14 months in the IRIAF or IRGC.\nIran has over 610,000 active troops and around 350,000 reservists, which is at least over 1 million military personnel, one of the world's highest percentage of citizens with military training. The Basij, a paramilitary volunteer militia within the IRGC, has over 20 million members, 600,000 available for immediate call-up, 300,000 reservists, and a million that could be mobilised when necessary. Faraja, the Iranian uniformed police force, has over 260,000 active personnel. Most statistical organizations do not include the Basij and Faraja in their rating reports.\nIran ranks 7th in the number of active military personnel and 9th in size of both its ground force and armoured force. Iran's armed forces are the largest in West Asia and comprise the greatest Army Aviation fleet in the Middle East. Iran is among the top 15 countries in terms of military budget. In 2021, its military spending increased for the first time in four years, to $24.6 billion, 2.3% of the national GDP. Funding for the IRGC accounted for 34% of Iran's total military spending in 2021.\nSince the Islamic revolution, to overcome foreign embargoes, Iran has developed a domestic military industry capable of producing indigenous tanks, armoured personnel carriers, missiles, submarines, missile destroyer, radar systems, helicopters, naval vessels, and fighter planes. Official announcements have highlighted the development of advanced weaponry, particularly in rocketry. Consequently, Iran has the largest and most diverse ballistic missile arsenal in the Middle East and is only the 5th country in the world with hypersonic missile technology. Iran designs and produces a variety of unmanned aerial vehicles. It is one of the world's five countries with cyberwarfare capabilities and is identified as \"one of the most active players in the international cyber arena\".\nFollowing Russia's purchase of Iranian drones during the invasion of Ukraine, in November 2023, the IRIAF finalized arrangements to acquire Russian Sukhoi Su-35 fighter jets, Mil Mi-28 attack helicopters, air defense and missile systems. The Iranian Navy has had joint exercises with Russia and China.\nNuclear program.\nIran's nuclear program dates back to the 1950s. Iran revived it after the Islamic revolution, and its extensive nuclear fuel cycle, including enrichment capabilities, became the subject of intense international negotiations and sanctions. Many countries have expressed concern Iran could divert civilian nuclear technology into a weapons program. In 2015, Iran and the P5+1 agreed to the Joint Comprehensive Plan on Action, aiming to end economic sanctions in exchange for restriction in producing enriched uranium.\nIn 2018, however, the US withdrew from the deal under the Trump administration and reimposed sanctions. This was met with resistance by Iran and other members of the P5+1. A year later, Iran began decreasing its compliance. By 2020, Iran announced it would no longer observe any limit set by the agreement. Progress since then has brought Iran to the nuclear threshold status. As of November 2023[ [update]], Iran had uranium enriched to up to 60% fissile content, close to weapon grade. Some analysts already regard Iran as a \"de facto\" nuclear power.\nRegional influence.\nIran's significant influence and foothold was sometimes characterized as the \"Dawn of A New Persian Empire.\" Some analysts associated the Iranian influence to the nation's proud national legacy, empire and history.\nAfter the revolution, Iran grew its influence across and beyond the region. It built military forces with a wide network of state and none-state actors, starting with Hezbollah in Lebanon in 1982. The IRGC was key to Iranian influence, through its Quds Force. The instability in Lebanon (from the 1980s), Iraq (from 2003) and Yemen (from 2014) allowed Iran to build strong alliances and footholds beyond its borders. Iran had a prominent influence in the social services, education, economy and politics of Lebanon, and Lebanon provides Iran access to the Mediterranean Sea. Hezbollah's strategic successes against Israel, such as its symbolic victory during the 2006 Israel\u2013Hezbollah War, elevated Iran's influence in the Levant and strengthened its appeal across the Muslim world.\nAfter the US invasion of Iraq in 2003 and the arrival of ISIS in the mid-2010s, Iran financed and trained militia groups in Iraq. After the Iran-Iraq war and the fall of Saddam Hussein, Iran shaped Iraq's politics. Following Iraq's struggle against ISIS in 2014, companies linked to the IRGC such as Khatam al-Anbiya, started to build roads, power plants, hotels and businesses in Iraq, creating an economic corridor worth around $9 billion before COVID-19.\nDuring Yemen's civil war Iran provided military support to the Houthis, a Zaydi Shia movement fighting Yemen's Sunni government since 2004, which gained significant power. Iran has considerable influence in Afghanistan and Pakistan through militant groups such as Liwa Fatemiyoun and Liwa Zainebiyoun.\nIn Syria, Iran supported President Bashar al-Assad; the two countries were long-standing allies. Iran provided significant military and economic support to Assad's government, so had a considerable foothold in Syria. Iran has long supported organizations in North Africa in countries like Algeria and Tunisia, embracing Hamas in part to help undermine the popularity of the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO). Iran's support of Hamas emerged more clearly in later years. According to US intelligence, Iran does not have full control over these state and non-state groups.\nHuman rights and censorship.\nThe Iranian government has been denounced by various international organizations and governments for violating human rights. The government has frequently persecuted and arrested critics of the government. Iranian law does not recognise sexual orientations. Sexual activity between members of the same sex is illegal and is punishable by death. Capital punishment is a legal punishment, and according to the BBC, Iran \"carries out more executions than any other country, except China\". UN Special Rapporteur Javaid Rehman has reported discrimination against several ethnic minorities in Iran. A group of UN experts in 2022 urged Iran to stop \"systematic persecution\" of religious minorities, adding that members of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith were arrested, barred from universities, or had their homes demolished. In 2024, a UN Special Rapporteur investigation concluded that Iran committed genocide against its political and religious minorities during 1981\u20131982 massacres and 1988 mass executions.\nCensorship is ranked among the most extreme worldwide. Iran has strict internet censorship, with the government persistently blocking social media and other sites. Since January 2021, authorities have blocked several social media platforms.\nThe 2006 election results were widely disputed, resulting in protests. The 2017\u201318 Iranian protests swept across the country in response to the economic and political situation. It was formally confirmed that thousands of protesters were arrested. The 2019\u201320 Iranian protests started on 15 November in Ahvaz, and spread across the country after the government announced increases in fuel prices of up to 300%. A week-long total Internet shutdown marked one of the most severe Internet blackouts in any country, and the bloodiest governmental crackdown of the protestors. Tens of thousands were arrested and hundreds were killed within a few days according to multiple international observers, including Amnesty International.\nUkraine International Airlines Flight 752 was a scheduled international civilian passenger flight from Tehran to Kyiv, operated by Ukraine International Airlines. On 8 January 2020, the Boeing 737\u2013800 flying the route was shot down by the IRGC shortly after takeoff, killing all 176 occupants on board and leading to protests. An international investigation led to the government admitting to the shootdown, calling it a \"human error\". Further protests against the government began on 16 September 2022 after a woman named Mahsa Amini died in police custody following her arrest by the Guidance Patrol, known commonly as the \"morality police\". Government crackdown on the protests have been described by the UN to be crimes against humanity.\nEconomy.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], Iran has the world's 19th largest economy (by PPP). It is a mixture of central planning, state ownership of oil and other large enterprises, village agriculture, and small-scale private trading and service ventures. Services contribute the largest percentage of GDP, followed by industry (mining and manufacturing) and agriculture. The economy is characterised by its hydrocarbon sector, manufacturing and financial services. With 10% of the world's oil reserves and 15% of gas reserves, Iran is an energy superpower. Over 40 industries are directly involved in the Tehran Stock Exchange.\nTehran is the economic powerhouse of Iran. About 30% of Iran's public-sector workforce and 45% of its large industrial firms are located there, and half those firms' employees work for government. The Central Bank of Iran is responsible for developing and maintaining the currency: the Iranian rial. The government does not recognise trade unions other than the Islamic labour councils, which are subject to the approval of employers and the security services. Iran was the first country to introduce a national basic income in Autumn 2010. Unemployment was 9% in 2022.\nBudget deficits have been a chronic problem, mostly due to large state subsidies, that include foodstuffs and especially petrol, totaling $100\u00a0billion in 2022 for energy alone. In 2010, the economic reform plan was to cut subsidies gradually and replace them with targeted social assistance. The objective is to move towards free market prices and increase productivity and social justice. The administration continues reform, and indicates it will diversify the oil-reliant economy. Iran has developed a biotechnology, nanotechnology, and pharmaceutical industry. The government is privatising industries.\nIran has leading manufacturing industries in automobile manufacture, transportation, construction materials, home appliances, food and agricultural goods, armaments, pharmaceuticals, information technology, and petrochemicals in the Middle East. It is among the world's top five producers of apricots, cherries, cucumbers and gherkins, dates, figs, pistachios, quinces, walnuts, Kiwifruit and watermelons. International sanctions against Iran have damaged the economy. Iran is one of three countries that has not ratified the Paris Agreement to limit climate change, although academics say it would be good for the country.\nIran suffers from high inflation and especially surging food prices. A major contributing factor is the involvement of the IRGC in the economy, particularly in the agriculture and food sectors but also due to significant spending on the Axis of Resistance which increase the public deficit.\nTourism.\nTourism had been rapidly growing before the COVID-19 pandemic, reaching nearly 9 million foreign visitors in 2019, the world's third fastest-growing tourism destination. In 2022 it expanded its share to 5% of the economy. Iran's tourism experienced a growth of 43% in 2023, attracting 6 million foreign tourists. The government ended visa requirements for 60 countries in 2023.\n98% of visits are for leisure, while 2% are for business, indicating the country's appeal as a tourist destination. Alongside the capital, the most popular tourist destinations are Isfahan, Shiraz and Mashhad. Travellers from other West Asian countries grew 31% in the first seven months of 2023. Domestic tourism is one of the world's largest; Iranian tourists spent $33bn in 2021. Iran projects investment of $32 billion in the tourism sector by 2026.\nAgriculture and fishery.\nRoughly one-third of Iran's surface area is suitable for farmland. Only 12% of the total land area is under cultivation, and less than one-third of the cultivated area is irrigated. The rest is devoted to dryland farming. Some 92% of agricultural products depend on water. The western and northwestern portions of the country have the most fertile soils. Iran's food security index stands at around 96 percent.\n3% of Iran's land area is used for grazing and fodder production. Most of the grazing is done on mostly semi-dry rangeland in mountain areas and on areas surrounding the large deserts of central Iran. Progressive government efforts and incentives during the 1990s improved agricultural productivity, helping Iran toward its goal of reestablishing national self-sufficiency in food production.\nAccess to the Caspian Sea, the Persian Gulf, the Gulf of Oman, and many river basins provides the potential to develop excellent fisheries. The government assumed control of commercial fishing in 1952. Expansion of the fishery infrastructure enabled Iran to harvest an estimated 700,000 tons of fish annually from the southern waters. Since the revolution, increased attention has been focused on producing fish from inland waters. Between 1976 and 2004, the combined take from inland waters by the state and private sectors increased from 1,100 tons to 110,175 tons. Iran is the world's largest producer and exporter of caviar, exporting more than 300 tonnes annually.\nIndustry and services.\nIn 2024, Iran was ranked 16th in global car manufacturing, ahead of the UK, Italy, and Russia. It built 1.188 million cars in 2023, a 12% growth compared to the previous years. Iran exports cars to countries such as Venezuela, Russia and Belarus. From 2008 to 2009, Iran leaped to 28th place from 69th in annual industrial production growth rate. Iranian contractors have been awarded several foreign tender contracts in different fields of construction of dams, bridges, roads, buildings, railroads, power generation, and gas, oil and petrochemical industries. In 2011, some 66 Iranian industrial companies were carrying out projects in 27 countries. Iran exported over $20 billion worth of technical and engineering services over 2001\u20132011. The availability of local raw materials, rich mineral reserves, experienced manpower have all played crucial role in winning the bids.\n45% of large industrial firms are located in Tehran, and almost half of their workers work for government. The Iranian retail industry is largely in the hands of cooperatives, many of them government-sponsored, and of independent retailers in the bazaars. The bulk of food sales occur at street markets, where the Chief Statistics Bureau sets the prices. \nIran's automotive industry is the second most active industry of Iran, after its oil and gas industry. ITMCO is the biggest tractor manufacturer in the Middle East. Iran is the 12th largest automaker in the world. Construction is one of the most important sectors in Iran. The annual turnover in the construction industry amounts to US$38.4 billion. The Central Bank of Iran indicates that 70 percent of the Iranians own homes, with huge amounts of idle money entering the housing market.\nIran is ranked among 15 major mineral-rich countries. Iran has become self-sufficient in designing, building and operating dams and power plants. Iran is one of the six countries in the world that manufacture gas- and steam-powered turbines.\nEnergy.\nIran is an energy superpower, and petroleum plays a key part. As of 2023[ [update]], Iran produced 4% of the world's crude oil ( per day), which generates US$36bn of export revenue and is the main source of foreign currency. Oil and gas reserves are estimated at 1.2 trn barrels; Iran holds 10% of world oil reserves and 15% for gas. Iran ranks 3rd in oil reserves and is OPEC's 2nd largest exporter. Iran has the 2nd largest gas reserves, and 3rd largest natural gas production. In 2019, Iran discovered a southern oil field of 50 bn barrels. In April 2024, the NIOC discovered 10 giant shale oil deposits, totaling 2.6 bn barrels. Iran plans to invest $500 billion in oil by 2025.\nIran manufactures 60\u201370% of its industrial equipment domestically, including turbines, pumps, catalysts, refineries, oil tankers, drilling rigs, offshore platforms, towers, pipes, and exploration instruments. The addition of new hydroelectric stations and streamlining of conventional coal and oil-fired stations increased installed capacity to 33 GW; about 75% was based on natural gas, 18% on oil, and 7% on hydroelectric power. In 2004, Iran opened its first wind-powered and geothermal plants, and the first solar thermal plant began in 2009. Iran is the world's third country to develop GTL technology.\nDemographic trends and intensified industrialization have caused electric power demand to grow by 8% per year. The government's goal of 53 GW of installed capacity by 2010 is to be reached by bringing on line new gas-fired plants, and adding hydropower and nuclear generation capacity. Iran's first nuclear power plant went online in 2011. Despite being an energy superpower as of 2024\u20132025 Iran suffers from an energy crisis, manifested by many power outages.\nScience and technology.\nIran has made considerable advances in science and technology, despite international sanctions. In the biomedical sciences, the Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics has a UNESCO chair in biology. In 2006, Iranian scientists successfully cloned a sheep at the Royan Research Centre in Tehran. Stem cell research is among the top 10 in the world. Iran ranks 15th in the world in nanotechnologies. Iranian scientists outside Iran have made major scientific contributions. In 1960, Ali Javan co-invented the first gas laser, and fuzzy set theory was introduced by Lotfi A. Zadeh.\nCardiologist Tofy Mussivand invented and developed the first artificial cardiac pump, the precursor of the artificial heart. Furthering research in diabetes, the HbA1c was discovered by Samuel Rahbar. Many papers in string theory are published in Iran. In 2014, Iranian mathematician Maryam Mirzakhani became the first woman, and Iranian, to receive the Fields Medal, the highest prize in mathematics.\nIran increased its publication output nearly tenfold from 1996 through 2004, and ranked first in output growth rate, followed by China. According to a study by SCImago in 2012, Iran would rank fourth in research output by 2018, if the trend persisted. The Iranian humanoid robot Sorena 2, which was designed by engineers at the University of Tehran, was unveiled in 2010. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) has placed the name of Surena among the five most prominent robots, after analysing its performance.\nAccording to a 2019 study by Isabel Campos-Varela et al., Iran recorded the highest proportion of retracted publications globally, with 15.52 retractions per 10,000 publications. Media reports from 2023 indicate that Iran continues to rank among the countries with the highest retraction rates. Common types of misconduct include fraudulent peer review processes, plagiarism, and data fabrication. Data from the Retraction Watch Leaderboard further highlights that two of the 32 individuals with the highest number of retracted articles worldwide are based in Iran. Iran was ranked 70th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nIranian Space Agency.\nThe Iranian Space Agency was established in 2004. Iran became an orbital-launch-capable nation in 2009 and is a founding member of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. Iran placed its domestically built satellite Omid into orbit on the 30th anniversary of the revolution, in 2009, through its first expendable launch vehicle Safir. It became the 9th country capable of both producing a satellite and sending it into space from a domestically made launcher. Simorgh's launch in 2016, is the successor of Safir.\nIn January 2024, Iran launched the Soraya satellite into its highest orbit yet (750\u00a0km), a space launch milestone for the country. It was launched by Qaem 100 rocket. Iran also successfully launched 3 indigenous satellites, The Mahda, Kayan and Hatef, into orbit using the Simorgh carrier rocket. It was the first time in the country's history that it simultaneously sent three satellites into space. The three satellites are designed for testing advanced satellite subsystems, space-based positioning technology, and narrowband communication.\nIn February 2024, Iran launched its domestically developed imaging satellite, Pars 1, from Russia into orbit. This was the second time since August 2022, when Russia launched another Iranian remote-sensing, Khayyam satellite, into orbit from Kazakhstan, reflecting deep scientific cooperation between the countries.\nTelecommunication.\nThe telecommunications industry is almost entirely state-owned, dominated by the Telecommunication Company of Iran. As of 2020, 70 million Iranians use high-speed mobile internet. Iran is among the first five countries which have had a growth rate of over 20 percent and the highest level of development in telecommunication. Iran has been awarded the UNESCO special certificate for providing telecommunication services to rural areas.\nGlobally, Iran ranks 75th in mobile internet speed and 153rd in fixed internet speed.\nDemographics.\nIran's population grew rapidly from about 19\u00a0million in 1956 to about 85 million by February 2023. Iran's fertility rate has dropped dramatically, from 6.5 children born per woman to about 1.7 two decades later, leading to a population growth rate of about 1.39% in 2018. Due to its young population, studies project that the growth will continue to slow until it stabilises at around 105\u00a0million by 2050.\nIran hosts one of the largest refugee populations, with almost one million, mostly from Afghanistan and Iraq. As of 2025, Iran was home to an estimated 4 million Afghan migrants and refugees. According to the Iranian Constitution, the government is required to provide every citizen with access to social security, covering retirement, unemployment, old age, disability, accidents, calamities, health and medical treatment and care services. This is covered by tax revenues and income derived from public contributions.\nIran has one of the highest urban growth rates in the world. From 1950 to 2002, the urban proportion of the population increased from 27% to 60%. Iran's population is concentrated in its western half, especially in the north, north-west and west. Tehran, with a population of around 9.4\u00a0million, is Iran's capital and largest city. Iran's second most populous city, Mashhad, has a population of around 3.4\u00a0million, and is capital of the province of Razavi Khorasan. Isfahan has a population of around 2.2\u00a0million and is Iran's third most populous city. It is the capital of Isfahan province and was the third capital of the Safavid Empire.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEthnic groups.\nEthnic group composition remains a point of debate, mainly regarding the largest and second largest ethnic groups, the Persians and Azerbaijanis, due to the lack of Iranian state censuses based on ethnicity.\nAccording to a 2003 estimate, Persians make up 51% of the population, while Azerbaijanis make up 24%, Gilaks and Mazenderanis 8%, Kurds 7%, Arabs 3%, Lurs 2%, Balochis 2%, Turkmens 2% and other groups (including Armenians, Jews, Assyrians, Qashqai, Shahsevan) make up the remaining 1%. The World Factbook at 2011 gives the same figures. The Library of Congress in 2008 issued slightly different estimates: 65% Persians (also including Gilaks and Mazenderanis), 16% Azerbaijanis, 7% Kurds, 6% Lurs, 2% Arabs, 2% Balochis, 1% Turkic tribal groups (such as Qashqai), and non-Persian, non-Turkic groups (including Armenians, Georgians, and Assyrians) less than 1%.\nMinorities in Iran have been disproportionately affected by the ongoing crackdown aimed at repressing the \"Woman, Life, Freedom\" movement, according to the UN Fact-Finding Mission.\nLanguages.\nMost of the population speaks Persian, Iran's official and national language. Others include speakers of other Iranian languages, within the greater Indo-European family, and languages belonging to other ethnicities. The Gilaki and Mazenderani languages are widely spoken in Gilan and Mazenderan, northern Iran. The Talysh language is spoken in parts of Gilan. Varieties of Kurdish are concentrated in the province of Kurdistan and nearby areas. In Khuzestan, several dialects of Persian are spoken. South Iran also houses the Luri and Lari languages.\nAzerbaijani, the most-spoken minority language in Iran, and other Turkic languages and dialects are found in various regions, especially Azerbaijan. Notable minority languages include Armenian, Georgian, Neo-Aramaic, and Arabic. Khuzi Arabic is spoken by the Arabs in Khuzestan, and the wider group of Iranian Arabs. Circassian was once widely spoken by the large Circassian minority, but, due to assimilation, no sizable number of Circassians speak the language anymore.\nReligion.\nTwelver Shi'a Islam is the state religion, which 90\u201395% of Iranians adhere to according to both official and unofficial sources, such as the CIA. About 5\u201310% of the population follow the Sunni branch of Islam, mainly the Hanafi school.\nThe Sunni branch of Islam, Christianity, Judaism, and Zoroastrianism are officially recognised by the government and have reserved seats in the Parliament. There is a large population of adherents to Yarsanism, a Kurdish indigenous religion, estimated to comprise 500,000 to 1,000,000 followers. The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith is not officially recognised and has been subject to official persecution; the persecution of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds has increased since the revolution. Irreligion is not recognised by the government. Iran is home to the largest Jewish community in the Muslim World and the Middle East, outside of Israel. Around 250,000 to 370,000 Christians reside in Iran, and it is the largest recognised minority religion. Most are of Armenian background, as well as a sizable minority of Assyrians. The Iranian government has supported the rebuilding and renovation of Armenian churches and has supported the Armenian Monastic Ensembles of Iran. In 2019, the government registered the Vank Cathedral, in Isfahan, as a World Heritage Site. Three Armenian churches in Iran are included in the World Heritage List.\nEducation.\nEducation is highly centralised. K\u201312 is supervised by the Ministry of Education. Higher education is supervised by the Ministry of Science and Technology. Literacy among people aged 15 and older was 86% as of 2016[ [update]], with men (90%) significantly more literate than women (81%). Government expenditure on education is around 4% of GDP.\nThe requirement to enter into higher education is to have a high school diploma and pass the Iranian University Entrance Exam. Many students do a one\u2013two-year course of pre-university. Iran's higher education has different levels of diplomas, including an associate degree in two years, a bachelor's degree in four years, and a master's degree in two years, after which another exam allows the candidate to pursue a doctoral programme.\nHealth.\nHealthcare is provided by the public-governmental system, the private sector, and NGOs. Iran is the only country in the world with a legal organ trade. Iran has been able to extend public health preventive services through the establishment of an extensive Primary Health Care Network. As a result, child and maternal mortality rates have fallen significantly, and life expectancy at birth has risen. Iran's medical knowledge rank is 17th globally and 1st in the Middle East and North Africa. In terms of medical science production index, Iran ranks 16th in the world. Iran is fast emerging as a preferred destination for medical tourism.\nIran faces the common problem of other young demographic nations in the region, which is keeping pace with growth of an already huge demand for public services. An anticipated increase in the population growth rate will increase the need for public health infrastructures and services. In 2016, about 90% of Iranians had health insurance.\nCulture.\nArt.\nIran has one of the richest art heritages in history and been strong in many media including architecture, painting, literature, music, metalworking, stonemasonry, weaving, calligraphy and sculpture. At different times, influences from neighboring civilizations have been important, and latterly Persian art gave and received major influences as part of the wider styles of Islamic art.\nFrom the Achaemenid Empire (550\u2013330 BC), the courts of successive dynasties led the style of Persian art, and court-sponsored art left many of the most impressive pieces that remain. The Islamic style of dense decoration, geometrically laid out, developed in Iran into an elegant and harmonious style, combining motifs derived from plants with Chinese motifs such as the cloud-band, and often animals represented at a smaller scale. During the Safavid Empire in the 16th century, this style was used across a variety of media, and diffused from the court artists of the king, most being painters.\nBy the time of the Sasanians, Iranian art had a renaissance. During the Middle Ages, Sasanian art played a prominent role in the formation of European and Asian mediaeval art. The Safavid era is known as the Golden Age of Iranian art. Safavid art exerted noticeable influences upon the Ottomans, the Mughals, and the Deccans, and was influential through its fashion and garden architecture on 11th\u201317th-century Europe.\nIran's contemporary art traces its origins to Kamal-ol-molk, a prominent realist painter at the court of the Qajar Empire who affected the norms of painting and adopted a naturalistic style that would compete with photographic works. A new Iranian school of fine art was established by him in 1928, and was followed by the so-called \"coffeehouse\" style of painting. Iran's avant-garde modernists emerged by the arrival of new western influences during World War II. The contemporary art scene originates in the late 1940s, and Tehran's first modern art gallery, Apadana, was opened in 1949 by Mahmud Javadipur, Hosein Kazemi, and Hushang Ajudani. The new movements received official encouragement by the 1950s, which led to the emergence of artists such as Marcos Grigorian.\nArchitecture.\nThe history of architecture in Iran dates back to at least 5,000 BC, with characteristic examples distributed over an area from what is now Turkey and Iraq to Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, and from the Caucasus to Zanzibar. The Iranians made early use of mathematics, geometry and astronomy in their architecture, yielding a tradition with structural and aesthetic variety. The guiding motif is its cosmic symbolism.\nIn addition to historic gates, palaces, and mosques, the rapid growth of cities such as Tehran has brought a wave of construction. Iran ranks 7th among UNESCO's list of countries with the most archaeological ruins and attractions from antiquity.\nWorld Heritage Sites.\nIran's rich culture and history is reflected by its 29 World Heritage Sites, ranking 1st in the Middle East, and 10th in the world. These include Persepolis, Naghsh-e Jahan Square, Chogha Zanbil, Pasargadae, Golestan Palace, Arg-e Bam, Behistun Inscription, Shahr-e Sukhteh, Susa, Takht-e Soleyman, Hyrcanian forests, the city of Yazd and more. Iran has 26 Intangible cultural heritage, or Human treasures, which ranks 4th worldwide.\nWeaving.\nIran's carpet-weaving has its origins in the Bronze Age and is one of the most distinguished manifestations of Iranian art. Carpet weaving is an essential part of Persian culture and Iranian art. Persian rugs and carpets were woven in parallel by nomadic tribes in village and town workshops, and by royal court manufactories. As such, they represent simultaneous lines of tradition, and reflect the history of Iran, Persian culture, and its various peoples. Although the term \"Persian carpet\" most often refers to pile-woven textiles, flat-woven carpets and rugs like Kilim, Soumak, and embroidered tissues like Suzani are part of the manifold tradition of Persian carpet weaving.\nIran produces three-quarters of the world's handmade carpets, and has 30% of export markets. In 2010, the \"traditional skills of carpet weaving\" in Fars province and Kashan were inscribed to the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage List. Within the Oriental rugs produced by the countries of the \"rug belt\", the Persian carpet stands out by the variety and elaborateness of its manifold designs.\nCarpets woven in towns and regional centres like Tabriz, Kerman, Ravar, Neyshabour, Mashhad, Kashan, Isfahan, Nain and Qom are characterized by their specific weaving techniques and use of high-quality materials, colours and patterns. Hand-woven Persian rugs and carpets have been regarded as objects of high artistic value and prestige, since they were mentioned by ancient Greek writers.\nLiterature.\nIran's oldest literary tradition is that of Avestan, the Old Iranian sacred language of the Avesta, which consists of the legendary and religious texts of Zoroastrianism and the ancient Iranian religion. The Persian language was used and developed through Persianate societies in Asia Minor, Central Asia, and South Asia, leaving extensive influences on Ottoman and Mughal literatures, among others. Iran has several famous medieval poets, notably Rumi, Ferdowsi, Hafez, Saadi Shirazi, Omar Khayyam, and Nizami Ganjavi.\nDescribed as one of the great literatures of humanity, including Goethe's assessment of it as one of the four main bodies of world literature, Persian literature has its roots in surviving works of Middle Persian and Old Persian, the latter of which dates back as far as 522 BCE, the date of the earliest surviving Achaemenid inscription, the Behistun Inscription. The bulk of surviving Persian literature, however, comes from the times following the Muslim conquest in c. 650 AD. After the Abbasids came to power (750 CE), the Iranians became the scribes and bureaucrats of the Islamic Caliphate and, increasingly, also its writers and poets. The New Persian language literature arose and flourished in Khorasan and Transoxiana because of political reasons, early Iranian dynasties of post-Islamic Iran, such as the Tahirids and Samanids, being based in Khorasan.\nMuseums.\nThe National Museum of Iran in Tehran is the country's most important cultural institution. As the first and biggest museum in Iran, the institution includes the Museum of Ancient Iran and the Museum of the Islamic Era. The National Museum is the world's most important museum in terms of preservation, display and research of archaeological collections of Iran, and ranks as one of the few most prestigious museums globally in terms of volume, diversity and quality of its monuments.\nThere are many other popular museums across the country such as the Golestan Palace (World Heritage Site), The Treasury of National Jewels, Reza Abbasi Museum, Tehran Museum of Contemporary Art, Sa'dabad Complex, The Carpet Museum, Abgineh Museum, Pars Museum, Azerbaijan Museum, Hegmataneh Museum, Susa Museum and more. Around 25 million people visited the museums in 2019.\nMusic and dance.\nIran is the apparent birthplace of the earliest complex instruments, dating to the 3rd millennium\u00a0BC. The use of angular harps have been documented at Madaktu and Kul-e Farah, with the largest collection of Elamite instruments documented at Kul-e Farah. Xenophon's \"Cyropaedia\" mentions singing women at the court of the Achaemenid Empire. Under the Parthian Empire, the \"g\u014ds\u0101n\" (Parthian for 'minstrel') had a prominent role.\nThe history of Sasanian music is better documented than earlier periods and is especially more evident in Avestan texts. By the time of Khosrow II, the Sasanian royal court hosted prominent musicians, namely Azad, Bamshad, Barbad, Nagisa, Ramtin, and Sarkash. Iranian traditional musical instruments include string instruments such as chang (harp), qanun, santur, rud (oud, barbat), tar, dotar, setar, tanbur, and kamanche, wind instruments such as sorna (zurna, karna) and ney, and percussion instruments such as tompak, kus, daf (dayere), and naqare.\nThe Tehran Symphony Orchestra was founded in 1933. By the late 1940s, Ruhollah Khaleqi founded the country's first national music society and established the School of National Music in 1949. Iranian pop music has its origins in the Qajar era. It was significantly developed since the 1950s, using indigenous instruments and forms accompanied by electric guitar and other imported characteristics. Iranian rock emerged in the 1960s and hip hop in the 2000s.\nIran has known dance in the forms of music, play, drama or religious rituals since at least the 6th millennium BC. Artifacts with pictures of dancers were found in archaeological prehistoric sites. Genres of dance vary depending on the area, culture, and language of the local people, and can range from sophisticated reconstructions of refined court dances to energetic folk dances. Each group, region, and historical epoch has specific dance styles associated with it. The earliest researched dance from historic Iran is a dance worshipping Mithra. Ancient Persian dance was significantly researched by Greek historian Herodotus. Iran was occupied by foreign powers, causing a slow disappearance of heritage dance traditions.\nThe Qajar period had an important influence on Persian dance. In this period, a style of dance began to be called \"classical Persian dance\". Dancers performed artistic dances in court for entertainment purposes such as coronations, marriage celebrations, and Norouz celebrations. In the 20th century, the music came to be orchestrated and dance movement and costuming gained a modernistic orientation to the West.\nMedia.\nIran's largest media corporation is the state-owned IRIB. The Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance is responsible for the cultural policy, including activities regarding communications and information.\nMost of the newspapers published in Iran are in Persian, the country's official and national language. The country's most widely circulated periodicals are based in Tehran, among which are \"Etemad\", \"Ettela'at\", \"Kayhan\", \"Hamshahri\", \"Resalat\", and \"Shargh\". \"Tehran Times\", \"Iran Daily\", and \"Financial Tribune\" are among the famous English-language newspapers based in Iran.\nIran ranks 17th among countries by number of Internet users. Google Search is Iran's most widely used search engine and Instagram is the most popular online social networking service. Direct access to many worldwide mainstream websites has been blocked in Iran, including Facebook, which has been blocked since 2009. About 90% of Iran's e-commerce takes place on the Iranian online store Digikala, which has around 750,000 visitors per day and is the most visited online store in the Middle East.\nCuisine.\nIranian main dishes include varieties of kebab, pilaf, stew (khoresh), soup and \u0101sh, and omelette. Lunch and dinner meals are commonly accompanied by side dishes such as plain yogurt or mast-o-khiar, sabzi, salad Shirazi, and torshi, and might follow dishes such as borani, Mirza Qasemi, or kashk e bademjan. In Iranian culture, tea is widely consumed. Iran is the world's seventh major tea producer. One of Iran's most popular desserts is the falude. There is also the popular saffron ice cream, known as \"Bastani Sonnati\" (\"traditional ice cream\"), which is sometimes accompanied with carrot juice. Iran is also famous for its caviar.\nTypical Iranian main dishes are combinations of rice with meat, vegetables and nuts. Herbs are frequently used, along with fruits such as plums, pomegranates, quince, prunes, apricots and raisins. Characteristic Iranian spices and flavourings such as saffron, cardamom, and dried lime and other sources of sour flavoring, cinnamon, turmeric and parsley are mixed and used in various dishes.\nSports.\nIran is the birthplace of polo, locally known as chogan, with its earliest records attributed to the ancient Medes. Freestyle wrestling is traditionally considered the national sport, and Iran's wrestlers have been world champions many times. Iran's traditional wrestling, called \"ko\u0691ti e pahlev\u0101ni\" (\"heroic wrestling\"), is registered on UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage list. Iran's National Olympic Committee was founded in 1947. Wrestlers and weightlifters have achieved the country's highest records at the Olympics. In 1974, Iran became the first country in West Asia to host the Asian Games.\nAs a mountainous country, Iran is a venue for skiing, snowboarding, hiking, rock climbing, and mountain climbing. It is home to ski resorts, the most famous being Tochal, Dizin, and Shemshak. Dizin is the largest, and authorised by FIS to administer international competitions.\nFootball is the most popular sport, with the men's national team having won the Asian Cup three times. The men's team ranks 2nd in Asia and 18th in the FIFA World Rankings as of April 2025[ [update]]. The Azadi Stadium in Tehran is the largest association football stadium in West Asia and on a list of top-20 stadiums in the world. Volleyball is the second most popular sport. Having won the 2011 and 2013 Asian Men's Volleyball Championships, the men's national team is the 2nd strongest in Asia, and 15th in the FIVB World Rankings as of January\u00a02025[ [update]]. Basketball is also popular, with the men's national team having won three Asian Championships since 2007.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n\"Encyclopaedia Iranica\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nMaps.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plain navboxes/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14654", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14654", "title": "Iran/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "14664", "revid": "18186449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14664", "title": "History of Iraq", "text": "Iraq, a country located in West Asia, largely coincides with the ancient region of Mesopotamia, often referred to as the cradle of civilization. The history of Mesopotamia extends back to the Lower Paleolithic period, with significant developments continuing through the establishment of the Caliphate in the late 7th century AD, after which the region became known as Iraq. Within its borders lies the ancient land of Sumer, which emerged between 6000 and 5000 BC during the Neolithic Ubaid period. Sumer is recognized as the world's earliest civilization, marking the beginning of urban development, written language, and monumental architecture. Iraq's territory also includes the heartlands of the Akkadian, Neo-Sumerian, Babylonian, Neo-Assyrian, and Neo-Babylonian empires, which dominated Mesopotamia and much of the Ancient Near East during the Bronze and Iron Ages.\nIraq was a center of innovation in antiquity, producing early written languages, literary works, and significant advancements in astronomy, mathematics, law, and philosophy. This era of indigenous rule ended in 539 BC when the Neo-Babylonian Empire was conquered by the Achaemenid Empire under Cyrus the Great, who declared himself the \"King of Babylon.\" The city of Babylon, the ancient seat of Babylonian power, became one of the key capitals of the Achaemenid Empire.\nIn the following centuries, the regions constituting modern Iraq came under the control of several empires, including the Greeks, Parthians, and Romans, establishing new centers like Seleucia and Ctesiphon. By the 3rd century AD, the region fell under Persian control through the Sasanian Empire, during which time Arab tribes from South Arabia migrated into Lower Mesopotamia, leading to the formation of the Sassanid-aligned Lakhmid kingdom. The Arabic name \"al-\u02bfIr\u0101q\" likely originated during this period. The Sasanian Empire was eventually conquered by the Rashidun Caliphate in the 7th century, bringing Iraq under Islamic rule after the Battle of al-Qadisiyyah in 636. The city of Kufa, founded shortly thereafter, became a central hub for the Rashidun dynasty until their overthrow by the Umayyads in 661.\nWith the rise of the Abbasid Caliphate in the mid-8th century, Iraq became the center of Islamic rule, with Baghdad, founded in 762, serving as the capital. Baghdad flourished during the Islamic Golden Age, becoming a global center for culture, science, and intellectualism. However, the city's prosperity declined following the Buwayhid and Seljuq invasions in the 10th century and suffered further with the Mongol invasion of 1258. Iraq came under Ottoman rule in the 16th century and, apart from a Safavid occupation from 1623 to 1638, remained part of the empire until the end of World War I, after which Mandatory Iraq was established by the British Empire. Initially united under the province of Baghdad, Ottoman Iraq was by the 17th century divided into the provinces of Baghdad, Basra, Mosul, and Shahrizor, which Ottoman officials collectively referred to as \"H\u0131tta-i Irakiyye\" (\"the Iraq Region\"). Iraq gained independence in 1932 as the Kingdom of Iraq, which became a republic in 1958. The modern era has seen Iraq facing challenges, including the rule of Saddam Hussein, the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and subsequent efforts to rebuild the country amidst sectarian violence and the rise of the Islamic State. Despite these difficulties, Iraq plays a vital role in the geopolitics of the Middle East.\nPrehistory.\nBetween 65,000 BC and 35,000 BC, northern Iraq was home to a Neanderthal culture, archaeological remains of which have been discovered at Shanidar Cave. During 1957\u20131961, Shanidar Cave was excavated by Ralph Solecki and his team from Columbia University, uncovering nine skeletons of Neanderthal man of varying ages and states of preservation (labelled Shanidar I\u2013IX). A tenth individual was later discovered by M. Zeder during examination of a faunal assemblage from the site at the Smithsonian Institution. The remains seemed to suggest that Neanderthals had funeral ceremonies, burying their dead with flowers (although the flowers are now thought to be a modern contaminant), and that they took care of injured and elderly individuals.\nThis region is also the location of a number of pre-Neolithic burials, dating from approximately 11,000 BC. Since approximately 10,000 BC, Iraq, together with a large part of the Fertile Crescent, was a center of a Neolithic culture known as Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA), where agriculture and cattle breeding appeared for the first time. In Iraq, this period has been excavated at sites like M'lefaat and Nemrik 9. The following Neolithic period, PPNB, is represented by rectangular houses. At the time of the pre-pottery Neolithic, people used vessels made of stone, gypsum, and burnt lime (Vaisselle blanche). Finds of obsidian tools from Anatolia are evidence of early trade relations. Further important sites of human advancement were Jarmo (circa 7100 BC), a number of sites belonging to the Halaf culture, and Tell al-'Ubaid, the type site of the Ubaid period (between 6500 BC and 3800 BC).\nAncient Mesopotamia.\nMesopotamia is the site of the earliest developments of the Neolithic Revolution from around 10,000 BC. It has been identified as having \"inspired some of the most important developments in human history including the invention of the wheel, the planting of the first cereal crops, and the development of cursive script, mathematics, astronomy, and agriculture.\"\nThe \"Cradle of Civilisation\" is a common term for the area comprising modern Iraq as it was home to the earliest known civilisation, the Sumerian civilisation, which arose in the fertile Tigris-Euphrates river valley of southern Iraq in the Chalcolithic (Ubaid period). It was there, in the late 4th millennium BC, that the world's first known writing system emerged. The Sumerians were also the first known to harness the wheel and create city-states; their writings record the first known evidence of mathematics, astronomy, astrology, written law, medicine, and organised religion. The Sumerian language is a language isolate. The major city-states of the early Sumerian period included Eridu, Bad-tibira, Larsa, Sippar, Shuruppak, Uruk, Kish, Ur, Nippur, Lagash, Girsu, Umma, Hamazi, Adab, Mari, Isin, Kutha, Der, and Akshak. The cities to the north, like Ashur, Arbela (modern Erbil), and Arrapha (modern Kirkuk), were also extant in what was to be called Assyria from the 25th century BC; however, at this stage, they were Sumerian-ruled administrative centers.\nBronze Age.\nSumer emerged as the civilization of Lower Mesopotamia out of the prehistoric Ubaid period (mid-6th millennium BC) in the Early Bronze Age (Uruk period). Classical Sumer ended with the rise of the Akkadian Empire in the 24th century BC. Following the Gutian period, the Ur III kingdom was once again able to unite large parts of southern and central Mesopotamia under a single ruler in the 21st century. It may have eventually disintegrated due to Amorite incursions. The Amorite dynasty of Isin persisted until c. 1600 BC, when southern Mesopotamia was united under Kassite Babylonian rule.\nDuring the Bronze Age, in the 26th century BC, Eannatum of Lagash created a short-lived empire. Later, Lugal-Zage-Si, the priest-king of Umma, overthrew the primacy of the Lagash dynasty in the area, then conquered Uruk, making it his capital, and claimed an empire extending from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean. It was during this period that the Epic of Gilgamesh originated, which includes the tale of The Great Flood. The origin and location of Akkad remain unclear. Its people spoke Akkadian, an East Semitic language. Between the 29th and 24th centuries BC, a number of kingdoms and city-states within Iraq began to have Akkadian-speaking dynasties, including Assyria, Ekallatum, Isin, and Larsa. However, the Sumerians remained generally dominant until the rise of the Akkadian Empire (2335\u20132124 BC), based in the city of Akkad in central Iraq. Sargon of Akkad founded the empire, conquered all the city-states of southern and central Iraq, and subjugated the kings of Assyria, thus uniting the Sumerians and Akkadians in one state. The Akkadian Empire was the first ancient empire of Mesopotamia after the long-lived civilization of Sumer.\nHe then set about expanding his empire, conquering Gutium, Elam in modern-day Iran, and had victories that did not result in full conquest against the Amorites and Eblaites of the Levant. The empire of Akkad likely fell in the 22nd century BC, within 180 years of its founding, ushering in a \"Dark Age\" with no prominent imperial authority until the Third Dynasty of Ur. The region's political structure may have reverted to the \"status quo ante\" of local governance by city-states.\nAfter the collapse of the Akkadian Empire in the late 22nd century BC, the Gutians occupied the south for a few decades, while Assyria reasserted its independence in the north. Most of southern Mesopotamia was again united under one ruler during the Ur III period, most notably during the rule of the prolific king Shulgi. His accomplishments include the completion of construction of the Great Ziggurat of Ur, begun by his father Ur-Nammu. In 1792 BC, an Amorite ruler named Hammurabi came to power and immediately set about building Babylon into a major city, declaring himself its king. Hammurabi conquered southern and central Iraq, as well as Elam to the east and Mari to the west, then engaged in a protracted war with the Assyrian king Ishme-Dagan for domination of the region, creating the short-lived Babylonian Empire. He eventually prevailed over the successor of Ishme-Dagan and subjected Assyria and its Anatolian colonies. By the middle of the eighteenth century BC, the Sumerians had lost their cultural identity and ceased to exist as a distinct people.\nIt is from the period of Hammurabi that southern Iraq came to be known as Babylonia, while the north had already coalesced into Assyria hundreds of years before. However, his empire was short-lived, and rapidly collapsed after his death, with both Assyria and southern Iraq, in the form of the Sealand Dynasty, falling back into native Akkadian hands. After this, another foreign people, the language-isolate-speaking Kassites, seized control of Babylonia. Iraq was from this point divided into three polities: Assyria in the north, Kassite Babylonia in the south-central region, and the Sealand Dynasty in the far south. The Sealand Dynasty was finally conquered by Kassite Babylonia circa 1380 BC. The origin of the Kassites is uncertain.\nThe Middle Assyrian Empire (1365\u20131020 BC) saw Assyria rise to be the most powerful nation in the known world. Beginning with the campaigns of Ashur-uballit I, Assyria destroyed the rival Hurrian-Mitanni Empire, annexed huge swathes of the Hittite Empire for itself, annexed northern Babylonia from the Kassites, forced the Egyptian Empire from the region, and defeated the Elamites, Phrygians, Canaanites, Phoenicians, Cilicians, Gutians, Dilmunites, and Arameans. At its height, the Middle Assyrian Empire stretched from The Caucasus to Dilmun (modern Bahrain), and from the Mediterranean coasts of Phoenicia to the Zagros Mountains of Iran. In 1235 BC, Tukulti-Ninurta I of Assyria took the throne of Babylon.\nDuring the Bronze Age collapse (1200\u2013900 BC), Babylonia was in a state of chaos, dominated for long periods by Assyria and Elam. The Kassites were driven from power by Assyria and Elam, allowing native south Mesopotamian kings to rule Babylonia for the first time, although often subject to Assyrian or Elamite rulers. However, these Akkadian kings were unable to prevent new waves of West Semitic migrants from entering southern Iraq, and during the 11th century BC, Arameans and Suteans entered Babylonia from The Levant, followed in the late 10th to early 9th century BC by the Chaldeans. However, the Chaldeans were absorbed and assimilated into the indigenous population of Babylonia.\nAssyria was an Akkadian (East Semitic) kingdom in Upper Mesopotamia, that came to rule regional empires a number of times through history. It was named for its original capital, the ancient city of Assur (Akkadian \"\").\nOf the early history of the kingdom of Assyria, little is positively known. In the Assyrian King List, the earliest king recorded was Tudiya. He was a contemporary of Ibrium of Ebla, who appears to have lived in the late 25th or early 24th century BC, according to the king list. The foundation of the first true urbanised Assyrian monarchy was traditionally ascribed to Ushpia, a contemporary of Ishbi-Erra of Isin and Naplanum of Larsa. c. 2030 BC.\nAssyria had a period of empire from the 19th to 18th centuries BC. From the 14th to 11th centuries BC, Assyria once more became a major power with the rise of the Middle Assyrian Empire.\nIron Age.\nThe Neo-Assyrian Empire (911\u2013609 BC) was the dominant political force in the Ancient Near East during the Iron Age, eclipsing Babylonia, Egypt, Urartu, and Elam. Because of its geopolitical dominance and ideology based on world domination, the Neo-Assyrian Empire is regarded by many researchers as the first world empire. At its height, the empire ruled over all of Mesopotamia, the Levant, and Egypt, as well as portions of Anatolia, the Arabian Peninsula, and modern-day Iran and Armenia. Under rulers such as Adad-Nirari II, Ashurnasirpal, Shalmaneser III, Semiramis, Tiglath-pileser III, Sargon II, Sennacherib, Esarhaddon, and Ashurbanipal, Iraq became the center of an empire stretching from Persia, Parthia, and Elam in the east to Cyprus and Antioch in the west, and from The Caucasus in the north to Egypt, Nubia, and Arabia in the south.\nIt was during this period that an Akkadian-influenced form of Eastern Aramaic was adopted by the Assyrians as their lingua franca, and Mesopotamian Aramaic began to supplant Akkadian as the spoken language of the general populace of both Assyria and Babylonia. The descendant dialects of this tongue survive among the Mandaeans of southern Iraq and Assyrians of northern Iraq. The Arabs and the Chaldeans are first mentioned in written history (circa 850 BC) in the annals of Shalmaneser III. The Neo-Assyrian Empire left a legacy of great cultural significance. The political structures established by the Neo-Assyrian Empire became the model for the later empires that succeeded it, and the ideology of universal rule promulgated by the Neo-Assyrian kings inspired similar ideas of rights to world domination in later empires. The Neo-Assyrian Empire became an important part of later folklore and literary traditions in northern Mesopotamia. Judaism, and thus in turn also Christianity and Islam, was profoundly affected by the period of Neo-Assyrian rule; numerous Biblical stories appear to draw on earlier Assyrian mythology and history, and the Assyrian impact on early Jewish theology was immense. Although the Neo-Assyrian Empire is prominently remembered today for the supposed excessive brutality of the Neo-Assyrian army, the Assyrians were not excessively brutal compared to other civilizations.\nIn the late 7th century BC, the Assyrian Empire tore itself apart with a series of brutal civil wars, weakening itself to such a degree that a coalition of its former subjects, including the Babylonians, Chaldeans, Medes, Persians, Parthians, Scythians, and Cimmerians, were able to attack Assyria, finally bringing its empire down by 605 BC.\n The short-lived Neo-Babylonian Empire (626\u2013539 BC) succeeded that of Assyria. It failed to attain the size, power, or longevity of its predecessor; however, it came to dominate The Levant, Canaan, Arabia, Israel, and Judah, and even defeated Egypt. Initially, Babylon was ruled by the Chaldeans, who had migrated to the region in the late 10th or early 9th century BC. Its greatest king, Nebuchadnezzar II, rivaled Hammurabi as the greatest king of Babylon. However, by 556 BC, the Chaldeans had been deposed by the Assyrian-born Nabonidus and his son and regent Belshazzar.\n The transfer of empire to Babylon marked the first time the city, and southern Mesopotamia in general, had risen to dominate the Ancient Near East since the collapse of Hammurabi's Old Babylonian Empire. The period of Neo-Babylonian rule saw unprecedented economic and population growth and a renaissance of culture and artwork. Nebuchadnezzar II succeeded Nabopolassar in 605 BC. The empire Nebuchadnezzar inherited was among the most powerful in the world. He quickly reinforced his father's alliance with the Medes by marrying Cyaxares's daughter or granddaughter, Amytis. Some sources suggest that the famous Hanging Gardens of Babylon, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, were built by Nebuchadnezzar for his wife (though the existence of these gardens is debated). Nebuchadnezzar's 43-year reign brought a golden age for Babylon, which became the most powerful kingdom in the Middle East.\nThe Neo-Babylonian period ended with the reign of Nabonidus in 539 BC. To the east, the Persians had been growing in strength, and eventually Cyrus the Great established his dominion over Babylon. The Chaldeans disappeared around this time, though both Assyria and Babylonia endured and thrived under Achaemenid rule (see Achaemenid Assyria). The Persian rulers retained Assyrian Imperial Aramaic as the language of empire, together with the Assyrian imperial infrastructure and an Assyrian style of art and architecture.\nClassical Antiquity.\nAchaemenid and Seleucid rule.\nMesopotamia was conquered by the Achaemenid Persians under Cyrus the Great in 539 BC, and remained under Persian rule for two centuries.\nThe Persian Empire fell to Alexander of Macedon in 331 BC and came under Greek rule as part of the Seleucid Empire. Babylon declined after the founding of Seleucia on the Tigris, the new Seleucid Empire capital. The Seleucid Empire at the height of its power stretched from the Aegean in the west to India in the east. It was a major center of Hellenistic culture that maintained the preeminence of Greek customs where a Greek political elite dominated, mostly in the urban areas. The Greek population of the cities who formed the dominant elite were reinforced by immigration from Greece. Much of the eastern part of the empire was conquered by the Parthians under Mithridates I of Parthia in the mid-2nd century BC.\nParthian and Roman rule.\n At the beginning of the 2nd century AD, the Romans, led by emperor Trajan, invaded Parthia and conquered Mesopotamia, making it an imperial province. It was returned to the Parthians shortly after by Trajan's successor, Hadrian.\nChristianity reached Mesopotamia in the 1st century AD, and Roman Syria in particular became the center of Eastern Rite Christianity and the Syriac literary tradition. Mandeism is also believed to have either originated there around this time or entered as Mandaeans sought refuge from Palestine.\nSumerian-Akkadian religious tradition disappeared during this period, as did the last remnants of cuneiform literacy, although temples were still being dedicated to the Assyrian national god Ashur in his home city as late as the 4th century.\nSassanid Empire.\nIn the 3rd century AD, the Parthians were in turn succeeded by the Sassanid dynasty, which ruled Mesopotamia until the 7th-century Islamic invasion. The Sassanids conquered the independent states of Adiabene, Osroene, Hatra, and finally Assur during the 3rd century. In the mid-6th century, the Persian Empire under the Sassanid dynasty was divided by Khosrow I into four quarters, of which the western one, called \"Khv\u0101rvar\u0101n\", included most of modern Iraq, and was subdivided into the provinces of \"Mish\u0101n\", Asurist\u0101n, Adiabene, and Lower Media. North of Asoristan and west of Adiabene lay the sasanian province of Arbayistan, which roughly corresponded to Upper Mesopotamia. The term Iraq is widely used in the medieval Arabic sources for the area in the center and south of the modern republic as a geographic rather than a political term, implying no greater precision of boundaries than the term \"Mesopotamia\" or, indeed, many of the names of modern states before the 20th century.\nThere was a influx of Arabs in the Sassanid period. Upper Mesopotamia came to be known as \"Al-Jazirah\" in Arabic (meaning \"The Island\" in reference to the \"island\" between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers), and Lower Mesopotamia came to be known as \"\u02bfIr\u0101q-i \u02bfArab\", meaning \"the escarpment of the Arabs\" (viz. to the south and east of \"the island\").\nUntil 602, the desert frontier of the Persian Empire had been guarded by the Arab Lakhmid kings of Al-Hirah. In that year, Shahanshah Khosrow II Aparviz (Persian \u062e\u0633\u0631\u0648 \u067e\u0631\u0648\u064a\u0632) abolished the Lakhmid kingdom and laid the frontier open to nomad incursions. Farther north, the western quarter was bounded by the Byzantine Empire. The frontier more or less followed the modern Syria-Iraq border and continued northward, passing between Nisibis (modern Nusaybin) as the Sassanian frontier fortress and Dara and Amida (modern Diyarbak\u0131r) held by the Byzantines.\nMiddle Ages.\nIslamic conquest.\nThe first organized conflict between invading Arab-Muslim forces and occupying Sassanid domains in Mesopotamia seems to have been in 634, when the Arabs were defeated at the Battle of the Bridge. There was a force of some 5,000 Muslims under Ab\u016b `Ubayd ath-Thaqaf\u012b, which was routed by the Persians. This was followed by Khalid ibn al-Walid's successful campaign, which saw all of Iraq come under Arab rule within a year, with the exception of the Sassanid Empire's capital, Ctesiphon. Around 636, a larger Arab Muslim force under Sa`d ibn Ab\u012b Waqq\u0101s defeated the main Persian army at the Battle of al-Q\u0101disiyyah and moved on to capture Ctesiphon. By the end of 638, the Muslims had conquered all of the Western Sassanid provinces (including modern Iraq), and the last Sassanid Emperor, Yazdegerd III, had fled to central and then northern Persia, where he was killed in 651.\nThe Islamic expansions constituted the largest of the Semitic expansions in history. These new arrivals established two new garrison cities, at Kufa, near ancient Babylon, and at Basra in the south and established Islam in these cities, while the north remained largely Assyrian and Christian in character.\nAbbasid Caliphate.\nThe city of Baghdad, established in the 8th century as the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate, quickly became the leading cultural and intellectual hub of the Muslim world during the Islamic Golden Age. At its peak, Baghdad was the largest and most multicultural city of the Middle Ages, with a population exceeding a million. However, its prominence was dramatically curtailed in the 13th century when the Mongol Empire sacked the city and destroyed its famed library during the Siege of Baghdad (1258).\nIn the 9th century, the Abbasid Caliphate entered a period of decline. During the late 9th to early 11th centuries, a period known as the \"Iranian Intermezzo\", parts of (the modern territory of) Iraq were governed by a number of minor Iranian emirates, including the Tahirids, Saffarids, Samanids, Buyids and Sallarids. Tughril, the founder of the Seljuk Empire, captured Baghdad in 1055. In spite of having lost all governance, the Abbasid caliphs nevertheless maintained a highly ritualized court in Baghdad and remained influential in religious matters, maintaining the orthodoxy of their Sunni sect in opposition to the Ismaili and Shia sects of Islam.\nMongol invasion.\nIn the later 11th century, Iraq fell under the rule of the Khwarazmian dynasty. Both Turkic secular rule and Abbasid caliphate came to an end with the Mongol invasions of the 13th century.\nThe Mongols under Genghis Khan had conquered Khwarezmia by 1221, but Iraq proper gained a respite due to the death of Genghis Khan in 1227 and the subsequent power struggles.\nM\u00f6ngke Khan from 1251 began a renewed expansion of the Mongol Empire, and when caliph al-Mustasim refused to submit to the Mongols, Baghdad was besieged and captured by Hulagu Khan in 1258. Estimates of the number of dead range from 200,000 to a million. With the destruction of the Abbasid Caliphate, Hulagu had an open route to Syria and moved against the other Muslim powers in the region.\nThe Mongols destroyed the Abbasid Caliphate and Baghdad's House of Wisdom. The city has never regained its previous pre-eminence as a major centre of culture and influence. Some historians believe that the Mongol invasion destroyed much of the irrigation infrastructure that had sustained Mesopotamia for millennia. Other historians point to soil salination as the culprit in the decline in agriculture.\nTurko-Mongol rule.\nIraq now became a province on the southwestern fringes of the Ilkhanate and Baghdad would never regain its former importance.\nThe Jalayirids were a Mongol Jalayir dynasty which ruled over Iraq and western Persia after the breakup of the Ilkhanate in the 1330s. The Jalayirid sultanate lasted about fifty years, until disrupted by Tamerlane's conquests and the revolts of the \"Black Sheep Turks\" or Qara Qoyunlu Turkmen.\nThe mid-14th-century Black Death ravaged much of the Islamic world. The best estimate for the Middle East is a death rate of roughly one-third.\nIn 1401, a warlord of Mongol descent, Tamerlane (Timur Lenk), invaded Iraq. After the capture of Baghdad, most of its citizens were massacred. Timur also conducted massacres of the indigenous Assyrian Christian population, and it was during this time that the ancient Assyrian city of Assur was finally abandoned. After Tamerlane's death in 1405, there was a brief attempt to re-establish the sultanate in southern Iraq and Khuzistan. The Jalayirids were finally eliminated by Kara Koyunlu in 1432.\nOttoman and Mamluk rule.\nDuring the late 14th and early 15th centuries, the Qara Qoyunlu, or Black Sheep Turkmens, ruled the area now known as Iraq. In 1466, the Aq Qoyunlu, or White Sheep, defeated the Qara Qoyunlu and took control. From 1508, as with all territories of the former White Sheep Turkmen, Iraq fell into the hands of the Iranian Safavids. With the Treaty of Zuhab in 1639, most of the territory of present-day Iraq came under the control of the Ottoman Empire as the eyalet of Baghdad as a result of wars with the neighboring rival, Safavid Iran. Throughout most of the period of Ottoman rule (1533\u20131918), the territory of present-day Iraq was a battle zone between rival regional empires and tribal alliances. \nAlthough Iraq became a modern nation-state in the 20th century, its territorial core was already governed as a cohesive administrative and strategic region during the Ottoman period. As early as the 16th century, the Ottoman Empire administered the area as an integrated province, with imperial registers from 1558 to 1587 describing the Baghdad Eyalet as encompassing districts stretching from \u0130madiye and Z\u00e2ho in the north to Deyr\u00fc Rahbe and Ane in the west, Kerne in the south, and Kasr-\u0131 \u015eirin in the east. This administrative configuration closely resembles the borders of modern-day Iraq. \nIn the 16th century, the Portuguese commanded by Ant\u00f3nio Tenreiro crossed from Aleppo to Basra in 1523, attempting to make alliances with local lords in the name of the Portuguese king. In 1550, the local kingdom of Basra and tribal rulers relied on the Portuguese against the Ottomans, leading to threats of invasion and conquest by the Portuguese. From 1595, the Portuguese acted as military protectors of Basra, and in 1624, they helped the Ottoman pasha of Basra repel a Persian invasion. The Portuguese were granted a share of customs revenue and exemption from tolls. From approximately 1625 to 1668, Basra and the Delta marshes were in the hands of local chiefs independent of the Ottoman administration in Baghdad. In the 17th century, frequent conflicts with the Safavids sapped the strength of the Ottoman Empire and weakened its control over its provinces. The nomadic population swelled with the influx of bedouins from Najd, leading to raids on settled areas that became difficult to curb.\nIn the 17th century, this unified framework evolved into four eyalets, Shahrizor, Basra, Baghdad, and Mosul, although at various times, the provinces were administratively downgraded to sanjaks under the authority of Baghdad before later being reestablished as separate provinces. For example, Ottoman registers from 1090 AH (1679-1680 CE) list \u0130madiye and Z\u00e2kho as districts of the Baghdad Eyalet, underscoring the continued extent of Baghdad's administrative reach.\nThe year 1704 saw the rise of a Mamluk dynasty of Georgian origin, who succeeded in obtaining autonomy from the Ottoman Empire. While nominally under Ottoman sovereignty, the provinces of Iraq experienced varying degrees of autonomy during this period, particularly in Mosul under the Arab Jalili family and in Shahrizor under the Kurdish Emirates, though both remained formally tied to Baghdad. They suppressed tribal revolts, curbed the power of the Janissaries, restored order, and introduced a program of modernization in the economy and military. In 1802, Wahhabis from Najd attacked Karbala in Iraq, killing up to 5,000 people and plundering the Imam Husayn Shrine. Following the overthrow of the Mamluks in 1831 and the reassertion of direct Ottoman control, the region was reorganized into the three vilayets of Baghdad, Mosul, and Basra. These were frequently referred to in official Ottoman documents as the Iraq Region (H\u0131tta-i Irakiyye). This designation, used in matters of taxation, military coordination, and governance, reflects the Ottoman state's practical conception of Iraq as a coherent administrative unit within its broader imperial structure\nThe population of Iraq, estimated at 30 million in 800 AD, was only 5 million at the start of the 20th century.\nKingdom of Khaza'il.\nThe Kingdom of Khaza'il (Arabic: \u0645\u0645\u0644\u0643\u0629 \u0627\u0644\u062e\u0632\u0627\u0639\u0644, romanized: Mamlakat al-Khaza'il), also known as the Emirate of Khaza'il (Arabic: \u0625\u0645\u0627\u0631\u0629 \u0627\u0644\u062e\u0632\u0627\u0639\u0644, romanized: Im\u0101rat al-Khaza'il) to the Arabs and officially as the Kingdom of the Middle and Lower Euphrates (Arabic: \u0645\u0645\u0644\u0643\u0629 \u0627\u0644\u0641\u0631\u0627\u062a \u0627\u0644\u0623\u0648\u0633\u0637 \u0648\u0627\u0644\u0623\u0633\u0641\u0644, romanized: Mamlakat al-Fur\u0101t al-Awsa\u1e6d wa-al-Asfal) by Britain, was an autonomous kingdom in present-day Iraq that resisted Ottoman colonial rule from the early 16th century to the early 20th century. Ruled by the Khaza'il Royal family, also known as the Banu Khuza'ah Sheikhly dynasty, the Kingdom exercised military, economic, and political sovereignty, particularly in the Middle and Lower Euphrates region.\nAt the height of their power in the 17th, 18th and 19th century, the Khaza'il ruled from the northern city of Anah to Basra, including the southern outskirts of Baghdad and all cities along both sides of the Euphrates River, controlling all cultivatable land and tribal forces in their territory. The Emirs of Khaza'il were known for their fierce armed resistance to Ottoman imperial authority lasting several centuries, vast land ownership, and their immense wealth established through the creation of Silk Road taxation mechanisms and agricultural monopoly. They are also known for establishing the dominance of Shiism in Mesopotamia and ending 383 years of Ottoman Empire rule in Iraq.\n20th century.\nBritish mandate of Mesopotamia.\nOttoman rule over Iraq lasted until World War I, when the Ottomans sided with Germany and the Central Powers. In the Mesopotamian campaign against the Central Powers, British forces invaded the country and suffered a defeat at the hands of the Turkish army during the Siege of Kut (1915\u201316). However, the British ultimately won the Mesopotamian Campaign with the capture of Baghdad in March 1917. During the war, the British employed the help of several Assyrian, Armenian, and Arab tribes against the Ottomans, who in turn employed the Kurds as allies. Following the defeat of the Ottoman Empire and its subsequent division, the British Mandate of Mesopotamia was established by the League of Nations mandate.\nIn line with their \"Sharifian Solution\" policy, the British established a monarchy on 23 August 1921, with Faisal I of Iraq as king, who was previously King of Syria but was forced out by the French. The official English name of the country simultaneously changed from \"Mesopotamia\" to the endonymic \"Iraq\". Likewise, British authorities selected Sunni Arab elites from the region for appointments to government and ministry offices. The royal family were Hashemites, who were also rulers of the neighboring Emirate of Transjordan, which later became the Kingdom of Jordan.\nDuring the rise of the Zionist movement and Arab nationalism, Faisal envisioned a federation consisting of the modern states of Iraq, Lebanon, Syria, and Palestine, including both modern Palestine and Israel. He also signed the Faisal\u2013Weizmann agreement.\nFaced with spiraling costs and influenced by the public protestations of the war hero T. E. Lawrence, Britain replaced Arnold Wilson in October 1920 with a new Civil Commissioner, Sir Percy Cox. Cox managed to quell a rebellion and was also responsible for implementing the policy of close cooperation with Iraq's Sunni minority. Slavery was abolished in Iraq in the 1920s. Britain granted independence to the Kingdom of Iraq in 1932, on the urging of King Faisal, though the British retained military bases and local militia in the form of Assyrian Levies. King Ghazi ruled as a figurehead after King Faisal's death in 1933. His rule, which lasted until his death in 1939, was undermined by numerous attempted military coups until his death in 1939. His underage son, Faisal II succeeded him, with 'Abd al-Ilah as Regent.\nIndependent Kingdom of Iraq.\nIn 1934 Iraq became an oil exporter with the completion of the Kirkuk-Haifa oil pipeline which transported oil from the Kirkuk Field, discovered in 1927, to the Mediterranean coast for shipment to Europe. The first commercial oil production on a small scale for domestic consumption had begun in 1927 from the Naft Khana field on the border with Iran.\nEstablishment of Arab Sunni domination in Iraq was followed by Assyrian, Yazidi and Shi'a unrests, which were all brutally suppressed. In 1936, the first military coup took place in the Kingdom of Iraq, as Bakr Sidqi succeeded in replacing the acting Prime Minister with his associate. Multiple coups followed in a period of political instability, peaking in 1941.\nDuring World War II, Iraqi regime of Regent 'Abd al-Ilah was overthrown in 1941 by the Golden Square officers, headed by Rashid Ali. The short lived pro-Nazi government of Iraq was defeated in May 1941 by the allied forces (with local Assyrian and Kurdish help) in the Anglo-Iraqi War. Iraq was later used as a base for allied attacks on Vichy-French held Mandate of Syria and support for the Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran.\nIn 1945, Iraq joined the United Nations and became a founding member of the Arab League.\nIn 1948, massive violent protests known as the Al-Wathbah uprising broke out across Baghdad with partial communist support, having demands against the government's treaty with Britain. Protests continued into spring and were interrupted in May when martial law was enforced as Iraq entered the failed 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War along with other Arab League members.\nIn February 1958, King Hussein of Jordan and `Abd al-Il\u0101h proposed a union of H\u0101shimite monarchies to counter the recently formed Egyptian-Syrian union. The prime minister Nuri as-Said wanted Kuwait to be part of the proposed Arab-H\u0101shimite Union. Shaykh `Abd-All\u0101h as-Sal\u012bm, the ruler of Kuwait, was invited to Baghdad to discuss Kuwait's future. This policy brought the government of Iraq into direct conflict with Britain, which did not want to grant independence to Kuwait. At that point, the monarchy found itself completely isolated. Nuri as-Said was able to contain the rising discontent only by resorting to even greater political oppression.\nRepublic of Iraq.\nIn 1958, inspired by Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt, officers from the Nineteenth Brigade, 3rd Division, known as \"The Four Colonels,\" under the leadership of Brigadier Abd al-Kar\u012bm Q\u0101sim (known as \"az-Za`\u012bm\", 'the leader') and Colonel Abdul Salam Arif overthrew the Hashemite monarchy on 14 July 1958. The new government proclaimed Iraq to be a republic and rejected the idea of a union with Jordan. Iraq's activity in the Baghdad Pact ceased.\nThis revolution was strongly anti-imperial and anti-monarchical in nature and had strong socialist elements. Numerous people were killed in the coup, including King Faisal II, Prince Abd al-Ilah, and Nuri al-Sa'id, as well as members of the royal family, which came to be known as the \"Royal family massacre\". After burial, their bodies were dragged through the streets of Baghdad by their opponents and mutilated. The short-lived federation between Jordan and Iraq was abolished by King Hussein following the coup in 1958.\nAbd al-Karim Qasim promoted a civic nationalism in Iraq, which asserted the belief that Iraqis are a nation and emphasized the cultural unity of Iraqis of different ethnoreligious groups such as Mesopotamian Arabs, Kurds, Turkmens, Assyrians, Yazidis, Mandeans, Yarsans, and others. His vision of nationalism involved the recognition of an Iraqi identity stemming from ancient Mesopotamia, including its civilizations of Sumer, Akkad, Babylonia, and Assyria.\nQasim controlled Iraq through military rule and began forcibly redistributing surplus land owned by some citizens in 1958. The Iraqi state emblem under Qasim was largely based on the Mesopotamian symbol of Shamash, avoiding pan-Arab symbolism by incorporating elements of Socialist heraldry. Under Qasim, freedom of religion was granted to religious minorities, and early restrictions on Jews were removed, leading to their reintegration into society.\nQasim's political ideologies were based on Iraqi nationalism instead of Arab nationalism, and he refused to join Gamal Abdel Nasser's political union between Egypt and Syria, known as the United Arab Republic. In 1959, Colonel Abd al-Wahab al-Shawaf led an uprising in Mosul against Qasim with the aim of joining the United Arab Republic, but was defeated by the government.\nIraq withdrew from the Baghdad Pact in 1959, leading to strained relations with the West and developing a close alliance with the Soviet Union. Qasim began claiming Kuwait as part of Iraq when it was officially declared an independent country in 1961. During Ottoman rule, Kuwait was part of Basra Province and was separated by the British to establish the Kuwait protectorate. In response, the United Kingdom sent its armed forces to the Iraq\u2013Kuwait border, and Qasim was forced to back down.\nIn 1961, Kurdish nationalist movements, led by Mustafa Barzani's Kurdistan Democratic Party, launched an armed rebellion against the Iraqi government, seeking Kurdish autonomy. The government faced challenges in quelling the Kurdish uprising, leading to intermittent conflict between Kurdish forces and the Iraqi military. The armed rebellion escalated into war, which officially lasted for nine years until 1970, during which numerous coups occurred.\nBa'athist Iraq.\nQ\u0101sim was assassinated in February 1963 when the Ba'ath Party took power under the leadership of General Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr (prime minister) and Colonel Abdul Salam Arif (president). In June 1963, Syria, which by then had also fallen under Ba'athist rule, took part in the Iraqi military campaign against the Kurds by providing aircraft, armoured vehicles, and a force of 6,000 soldiers. Several months later, Abd as-Salam Muhammad Arif led a successful coup against the Ba'ath government. Arif declared a ceasefire in February 1964, which provoked a split among Kurdish urban radicals on one hand and Peshmerga (Freedom fighters) forces led by Barzani on the other.\nOn 13 April 1966, President Abdul Salam Arif died in a helicopter crash and was succeeded by his brother, General Abdul Rahman Arif. Following this unexpected death, the Iraqi government launched a last-ditch effort to defeat the Kurds. This campaign failed in May 1966, when Barzani forces thoroughly defeated the Iraqi Army at the Battle of Mount Handrin, near Rawandiz. Following the Six-Day War of 1967, the Ba'ath Party felt strong enough to retake power in 1968. Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr became president and chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC). The Ba'ath government started a campaign to end the Kurdish insurrection, which stalled in 1969 due to internal power struggles and tensions with Iran. The war ended with more than 100,000 casualties and little achievement for both sides.\nIn March 1970, a peace plan was announced that provided for broader Kurdish autonomy and gave Kurds representation in government bodies, to be implemented in four years. Despite this, the Iraqi government embarked on an Arabization program in the oil-rich regions of Kirkuk and Khanaqin. By 1974, tensions escalated again, leading to the Second Kurdish Iraqi War, which lasted until 1975. The 1975 peace treaty between Iraq and Iran resolved the Shatt al-Arab dispute, leading to Iran withdrawing support for the Kurdish rebels and their subsequent defeat by the Iraqi government.\nUnder Saddam Hussein.\nIn July 1979, President Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr was forced to resign by Saddam Hussein, who assumed the offices of both President and Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council. Saddam then purged his opponents including those from within the Baath party.\nIraq's territorial claims to neighboring countries were largely due to the plans and promises of the Entente countries in 1919\u20131920, when the Ottoman Empire was divided, to create a more extensive Arab state in Iraq and Jazeera, which would also include significant territories of eastern Syria, southeastern Turkey, all of Kuwait and Iran's border areas, which are shown on this English map of 1920.\nTerritorial disputes with Iran led to an inconclusive and costly eight-year war, the \"Iran\u2013Iraq War\" (1980\u20131988, termed \"Q\u0101disiyyat-Sadd\u0101m\" \u2013 'Saddam's Q\u0101disiyyah'), which devastated the economy. Iraq falsely declared victory in 1988 but actually only achieved a weary return to the \"status quo ante bellum\", meaning both sides retained their original borders.\nThe war began when Iraq invaded Iran, launching a simultaneous invasion by air and land into Iranian territory on 22 September 1980, following a long history of border disputes, and fears of Shia insurgency among Iraq's long-suppressed Shia majority influenced by the Iranian Revolution. Iraq was also aiming to replace Iran as the dominant Persian Gulf state. The United States supported Saddam Hussein in the war against Iran. Although Iraq hoped to take advantage of the revolutionary chaos in Iran and attacked without formal warning, they made only limited progress into Iran and within several months were repelled by the Iranians who regained virtually all lost territory by June 1982. For the next six years, Iran was on the offensive. Despite calls for a ceasefire by the United Nations Security Council, hostilities continued until 20 August 1988. The war finally ended with a United Nations-brokered ceasefire in the form of United Nations Security Council Resolution 598, which was accepted by both sides. It took several weeks for the Iranian armed forces to evacuate Iraqi territory to honor pre-war international borders between the two nations (see 1975 Algiers Agreement). The last prisoners of war were exchanged in 2003.\nThe war came at a great cost in lives and economic damage\u2014half a million Iraqi and Iranian soldiers, as well as civilians, are believed to have died in the war with many more injured\u2014but it brought neither reparations nor change in borders. The conflict is often compared to World War I, in that the tactics used closely mirrored those of that conflict, including large scale trench warfare, manned machine-gun posts, bayonet charges, use of barbed wire across trenches, human wave attacks across no-man's land, and extensive use of chemical weapons such as mustard gas by the Iraqi government against Iranian troops and civilians as well as Iraqi Kurds. At the time, the UN Security Council issued statements that \"chemical weapons had been used in the war.\" However, in these UN statements, it was never made clear that it was only Iraq that was using chemical weapons, so it has been said that \"the international community remained silent as Iraq used weapons of mass destruction against Iranian as well as Iraqi Kurds\" and it is believed.\nA long-standing territorial dispute was the ostensible reason for Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990. In November 1990, the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 678, permitting member states to use all necessary means, authorizing military action against the Iraqi forces occupying Kuwait and demanded a complete withdrawal by 15 January 1991. When Saddam Hussein failed to comply with this demand, the Gulf War (Operation \"Desert Storm\") ensued on 17 January 1991. Estimates range from 1,500 to as many as 30,000 Iraqi soldiers killed, as well as less than a thousand civilians.\nIn March 1991 revolts in the Shia-dominated southern Iraq started involving demoralized Iraqi Army troops and the anti-government Shia parties. Another wave of insurgency broke out shortly afterwards in the Kurdish populated northern Iraq (see 1991 Iraqi uprisings). Although they presented a serious threat to the Iraqi Ba'ath Party regime, Saddam Hussein managed to suppress the rebellions with massive and indiscriminate force and maintained power. They were ruthlessly crushed by the loyalist forces spearheaded by the Iraqi Republican Guard and the population was successfully terrorized. During the few weeks of unrest tens of thousands of people were killed. Many more died during the following months, while nearly two million Iraqis fled for their lives. In the aftermath, the government intensified the forced relocating of Marsh Arabs and the draining of the Iraqi marshlands, while the Coalition established the Iraqi no-fly zones.\nOn 6 August 1990, after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 661 which imposed economic sanctions on Iraq, providing for a full trade embargo, excluding medical supplies, food and other items of humanitarian necessity, these to be determined by the Security Council sanctions committee. After the end of the Gulf War and after the Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, the sanctions were linked to removal of weapons of mass destruction by Resolution 687. To varying degrees, the effects of government policy, the aftermath of Gulf War and the sanctions regime have been blamed for these conditions.\nThe effects of the sanctions on the civilian population of Iraq have been disputed. Whereas it was widely believed that the sanctions caused a major rise in child mortality, recent research has shown that commonly cited data were fabricated by the Iraqi government and that \"there was no major rise in child mortality in Iraq after 1990 and during the period of the sanctions.\" An oil for food program was established in 1996 to ease the effects of sanctions.\nIraqi cooperation with UN weapons inspection teams was questioned on several occasions during the 1990s. UNSCOM chief weapons inspector Richard Butler withdrew his team from Iraq in November 1998 because of Iraq's lack of cooperation. The team returned in December. Butler prepared a report for the UN Security Council afterwards in which he expressed dissatisfaction with the level of compliance https://. The same month, US President Bill Clinton authorized air strikes on government targets and military facilities. Air strikes against military facilities and alleged WMD sites continued into 2002.\nU.S. invasion and the aftermath (2003\u2013present).\n2003 U.S. invasion.\nAfter the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington in the United States in 2001 were linked to the group formed by the multi-millionaire Saudi Osama bin Laden, American foreign policy began to call for the removal of the Ba'ath government in Iraq. Neoconservative think-tanks in Washington had for years been urging regime change in Baghdad. On 14 August 1998, President Clinton signed Public Law 105\u2013235, which declared that \"the Government of Iraq is in material and unacceptable breach of its international obligations.\" It urged the President \"to take appropriate action, in accordance with the Constitution and relevant laws of the United States, to bring Iraq into compliance with its international obligations.\" Several months later, Congress enacted the Iraq Liberation Act of 1998 on 31 October 1998. This law stated that it \"should be the policy of the United States to support efforts to remove the regime headed by Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq and to promote the emergence of a democratic government to replace that regime.\" It was passed 360 - 38 by the United States House of Representatives and 99\u20130 by the United States Senate in 1998.\nThe US urged the United Nations to take military action against Iraq. American president George W. Bush stated that Sadd\u0101m had repeatedly violated 16 UN Security Council resolutions. The Iraqi government rejected Bush's assertions. A team of U.N. inspectors, led by Swedish diplomat Hans Blix was admitted, into the country; their final report stated that Iraqis capability in producing \"weapons of mass destruction\" was not significantly different from 1992 when the country dismantled the bulk of their remaining arsenals under terms of the ceasefire agreement with U.N. forces, but did not completely rule out the possibility that Saddam still had weapons of mass destruction. The United States and the United Kingdom charged that Iraq was hiding WMD and opposed the team's requests for more time to further investigate the matter. Resolution 1441 was passed unanimously by the UN Security Council on 8 November 2002, offering Iraq \"a final opportunity to comply with its disarmament obligations\" that had been set out in several previous UN resolutions, threatening \"serious consequences\" if the obligations were not fulfilled. The UN Security Council did not issue a resolution authorizing the use of force against Iraq.\nIn March 2003, the United States and the United Kingdom, with military aid from other nations, invaded Iraq.\nOver the following years in the U.S. occupation of Iraq, Iraq disintegrated into a civil war from 2006 to 2008, and the situation deteriorated in 2011 which later escalated into a renewed war following ISIL gains in the country in 2014. By 2015, Iraq was effectively divided, the central and southern part being controlled by the government, the northwest by the Kurdistan Regional Government and the western part by the Islamic State. IS was expelled from Iraq in 2017, but a low-intensity ISIL insurgency continues mostly in the rural parts of northern western parts of the country, due to Iraq's long border with Syria.\nOccupation (2003\u201311).\nIn 2003, after the American and British invasion, Iraq was occupied by U.S.-led Coalition forces. On 23 May 2003, the UN Security Council unanimously approved a resolution lifting all economic sanctions against Iraq. As the country struggled to rebuild after three wars and a decade of sanctions, it was plagued by violence between a growing Iraqi insurgency and occupation forces. Saddam Hussein, who vanished in April, was captured on 13 December 2003 in ad-Dawr, Saladin Governorate. Jay Garner was appointed Interim Civil Administrator with three deputies, including Tim Cross. Garner was replaced in May 2003 by Paul Bremer, who was himself replaced by John Negroponte on 19 April 2004. Negroponte was the last US interim administrator and left Iraq in 2005. A parliamentary election was held in January 2005, followed by the drafting and ratification of a constitution and a further parliamentary election in December 2005.\nTerrorism emerged as a threat to Iraq's people not long after the invasion of 2003. Al Qaeda now had a presence in the country, in the form of several terrorist groups formerly led by Abu Musab Al Zarqawi. Al Zarqawi was a Jordanian militant Islamist who ran a militant training camp in Afghanistan. He became known after going to Iraq and being responsible for a series of bombings, beheadings and attacks during the Iraq war. Al Zarqawi was killed on 7 June 2006. Many foreign fighters and former Ba'ath Party officials also joined the insurgency, which was mainly aimed at attacking American forces and Iraqis who worked with them. The most dangerous insurgent area was the Sunni Triangle, a mostly Sunni-Muslim area just north of Baghdad.\nReported acts of violence conducted by an uneasy tapestry of insurgents steadily increased by the end of 2006. Sunni jihadist forces including Al Qaeda in Iraq continued to target Shia civilians, notably in the 23 February 2006 attack on the Al Askari Mosque in Samarra, one of Shi'ite Islam's holiest sites leading to a civil war between Sunni and Shia militants in Iraq. Analysis of the attack suggested that the Mujahideen Shura Council and Al-Qaeda in Iraq were responsible, and that the motivation was to provoke further violence by outraging the Shia population. In mid-October 2006, a statement was released stating that the Mujahideen Shura Council had been disbanded and was replaced by the \"Islamic State of Iraq\". It was formed to resist efforts by the U.S. and Iraqi authorities to win over Sunni supporters of the insurgency. Shia militias, some of whom were associated with elements in the Iraq government, reacted with reprisal acts against the Sunni minority. A cycle of violence thus ensued whereby Sunni insurgent attacks were followed reprisals by Shiite militias, often in the form of Shi'ite death squads that sought out and killed Sunnis. Following a surge in U.S. troops in 2007 and 2008, violence in Iraq began to decrease. The U.S. ended their main military presence in 2011, however, resulting in renewed escalation into war.\nInsurgency and war (2011\u20132017).\nThe departure of US troops from Iraq in 2011 triggered a renewed insurgency and by a spillover of the Syrian civil war into Iraq. By 2013, the insurgency escalated into a state renewed war, the central government of Iraq being opposed by various factions, primarily radical Sunni forces.\nThe Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant invaded Iraq in 2013\u201314 and seized the majority of Al Anbar Governorate, including the cities of Fallujah, Al Qaim, Abu Ghraib and (in May 2015) Ramadi, leaving them in control of 90% of Anbar. Tikrit, Mosul and most of the Nineveh province, along with parts of Salahuddin, Kirkuk and Diyala provinces, were seized by insurgent forces in the June 2014 offensive. ISIL also captured Sinjar and a number of other towns in the August 2014 offensive, but were halted by the Sinjar offensive launched in December 2014 by Kurdish Peshmerga and YPG forces. The war ended with a government victory in December 2017.\nOn 30 April 2016, thousands of protesters entered the Green Zone in Baghdad and occupied the Iraqi parliament building. This happened after the Iraqi parliament did not approve new government ministers. The protesters included supporters of Shia cleric Muqtada Al Sadr. Although Iraqi security forces were present, they did not attempt to stop the protesters from entering the parliament building.\nContinued ISIL insurgency and protests (2017\u2013present).\nTensions between the federal Iraqi government and Kurdistan Region arising from the Kurdistan Region independence referendum of 25 September 2017 escalated into armed conflict in October 2017. As a result of the conflict, Kurdistan Region lost a fifth of the land mass it had administered prior to the conflict and was forced to cancel the results of the referendum.\nBy 2018, violence in Iraq was at its lowest level in ten years.\nProtests over deteriorating economic conditions and state corruption started in July 2018 in Baghdad and other major Iraqi cities, mainly in the central and southern provinces. The latest nationwide protests, erupting in October 2019, had a death toll of at least 93 people, including police.\nIn November 2021, Iraqi Prime Minister Mustafa al-Kadhimi survived a failed assassination attempt.\nCleric Muqtada al-Sadr's Sadrist Movement was the biggest winner in the 2021 parliamentary elections. Governmental stalemate lead to the 2022 Iraqi political crisis.\nIn October 2022, Abdul Latif Rashid was elected as the new President of Iraq after winning the parliamentary election against incumbent Barham Salih, who was running for a second term. The presidency is largely ceremonial and is traditionally held by a Kurd. On 27 October 2022, Mohammed Shia al-Sudani, close ally of former Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, took the office to succeed Mustafa al-Kadhimi as new Prime Minister of Iraq.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14665", "revid": "50302676", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14665", "title": "Geography of Iraq", "text": " \nThe geography of Iraq is diverse and falls into five main regions: the desert (west of the Euphrates), Upper Mesopotamia (between the upper Tigris and Euphrates rivers), the northern highlands of Iraq, Lower Mesopotamia, and the alluvial plain extending from around Tikrit to the Arabian Gulf.\nThe mountains in the northeast are an extension of the alpine system that runs eastward from the Balkans through southern Turkey, northern Iraq, Iran, and Afghanistan, eventually reaching the Himalayas in Pakistan. The desert lies in the southwest provinces along the borders with Saudi Arabia and Jordan and geographically belongs in the Arabian Peninsula.\nMajor geographical features.\nMost geographers, including those of the Iraqi government, discuss the country's geography in terms of four main zones or regions: the desert in the west and southwest; the rolling upland between the upper Tigris and Euphrates rivers (in Arabic the \"Dijla\" and \"Furat\", respectively); the highlands in the north and northeast; and the alluvial plain through which the Tigris and Euphrates flow.\nIraq's official statistical reports give the total land area as , whereas a United States Department of State publication gives the area as .\nUpper Mesopotamia.\nThe uplands region, between the Tigris north of Hamrin Mountains and the Euphrates north of Hit, is known as Al Jazira (the island) and is part of a larger area that extends westward into Syria between the two rivers and into Turkey. Water in the area flows in deeply cut valleys, and irrigation is much more difficult than it is in the lower plain. The southwest areas of this zone are classified as desert or semi-desert. The northern parts, which include such places like the Nineveh Plains, Duhok, Zakho and Amedi, mainly consist of Mediterranean vegetation. The vegetation cyclically dries out and appear brown in the virtually arid summer and flourish in the wet winter.\nLower Mesopotamia.\nAn alluvial plain begins north of Baghdad and extends to the Persian Gulf. Here the Tigris and Euphrates rivers lie above the level of the plain in many places, and the whole area is a river delta interlaced by the channels of the two rivers and by irrigation canals. Intermittent lakes, fed by the rivers in flood, also characterize southeastern Iraq. A fairly large area () just above the confluence of the two rivers at Al Qurnah and extending east of the Tigris beyond the Iranian border is marshland, known as Hawr al Hammar, the result of centuries of flooding and inadequate drainage. Much of it is permanent marsh, but some parts dry out in early winter, and other parts become marshland only in years of great flood.\nBecause the waters of the Tigris and Euphrates above their confluence are heavily silt- laden, irrigation and fairly frequent flooding deposit large quantities of silty loam in much of the delta area. Windborne silt contributes to the total deposit of sediments. It has been estimated that the delta plains are built up at the rate of nearly twenty centimeters in a century. In some areas, major floods lead to the deposit in temporary lakes of as much as thirty centimeters of mud.\nThe Tigris and Euphrates also carry large quantities of salts. These, too, are spread on the land by sometimes excessive irrigation and flooding. A high water table and poor surface and subsurface drainage tend to concentrate the salts near the surface of the soil. In general, the salinity of the soil increases from Baghdad south to the Persian Gulf and severely limits productivity in the region south of Al Amarah. The salinity is reflected in the large lake in central Iraq, southwest of Baghdad, known as Bahr al Milh (Sea of Salt). There are two other major lakes in the country to the north of Bahr al Milh: Buhayrat ath Tharthar and Buhayrat al Habbaniyah.\nBaghdad area.\nBetween Upper and Lower Mesopotamia is the urban area surrounding Baghdad. These \"Baghdad Belts\" can be described as the provinces adjacent to the Iraqi capital and can be divided into four quadrants: northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest. Beginning in the north, the belts include the province of Saladin, clockwise to Baghdad province, Diyala in the northeast, Babil and Wasit in the southeast and around to Al Anbar in the west.\nHighlands.\nThe northeastern highlands begin just south of a line drawn from Mosul to Kirkuk and extend to the borders with Turkey and Iran. High ground, separated by broad, undulating steppes, gives way to mountains ranging from near the Iranian and Turkish borders. Except for a few valleys, the mountain area proper is suitable only for grazing in the foothills and steppes; adequate soil and rainfall, however, make cultivation possible. Here, too, are the great oil fields near Mosul and Kirkuk. The northeast is the homeland of most Iraqi Kurds.\nDesert.\nThe desert zone, an area lying west and southwest of the Euphrates River, is a part of the Syrian Desert and Arabian Desert, which covers sections of Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia and most of the Arabian Peninsula.\nThe region, sparsely inhabited by pastoral Bedouins, consists of a wide stony plain interspersed with rare sandy stretches. A widely ramified pattern of wadis\u2013watercourses that are dry most of the year\u2013runs from the border to the Euphrates. Some wadis are over long and carry brief but torrential floods during the winter rains.\nWestern and southern Iraq is a vast desert region covering some , almost two-fifths of the country. The western desert, an extension of the Syrian Desert, rises to elevations above . The southern desert is known as Al-Hajarah in the western part and as Al-Dibdibah in the east. Both deserts are part of the Arabian Desert. Al Hajarah has a complex topography of rocky desert, wadis, ridges, and depressions. Al-Dibdibah is a more sandy region with a covering of scrub vegetation. Elevation in the southern desert averages between . A height of is reached at Mount 'Unayzah at the intersection of the borders of Jordan, Iraq and Saudi Arabia. The deep Wadi Al-Batin runs in a northeast\u2013southwest direction through Al-Dibdibah. It has been recognized since 1913 as the boundary between western Kuwait and Iraq.\nTigris\u2013Euphrates river system.\nThe Euphrates originates in Turkey, is augmented by the Balikh and Khabur rivers in Syria, and enters Iraq in the northwest. Here it is fed only by the wadis of the western desert during the winter rains. It then winds through a gorge, which varies from two to 16 kilometers in width, until it flows out on the plain at Ar Ramadi. Beyond there the Euphrates continues to the Hindiya Barrage, which was constructed in 1914 to divert the river into the Hindiyah Channel; the present day Shatt al Hillah had been the main channel of the Euphrates before 1914. Below Al Kifl, the river follows two channels to As-Samawah, where it reappears as a single channel to join the Tigris at Al Qurnah.\nThe Tigris also rises in Turkey but is significantly augmented by several rivers in Iraq, the most important of which are the Khabur, the Great Zab, the Little Zab, and the Adhaim, all of which join the Tigris above Baghdad, and the Diyala, which joins it about thirty-six kilometers below the city. At the Kut Barrage much of the water is diverted into the Shatt al-Hayy, which was once the main channel of the Tigris. Water from the Tigris thus enters the Euphrates through the Shatt al-Hayy well above the confluence of the two main channels at Al Qurnah.\nBoth the Tigris and the Euphrates break into a number of channels in the marshland area, and the flow of the rivers is substantially reduced by the time they come together at Al Qurnah. Moreover. the swamps act as silt traps, and the Shatt al Arab is relatively silt free as it flows south. Below Basra, however, the Karun River enters the Shatt al Arab from Iran, carrying large quantities of silt that present a continuous dredging problem in maintaining a channel for ocean-going vessels to reach the port at Basra. This problem has been superseded by a greater obstacle to river traffic, however, namely the presence of several sunken hulls that have been rusting in the Shatt al Arab since early in the Iran-Iraq war.\nThe waters of the Tigris and Euphrates are essential to the life of the country, but they sometimes threaten it. The rivers are at their lowest level in September and October and at flood in March, April, and May when they may carry forty times as much water as at low mark. Moreover, one season's flood may be ten or more times as great as that in another year. In 1954, for example, Baghdad was seriously threatened, and dikes protecting it were nearly topped by the flooding Tigris. Since Syria built a dam on the Euphrates, the flow of water has been considerably diminished and flooding was no longer a problem in the mid-1980s. In 1988 Turkey was also constructing a dam on the Euphrates that would further restrict the water flow.\nUntil the mid-twentieth century, most efforts to control the waters were primarily concerned with irrigation. Some attention was given to problems of flood control and drainage before the revolution of July 14, 1958, but development plans in the 1960s and 1970s were increasingly devoted to these matters, as well as to irrigation projects on the upper reaches of the Tigris and Euphrates and the tributaries of the Tigris in the northeast. During the war, government officials stressed to foreign visitors that, with the conclusion of a peace settlement, problems of irrigation and flooding would receive top priority from the government.\nIraqi coastal waters boast a living coral reef, covering an area of 28\u00a0km2 in the Persian Gulf, at the mouth of the Shatt al-Arab river (). The coral reef was discovered by joint Iraqi\u2013German expeditions of scientific scuba divers carried out in September 2012 and in May 2013. Prior to its discovery, it was believed that Iraq lacks coral reefs as the local turbid waters prevented the detection of the potential presence of local coral reefs. Iraqi corals were found to be adapted to one of the most extreme coral-bearing environments in the world, as the seawater temperature in this area ranges between 14 and 34\u00a0\u00b0C. The reef harbors several living stone corals, octocorals, ophiuroids and bivalves. There are also silica-containing demo-sponges.\nSettlement patterns.\nIn the rural areas of the alluvial plain and in the lower Diyala region, settlement almost invariably clusters near the rivers, streams, and irrigation canals. The bases of the relationship between watercourse and settlement have been summarized by Robert McCormick Adams, director of the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago. He notes that the levees laid down by streams and canals provide advantages for both settlement and agriculture. Surface water drains more easily on the levees' back-slope, and the coarse soils of the levees are easier to cultivate and permit better subsurface drainage. The height of the levees gives some protection against floods and the frost that often affect low-lying areas and may kill and/or damage winter crops. Above all, those living or cultivating on the crest of a levee have easy access to water for irrigation and household use in a dry, hot country.\nAlthough there are some isolated homesteads, most rural communities are nucleated settlements rather than dispersed farmsteads; that is, the farmer leaves his village to cultivate the fields outside it. The pattern holds for farming communities in the Kurdish highlands of the northeast as well as for those in the alluvial plain. The size of the settlement varies, generally with the volume of water available for household use and with the amount of land accessible to village dwellers. Sometimes, particularly in the lower Tigris and Euphrates valleys, soil salinity restricts the area of arable land and limits the size of the community dependent on it, and it also usually results in large unsettled and uncultivated stretches between the villages.\nFragmentary information suggests that most farmers in the alluvial plain tend to live in villages of over 100 persons. For example, in the mid-1970s a substantial number of the residents of Baqubah, the administrative center and major city of Diyala Governorate, were employed in agriculture.\nThe Marsh Arabs of the south usually live in small clusters of two or three houses kept above water by rushes that are constantly being replenished. Such clusters often are close together, but access from one to another is possible only by small boat. Here and there a few natural islands permit slightly larger clusters. Some of these people are primarily water buffalo herders and lead a semi-nomadic life. In the winter, when the waters are at a low point, they build fairly large temporary villages. In the summer they move their herds out of the marshes to the river banks.\nThe war has had its effect on the lives of these denizens of the marshes. With much of the fighting concentrated in their areas, they have either migrated to settled communities away from the marshes or have been forced by government decree to relocate within the marshes. Also, in early 1988, the marshes had become the refuge of deserters from the Iraqi army who attempted to maintain life in the fastness of the overgrown, desolate areas while hiding out from the authorities. These deserters in many instances have formed into large gangs that raid the marsh communities; this also has induced many of the marsh dwellers to abandon their villages.\nThe war has also affected settlement patterns in the northern Kurdish areas. There, the struggle for a Kurdish state by guerrillas was rejected by the government as it steadily escalated violence against the local communities. Starting in 1984, the government launched a scorched-earth campaign to drive a wedge between the villagers and the guerrillas in the remote areas of two provinces of Kurdistan in which Kurdish guerrillas were active. In the process whole villages were torched and subsequently bulldozed, which resulted in the Kurds flocking into the regional centers of Irbil and As Sulaymaniyah. Also as a \"military precaution\", the government has cleared a broad strip of territory in the Kurdish region along the Iranian border of all its inhabitants, hoping in this way to interdict the movement of Kurdish guerrillas back and forth between Iran and Iraq. The majority of Kurdish villages, however, remained intact in early 1988.\nIn the arid areas of Iraq to the west and south, cities and large towns are almost invariably situated on watercourses, usually on the major rivers or their larger tributaries. In the south this dependence has had its disadvantages. Until the recent development of flood control, Baghdad and other cities were subject to the threat of inundation. Moreover, the dikes needed for protection have effectively prevented the expansion of the urban areas in some directions. The growth of Baghdad, for example, was restricted by dikes on its eastern edge. The diversion of water to the Milhat ath Tharthar and the construction of a canal transferring water from the Tigris north of Baghdad to the Diyala River have permitted the irrigation of land outside the limits of the dikes and the expansion of settlement.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Iraq is mainly a hot desert climate or a hot semi-arid climate to the northernmost part. Averages high temperatures are generally above at low elevations during summer months (June, July and August) while averages low temperatures can drop to below during the coldest month of the year during winter The all-time record high temperature in Iraq of was recorded near Basra on 22 July 2016. Most of the rainfall occurs from December through April and averages between annually. The mountainous region of northern Iraq receives appreciably more precipitation than the central or southern desert region, where they tend to have a Mediterranean climate.\nRoughly 90% of the annual rainfall occurs between November and April, most of it in the winter months from December through March. The remaining six months, particularly the hottest ones of June, July, and August, are extremely dry.\nExcept in the north and northeast, mean annual rainfall ranges between . Data available from stations in the foothills and steppes south and southwest of the mountains suggest mean annual rainfall between for that area. Rainfall in the mountains is more abundant and may reach a year in some places, but the terrain precludes extensive cultivation. Cultivation on nonirrigated land is limited essentially to the mountain valleys, foothills, and steppes, which have or more of rainfall annually. Even in this zone, however, only one crop a year can be grown, and shortages of rain have often led to crop failures.\nMean minimum temperatures in the winter range from near freezing (just before dawn) in the northern and northeastern foothills and the western desert to in the alluvial plains of southern Iraq. They rise to a mean maximum of about in the western desert and the northeast, and in the south. In the summer mean minimum temperatures range from about and rise to maxima between roughly . Temperatures sometimes fall below freezing and have fallen as low as at Ar Rutbah in the western desert. Such summer heat, even in a hot desert, is high and this can be easily explained by the very low elevations of deserts regions which experience these exceptionally searing high temperatures. In fact, the elevations of cities such as Baghdad or Basra are near the sea level (0 m) because deserts are located predominantly along the Persian Gulf. That is why some Gulf's countries like Iraq, Iran and Kuwait experience extreme heat during summer, even more extreme than the normal level. The searing summer heat only exists in low elevations in these countries while mountains and higher elevations know much more moderated summer temperatures.\nThe summer months are marked by two kinds of wind phenomena. The southern and southeasterly \"sharqi\", a dry, dusty wind with occasional gusts of , occurs from April to early June and again from late September through November. It may last for a day at the beginning and end of the season but for several days at other times. This wind is often accompanied by violent duststorms that may rise to heights of several thousand meters and close airports for brief periods. From mid-June to mid-September the prevailing wind, called the shamal, is from the north and northwest. It is a steady wind, absent only occasionally during this period. The very dry air brought by this shamal permits intensive sun heating of the land surface, but the breeze has some cooling effect.\nThe combination of rain shortage and extreme heat makes much of Iraq a desert. Because of very high rates of evaporation, soil and plants rapidly lose the little moisture obtained from the rain, and vegetation could not survive without extensive irrigation. Some areas, however, although arid, do have natural vegetation in contrast to the desert. For example, in the Zagros Mountains in northeastern Iraq there is permanent vegetation, such as oak trees, and date palms are found in the south.\nArea and boundaries.\nIn 1922 British officials concluded the Treaty of Mohammara with Abd al Aziz ibn Abd ar Rahman Al Saud, who in 1932 formed the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The treaty provided the basic agreement for the boundary between the eventually independent nations. Also in 1922 the two parties agreed to the creation of the diamond-shaped Saudi Arabian\u2013Iraqi neutral zone of approximately adjacent to the western tip of Kuwait in which neither Iraq nor Saudi Arabia would build dwellings or installations. Bedouins from either country could utilize the limited water and seasonal grazing resources of the zone. In April 1975, an agreement signed in Baghdad fixed the borders of the countries.\nThrough Algerian mediation, Iran and Iraq agreed in March 1975 to normalize their relations, and three months later they signed a treaty known as the Algiers Accord. The document defined the common border all along the Khawr Abd Allah (Shatt) River estuary as the thalweg. To compensate Iraq for the loss of what formerly had been regarded as its territory, pockets of territory along the mountain border in the central sector of its common boundary with Iran were assigned to it. Nonetheless, in September 1980 Iraq went to war with Iran, citing among other complaints the fact that Iran had not turned over to it the land specified in the Algiers Accord. This problem has subsequently proved to be a stumbling block to a negotiated settlement of the ongoing conflict.\nIn 1988 the boundary with Kuwait was another outstanding problem. It was fixed in a 1913 treaty between the Ottoman Empire and British officials acting on behalf of Kuwait's ruling family, which in 1899 had ceded control over foreign affairs to Britain. The boundary was accepted by Iraq when it became independent in 1932, but in the 1960s and again in the mid-1970s, the Iraqi government advanced a claim to parts of Kuwait. Kuwait made several representations to the Iraqis during the war to fix the border once and for all but Baghdad repeatedly demurred, claiming that the issue is a potentially divisive one that could inflame nationalist sentiment inside Iraq. Hence in 1988 it was likely that a solution would have to wait until the war ended.\nArea:&lt;br&gt;\n\"total:\" &lt;br&gt;\n\"land:\" &lt;br&gt;\n\"water:\" \nLand boundaries:&lt;br&gt;\n\"total:\" &lt;br&gt;\n\"border countries:\" Iran , Saudi Arabia , Syria , Turkey , Kuwait , Jordan \nCoastline: \nMaritime claims:&lt;br&gt;\n\"territorial sea:\" \n\"continental shelf:\" not specified\nTerrain:&lt;br&gt; mostly broad plains; reedy marshes along Iranian border in south with large flooded areas; mountains along borders with Iran and Turkey\nElevation extremes:&lt;br&gt;\n\"lowest point:\" Persian Gulf 0 m&lt;br&gt;\n\"highest point:\" Cheekah Dar \nResources and land use.\nNatural resources: petroleum, natural gas, phosphates, sulfur\nLand use:&lt;br&gt;\n\"arable land:\" 7.89%&lt;br&gt;\n\"permanent crops:\" 0.53%&lt;br&gt;\n\"other:\" 91.58% (2012)\nIrrigated land: (2003)\nTotal renewable water resources: (2011)\nFreshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):&lt;br&gt;\n\"total:\" 66\u00a0km3/yr (7%/15%/79%)&lt;br&gt;\n\"per capita:\" 2,616 m3/yr (2000)\nWhile its proven oil reserves of ranks Iraq fifth in the world behind Iran, the United States Department of Energy estimates that up to 90 percent of the country remains unexplored. Unexplored regions of Iraq could yield an additional . Iraq's oil production costs are among the lowest in the world. However, only about 2,000 oil wells have been drilled in Iraq, compared to about 1 million wells in Texas alone.\nEnvironmental concerns.\nNatural hazards: dust storms, sandstorms, floods\nEnvironment - current issues: government water control projects have drained most of the inhabited marsh areas east of An Kshatriya by drying up or diverting the feeder streams and rivers; a once sizable population of Shi'a Muslims, who have inhabited these areas for thousands of years, has been displaced; furthermore, the destruction of the natural habitat poses serious threats to the area's wildlife populations; inadequate supplies of potable water; development of Tigris-Euphrates Rivers system contingent upon agreements with upstream riparian Turkey; air and water pollution; soil degradation (desalination) and erosion; and desertification.\nEnvironment - international agreements:&lt;br&gt;\n\"party to:\" Biodiversity, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection&lt;br&gt;\n\"signed, but not ratified:\" Environmental Modification\nMajor regressions:\n*Arabian Desert and East Sahero-Arabian xeric shrublands (PA1303)\n*Mesopotamian shrub desert (PA1320)\nMinor ecoregions:\n*Zagros Mountains forest steppe (PA0446)\n*Middle East steppe (PA0812)\n*Eastern Mediterranean conifer-sclerophyllous broadleaf forests (PA1207)\n*South Iran Nubo-Sindian desert and semi-desert (PA1328)\n*Tigris-Euphrates alluvial salt marsh (PA0906)\n*Red Sea Nubo-Sindian tropical desert and semi-desert (PA1325)\n*Persian Gulf desert and semi-desert (PA1323)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14666", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14666", "title": "Demographics of Iraq", "text": "The Iraqi people (; ; Syriac: \u0725\u0721\u0710 \u0725\u071d\u072a\u0729\u071d\u0710) are people originating from the country of Iraq.\nIraqi Arabs are the largest ethnic group in Iraq, followed by Iraqi Kurds, then Iraqi Turkmen as the third largest ethnic group in the country. Studies indicate that Mesopotamian Arabs, who make up the overwhelming majority of Iraq's population, are genetically distinct from other Arab populations in the Arabs of the Arabian peninsula.\nThe most spoken languages are Mesopotamian Arabic, Kurdish, Assyrian Syriac and Iraqi Turkmen dialects. The percentages of the different ethno-religious groups of Iraq vary from source to source due to the lack of recent official data. \nAfter several postponements, the latest national census was held on 20 and 21 November 2024, with a total number of 120,000 field researchers who executed the census in all governorates on the set date. The detailed results, announced on 24 February 2025, showed that the Iraqi population had risen to 46,118,793, with 101 Male for every 100 Female. Named the \u2018General Population and Housing Census\u2019, it did not include a questionnaire on ethnicity, and was specifically designed to provide official data for developmental and welfare purposes.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Structure of the population\nStructure of the population (17.10.1997) (Official)\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020):\nVital statistics.\nUN estimates (based on UN WPP Revision 2022).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nLife expectancy at birth.\nAverage life expectancy at birth of the total population.\nEthnicity.\nIraq's dominant ethnic group is Arabs, who account for more than three-quarters of the population.\nAccording to the CIA World Factbook, citing a 1987 Iraqi government estimate, the population of Iraq is formed of 75-80% Arabs (including Marsh Arabs) followed by 15-20% Kurds and other minorities form 5% of the country's population, including the Turkmen, Kaka'i, Bedouins, Roma, Assyrians, Circassians, Mandaeans, and Persians.\nHowever, the International Crisis Group points out that figures from the 1987 census, as well as the 1967, 1977, and 1997 censuses, \"are all considered highly problematic, due to suspicions of regime manipulation\" because Iraqi citizens were only allowed to indicate belonging to either the Arab or Kurdish ethnic groups; consequently, this skewed the number of other ethnic minorities, such as Iraq's third largest ethnic group \u2013 the Turkmen.\nLanguages.\nArabic and Kurdish are the two official languages of Iraq. Arabic is taught across all schools in Iraq, however in the north the Kurdish language is the most spoken. Eastern Aramaic languages, such as Syriac and Mandaic are spoken, as well as the Iraqi Turkmen language, and various other indigenous languages.\nKurdish, including several dialects, is the second largest language and has regional language status in the north of the country. Aramaic, in antiquity spoken throughout the whole country, is now only spoken by the Assyrian minority, in distinct dialects that differ from church affiliation and geographic origin. The Iraqi Turkmen dialect is spoken in parts of northern Iraq, numerous languages of the Caucasus are also spoken by minorities, notably the Chechen community.\nReligions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe CIA World Factbook estimated in 2015 that between 95-98% of Iraqis followed Islam, with 61-64% being Shia and 29-34% being Sunni. Christianity accounted for 2%, and the rest (1-4%) practiced Yazidism, Mandaeism, and other religions.\nWhile there has been voluntary relocation of many Christian families to northern Iraq, recent reporting indicates that the overall Christian population may have dropped by as much as 50 percent since the fall of Saddam Hussein in 2003, with many fleeing to Syria, Jordan, and Lebanon (2010 estimate). The percentage of Christians has fallen from 6% in 1991 or 1.5 million to about one third of this. Estimates say there are 500,000 Christians in Iraq.\nNearly all Iraqi Kurds identify as Sunni Muslims. A 2014 survey in Iraq concluded that \"98% of Kurds in Iraq identified themselves as Sunnis and only 2% identified as Shias\". The religious differences between Sunni Arabs and Sunni Kurds are small. While 98 percent of Shia Arabs believe that visiting the shrines of saints is acceptable, 71 percent of Sunni Arabs did and 59 percent of Sunni Kurds support this practice. About 94 percent of the population in Iraqi Kurdistan is Muslim.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14667", "revid": "47481484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14667", "title": "Politics of Iraq", "text": " \nIraq is a federal parliamentary representative democratic republic. It is a multi-party system whereby the executive power is exercised by the Prime Minister of the Council of Ministers as the head of government, the President of Iraq as the largely ceremonial head of state, and legislative power is vested in the Council of Representatives.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Iraq an \"authoritarian regime\" in . The Regimes of the World index rated Iraq 2024 an electoral autocracy.\nGovernment.\nFederal government.\nThe federal government of Iraq is defined under the current constitution as a democratic, federal parliamentary republic. The federal government is composed of the executive, legislative, and judicial branches, as well as numerous independent commissions. Islam is the official religion of the state and a foundation source of legislation, and no law may be enacted that contradicts its established provisions; furthermore, no law may be enacted that contradicts the principles of democracy or those basic rights and freedoms stipulated in the constitution.\nThe legislative branch is composed of the Council of Representatives and a Federation Council. The executive branch is composed of the president, the prime minister, and the Council of Ministers. The federal judiciary is composed of the Supreme Judicial Council, the Court of Cassation, the Supreme Court, the Public Prosecution Department, the Judiciary Oversight Commission, and other federal courts that are regulated by law. One such court is the Central Criminal Court.\nThe Independent High Commission for Human Rights, the Independent High Electoral Commission, and the Commission on Integrity are independent commissions subject to monitoring by the Council of Representatives. The Central Bank of Iraq, the Board of Supreme Audit, the Communications and Media Commission, and the Endowment Commission are financially and administratively independent institutions. The Foundation of Martyrs is attached to the Council of Ministers. The Federal Public Service Council regulates the affairs of the federal public service, including appointment and promotion.\nLocal government.\nThe basic subdivisions of the country are the regions and the governorates. Both regions and governorates are given broad autonomy with regions given additional powers such as control of internal security forces for the region such as police, security forces, and guards. The last local elections for the governorates were held in the 2009 Iraqi governorate elections on 31 January 2009.\nFederal regions.\nThe constitution requires that the Council of Representatives enact a law which provides the procedures for forming a new region 6 months from the start of its first session. A law was passed 11 October 2006 by a unanimous vote with only 138 of 275 representatives present, with the remaining representatives boycotting the vote. Legislators from the Iraqi Accord Front, Sadrist Movement and Islamic Virtue Party all opposed the bill.\nUnder the law, a region can be created out of one or more existing governorates or two or more existing regions, and a governorate can also join an existing region to create a new region. A new region can be proposed by one third or more of the council members in each affected governorate plus 500 voters or by one tenth or more voters in each affected governorate. A referendum must then be held within three months, which requires a simple majority in favour to pass. In the event of competing proposals, the multiple proposals are put to a ballot and the proposal with the most supporters is put to the referendum. In the event of an affirmative referendum a Transitional Legislative Assembly is elected for one year, which has the task of writing a constitution for the Region, which is then put to a referendum requiring a simple majority to pass. The President, Prime Minister and Ministers of the region are elected by simple majority, in contrast to the Iraqi Council of Representatives which requires two thirds support.\nThe northern Kurdistan Region emerged in 1992 with its own local government and parliament officially recognised in 2005 following the adoption of the new constitution.\nProvinces.\nIraq is divided into 19 governorates, which are further divided into districts:\nElections.\nIraqi parliamentary election, January 2005.\nElections for the National Assembly of Iraq were held on January 30, 2005, in Iraq. The 275-member National Assembly was a parliament created under the Transitional Law during the Occupation of Iraq. The newly elected transitional Assembly was given a mandate to write the new and permanent Constitution of Iraq and exercised legislative functions until the new Constitution came into effect, and resulted in the formation of the Iraqi Transitional Government.\nThe United Iraqi Alliance, tacitly backed by Shia Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, led with some 48% of the vote. The Democratic Patriotic Alliance of Kurdistan was in second place with some 26% of the vote. Prime Minister Ayad Allawi's party, the Iraqi List, came third with some 14%. In total, twelve parties received enough votes to win a seat in the assembly.\nLow Arab Sunni turnout threatened the legitimacy of the election, which was as low as 2% in Anbar province. More than 100 armed attacks on polling places took place, killing at least 44 people (including nine suicide bombers) across Iraq, including at least 20 in Baghdad.\nIraqi parliamentary election, December 2005.\nFollowing the ratification of the Constitution of Iraq on 15 October 2005, a general election was held on 15 December to elect the permanent 275-member Iraqi Council of Representatives.\nThe elections took place under a list system, whereby voters chose from a list of parties and coalitions. 230 seats were apportioned among Iraq's 18 governorates based on the number of registered voters in each as of the January 2005 elections, including 59 seats for Baghdad Governorate. The seats within each governorate were allocated to lists through a system of Proportional Representation. An additional 45 \"compensatory\" seats were allocated to those parties whose percentage of the national vote total (including out of country votes) exceeds the percentage of the 275 total seats that they have been allocated. Women were required to occupy 25% of the 275 seats. The change in the voting system gave more weight to Arab Sunni voters, who make up most of the voters in several provinces. It was expected that these provinces would thus return mostly Sunni Arab representatives, after most Sunnis boycotted the last election.\nTurnout was high (79.6%). The White House was encouraged by the relatively low levels of violence during polling, with one insurgent group making good on a promised election day moratorium on attacks, even going so far as to guard the voters from attack. President Bush frequently pointed to the election as a sign of progress in rebuilding Iraq. However, post-election violence threatened to plunge the nation into civil war, before the situation began to calm in 2007. The election results themselves produced a shaky coalition government headed by Nouri al-Maliki.\nIraqi parliamentary election, 2010.\nA parliamentary election was held in Iraq on 7 March 2010. The election decided the 325 members of the Council of Representatives of Iraq who will elect the Iraqi Prime Minister and President. The election resulted in a partial victory for the Iraqi National Movement, led by former Interim Prime Minister Ayad Allawi, which won a total of 91 seats, making it the largest alliance in the council. The State of Law Coalition, led by incumbent Prime Minister Nouri Al-Maliki, was the second largest grouping with 89 seats.\nThe election was rife with controversy. Prior to the election, the Supreme Court in Iraq ruled that the existing electoral law/rule was unconstitutional, and a new elections law made changes in the electoral system. On 15 January 2010, the Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) banned 499 candidates from the election due to alleged links with the Ba'ath Party. Before the start of the campaign on 12 February 2010, IHEC confirmed that most of the appeals by banned candidates had been rejected and 456 of the initially banned candidates would not be allowed to run for the election. There were numerous allegations of fraud, and a recount of the votes in Baghdad was ordered on 19 April 2010. On May 14, IHEC announced that after 11,298 ballot boxes had been recounted, there was no sign of fraud or violations.\nThe new parliament opened on 14 June 2010. After months of fraught negotiations, an agreement was reached on the formation of a new government on November 11. Talabani would continue as president, Al-Maliki would stay on as prime minister and Allawi would head a new security council.\nIraqi parliamentary election, 2014.\nParliamentary elections were held in Iraq on 30 April 2014. The elections decided the 328 members of the Council of Representatives who will in turn elect the Iraqi President and Prime Minister.\nIraqi parliamentary election, 2021.\nOn 30 November 2021, the political bloc led by Shia leader Muqtada al-Sadr was confirmed the winner of the October parliamentary election. His Sadrist Movement, won a total of 73 out of the 329 seats in the parliament. The Taqadum, or Progress Party-led by Parliament Speaker Mohammed al-Halbousi, a Sunni \u2013 secured 37 seats. Former Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki's State of Law party got 33 seats in parliament. Al-Fatah alliance, whose main components are militia groups affiliated with the Iran-backed Popular Mobilisation Forces, sustained its crushing loss and snatched 17 seats. The Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) received 31 seats, and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) gained 18.\nAfter the election 2022\u20132025.\nIn June 2022, 73 members of parliament from the Sadrist movement, resigned.\nOn 27 October 2022, Mohammed Shia al-Sudani, close ally of former Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, took the office to succeed Mustafa al-Kadhimi as new Prime Minister of Iraq.\nIraqi parliamentary election, 2025.\nOn 17 November 2025, the Iraqi Independent High Electoral Commission announced that the Reconstruction and Development coalition, led by Prime Minister Mohammed Shia al-Sudani, topped the final results with 46 seats in the 329-member Council of Representatives, followed by the Progress (Taqaddum) party of former Parliament Speaker Mohammed al-Halbousi with 36 seats, and the State of Law coalition of former Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki with 29 seats. Subsequently, the Shia-led Coordination Framework declared that it had constituted itself as the largest parliamentary bloc by uniting its component parties, thereby positioning itself as a central force in government formation and parliamentary negotiations.\nIssues.\nCorruption.\nAccording to Transparency International, Iraq's is the most corrupt government in the Middle East, and is described as a \"hybrid regime\" (between a \"flawed democracy\" and an \"authoritarian regime\"). The 2011 report \"Costs of War\" from Brown University's Watson Institute for International Studies concluded that U.S. military presence in Iraq has not been able to prevent this corruption, noting that as early as 2006, \"there were clear signs that post-Saddam Iraq was not going to be the linchpin for a new democratic Middle East.\"\nElite cartel ruling Iraq by \"muhasasa\".\nDuring the regime of Saddam Hussein (1979\u20132003), several Iraqi opposition groups created a quota system by which Sunni Islamic, Shia Islamic, Kurdish and other religious or ethnic groups would be proportionally represented in a future new government. The U.S. in July 2003 selected the members of the Iraqi Governing Council, the forerunner of the first post\u2013Hussein sovereign Iraqi (interim) government, according to that ethno-sectarian quota system.\nAlso in 2003, a \"pact\" (\"muhasasa ta\u2019ifa\") was struck by \"the elite\", holding that after a national election, the winning parties divide the ministerial positions in direct relationship to their success at the ballot box. After 2003, a second agreement (\"muhasasa\") was made, holding that ministries and their budgets and other political positions must be proportionally placed under the \"control\" of \"religious [or sectarian or ethnic] groups\", \"depending mostly on a group's size\", presuming such \"groups\" to be fully represented by one or several parties or lists taking part in the elections, or that national governments should \"represent the different ethnic, religious and sectarian identities that make up the Iraqi society\", presuming that such \"identities\" are expressed or represented by existing political parties. Such agreements between members of the elite to collude in order to avoid competition, improve their own profits, and dominate the market (of voters in a democracy), have been labeled \"elite cartel\". The political parties themselves, once they win any ministry through the \"muhasasa\" system, benefit financially from state contracts awarded by them to companies run by their party members (see below, section Clientelism, patronage) what makes it even harder for them to step out of the \"muhasasa\" arrangements. Or, as a researcher phrased it in 2020: \"Such elite pacts are notoriously resistant to reform, particularly if any proposed change is perceived to undermine elite interests (\u2026)\".\nAlthough the system functions informally, a group of Norwegian researchers in late 2020 asserted\u2014while citing other researchers but not a basic source\u2014that 54% of the ministry posts would 'normally' go to the Shia, 24% to the Sunni, 18% to the Kurds, and 4% to minorities including the Christians. They suggested that the \"muhasasa\" system leads to \"a closed system of elite rule\u2026 recycling the political elites irrespective of their performance\", not urging or inciting the Iraqi politicians to act transparently or accountably or to respond to citizen demands and deliver benefits to the Iraqi population as a whole, but instead making them easily susceptible to corruption, nepotism, clientelism and patronage while focusing on their own (group's) interests and (elite's) survival and consolidation.\nThis \"muhasasa\" elite cartel (and connected problems) led to massive protests in Iraq in 2011, 2012\u20132013, 2015, 2016, 2018 and 2019\u20132021. Analysts have seen this \"muhasasa\" system to exist until at least late 2020. The Abdul Mahdi Government of 2018 broke with elements of \"muhasasa\". Although his anti-\"muhasasa\" Sadrist Movement retained plurality in the 2021 election, inability to form a government eventually led to the party's withdrawal from Parliament, allowing the rival parties to form another \"muhasasa\"-based government.\nIncompetent government.\nThose two \"muhasasa\" agreements in and after 2003 (see above) had the effect that, starting with the first post\u20132003 Iraqi government after elections in 2006, if a party \"controlled\" a ministry, it appointed also the top positions in their civil services to their party followers and faction members; also the positions for senior public service were distributed on the basis of \"ethnic, religious and/or party affiliation\" rather than merit, professional competence or experience. This incompetence caused mismanagement in the successive Iraqi governments of Al-Maliki (2006\u20132014), Al-Abadi (2014\u20132018), and also Abdul-Mahdi (2018\u20132020), leading to hundreds of billions of dollars being wasted on failed projects and the neglect of electricity networks, the transportation sector, economic legislation, and other infrastructure, as well as citizen demands not being responded to. Such incompetence \u2013 next to other forms of political turmoil like corruption (see next subsection) and instability \u2013 is considered by many analysts to have also fostered . (During the formation of the Abdul Mahdi Government in 2018, this new prime minister attempted to break through the traditional \"muhasasa\" procedures, but there's no clear information as to how far he succeeded in that, or whether the Iraqi governments since 2018 worked more competently or less corruptly.)\nClientelism, patronage.\nCivil services being staffed \u2013 under these \"muhasasa\" agreements (see above) \u2013 according to party loyalty had the effect that state contracts would only be awarded by them to \"party-affiliated companies and businesspeople\", who would be paid handsomely for their contracted services; even if they hardly, or not at all, actually delivered those services. Such manner of spending state finances has been labeled governmental contracting fraud and structural political corruption: not the general public but privileged companies were being served by the government. This culture of clientelism and \"systemic political patronage\" produced a new class of entrepreneurs, getting rich through close relations with government officials and their lush government contracts. Meanwhile, politicians themselves lived in wealth, self-enrichment and massive personal protection.\nStagnant economy.\nThe infrastructure not being maintained or modernized due to governmental incompetence and mismanagement (see above) severely hampered the development of private economic activity, therefore meaning the private sector could not absorb the half million of young people entering the job market every year. This \"muhasasa\"-style 'cartel' government, due to its lack of accountability \u2013 politicians being \"recycled ... irrespective of their performance\" \u2013 provided too little incentives for those politicians to build a diversified and competitive economy or \"deliver benefits to the population\".\nLack of commitment to federalism.\nSince the adoption of the new Iraqi constitution in 2005, federalism with a heavy emphasis on decentralisation has been the official model of governance in Iraq. However, certain constitutional stipulations, such as those related to the creation of the Federation Council (the upper house of the legislature) have not been implemented, which remains an issue undermining the full implementation of federalism in the country. In September 2017, a one-sided referendum was held in Iraq's Kurdistan Region regarding Kurdish independence, which resulted in 92% (of those participating in the region) voting in favor of independence. The referendum was rejected by the federal government and ruled as illegal by the Federal Supreme Court. Following this, an armed conflict ensued between the federal government and the Kurdistan Regional Government which resulted in Kurdish defeat and capitulation; Kurdistan Region subsequently lost territory it had previously occupied, and the president of Kurdistan Region officially resigned, and finally, the regional government announced that it would respect the Federal Supreme Court's ruling that no Iraqi province is allowed to secede, effectively abandoning the referendum. According to a report published by The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, a U.S-based think tank, since Kurdistan Region's failed bid to gain independence, the federal government has been severely punishing it both politically and economically. In gradual steps, the federal government has consistently weakened Kurdistan Region's ability to administer its own affairs by revoking crucial authorities that had previously defined its autonomy. Furthermore, since it won a pivotal ICC arbitration case, the federal government has also been refusing Kurdistan Region access to its most important source of income, namely, oil exports, and the latter has had no other option but to concede. Some have argued that this signals the Iraqi government's intention to abandon federalism and return to a centralized political system, and in a leaked letter sent in 2023 to the U.S president, the prime minister of Kurdistan region wrote of an impending collapse of Kurdistan Region.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14668", "revid": "46538735", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14668", "title": "Economy of Iraq", "text": "The economy of Iraq is dominated by the oil sector. The IFAD has classified Iraq as an oil-rich upper middle income country. In 2025, the economy is estimated to be at $690 billion (GDP PPP). making it as the fifth largest economy in the Arab world, seventh largest in the Middle East and North Africa and world's 51st largest. It is one of the top five Arab countries with gold reserves and 30th globally.\nIraq experienced economic growth by in the 1970s. Oil industry was nationalized in 1972, followed by a sharp increase in the price of petroleum. Revenue generated from the oil sector were utilized in development and expanding social services, which turned Iraq into a highly developed country. However, the Gulf War and subsequent sanctions drained the country economically. An oil-for-food program by the United Nation, allowed Iraq to sell oil in exchange of humanitarian goods for the civilian population. \nGradually, the economic situation quite improved. Many countries resumed trade with Iraq and the government rebuilt large swaths of country after the war. However, the invasion of Iraq in 2003 and the war damaged much of the country's infrastructure. Although economy expanded rapidly due to privatization, it was interrupted by escalating war. Since 2022, under the leadership of Prime MInister Muhammad Shayya al-Sudani, Iraq has seen a period of relative economic stability.\nIraq is traditionally an oil-rich state, with oil industry being the dominant sector. In 2024, it provided 89% of foreign exchange earning. Crude oil accounts between 92-99% of Iraq's total exports, followed by fruits, aluminum and dates. While import goods include foods, medicine and manufactured products such as ships, automobiles and consumer electronics. Major trade partners of Iraq are the United States, China, India, Greece, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates. Iraq has strong economic and trade ties with numerous countries, with large investments from China and Saudi Arabia. \nHistory.\nMonarchy.\nIn the early monarchy era, economic institutions developed slowly. The Iraqi economy was largely market-oriented, but based more on feudal and traditions rather than on modern principles. King Faisal, the first king of Iraq, laid foundations for the modern Iraqi state. Under his rule, an oil pipeline was built between Kirkuk and Haifa. Then finance minister Sassoon Eskell was instrumental in forming Iraq's financial system and oil industry.\nA development board was established in 1950. The board regulated five-year plans that emphasized three priorities\u2014agriculture, transportation and communication and construction. The agriculture part also included irrigation and flood control. The board was well-received by the commentators for using most of the country's oil income for capital investment and infrastructure development. It also received criticism for over-emphasizing agriculture and ignoring industry and human resources, which would have appealed to two increasingly important constituents\u2014educated elites and workers. Neglecting these groups became one of the minor reasons which provoked the coup in 1958.\nEconomic growth.\nDuring its modern history, the oil sector has provided about 99.7% of foreign exchange earnings. Agrarian economy underwent rapid development following the 14 July Revolution in 1958. It had become the third-largest economy in the Middle East by 1980. This occurred in part because of the industrialization and infrastructure development initiatives led by Saddam Hussein, which included irrigation projects, railway and highway construction, and rural electrification. In the 1980s, financial problems caused by massive expenditures in the Iran-Iraq War and damage to oil export facilities by Iran's military led the government to implement austerity measures, to borrow heavily, and to later reschedule foreign debt payments. \nNominal GDP grew by 213% in the 1960s, 1325% in the 1970s, 2% in the 1980s, \u221247% in the 1990s, and 317% in 2000s. Real GDP per capita (measured in $1990 ) increased significantly during the 1950s, 60s and 70s, which can be explained by both higher oil production levels as well as oil prices, which famously peaked in the 1970s due to the OPEC's oil embargo, causing the 1973 oil crisis. In the following two decades, however, GDP per capita in Iraq dropped substantially because of multiple wars, namely the 1980-88 war with Iran, the 1990-1991 Gulf War.\nBefore the outbreak of the war with Iran in September 1980, the economic outlook was positive. In 1979, oil production reached a level of 560,000 m\u00b3 (3.5 million barrels) per day, and oil revenues were 21 billion dollars in 1979 and $27 billion in 1980 due to record oil prices. Iraq had amassed an estimated $35 billion in foreign exchange reserves. It was believed to have one of the best education and health care systems in the Middle East, and thousands of migrant workers from Egypt, Somalia, and the Indian subcontinent were employed in construction projects.\nThe Iran\u2013Iraq War and the 1980s oil glut depleted Iraq's foreign exchange reserves, devastated its economy and left the country with a foreign debt of more than $40 billion. Iraq suffered economic losses of at least $80 billion from the war. In 1988, the hostilities ended. Oil exports gradually increased with the construction of new pipelines and restoration of damaged facilities, but again underwent a sharp decline after the Persian Gulf War. \nA U.S government report in June 2003 states: In the 1980s, Iraq had one of the Arab world\u2019s most advanced economies. Though buffeted by the strains of the Iran-Iraq war, it had \u2013 besides petroleum -- a considerable industrial sector, a relatively well-developed transport system, and comparatively good infrastructure. Iraq had a relatively large middle class, per capita income levels comparable to Venezuela, Trinidad or Korea, one of the best educational systems in the Arab world, a well educated population and generally good standards of medical care.\nSanctions.\nIraq's seizure of Kuwait in August 1990, subsequent international economic sanctions on Iraq, and damage from military action by the international coalition beginning in January 1991, drastically reduced economic activity. The regime exacerbated shortages by supporting large military and internal security forces and by allocating resources to key supporters of the ruling Party. GDP dropped to one-fourth of the country's 1980 GDP and continued to decline under the postwar international sanctions, until receiving aid from the U.N. Oil-for-Food Programme in 1997.\nThe implementation of the UN's Oil for Food program in December 1996 helped improve economic conditions. For the first six six-month phases of the program, Iraq was allowed to export increasing amounts of oil in exchange for food, medicine, and other humanitarian goods. In December 1999, the UN Security Council authorized Iraq to export as much oil as required to meet humanitarian needs. Per capita, food imports increased substantially, while medical supplies and health care services steadily improved, though per capita economic production and living standards were still well below their prewar level.\nIraq changed its oil reserve currency from the U.S. dollar to the euro in 2000. However, 28% of Iraq's export revenues under the program were deducted to meet UN Compensation Fund and UN administrative expenses. The drop in GDP in 2001 was largely the result of the global economic slowdown and lower oil prices.\nIraq experienced a modest growth by 2000, when the government attempted to make improvements and reorganizations in the economic system. Oil exports gradually increased as new pipelines were constructed and damaged facilities were restored.\nAfter the invasion of Iraq in 2003.\nThe removal of sanctions on 24 May 2003 and rising oil prices in the mid-to-late 2000s led to a doubling in oil production from a low of 1.3 mbpd during the turbulence of 2003 to a high of 2.6 mbpd in 2011. Furthermore, reduced inflation and violence since 2007 have translated to real increases in living standards for Iraqis. One of the key economic challenges was Iraq's immense foreign debt, estimated at $130 billion. Although some of this debt was derived from normal export contracts that Iraq had failed to pay for, some was a result of military and financial support during Iraq's war with Iran.\nThe Coalition Provisional Authority made efforts to modernize the economy after the 2003 U.S.-led invasion, through privatization and reducing the country's foreign debt. As a result Iraq's economy expanded rapidly during this time, though growth was stunted by the insurgency, civil war, economic mismanagement, and oil shortages caused by outdated technology. Since mid-2009, oil export earnings have returned to levels seen before . Government revenues rebounded, along with global oil prices. In 2011, Iraq increased oil exports above their then-current level of per day as a result of new contracts with international oil companies. The export was thought likely to fall short of the per day forecasting in the budget. Iraq's contracts with major oil companies had the potential to greatly expand oil revenues, but Iraq needed to upgrade its oil processing, pipeline, and export infrastructure to enable these deals to reach their potential.\nAn improved security environment and an initial wave of foreign investment helped to spur economic activity, particularly in the energy, construction, and retail sectors. Broader economic improvement, long-term fiscal health, and sustained increases in the standard of living still depended on the government passing major policy reforms and the continued development of Iraq's massive oil reserves. Although foreign investors viewed Iraq with increasing interest in 2010, most were still hampered by difficulties acquiring land for projects and other regulatory impediments.\nThe Jubilee Iraq campaign argued that much of these debts were odious (illegitimate). However, as the concept of odious debt is not accepted, trying to deal with the debt on those terms would have embroiled Iraq in legal disputes for years. Iraq decided to deal with its debt more pragmatically and approached the Paris Club of official creditors.\nIn a December 2006 \"Newsweek International\" article, a study by Global Insight in London was reported to show \"that Civil war or not, Iraq has an economy, and\u2014mother of all surprises\u2014it's doing remarkably well. Real estate is booming. Construction, retail and wholesale trade sectors are healthy, too, according to [the report]. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce reports 34,000 registered companies in Iraq, up from 8,000 three years ago. Sales of secondhand cars, televisions and mobile phones have all risen sharply. Estimates vary, but one from Global Insight puts GDP growth at 17 per cent last year and projects 13 per cent for 2006. The World Bank has it lower: at 4 per cent this year. But, given all the attention paid to deteriorating security, the startling fact is that Iraq is growing at all.\"\nIndustry.\nSince 1974, after the government took direct control of Iraq\u2019s largest private oil production operations, Mosul Oil and Basra Oil, most of Iraq's manufacturing activity has been closely connected to the oil industry. The major industries in that category have been petroleum refining and the manufacture of chemicals and fertilizers. Before 2003, diversification was hindered by limitations on privatization and the effects of the international sanctions of the 1990s. Since 2003, security problems have blocked efforts to establish new enterprises. The construction industry is an exception; in 2000 cement was the only major industrial product not based on hydrocarbons. The construction industry has profited from the need to rebuild after Iraq's several wars. In the 1990s, the industry benefited from government funding of extensive infrastructure and housing projects and elaborate palace complexes.\nAutomobile industry.\nIraq has a growing automotive industry, which is mostly concentrated in Baghdad, Babylon and Erbil. According to the prime minister's economic advisor Mazhar Mohammed Salih, there are 9 million registered vehicles in Iraq. Iraq imports approximately 200,000 cars annually from international companies, most notably Iranian, European, Japanese, Korean, Chinese, and American manufacturers. He has emphasized that the presence of production facilities for international companies in Iraq would reduce the percentage of car imports from abroad by approximately 10%. \nAl-Sadeq Group manages numerous automotive manufacturing plants across the country, mostly concentrated around the Babylon governorate. The brands include Chery, FAW Group and Renault Trucks, with an upcoming factory for Bestune. The Chery facility in Iraq covers an area of , manufacture passenger cars having annual production capacity of 30,000 cars and employ 750 people directly and 5,000 people directly. It has also activated separate battery, tire, oil and plastic factory, which would act as ancillaries. Al-Sadeq's factory for FAW Group in the Babylon governorate spread across an area of , manufacturing passenger cars with an annual capacity of 25,000 cars. Al-Sadeq also operates an assembly for Renault Trucks in Iraq, which has an assembling capacity of 10 trucks daily. The group has also planned to construct a new plant for Bestune, which would expand its presence in Iraq and create more opportunities in the region.\nPrimary sectors.\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture contributes just 3.3% to the gross national product but employs a fifth of the labor force.\nHistorically, 50 to 60 per cent of Iraq's arable land was under cultivation. Under the UN Oil for Food program, Iraq imported large quantities of grains, meat, poultry, and dairy products. In 1981, the government abolished its collective farming program. During the Gulf War, Iraqi agriculture was disrupted physically and suffered from economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations. Imports were curtailed, petroleum exports were cut off and agricultural production with potential military application was halted. The Iraqi government responded by monopolizing grain and oilseed marketing, imposing production quotas, and instituting a Public Distribution System for basic foodstuffs. By mid-1991, the government supplied a \"basket\" of foodstuffs that provided about one-third of the caloric daily requirement and cost consumers about five percent of its market value. With subsidies for agricultural inputs diminished, the government's prices failed to cover their costs. Tax on agricultural production reached 20 to 35 percent by the mid-1990s. In October 1991 the Baghdad regime withdrew personnel from the northern region controlled by two Kurdish parties. Kurdistan Region was described as \"... a market economy essentially left alone by a fragile governing structure, but heavily influenced by substantial international humanitarian aid flows.\"\nIn December 1996, under an \"Oil for Food Program\" negotiated with the United Nations, Iraq started exporting petroleum and used the proceeds to import foodstuffs. Grain imports averaged $828 million from 1997 to 2001, an increase of over 180 percent from the previous five-year period. Due to foreign competition, Iraqi production declined (29 percent for wheat, 31 percent for barley, and 52 percent for maize). Because the government had neglected the production of forage crops, fruits, vegetables, and livestock other than poultry, those sectors were less buffeted by international affairs. Nevertheless, they were affected by severe drought, an outbreak of screwworm, and an epizootic of foot-and-mouth disease As the Oil for Food Program expanded to cover more agricultural inputs and machinery, the productivity of Iraqi agriculture stabilized around 2002.\nAfter the U.S. invasion in March 2003, many Iraqis became dependent on government-subsidized food. The US-funded agricultural reconstruction program thus focused on increased productivity under the aegis of Agricultural Reconstruction and Development Iraq (ARDI). Another program was run by Development Alternatives, Inc. (DAI) of Bethesda, Maryland. The restoration of Iraq's irrigation systems was largely funded by Bechtel International.\nARDI conducted trials to improve farming practices and crop varieties of winter cereals (wheat and barley), summer cereals (rice, maize, and sorghum), potatoes, and tomatoes. Feed supplements and veterinary treatments were introduced to increase ovulation, conception, and birth weights of livestock. Surveys were conducted of poultry growers and apple farmers. Nurseries were established for date palms and grapes. ARDI had projects promoting trade associations and producers' co-ops and supported extension as an appropriate governmental function. The contract eventually cost over $100 million and lasted through December 2006. Under its Community Action Program, USAID also funded an analysis of markets for sheep and wool. It awarded a contract to the University of Hawaii to revitalize higher education in agriculture. It awarded a contract for $120 million to the Louis Berger Group to promote Iraq's private sector, including agriculture.\nStarting in 2006, Provincial Reconstruction Teams were sent in to promote goodwill and sap the insurgency. \"PRTs\" allowed military commanders to identify local needs and, with few bureaucratic hurdles, to dispense up to $500,000. Civilians from many agencies within the U.S. Department of Agriculture, as well as USAID, served tours on PRTs. Some participants criticized the absence of a national agricultural strategy, or clear direction on the design of projects. Others complained that projects emphasized \"American-style, 21st-century agricultural technologies and methodologies...\" that were inappropriate for Iraq.\nAgricultural production did not rebound from the reconstruction program. According to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), between 2002 and 2013, the production of wheat increased 11 percent and milled rice 8 percent, but barley had decreased 13 percent and maize 40 percent. Scaled in \"international dollars\" (2004-2006 base equaling 100) Iraq's per capita food production was 135 in 2002, 96 in 2007, and 94 in 2012. The agricultural sector shed workers. In those same years, production per worker was 117, 106, and 130, respectively.\nThe international Oil-for-Food program (1997\u20132003) further reduced farm production by supplying artificially priced foreign foodstuffs. Because of favorable weather conditions, grain production was 22 percent higher than in 2002. Although growth continued in 2004, experts predicted that Iraq would be an importer of agricultural products for the foreseeable future. Long-term plans call for investment in agricultural machinery and materials and more prolific crop varieties\u2014improvements that did not reach Iraq's farmers under the Hussein regime. In 2004, the main crops were wheat, barley, corn, rice, vegetables, dates, and cotton, and the main livestock outputs were cattle and sheep.\nThe Agricultural Cooperative Bank, capitalized at nearly 1 G$ - by 1984, targets its low-interest, low-collateral loans to private farmers for mechanization, poultry projects, and orchard development. Large modern cattle, dairy, and poultry farms are under construction. Obstacles to agricultural development include labor shortages, inadequate management and maintenance, salinization, urban migration, and dislocations resulting from previous land reform and collectivization programs.\nIn 2011, an agricultural adviser to the Iraqi government, Layth Mahdi, summarized the forced United States agricultural reconstruction: Before 2003, Iraq had imported about 30 per cent of its food needs annually. The decline in agricultural production after this period, created the need for importing 90 per cent of the food at a cost estimated at more than $12 billion annually. Due to the sudden shift in the agricultural policy from subsidized assistance to an immediate shift to a free market policy, the outcomes led to a decline in production. The observed outcome resulted in many farmers abandoning the land and agriculture. The impact on natural resources results in an exploited and degraded environment leaving the land destitute and the people impoverished, unemployed [and] experiencing a sense of losing their human dignity.Importation of foreign workers and increased entry of women into traditionally male labour roles have helped compensate for agricultural and industrial labour shortages exacerbated by the war. A disastrous attempt to drain the southern marshes and introduce irrigated farming to this region merely destroyed a natural food producing area, while concentration of salts and minerals in the soil due to the draining left the land unsuitable for agriculture. \nIn the Mada'in Qada region east of Baghdad, hundreds of small farmers united to form the Green Mada'in Association for Agricultural Development, an agricultural cooperative that provides its members with drip irrigation and greenhouses as well as access to credit. \nIn recent years, farmers have been confronted with reduced rainfall and high temperatures. Particularly affected are small scale farmers who, unable to withstand lower water levels, are forced to leave their lands in search of different ways to fulfill their livelihoods.\nForestry, fishing, and mining.\nThroughout the twentieth century, human exploration, shifting agriculture, forest fires, and uncontrolled grazing denuded large areas of Iraq's natural forests, which in 2005 were almost exclusively confined to the northeastern highlands. Most of the trees found in that region are not suitable for lumbering. In 2002, a total of 112,000 cubic meters of wood were harvested, nearly half of which was used as fuel.\nDespite its notable large rivers, Iraq's fishing industry has remained relatively small and based largely on marine species in the Persian Gulf. In 2001, the approximate yield was 8,000 tons (compared to 18,000/t during the period between 1981-1997) according to official government estimates.\nAside from hydrocarbons, Iraq's mining industry has been confined to extraction of relatively small amounts of phosphates (at Akashat), salt, and sulfur (near Mosul). Since a productive period in the 1970s, the mining industry has been hampered by the Iran\u2013Iraq War (1980\u201388), the sanctions of the 1990s, and the economic collapse of 2003.\nEnergy.\nIraq is one of the most oil-rich countries in the world. The country holding the fifth largest proven crude oil reserves,5 totaling 147.22 billion barrels at the end of 2017. Most of this oil\u20144 million barrels per day out of 4.3 million barrels produced daily\u2014is exported, making Iraq the third-largest exporter of oil.5 Despite its ongoing civil war, Iraq was able to increase oil production during 2015 and 2016, with production dipping by 3.5 per cent in 2017 due to conflict with the Kurdistan Regional Government and OPEC production limits.5 By world standards, production costs for Iraqi oil are relatively low. However, four wars\u2014the 1980\u20131988 Iraq-Iran War, 1991 Gulf War, the 2003\u20132011 War in Iraq, and the civil war\u2014and the 1991\u20132003 UN sanctions have left the industry's infrastructure in poor condition.\nIn the 1970s, Iraq produced over 3.5 million barrels of oil per day. Production began to fall during the Iran-Iraq War, before plummeting 85 per cent after the 1991 invasion of Kuwait. UN sanctions prevented the export of oil until 1996, and then allowed exports only in exchange for humanitarian aid in the Oil-for-Food Programme.\nThe 2003 lifting of sanctions enabled production\u2014and exports\u2014to restart. Production has since recovered to pre-Gulf War levels, and most of Iraq's oil infrastructure has been repaired, despite persistent sabotage by the Islamic State (ISIL) and others. In 2004, Iraq had eight oil refineries, the largest of which were at Baiji, Basra, and Daura.\nDespite its oil wealth, sabotage and technical problems at refineries have forced Iraq to import petroleum, other refined oil products, and electricity from the neighbouring countries, especially Iran. In 2004, for example, Iraq spent $60 million per month for imported gasoline. Sabotage\nIn late 2004 and early 2005, regular sabotage of plants and pipelines reduced export and domestic distribution of oil, particularly to Baghdad. Nationwide fuel shortages and power outages resulted. Persistent ISIL sabotage of pipelines, power plants and power lines, and theft of oil and electricity have also contributed to the July 2018 protests in southern Iraq.\nIn 2004, plans called for increased domestic utilization of natural gas to replace oil and for use in the petrochemical industry. However, because most of Iraq's gas output is associated with oil, output growth depends on developments in the oil industry.\nHalf of Iraq's power plants were destroyed in the Persian Gulf War of 1991, and full recovery never occurred. In mid-2004, Iraq had an estimated 5,000 megawatts of power-generating capacity, compared with 7,500 megawatts of demand. At that time, the transmission system included 17,700 kilometers of line. In 2004, plans called for construction of two new power plants and restoration of existing plants and transmission lines to ease the blackouts and economic hardship caused by this shortfall, but sabotage and looting kept capacity below 6,000 megawatts. The ongoing civil war, sabotage of transmission lines, and government corruption caused the electricity shortage to worsen: by 2010 demand outstripped supply by 6000 megawatts.\nOil continues to dominate Iraq's economy. As of 2018[ [update]], oil is responsible for over 65% of GDP and 90% of total government revenue. Petroleum constitutes 94% of Iraq's exports with a value of $59.73 billion in 2017. The central government hopes to diversify the economy away from oil, and has had some success: non-oil GDP growth, which was below the regional average from 2014 to 2016, pushed above the average in 2017.4 Despite this, the percentage of government spending going to non-oil investment has continued to decline since 2013 and now stands at only 34 per cent.4\n2009 oil services contracts.\nBetween June 2009 and February 2010 the Ministry of Oil tendered for the award of Service Contracts to develop Iraq's existing oil fields. The results of the tender, which were broadcast live on Iraqi television, are as follows for all major fields awarded but excluding the Kurdistan Region where Production Sharing Contracts have been awarded that are currently being disputed by the Baghdad government. All contracts are awaiting final ratification of the awards by the Iraqi government. Company shares are subject to change as a result of commercial negotiations between parties.\n\"Notes:\"\nIn summary the shares by region in the increased production are:\nServices.\nFinance.\nIraq's financial services have been the subject of post-Saddam reforms. The 17 private banks established during the 1990s were limited to domestic transactions and attracted few private depositors. Those banks and two main state banks were badly damaged by the international embargo of the 1990s. To further privatize and expand the system, in 2003 the Coalition Provisional Authority removed restrictions on international bank transactions and freed the Central Bank of Iraq (CBI) from government control. In its first year of independent operation, the CBI received credit for limiting Iraq's inflation. In 2004, three foreign banks (HSBC, Standard Chartered, National Bank of Kuwait) were the first to receive licenses to do business in Iraq.\nPrivate security.\nBecause of the danger posed by Iraq's ongoing insurgency, the security industry has been a uniquely prosperous part of the services sector. Often run by former US military personnel, in 2005 at least 26 companies offered personal and institutional protection, surveillance, and other forms of security.\nRetail.\nIn the early post-Hussein period, a freewheeling retail trade in all types of commodities straddled the line between legitimate and illegitimate commerce, taking advantage of the lack of income tax and import controls.\nTourism.\nThe Iraq tourism industry, which in peaceful times has profited from Iraq's many places of cultural interest (earning US$14 million in 2001), has been dormant since 2003. Despite conditions, in 2005 the Iraqi Tourism Board maintained a staff of 2,500 and 14 regional offices. Between 2009 and 2010, 165 tourists from 16 countries entered Iraq to visit historic sites; as of January 2011, a U.S. State Department grant provided $2 million to help preserve Babylon, supporting the re-opening of one of the site's two museums.\nTelecommunications.\nFrom 2003 to 2008, mobile phone subscriptions had expanded over hundred-fold to ten million nationwide, according to the Brookings Institution.\nLabor force.\nIn 2002, Iraq's labour force was estimated at 6.8 million people.\nIn 1996, some 66.4 per cent of the labour force worked in services, 17.5 per cent in industry, and 16.1 per cent in agriculture. 2004 estimates of Iraq's unemployment ranged from 30 per cent to 60 per cent.\nThe CPA has referred to a 25% unemployment rate, the Iraqi Ministry of Planning mentioned a 30% unemployment rate, whereas the Iraqi Ministry of Social Affairs claims it to be 48%. Other sources are claiming a 20% unemployment rate and a probably 60% under-employment rate. The actual figure is problematic because of high participation in black-market activities and poor security conditions in many populous areas. In central Iraq, security concerns discouraged the hiring of new workers and the resumption of regular work schedules. At the same time, the return of Iraqis from other countries increased the number of job seekers. In late 2004, most legitimate jobs were in the government, the army, the oil industry, and security-related enterprises. Under Saddam Hussein's reign, many of the highest-paid workers were employed by the greatly overstaffed government, whose overthrow disrupted the input of these people to the economy. In 2004, the U.S. Agency for International Development committed US$1 billion for a worker-training program. In early 2004, the minimum wage was US$72 per month.\nExternal trade.\nIraq is a founding member of OPEC. Petroleum constitutes 99,7% of Iraq's exports with a value of $43,8 billion in 2016.\nFrom the 1990s until 2003, the international trade embargo restricted Iraq's export activity almost exclusively to oil. In 2003, oil accounted for about US$7.4 billion of Iraq's total US$7.6 billion of export value, and statistics for earlier years showed similar proportions. After the end of the trade embargo in 2003 expanded the range of exports, oil continued to occupy the dominant position: in 2004 Iraq's export income doubled (to US$16.5 billion), but oil accounted for all but US$340 million (2 per cent) of the total. In late 2004, sabotage significantly reduced oil output, and experts forecast that output, hence exports, would be below capacity in 2005 as well. In 2004, the chief export markets were the United States (which accounted for nearly half), Italy, France, Jordan, Canada, and the Netherlands. In 2004, the value of Iraq's imports was US$21.7 billion, incurring a trade deficit of about US$5.2 billion. In 2003, the main sources of Iraq's imports were Turkey, Jordan, Vietnam, the United States, Germany, and Britain. Because of Iraq's inactive manufacturing sector, the range of imports was quite large, including food, fuels, medicines, and manufactured goods. By 2010, exports rose to US$50.8 billion and imports rose to US$45.2 billion. Chief 2009 export partners were: U.S., India, Italy, South Korea, Taiwan, China, Netherlands, and Japan. Chief 2009 import partners were: Turkey, Syria, U.S., China, Jordan, Italy, and Germany.\nIn March 2022, Iran-Iraq trade reached a volume of 10 billion USD, as joint ventures increased significantly but were still limited due to sanctions against Iran. Especially goods originating from Iran were subject to a trade embargo imposed by the United States and the European Union. Iran and Iraq signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) on economic cooperation in January 2021.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14670", "revid": "141808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14670", "title": "Transport in Iraq", "text": "Transport in Iraq consists of railways, highways, waterways, pipelines, ports and harbors, marines and airports.\nRailways.\n\"total:\"\n2,272\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"standard gauge:\"\n2,272\u00a0km \nFor more than two decades there have been plans for building a metro system in Baghdad. It is possible that part of the tunnels have been built, but that they are now used for military, shelter, hiding, and escaping purposes. U.N. inspectors have heard of the tunnels for years, but have not found their entrances. https:// http:// http:// http:// In November, 2008, an overground service dubbed the Baghdad Metro began service. Local government in Baghdad is arranging feasibility studies for the construction of two new underground lines\nA 37\u00a0km monorail is planned in Najaf, which would link three Shi'ite holy sites.\nThe first Iraqi Republic Railways train to Basra since the overthrow of Saddam Hussein's regime arrived on 26 April 2003. British troops hope to use the 68\u00a0km long railway to transport much-needed aid supplies from the port town of Umm Qasr to Basra.\nIn June 2011, it was announced that planning had begun for a new high-speed rail line between Baghdad and Basra, with a memorandum of understanding with Alstom having been signed.\nRailway links with adjacent countries.\nAll adjacent countries generally use , but may vary in couplings. Neighbours with electrified railways \u2013 Turkey and Iran \u2013 both use the world standard 25 kVAC\nRoad Transport.\nAn overland trans-desert bus service between Beirut, Haifa, Damascus and Baghdad was established by the \"Nairn Transport Company\" of Damascus in 1923.\nRoads.\n\"total:\"\n55,100\u00a0km \n&lt;br&gt;\"paved:\"\n40,362\u00a0km,\n&lt;br&gt;\"unpaved:\"\n10,274\u00a0km (2025)\nWaterways.\n5,729\u00a0km (Euphrates River (2,815\u00a0km), Tigris River 1,899\u00a0km, Third River (565\u00a0km)); Shatt al Arab is usually navigable by maritime traffic for about 130\u00a0km. The channel has been dredged to 3 m and is in use. The Tigris and Euphrates Rivers have navigable sections for shallow-draft watercraft; the Shatt al Basrah canal was navigable by shallow-draft craft before closing in 1991 because of the Gulf War.\nPipelines.\ncrude oil 5,432\u00a0km; natural gas 2,455\u00a0km; refined products 1,637\u00a0km; liquid petroleum gas 913\u00a0km\nMerchant marine.\n\"total:\"\n32 ships (with a volume of \u00a0gross tonnage\u00a0(GT) or over) totaling \u00a0GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT)\n&lt;br&gt;\"ships by type:\"\ncargo ship 14, passenger ship 1, passenger/cargo 1, petroleum tanker 13, refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off ship 2 (1999 est.)\nAirports.\nIraq has about 104 airports as of 2012. Major airports include:\nHeliports.\n81 (2025)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14671", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14671", "title": "Military of Iraq", "text": ""}
{"id": "14672", "revid": "47069993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14672", "title": "Foreign relations of Iraq", "text": "The foreign relations of Iraq are the international relations maintained by the Republic of Iraq since its independence from the Ottoman Empire proclaimed in 1921. Iraq was a British protectorate under a mandate from the League of Nations between 1921 and 1932, then effectively gained its independence with the 1958 revolution which overthrew the pro-Western royal family and established the Republic.\nIraq is a member of the United Nations, the Arab League (of which it is a founding member) since 1945, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (of which it is also a founding member) since 1960, and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation since 1976. The international trade embargo on Iraq between 1990 and 2003 in retaliation for the invasion of Kuwait by Saddam Hussein allowed it to relatively spare its oil reserves compared to other countries in the region. Like Saudi Arabia, one of its other major resources is the presence of Islamic holy sites on its territory which attracts millions of pilgrims each year (mainly Iranians): the shrine of Ali in Najaf and the city of Karbala.\nThe Iraqi Minister of Foreign Affairs is the Kurd Fuad Hussein, since June 2020. This position is strategic for Iraq, which largely depends on its foreign relations for its economy and security, after being the scene of a particularly violent civil war between 2013 and 2017.\nBut Iraq is also a battleground between foreign powers vying to extend their influence in the Middle East, mainly Iran, the United States, Turkey, and to a lesser extent, Saudi Arabia. Unlike Syria, its bordering neighbor, these foreign powers avoid military confrontations on Iraqi soil (with the notable exception of the elimination of the Iranian general Qasem Soleimani by an American strike in Baghdad in 2020) and prefer political and commercial struggles.\nThus, the formation of various Iraqi governments is often the result of a compromise integrating Iranian, American, and Turkish concerns, ensuring that Iraq's foreign policy will not be unfavorable to them. It must also be representative of its multi-ethnic and multi-denominational population, while the Shiite sectarianism of Nouri al-Maliki, Prime Minister from 2006 to 2014, is considered one of the main causes of the second Iraqi civil war. This war saw, like the 1991 Gulf War, the intervention in Iraq of a vast international military coalition led by the United States, this time in support of the Iraqi government, which allowed it to regain control of the entire territory in 2017.\nSince then, Iraq has gradually pursued its global reintegration, being the subject of several international conferences in August 2021 and December 2022 aimed at supporting Baghdad on economic, diplomatic, and security levels. Several Arab and Western countries participate, while this summit also aims to promote dialogue between regional stakeholders.\nChronology of relations.\n1932 to 1958.\nIn 1921, the British, victors of the Mesopotamian campaign (Iraqi theater of World War I), established a protectorate over Iraq which they transformed into a constitutional monarchy and installed the Hashemite dynasty in power. Despite its independence officially obtained in 1932, Iraq remained a satellite state of the United Kingdom which continued to exert its influence via the royal family favorable to i.t\nAt the beginning of World War II, the former Prime Minister Rashid Ali al-Gaylani overthrew the pro-British Prime Minister in place Nuri al-Said by a coup d'\u00e9tat, and acceded to power. He oriented the kingdom's policy towards neutrality, then towards rapprochement with the Axis powers, provoking the Anglo-Iraqi War, then the reoccupation of Iraq by the victorious British. After the end of World War II, violent strikes shook Kirkuk, where protesters denounced working conditions, as well as British domination over oil exploitation. Tensions degenerated further when Prime Minister Salih Jabr signed a new treaty with London (supposedly more favorable to Iraq) in 1948, leading to increasing repression by the government. The same year, the Iraqi army joined the Arab coalition led by Egypt against Israel during the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, and conquered the regions of Jenin and Nablus, before being repelled by a counter-offensive that led to Israel's victory.\nIn 1955, Nuri al-Said, recalled by the monarchy to the post of Prime Minister, reaffirmed Iraq's pro-Western foreign policy by signing the Baghdad Pact, a military alliance established by Great Britain and integrating former British colonies in the Middle East, as well as Turkey. The year 1956 was marked by the Suez Crisis in Egypt, a Franco-British military intervention aimed at regaining control of the Suez Canal nationalized by Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser. This crisis provoked strong hostility from local populations towards the former colonial powers in the region, while the success achieved by Nasser against this Western interference inspired Arab nationalists.\nOn 1 February 1958, Syria and Egypt united to create the United Arab Republic. In reaction, two weeks later, on 14 February 1958, Iraq and Jordan whose kings Faisal II and Hussein are cousins, united in turn and founded the Arab Federation of Iraq and Jordan.\n1958 to 1968.\nIn July 1958, a political crisis erupted in Lebanon resulting from tensions between the pro-Western government and its political opponents inspired by Nasser, eager to join the United Arab Republic. Neighboring Jordan feeling threatened, requested military support from the Iraqi government, which sent the 2nd armored division from Diwaniyah towards Amman. But the Nasserist officer Abd al-Salam Arif who commanded this division decided to turn back on the night of 13 July 1958 to 14 July 1958, and upon returning to Baghdad, attacked the royal palace with the help of Abd al-Karim Qasim, co-organizer of the coup d'\u00e9tat. Prime Minister Nuri al-Said and the royal family were massacred (despite the latter's quick surrender), after which the putschists proclaimed the Republic of Iraq, and the dissolution of the Arab Federation of Iraq and Jordan.\nIn the following years, the newly proclaimed Republic based its regime on Arab socialism and reoriented its foreign policy towards the Eastern Bloc allowing several communist countries, including the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China, to open embassies in Baghdad. While withdrawing from the Baghdad Pact (whose headquarters was moved to Ankara) in March 1959, Abd al-Karim Qasim in power in Iraq maintained close ties with London and the United States, which accommodated his rapprochement with the Soviet Union. An Iraqi delegation went to Moscow as early as 16 March 1959.\nDomestically, Abd al-Karim Qasim and Abd al-Salam Arif shared power and the main ministries, but quickly, tensions appeared in the new Iraqi government, between nationalists favorable to Iraq's independence, and Nasserists favorable to its attachment to the United Arab Republic. In December 1958, Abd al-Salam Arif (Nasserist) was arrested and imprisoned on the order of the Prime Minister, his former brother-in-arms Abd al-Karim Qasim (independentist), provoking tensions with Egypt of Gamal Abdel Nasser. These were accentuated in June 1961 by an Iraqi project to annex Kuwait, a small oil-rich emirate southeast of Iraq, condemned by Egypt, Lebanon, Jordan, Tunisia, the United States, Iran, and Japan. In retaliation for these international condemnations, Abd al-Karim Qasim broke Iraq's diplomatic relations with these states. Great Britain kept 5,000 soldiers in Kuwait (supposed to withdraw upon its independence in 1961), replaced the following months by a multinational Arab force initiated by Nasser, pushing Abd al-Karim Qasim to abandon his invasion project. In February 1963, the latter was overthrown and executed following a coup d'\u00e9tat by the Ba'ath Party, which placed his rival Abd al-Salam Arif in the presidency, a position he held until his accidental death three years later. His brother Abd al-Rahman Arif succeeded him, but remained in power for only two years.\n1968 to 2003.\nThe year 1968 was marked by a new Ba'ath Party coup d'\u00e9tat, led by Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr, former Prime Minister of Abd al-Salam Arif (from February to November 1963) and Saddam Hussein, who in turn shared power, the first as president, the second as vice-president. From then on, Saddam Hussein remained at the head of Iraq (of which he became President in 1979) for 35 years until his overthrow by the American invasion in 2003. Under his governance, Iraq became a regional power, partly thanks to oil revenues and support from Western countries, Arabs, and the Eastern Bloc. For in 1973, Iraq participated in the consultation of oil-producing countries which caused a quadrupling of the barrel price, while this agreement facilitated the integration of the new Iraqi regime into the Arab world.\nIn 1979, as Saddam Hussein acceded to the presidency, Iran found itself diplomatically isolated after the Islamic Revolution, while Iraq, perceived as a stabilizing force for the region, was supported by France, the United States, the Soviet Union, and Arab powers such as Saudi Arabia and Egypt. Benefiting from significant financial and material support, Saddam Hussein attacked Iran to annex part of its territory and oil resources in September 1980. Although supplied in large quantities with weapons and technologies, the Iraqi army bogged down and the Iran\u2013Iraq War ended after eight years in August 1988, without a winner, but with a human toll of several hundred thousand victims. After the war, Saddam Hussein pursued his foreign policy towards Arab states, by creating an Arab Cooperation Council composed of Iraq, Jordan, Egypt, and North Yemen.\nTwo years later, ruined by its military expenditures and accusing Kuwait, one of its main creditors, of having stolen oil from it by horizontal drilling, Saddam Hussein decided, like his predecessor Abd al-Karim Qasim 30 years earlier, to invade the small Emirate. This invasion changed Iraq's relations with the Arab world and the West, which formed a military coalition led by the United States and repelled the Iraqi army during the Gulf War. Again militarily defeated and diplomatically isolated, Iraq saw UN-imposed economic sanctions which severely deteriorated the living conditions of its population, but these were alleviated by the \"Oil for Food\" program aimed at meeting its humanitarian needs. From March 1997, Iraq resumed its diplomatic and commercial relations with the West and the Arab states of the region, except for Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.\n2003 to present day.\nIn 2003, a joint offensive by the United States and Great Britain in Iraq caused the overthrow of Saddam Hussein (executed in 2006), replaced by a Shiite government favorable to Iran and a strategic ally of the United States.\nThis regime change provoked a series of insurrections, notably two civil wars (from 2006 to 2009 then from 2013 to 2017), the second, particularly deadly, marked by the takeover of a large part of Iraqi territory by the jihadist group \"Islamic State\" in 2014. Following this lightning advance by the jihadists, a vast Arab-Western coalition formed again, this time in support of the Iraqi government, and allowed the reconquest of most of the territories lost by the Iraqi army by the end of 2017. Since then, Iraq, again faced with the challenge of pacification and reconstruction of the territory, is torn by its contradictory alliance with Iran on one hand, and the United States on the other, these two countries being enemies since the 1979 Iranian revolution.\nThe beginning of the year 2021 was marked by the historic visit of Pope Francis to Iraq, followed worldwide, and focused on reconciliation and interfaith dialogue. This papal visit was unanimously welcomed by the Iraqi political class, as well as by the United States, France, Iran, the Lebanese Hezbollah (pro-Iran), and the UN. In August of the same year, Iraqi Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi organized a regional summit in Baghdad also including France, where representatives from Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Qatar, Iran, Turkey, Egypt, and Jordan were invited. The stated objective was to defuse tensions in the region and reach agreements on pressing issues such as the Yemeni civil war, the economic and social crisis in Lebanon, maritime security, or the scarcity of water in the region.\nIn November 2021, Mustafa al-Kadhimi was the victim of a drone assassination attempt at his residence in Baghdad, injuring several members of his security staff, whose perpetrators remain unknown. This triggered a broad wave of international solidarity, with several dozen foreign governments, Arab, Asian and Western bringing their support to the Iraqi Prime Minister, illustrating Iraq's reintegration into the international community.\nIn October 2022, the Iraqi parliament designated Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani as the new Prime Minister. In foreign policy, the latter declared \"not to want to adopt the policy of axes, instead pursuing a policy of friendship and cooperation with everyone\" while not allowing \"Iraq to be a base from which other countries are attacked\". Researcher Lahib Higel from the International Crisis Group predicted that Mr. Sudani would seek, like his predecessor, \"a balance between the West and Iran\", especially since Iraq, exhausted by years of crises and wars, has a \"need for foreign investments in various sectors\". In December 2022, the second \"Baghdad Conference\" opened in Amman, capital of Jordan, following that of August 2021, aimed at supporting Iraq on economic, diplomatic, and security levels. Several Arab and Western countries participated: the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council, as well as Jordan which hosted this summit, Egypt, Iran, Turkey, as well as France and the European Union represented by its foreign policy chief Josep Borrell. \nIn January 2023, Iraq organized and won the Arabian Gulf Cup, in the coastal city of Basra, in the southeast of the country. This event had strong symbolic importance, as security obstacles had prevented Iraq from organizing it since 1979, the year preceding the Iran\u2013Iraq War, which was followed by the Gulf War, the 1990s embargo, the American invasion, and the two Iraqi civil wars. It should also be noted that the Iraqi national football team was, due to the invasion of Kuwait, excluded between 1990 and 2004 from this competition in which seven other Arab countries participate: Oman, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Bahrain, and Kuwait. Following the victory of the Iraqi team in the final of this competition (against the Oman team), the Iraqi media \"Kitabat\" declared that this success must \"be a turning point in Iraq's relationship with its Arab environment\" and \"reduce foreign influences to zero\".\nIn March 2023, the Secretary-General of the United Nations Ant\u00f3nio Guterres went to Baghdad at a time when Iraq was commemorating this year the 20th anniversary of the fall of Saddam Hussein's regime. He hailed the \"central\" role of Iraq for \"regional stability\" and \"the government's commitment to advancing dialogue and diplomacy\". The following week, another high UN official, the director of UNESCO Audrey Azoulay, in turn went to Iraq to visit reconstruction sites and discuss with Iraqi officials on culture and education. She was received upon her arrival in Baghdad by President Abdul Latif Rashid and Prime Minister Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani, before going to Mosul, then Erbil, while Iraq, cradle of ancient civilizations, has six sites listed as UNESCO World Heritage. \nIn spring and summer 2023, foreign investment projects multiplied in Iraq, mainly from the Arab Gulf countries, marking a positive turning point for Baghdad, whose economy has been very dependent on Iran since 2003. In May, Baghdad presented a project to build a 1,200\u00a0km corridor including a road and a railway to connect the Gulf to Turkey: the \"Iraq Development Road\" project. These structures are intended to place Iraq on the global transport route by capitalizing on its geographical position, and develop interdependence between the countries of the region. Its purpose is notably to transport goods from the Iraqi port of al-Faw to European markets via Turkey. This project plans the construction of about fifteen stations and should serve Qatar, United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Syria, Oman, Jordan, Turkey, Iran, and Saudi Arabia. Three months later, the Iraqi Prime Minister kicked off the construction works of the first railway line connecting Iraq to the neighboring Iran's rail network: the \"Basra-Shalamcheh connection project\". In April 2024, a memorandum of understanding launching the \"Iraq Development Road\" project was signed in Baghdad by the Iraqi and Turkish heads of state, as well as the transport ministers of four concerned countries: Iraq, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, and Qatar.\nIn September 2024, Iraq obtained the departure of part of the American troops stationed on its territory to fight the Islamic State, within about a year. Farhad Alaeddine, advisor to the Iraqi Prime Minister for Foreign Affairs, declared: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We are now on the verge of taking relations between Iraq and the members of the international coalition to another level, focusing on bilateral relations in military, security, economic, and cultural fields.At the same time, Baghdad expelled UN officials responsible for investigating the Yazidi genocide committed by the organization.\nIn December, the fall of the Syrian regime favorable to Baghdad and Tehran, overthrown by a coalition of Sunni rebels, put the Iraqi government in an awkward position, as Iraqi fighters had come to its aid, in vain. The end of the Assad reign in Syria reshuffles the regional cards (notably cutting the Shiite corridor Tehran-Baghdad-Damascus-Beirut), and forces the Iraqi government to position itself towards its new neighboring interlocutors, at the risk of compromising certain internal balances. Moreover, Iraqi officials having noted the speed with which Iran abandoned Bashar al-Assad and the speed with which his regime collapsed, are encouraged to reevaluate their own dependence on Tehran. Iraq could thus conform to the American will to distance itself from its Iranian neighbor, especially since the return of Donald Trump to the presidency of the United States will probably multiply the efforts to curb Iranian strike force.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Iraq maintains diplomatic relations with by date:\nRelations with Middle Eastern and Central Asian countries.\nRelations with Iran.\nRelations prior to the 1979 Iranian Revolution.\nMarked by mutual influences and conflicts, relations between Iraq and Iran are among the oldest between two neighboring civilizations. In the Sumerian Babylonian era, Iran was subject to the first Iraqi empires, and religions prior to monotheistic cults left a deep imprint there. Subsequently, the rise of the Persian Empire led in 639 BC to the occupation of Babylon. A few years after the Hijrah, these lands, Iraqi first, then Iranian, yielded to the first Muslim conquests before entering the fold of the Abbasid Caliphate encompassing Persia, the Arabian Peninsula and the Maghreb, with Baghdad as capital. The border between Iran and Iraq was drawn at the beginning of the 16th century with the emergence of the Safavid Empire on the current territory of Iran, while Iraq was integrated into the Ottoman Empire.\nAfter World War I, while Iraq separated from the Ottoman Empire and became a British protectorate, Iran, feeling competed by this new national entity, was the only country to abstain from recognizing this new established state until 1929. From the 1930s, the two countries ultimately became allies, both governed by pro-Western monarchies, and signatories in 1955 to the Baghdad Pact, (from which Iraq withdrew in 1959 following the Iraqi revolution). At the beginning of the 1970s, however, the two states opposed each other during the Dhofar War (1964-1976), in which Iran intervened massively alongside the pro-British Sultan Qaboos bin Said from 1973, while the Ba'athist Iraqi regime supported the Marxist rebellion.\nThe border that currently separates Iraq and Iran as independent states measures 1,458 kilometers and was approved by the Algiers Agreements signed in 1975. The objective of this treaty is for Iraq to convince Iran to cease its support for Kurdish autonomists, in exchange for Iraq's recognition of the borders of the Shatt al-Arab (favorable to Iran). Deprived of Iranian support, the Kurds of Iraq lay down their arms and accept a peace agreement proposed a year earlier by the government.\nIn 1979, the Iranian monarchy was in turn overthrown by a popular uprising after which Saddam Hussein decided to renege on the Algiers Agreements and invade Iran.\nIran-Iraq War (1980-1988).\nWhen Saddam Hussein attacked Iran in September 1980, he declared three conquest objectives: occupy the Shatt al-Arab (delta of the Tigris and Euphrates), the \"river of the Arabs\", which he had to share with Iran in 1975; make the \"Khalidj al-Farsi\", the Persian Gulf, the \"Khalidj al-Arabi\", the \"Arabian Gulf\", by driving the Iranians from the islets that control access to the Strait of Hormuz; seize the oil-rich province of Khuzestan, named by Arab nationalists, the \"Arabistan\".\nOne can add to this Saddam Hussein's fear of seeing the revolution of Iran's Shiites spread to Iraq, where Shiite Muslims represent 60% of the population without being associated with the government, and are perceived as a threat by the power.\nAs early as 1982, noting the failure of his offensive, Baghdad tried to end the conflict, but the ceasefire was only accepted six years later by Iran under military pressure from the United States whose fleet was very present in the Gulf. The war thus ended in 1988 and resulted in a territorial \"status quo\", but the Iraqi economy emerged in ruins, with an external debt of more than 70 billion dollars (half of which owed to the Gulf States), and a reconstruction cost estimated at 60 billion dollars. It also gave Iran the opportunity to establish influence over part of Iraqi society by welcoming, training, and enlisting opponents: the Kurds, and the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq and its armed branch, and the Badr organization from which a large contingent of high-ranking Iraqi state officials today originate.\nOn 15 August 1990, Saddam Hussein, in turn diplomatically isolated following the invasion of Kuwait ten days earlier, renewed ties with Iran, and proposed to it the reapplication of the Algiers Agreement. The following year, Iran did not participate in the Gulf War, but hosted on its territory many Iraqi Shiite political organizations hostile to Saddam Hussein. Until the overthrow of Saddam Hussein in 2003, the border between Iran and Iraq remained officially closed although from 1991, the embargo imposed on Iraq by the UN increased smuggling with Iran already creating strong commercial interdependence between the two states yet still officially enemies.\nIn 2003, the Iraq War causing the fall of Saddam Hussein, allowed the two enemy neighbors to get closer and formalize very strong economic, political, and commercial relations.\nPolitical and economic relations post-2003.\nAfter 2003, Iraq's very low productivity destroyed by the war allowed Iran to find an unexpected commercial outlet there while its economy was in turn stifled by US economic sanctions imposed from 1995. Thus, between 2006 and 2016, annual trade exchanges between Iran and Iraq went from 1.6 billion to 18 billion dollars, with a trade balance largely favorable to Iran, making Iraq its \"economic lung\". Iraq exports to Iran dates, leather, and sulfur and imports from Iran cars, medical equipment, vegetables, construction materials, as well as fuel, gas, and electricity (imports from Iran representing one third of Iraqi consumption).\nIn parallel, after the overthrow of Saddam Hussein in 2003, Shiite-dominated governments favorable to Iran succeeded each other in Baghdad, creating the conditions for political rapprochement between the two countries. The warming of relations between the two countries materialized officially in March 2008 with the visit of Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad to Iraq. Of the six Iraqi Prime Ministers appointed between 2003 and 2020, three spent most of the 1980s in Iran, notably Nouri al-Maliki who held this post for eight years from 2006 to 2014. His pro-Iranian policy unfavorable to Sunni Muslims was considered in 2014 by many observers as one of the main reasons for the outbreak of the second Iraqi civil war in 2013, which forced him to resign in September 2014. In 2011, the withdrawal of Americans from Iraq gave Tehran access to Iraqi institutions, notably the intelligence services which previously worked with the Americans. Iran then has in Iraq eighteen offices and 5,700 rented accommodations to facilitate the work of Iranian intelligence agents.\nIn 2014, as political and economic instability in Iraq worsened with the civil war, Iran took charge of supplying Iraq with equipment and weapons and participated in the reconstruction of cities damaged by the war. The Iranian \"Qods Forces\" took advantage of this civil war to increase their influence by supporting the \"Popular Mobilization Units\" (\"Hachd al-Chaabi\"), which continued until the victory of the Iraqi government over the jihadists of the Islamic State in December 2017. The Iranian general and commander of the Qods Forces Qasem Soleimani personally directed offensives in several major battles of the conflict, notably during the siege of Amirli (2014), the battles of Tikrit (2014-2015). Baiji (2014-2015), and Fallujah (2016).\nAt the end of the second civil war in December 2017, the Iraqi government was again faced as after the 2003 war with the challenge of rebuilding the country and its economy, and further increased its economic dependence on Iran with which it multiplied trade agreements. On 11 March 2019, a year after the end of the civil war, Iranian President Hassan Rouhani went to Baghdad for a three-day visit, during which agreements were concluded between Iran and Iraq in several fields: oil, trade, health, education, and transport with the construction of a railway between Shalamcheh in Iran and Basra in Iraq. In addition, these agreements provided for the construction of joint industrial cities at the border for joint manufacturing production, as well as direct transport of goods. Finally, a symbolically strong aspect of these agreements was the reaffirmation of the 1975 Algiers Agreements on the border between the two states, the questioning of which by Saddam Hussein had been the cause of the Iran-Iraq War between 1980 and 1988.\nIn June 2020, the new Iraqi Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi made his first trip abroad to Iran, where he met Ayatollah Ali Khamenei and President Hassan Rouhani. Their discussions focused on ways to strengthen trade ties, the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic (while Iran is one of the most affected countries), and on efforts to ensure regional stability. Hassan Rouhani declared during a joint press conference: \"The two governments wish to expand bilateral relations to reach 20 billion dollars [in annual trade exchanges]\". This volume of exchanges, twice that of 2019, would be possible in the event of the lifting of US sanctions on Iran, a prospect conceivable with the upcoming end of Donald Trump's term. In February 2021, the foreign ministers of the two countries Javad Zarif and Fuad Hussein met in Tehran, in the presence of Hassan Rouhani and the secretary of the Iranian Supreme National Security Council, Ali Shamkhani. The Iranian representatives asked their Iraqi counterparts to expel US troops from their territory, calling their presence \"detrimental\", a year after the elimination in Baghdad by an American strike of the Iranian general Qasem Soleimani and the leader of the Iranian-backed Iraqi Shiite militias, Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis. Javad Zarif thanked the Iraqi justice for issuing on 7 January 2021, an arrest warrant against Donald Trump as part of the investigation into the elimination of Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis. In a context marked by the possibility of a resumption of dialogue between Washington and Tehran after the election of Joe Biden to the US presidency in November 2020, the officials also discussed strengthening economic ties, notably agreements on border markets, trade, transport of goods, debts, and banking issues.\nIn November 2022, Iraqi Prime Minister Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani went to Tehran a month after taking office to strengthen bilateral cooperation in all fields. He was welcomed with great pomp in Tehran by Iranian President Ebrahim Raisi as well as by Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who had not received his predecessor Mustafa al-Kadhimi, deemed close to Washington and Riyadh during his two visits to Tehran. A contract worth 4 billion dollars was signed during this visit to allow Tehran to export technical and engineering services to Iraq, while the Iranian Ministry of Petroleum announced the opening of an office in Baghdad. In parallel, the new Iraqi government approved the creation of a public works company managed by the Hashd al-Shaabi, a paramilitary coalition of pro-Iran militias.\nRanda Slim, senior researcher at the Middle East Institute, estimates that \"Tehran is more positively oriented towards this Prime Minister than his predecessor, which could translate into more economic engagement\". In September 2024, the new Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian went to Iraq for his first visit abroad since his election, and met Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani. During this meeting, 14 memoranda of understanding were signed to strengthen cooperation between the two neighboring countries.\nLimits.\nDespite these growing interactions between Iran and Iraq, these two countries are competitors on the international scene as producers and exporters of oil (but not for gas, Iran being an indispensable supplier for Iraq).The affinities between their governments do not reflect those between their populations, for whom despite the change in geopolitical context since the overthrow of Saddam Hussein, the war between Iran and Iraq from 1980 to 1988 continues to mark memories. Moreover, Iran's political and economic influence is very poorly experienced by the majority of the Iraqi population. In 2019, during the Iraqi protests of October, the protesters expressed their discontent by nicknaming the Iraqi leaders \"the tentacles of Iran\".\nIraqi Shiism competes with Iranian Shiism, and despite converging interests, the Ayatollah Sistani, the highest religious authority of Iraqi Shiism, is not aligned with the position of the Ayatollah Khamenei, although being himself of Iranian origin. His Iraqi Shiite rival Muqtada al-Sadr, particularly popular among the Iraqi population, is clearly appreciated for his \"nationalist Shiism\" considered a bulwark against foreign influences, American as well as Iranian.\nTehran has privileged links with Iraqi Kurdistan (particularly with the \"Patriotic Union of Kurdistan\"), which has several times manifested secessionist desires from Iraq. For its part, northern Iraq serves as a refuge for Iranian opposition groups: the PJAK, Iranian \"affiliate\" of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), the fighters of the Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran, and the Iranian communist organization Komala.\nIn September 2022, the Guardians of the Revolution, the ideological army of the Iranian regime, bombarded northern Iraq accused of serving as a refuge for Iranian Kurdish separatist groups, in a context of large-scale protests in Iran after the murder of a Kurdish civilian by Iran's Guidance Patrol. If the armed Iranian opponents settled in northern Iraq do not take part in these protests, many protesters, on the other hand, cross the Iraqi border to enlist in these organizations. A month and a half later, northern Iraq was again bombarded by Iranian missiles and drones supposed to target Iranian Kurdish opposition groups. In mid-July 2023, the Iraqi Ministry of Interior announced the deployment of a brigade at the border with Iran in Iraqi Kurdistan, with a budget of more than seven million dollars, comprising some 50 surveillance towers and 40 cameras, to prevent infiltrations and smuggling.\nIn January 2024, Iran again bombarded Iraqi Kurdistan in retaliation for the attack in the Iranian city of Kerman claimed by the Islamic State which killed 84 people the previous week. These Iranian strikes killed at least 4 people in Erbil, including a Kurdish businessman close to Iraqi Kurdish Prime Minister Masrour Barzani. This attack aroused anger in Iraq, even among Shiites who are ordinarily rather aligned with the Islamic Republic. Iraq recalled its ambassador to Tehran Nassir Abdul Mohsen and filed a complaint with the UN Security Council, marking the strongest diplomatic tensions between Baghdad and Tehran since the overthrow of Saddam Hussein.\nRelations with Turkey.\nHistory of Turkish-Iraqi relations.\nRelations between Turkey and Iraq are marked by the Ottoman Empire which included the two current states until its dismantling after World War I. After World War II, the two states were close allies, having notably been part of the Baghdad Pact in force between 1955 and 1978 (although Iraq withdrew in 1959). In 1973, Baghdad and Ankara concluded an agreement on Iraqi oil exports destined for Turkey.\nThe Kirkuk\u2013Ceyhan Oil Pipeline, put into service in 1977 to bypass a Syrian attempt to embargo its oil exports, allowed Iraq in 2014 to deliver up to 400,000 barrels of oil per day via Turkey, or a quarter of its oil exports. After the second Iraqi civil war (2013-2017), Iraq decided to build a second pipeline to the Turkish port of Ceyhan (from Baiji), due to damage caused by the Islamic State on the first.\nDuring the conflicts opposing Iran to Iraq, then Iraq to Kuwait, Turkey member of NATO and candidate to the European Union took the side of the Westerners supporting Iraq in 1980 then Kuwait in 1990, making the Incirlik Air Base available to the American and British armies. In 1991, Resolution 687 of the United Nations Security Council ended the Gulf War and opened the way to the autonomy of Iraqi Kurdistan, which became a refuge for the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) against which the Turkish government has been at war since the beginning of the 1980s. From then on, the Turkish government got closer to the Iraqi authorities and Kurdistan to secure its border and conduct military operations against the PKK in northern Iraq. But this did not prevent Turkey from in turn serving as a refuge for hundreds of thousands of Iraqi Kurds repressed by the government during the Iraqi uprising of March 1991, while the Incirlik base served as a rotation point for the delivery of humanitarian aid.\nIn March 2003, Turkey opposed the American intervention in Iraq, during which Turkish deputies refused American soldiers access to the Incirlik base. The government nevertheless agreed six months later to reverse this prohibition, in exchange for which US President George W. Bush agreed to provide Turkey with information on the location of PKK Kurdish rebels in northern Iraq.\nIn November 2007 and December 2008, Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki went to Turkey where he discussed security cooperation between the two states calling on the PKK to \"abandon the armed struggle and join the democratic process\", as well as energy cooperation projects. In April 2009, the Iraqi Shiite leader Moqtada al-Sadr was in turn received by Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Between 2014 and 2018, Turkey closed its consulate in Mosul because of the taking hostage of its diplomats in this city by the Islamic State group.\nIn March 2023, Iraqi Prime Minister Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani went to Ankara where he met Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan on the drought in Iraq and the sharing of the waters of the rivers Tigris and Euphrates which both take their source in Turkey. While Baghdad regularly accuses Turkey of reducing the flow of waterways to Iraq because of dams built upstream, the Turkish president promised him to release more water into the Tigris. The following week, still in a trend of rapprochement and collaboration with Baghdad, Ankara announced its intention to stop oil imports from Iraqi Kurdistan, while the latter was in conflict with the Iraqi central government on the sharing of oil revenues. This Turkish decision was taken at the request of Iraq to force the Kurdish authorities to negotiate with the Iraqi government. The following week, an agreement was found between the Kurdistan Regional Government and that of Baghdad to resume oil exports via Turkey.\nIn August 2023, Turkish Foreign Minister Hakan Fidan went to Baghdad where he met his Iraqi counterpart Fuad Hussein. The files discussed between the two men are the distribution of the waters of the Tigris and Euphrates, the resumption of exports of oil from Iraqi Kurdistan to Turkey, and the fight against PKK bases, fought by Turkey in northern Iraq, even if Hakan Fidan declared on this subject \"our common enemy must not poison our bilateral relations\".\nHakan Fidan went again to Baghdad, and met again his Iraqi counterpart Fuad Hussein in March 2024. A delegation of high Turkish officials accompanied him for bilateral exchanges on the themes of security and energy. The following month, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan to Baghdad for his first state visit to Iraq in more than a decade, and met his Iraqi counterpart Abdul Latif Rashid and Prime Minister Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani. His visit focused on economic and security discussions, notably on the fight against the PKK in northern Iraq and the sharing of the waters of the rivers Tigris and Euphrates (which take their source in Turkey before crossing Iraqi territory. Also on the agenda, the \"Development Road\", a project of a corridor consisting of road and railway of 1,200\u00a0km to connect by 2030 the Gulf to Turkey passing through Iraq.\nOn 17 March, Turkey announced an agreement with Iraq to double its electricity exports.\nTurkish expansionism on Iraq.\nThe former Ottoman domination over the current territory of Iraq explains regularly affirmed expansionist desires by the various Turkish governments on northern Iraq. The Iraqi city of Mosul is particularly the object of these territorial claims, notably:\nin 1925, the vote of the League of Nations which attached the Mosul vilayet to Iraq rather than to Turkey was immediately contested by Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk (first president of the Republic of Turkey), then his successors;\nin 1958, Turkey claimed it again when Iraq and Jordan united their two countries in the Arab Federation of Iraq and Jordan;\nin 1983, in the midst of the Iran\u2013Iraq War, Turkish Prime Minister Turgut \u00d6zal claimed the city of Mosul in Turkey's zone of influence;\nin 1990, at the time of the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq, Turkey member of the international military coalition against Saddam Hussein tried to take advantage to annex the regions of Mosul and Kirkuk, but Washington opposed it;\nin 1994, President S\u00fcleyman Demirel evoked his desire to see \"the border follow the foot of the mountains\", which, in fact, included Mosul in Turkey;\nin 2004, Ankara claimed again the Mosul vilayet, this time taking advantage of the invasion of Iraq by the American army. It did not obtain it, but, three years later, obtained the right to conduct military operations in the north of the country;\nin 2016, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan tried to impose participation of the Turkish army in the Battle of Mosul to defend his \"Turkmen, Arab, Kurdish compatriots\", rejected by Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, who assimilated such an intervention to an \"occupation\" of Iraqi territory.\nFurthermore, a contestation of the borders delimiting the states resulting from the Ottoman Empire also exists on the side of Iraq, which has claimed several times its sovereignty over Kuwait (1937, 1961, and 1990) because the latter was part of the Basra Vilayet.\nIncursions of the Turkish army in northern Iraq.\nIn 2003, although opposed to the Iraq War, Turkey took advantage of the weakening of the Iraqi government to conduct targeted interventions against the PKK in northern Iraq.\nWhen the second Iraqi civil war broke out, the PKK played a decisive role in the fight against the Islamic State in northern Iraq, notably by coming to the aid of the Yazidis minorities, massacred and enslaved by the jihadists in the region of Sinjar. Having liberated the region from the jihadist presence, PKK fighters helped in the constitution of autonomous Yazidi militias, and remained in Sinjar notably on the Qandil Mountains.\nWhile Ankara's threats multiplied, the head of the Iraqi government Haider al-Abadi warned Turkey in November 2016 that it would be treated as an enemy if it provoked a confrontation in northern Iraq, after the deployment of Turkish tanks at the Turkish-Iraqi border. In January 2019, Iraqi protesters attacked a Turkish army base in Shiladze, in western Iraqi Kurdistan, which they accused of having killed four civilians in a bombing. A note of protest was handed to the Turkish ambassador denouncing repeated bombings in Iraq and a \"violation of its sovereignty\".\nIn August 2020 three Iraqi soldiers including two officers were killed by a Turkish drone in northern Iraq, prompting Baghdad to summon the Turkish ambassador for the third time in two months. Following this incident, Baghdad solicited the diplomatic support of the Arab League to obtain the withdrawal of Turkish troops from its territory, without success. For its part, the Iranian-backed Iraqi Shiite militia \"Ashab Al-Kahf\" demanded that Turkey cease its hostile acts and complete its withdrawal from Iraqi territory.\nIn January 2021, Turkish Defense Minister Hulusi Akar went to the two capitals, Baghdad and Erbil, to try to improve bilateral security cooperation. On 10 February 2021, the Turkish army launched a raid in northern Iraq to free PKK prisoners (military and members of the intelligence services), but this attempt turned into a fiasco and concluded with the death of the 13 prisoners.\nIn April 2022 the Turkish army launched a new military operation in northern Iraq against the PKK, which in the meantime got closer to pro-Iranian militias rejecting the presence of Turkish forces in the north of the country in the name of Iraq's sovereignty. Several Turkish soldiers were killed during this operation. In November 2022, following a bomb attack in Istanbul attributed by the Turkish government to the PKK (which contested this accusation), Turkish aviation again bombed northern Iraq and Syria.\nAccording to Iraqi sources, Turkey possessed in 2022 a hundred military support points in Kurdistan, with the presence of a permanent contingent of at least 4,000 soldiers. The Iraqi government and that of the autonomous region of Iraqi Kurdistan are regularly accused of ambivalence in tolerating Turkish military operations in order to preserve their close economic ties with Ankara. In March 2024, in the wake of a meeting between the Iraqi and Turkish foreign ministers, the Iraqi government officially banned the PKK.\nIn July, the Iraqi government denounced new incursions by the Turkish army in Iraqi Kurdistan after a resurgence of Ankara's military operations against the PKK. In August 2024, Turkey announced a military cooperation agreement with Iraq with the installation of joint command and training centers against PKK fighters.\nRelations with Jordan.\nIraq and Jordan are separated by a border of 181 kilometers, the two countries having previously been part of the Ottoman Empire until its dismantling after the First World War, before becoming British protectorates, the British Mandate for Mesopotamia and the Emirate of Transjordan, and finally gradually obtaining their independence (proclaimed in 1946 for Jordan). When the British received from the League of Nations a mandate to administer these two te\nritories, two brothers of the Hashemite dynasty originating from Mecca, were placed to govern them: Abdullah I of Jordan, and his brother Faisal I of Iraq.\nThe two states are members and co-founders of the Arab League and of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. In 1948 and 1967, they were with Egypt and Syria the main contributors to the Arab coalition formed against Israel during the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War and during the Six-Day War (Jordan however refused, unlike Iraq, to participate in the Yom Kippur War in 1973).\nOn 14 February 1958, King Faisal II of Iraq and his cousin King Hussein of Jordan, decided to unite their two kingdoms into a single state, the Arab Federation of Iraq and Jordan, but it was dissolved five months later after the revolution which ended the Iraqi monarchy. It was following a request for military aid from King Hussein to his cousin Faisal II that the revolution took place, the Iraqi units en route to Jordan deciding to turn back on the night of 13 July 1958 to 14 July 1958 and overthrow the Iraqi monarch.\nIn 1968, the arrival in power of the Ba'ath party in Iraq was followed by a rapprochement between Iraq and Jordan, while the affinities between their populations remained strong. Under Saddam Hussein's regime, tens of thousands of Jordanian students obtained degrees in Iraqi universities thanks to scholarships offered by Iraq. In addition, Saddam Hussein's support for the Palestinian cause was favorably perceived by Jordan, which hosts a large number of Palestinian refugees.\nJordan did not get involved in any of the major armed conflicts affecting Iraq in 1980, 1990 and 2003, but opposed the two American interventions against Saddam Hussein, and hosted important waves of refugees.\nIn February 1990, Iraqi President Saddam Hussein went to Amman, where he was welcomed by the king. A few months later, at the beginning of the Gulf War, King Hussein declared in his address to the nation that the Western intervention was against \"all Arabs and all Muslims\" and evoked objectives aiming to \"destroy Iraq and reorganize the area in a more dangerous way for our people than the Sykes-Picot agreements\". His rhetoric was essentially populist addressed to his Jordanian population of Palestinian origin largely supportive of Saddam Hussein and economically interested due to Jordan's dependence on Iraqi oil. But on the substance, the invasion of Kuwait made King Hussein very angry, he never forgave Saddam Hussein and their degradation deteriorated.\nIn August 2003, in the midst of the Iraq War, while the new King Abdullah II of Jordan, in power since 1999, decided to support the American intervention of 2003 (unlike his father in 1990), the Jordanian embassy in Baghdad was targeted by a car bomb attack. As for the Jordanian population, the years following the fall and execution of Saddam Hussein, the former Iraqi dictator continued to arouse the admiration of many Jordanians, who saw in him a hero of the Arab and Palestinian causes. While his portraits and the symbols associated with his reign disappeared from public life in Iraq, his face remained omnipresent in Jordan, on stickers adorning car windows or phone cases in his likeness.\nIn 2008 King Abdullah II was the first Arab head of state to go to Baghdad since the establishment of the new authorities, dominated by Shiites. In 2014, Jordan joined the international coalition against the Islamic State by making military means available to Iraq, and conducting a series of airstrikes notably after the execution of one of its pilots by the jihadist group. In August 2017, Jordan and Iraq announced the reopening of their only border post closed since 2014, after securing the road linking their two capitals.\nKing Abdullah II went again to Baghdad in January 2019 to improve economic and energy cooperation between the two countries. This visit was encouraged by the United States, which sought to encourage the Iraqi authorities to reduce their economic and commercial dependence on Iran. It was crowned by the signing of agreements on trade, finance, agriculture, health, transport, the energy sector, with the extension of the Basra pipeline in Iraq to Aqaba in Jordan, and the creation of a common industrial zone of 24 square kilometers.\nIn April 2021, following an alleged plot against King Abdullah II, Iraqi Prime Minister Mustafa al-Kadhimi affirmed \"standing alongside the Jordanian kingdom\", whose sovereign he was to meet soon in Baghdad.\nKing Abdullah II went for the third time to Baghdad on 27 June 2021, in the framework of a tripartite summit between Iraq, Jordan, and Egypt, on political and economic cooperation, investments, and the fight against terrorism. An alliance between Egypt which has significant military capabilities, Iraq which has considerable oil resources and Jordan rich in its human capital is promising if these countries capitalize on their complementarity. Several cooperation agreements were thus signed in the sectors of energy, health and education, while Baghdad renewed its oil supply contract to Egypt of 12 million barrels in 2021, and plans to build an oil pipeline aiming to export 1 million barrels per day of crude from the Iraqi city of Basra to the Jordanian port of Aqaba.\nAbdel Fattah el-Sisi, Mustafa al-Kadhimi and King Abdullah II met again in Baghdad in August 2021 during an expanded summit in the Middle East including France, focused on security and regional economic development.\nIn December 2022, Amman hosted the second international Baghdad conference aimed at supporting Iraq and promoting dialogue between countries in the region. King Abdullah II emphasized in a speech the \"pivotal role of Iraq in maintaining regional stability\".\nRelations with Kuwait.\nSeparated by a border of 240 kilometers, Kuwait and Iraq have undergone the same influences, having been successively under Ottoman domination (the \"Basra Vilayet\") and British, and could have formed a single country. Its route is defined by the Uqair agreements of 1922-1923.\nRelations between Iraq and Kuwait have always been more intense than with other Gulf countries, characterized by an alternation between tension and cooperation. Large Kuwaiti families were established in the Basra region where they owned important date plantations and the emirate depended closely on Iraq for its supplies of agricultural products and especially water from the Shatt Al-Arab. The first official claims of Iraq date back to 1937-1938, following the first oil discoveries in the Emirate. Since then, all Iraqi regimes of the 20th century claimed the latter. The death of King Ghazi in 1939 put an end to this first episode of tensions, but the delimitation of the border remained impossible due to Iraq's reluctance to recognize the legitimacy of a separate Kuwaiti entity.\nIn June 1961, following the British withdrawal formalizing Kuwait's independence, General Abd al-Karim Qasim, Iraqi Prime Minister since the 1958 revolution, claimed the territory of Kuwait as \"an integral part of Iraq\". To put pressure on the Emirate, he froze its funds placed in Iraqi banks, and blocked Kuwaiti ships stationed in Basra. In reaction, the Sheikh of Kuwait filed a complaint with the UN Security Council against this threat of annexation, submitted his candidacy to the Arab League and appealed for diplomatic and military aid from Great Britain. 5,000 British soldiers stationed in the Emirate, pushing Abd al-Karim Qasim to abandon his expansionist ambitions. At the initiative of Egyptian President Nasser these forces were replaced by a multinational Arab force, with the same objective of countering an Iraqi invasion.\nThe replacement in 1963 of Abd al-Karim Qasim by Abd al-Salam Arif opened the way to a normalization of relations: Iraq agreed to recognize Kuwait's sovereignty (on 4 October 1963) in exchange for the latter's renunciation of its defense treaty with Great Britain.\nBetween 1980 and 1988, Kuwait supported Iraq during the Iran\u2013Iraq War. But two years later, ruined by its military expenditures and accusing Kuwait, one of its main creditors of having stolen oil from it by horizontal drilling, Saddam Hussein decided to invade the small Emirate. After a quick victory, he installed there a puppet government favorable to Iraq, led by the Kuwaiti officer Alaa Hussein Ali.\nAfter a series of unsuccessful international negotiations, the United States declared war on Iraq in January 1991. The Gulf War grouping against Iraq a large international coalition lasted until the end of February 1991, date on which Kuwait was liberated. On 15 March 1991, the Emir of Kuwait, Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah, returned to the country after having spent more than 8 months in exile.\nEarly 1993, Saddam Hussein again led incursions into Kuwait and installed missiles in the no-fly zone, provoking the response of the United States (air raids in the south on 13 January 1993 and against Baghdad on 17 January 1993), before finally officially recognizing Kuwait in November 1994.\nDuring the 2003 Iraq War, Kuwait joined the international coalition led by the United States and Great Britain, while a large part of the forces of this coalition stationed on the territory of the Emirate, from which they launched the invasion of Iraq on 20 March 2003.\nIn 2014, during the war against the Islamic State, Kuwait again made its territory available to the international coalition, this time in support of the Iraqi government. In retaliation, the jihadist group committed a bomb attack against a Shiite mosque in Kuwait in 2015. In 2018, after the end of the civil war, a strong sign of rapprochement between the two states, Kuwait was the host of an international conference on the reconstruction of Iraq. The following year, a project for electrical interconnection between Kuwait and Iraq was signed with the Gulf Cooperation Council, but this project struggled to materialize.\nIn 2021, thirty years after the Gulf War, Iraq paid more than 50 billion dollars in compensations to Kuwait, and returned several tons of archives looted by the Iraqi army during its seven months of occupation of this country. The Iraqi government officially declared having finished paying the indemnities due to Kuwait on 23 December 2021. The two countries have however still not delimited their maritime borders while the file of missing Kuwaitis remains open. Conflicts remain between the two states regarding the sharing of their oil resources and the competition between their port infrastructures. Kuwaiti coast guards regularly seize Iraqi fishing boats and arrest Iraqi fishermen for illegal entry into their territorial waters.\nIn July 2023, the head of Kuwaiti diplomacy Salem Al-Sabah went to Baghdad where he met his Iraqi counterpart Fuad Hussein, for a meeting focused on \"the resolution of border issues\". Baghdad announced for the following month a new meeting of a legal committee engaged on this file.\nRelations with Syria.\nIraq and Syria share a border of 600 kilometers, as well as strong historical and cultural ties. The two countries were part of the Ottoman Empire before its dismantling after World War I, and the border that separates them was drawn by the Sykes\u2013Picot Agreement in 1916. Both are members and co-founders of the Arab League and of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, but Syria was suspended from these two organizations in 2011 and 2012 due to the repression of the regime which led to the Syrian civil war.\nThe two states participated in the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, but their interests became divergent in the following years when Syria got closer to Nasser's Egypt, while Iraq was governed by a pro-British monarchy. In February 1958, Syria and Egypt merged into the United Arab Republic, following which Iraq and Jordan united in turn in the Arab Federation of Iraq and Jordan. But neither of these two federations lasted: Iraq seceded after a few months, while Syria left the United Arab Republic in September 1961.\nIn 1963, the \"Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party\" (called \"Ba'ath Party\"), pan-Arab and secular of Syrian origin (founded by the Syrian writer Michel Aflaq), came to power in Syria by a coup d'\u00e9tat, and led a similar attempt in Iraq, but only truly succeeded there in 1968. Paradoxically, this takeover by the same party in two neighboring countries contributed to strongly deteriorating their relations, each being governed by two rival branches of the party, to which was added a religious rivalry between the Sunni regime of Baghdad and the Alawite regime of Damascus.\nThis did not prevent them from remaining objective allies against Israel against whom both fought during the Yom Kippur War in 1973. But in 1979, Saddam Hussein broke diplomatic relations with Damascus due to Syrian support for Iran, with which he was at war. Indeed, during the Iran-Iraq War, the Syrian government delivered weapons to Tehran, and closed the pipeline connecting Kirkuk to the Syrian port of Baniyas, with limited consequences for Iraq thanks to the commissioning of the Kirkuk-Ceyhan pipeline in 1977.\nIn 1990, Syria joined the international coalition against Iraq during the Gulf War, Hafez al-Assad seeking to tighten ties with Washington, after the collapse of the USSR. He welcomed US President Bill Clinton in Damascus in 1994, while at the same time, Iraq was under embargo imposed by the United States. However, ten years later, the overthrow of Saddam Hussein following the Iraq War and his replacement by a Shiite government (of which Alawism is a branch) allowed a Syrian-Iraqi rapprochement, like the relations between Iraq and Iran, ally of Damascus. In the meantime, upon his arrival in power in 2000, Bashar al-Assad had engaged a diplomatic warming between Baghdad and Damascus, but their relations were only normalized in 2006.\nIn 2011, Baghdad abstained during the vote that led to the suspension of Damascus from the Arab League, due to the repression of the regime of the Syrian revolution. Baghdad was also one of the few Arab capitals to keep its embassy in Damascus.\nFrom 2013, Iraq and Syria were simultaneously in civil war, and fought the same Sunni extremist group, the Islamic State, which established a \"caliphate\" covering a significant area of these two countries. The two Shiite governments collaborated on several fronts against this common enemy. The Iraqi air force carried out several strikes in eastern Syria with the approval of the Syrian government, while like the Lebanese Hezbollah, Iraqi Shiite militias fought alongside the Syrian army. But Iraqi involvement in the Syrian civil war was not limited to the war against the Islamic State, Iraqi Shiite militias also actively participating in the regime's repression against the rebels, notably during the Battle of Aleppo. In parallel, Iraq hosted between 2011 and 2021 approximately 250,000 Syrian refugees who fled the civil war, mainly in refugee camps located in Iraqi Kurdistan.\nIn October 2018, the border post located between the cities of Iraq and Syria Bukamal, and Al-Qa'im was reopened following the recapture of these two cities from the Islamic State by the Iraqi and Syrian armies. This post constituted before the outbreak of the war in Syria in 2011 one of the strategic arteries for the passage of goods, tourists and labor.\nThe following years, Baghdad actively campaigned for the reintegration of Syria into the Arab League, which was officially reintegrated on 7 May 2023, and participated in the league summit in Jeddah on 19 May. The following month, Syrian Foreign Minister Faisal Mekdad went to Baghdad and met his Iraqi counterpart Fuad Hussein to discuss strengthening Syrian-Iraqi cooperation in humanitarian aid and the fight against drug trafficking. Faisal Mekdad also met with Prime Minister Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani and President Abdul Latif Rashid, whom he thanked for their help after the 2023 earthquake in Turkey and Syria. Two months later, Iraqi Prime Minister Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani went to Damascus where he was received by Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, a meeting focused on strengthening Syrian-Iraqi bilateral relations, notably security.\nIn December 2024, on the eve of the offensive launched in northwestern Syria by the Syrian rebel Islamist group Hay'at Tahrir al-Sham, Iraqi factions were still present on Syrian territory, particularly in the Deir ez-Zor Governorate When this offensive was launched, Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani declared that \"the security and stability of Syria are directly linked to Iraq's national security\", and called his Turkish counterpart Recep Tayyip Erdogan, supporter of HTS, to affirm to him that \"Iraq will not be a mere spectator of the serious repercussions of the events taking place in Syria\". A massive Iraqi intervention then appeared probable if the Syrian regime was threatened, but this could exacerbate the already tense tensions between Baghdad and Ankara. Thus, Iraqi support for the Assad regime was minimal, limited to about 300 Iraqi fighters sent as reinforcements to protect the Shiite shrine of Sayyidah Zaynab, near Damascus, and to a strengthening of security along the Syrian-Iraqi border. Most of the pro-Iran Iraqi militias also showed reluctance to intervene, for fear that Israeli aviation would take advantage to bomb them. On 8 December, the fall of the Syrian regime caused the flight of several thousand pro-regime Syrian soldiers to Iraq, and put the Iraqi government in an awkward position. This end of the Assad reign in Syria reshuffles the regional cards (notably cutting the Shiite corridor Tehran-Baghdad-Damascus-Beirut), and forces the Iraqi government to position itself towards its new neighboring interlocutors. The head of the HTS group Ahmed al-Sharaa, imprisoned for several years in Iraq for his membership in Al-Qaeda, became Syrian head of state after his victory in the Syrian civil war. Following his arrival in power, he addressed in a video the Iraqi Prime Minister and assured him of his desire to establish renewed political and economic relations with Iraq. In April 2025, the two heads of state met for the first time in Qatar, each being there on a visit at the invitation of the emir Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani.\nRelations with Lebanon.\nIraq and Lebanon are both members and founders of the Arab League, and members of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. Iraq and Lebanon are culturally close and share the same language, despite some dialectal differences.\nDuring the Arab-Israeli wars of 1948 and 1967, Iraq and Lebanon both participated in the Arab coalitions formed against Israel although Lebanese participation was much lower than that of the other Arab armies. Lebanon did not take sides during the major armed conflicts affecting Iraq in 1980 and 1990, being itself confronted with a civil war between 1975 and 1990, during which General Michel Aoun received weapons from Saddam Hussein to fight against the intervention of the Syrian army on its soil.\nIn 1990, Syrian President Hafez al-Assad sided with Washington in the Gulf War, and received in return the American green light to take control of Lebanon. In 2003, former Lebanese President Amine Gemayel (1982-1988) went to Baghdad for mediation in an attempt, unsuccessfully, to prevent the invasion of Iraq by the United States.\nDuring the second Iraqi civil war (2013-2017), the Lebanese Hezbollah participated in the conflict in the camp loyal to the Iraqi government, alongside the other Shiite militias supported by Iran. In February 2018, Michel Aoun went to Baghdad as President of the Lebanese Republic (a year after his election in October 2016) marking the first visit to Iraq by a Lebanese head of state in office for decades. He met there his counterpart Fuad Masum and Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi. The main subject of their exchanges concerned Lebanese participation in the reconstruction of Iraq after the end of the second civil war, to which were added subjects of security cooperation against Islamist terrorism, but also against Israel against which the two states are still enemies.\nIn April 2021, Lebanese Health Minister Hamad Hassan and his Iraqi counterpart Hassan al-Tamimi met in Beirut and signed a framework agreement between the two countries including the supply by Iraq of 3.5 million barrels of oil per year to Lebanon, in exchange for medical and hospital services. Lebanon attracts significant medical tourism, each year, thousands of Iraqi patients who come there seeking care now non-existent in their country.\nMore than 15,000 Lebanese live in Iraq, including about 5,000 in Iraqi Kurdistan, while many Shiite Lebanese go each year to Iraq, to the holy places of Najaf and the city of Karbala. Since the end of the second Iraqi civil war, Iraq has become an attractive destination for qualified Lebanese lacking opportunity in their country in crisis. In 2021, about 900 Lebanese companies are established in Iraq, mainly in the fields of tourism, catering or health. According to Iraqi authorities, more than 20,000 Lebanese went to Iraq between June 2021 and February 2022, not counting pilgrims visiting the cities of Najaf and Karbala.\nThe total volume of Lebanese exports to Iraq is however quite limited, rarely crossing the threshold of 150 million dollars per year, due to competition from Iran and Turkey and logistical costs that the two poor countries struggle to bear.\nRelations with Saudi Arabia.\nIraq and Saudi Arabia are separated by a border of 814 kilometers, the two countries having previously been part of the Ottoman Empire until its dismantling after World War I. Both members and co-founders of the Arab League, of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, and of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation.\nAfter the 1958 Iraqi revolution, although having little affinity with the pro-Western monarchy of Saudi Arabia, the Iraqi government sought to find with it a regional \"modus vivendi\" and to reassure it that it had no intention of interfering in its affairs, nor of exporting its revolution there. In 1961 however, Saudi Arabia, in solidarity with Kuwait the other pro-Western monarchy in the region, was one of the main contributors to the multinational Arab force deployed in this country to prevent Iraq from annexing it.\nA real d\u00e9tente between Iraq and Saudi Arabia was established in 1975 after the signing of an agreement on border delimitation, which also allowed a d\u00e9tente in relations between Iraq and Iran, another pillar of American strategy in the Gulf. The two countries got closer following the 1979 Iranian revolution which triggered strong concern in Saudi Arabia which saw the emergence of a Shiite theocracy in a neighboring country. The Saudi royal family, wishing to forge an alliance with Iraq against Iran, then the main military power in the Middle East, decided to receive Saddam Hussein on an official visit during the summer of 1980, marking the first visit of an Iraqi president to the kingdom. The two countries agreed that it was in their common interest for Iraq to attack Iran: this would satisfy Saddam Hussein's expansionist ambitions by widening his access to the sea and giving him control of oil regions, and it would neutralize a significant threat to Saudi Arabia.\nThus, when the Iran-Iraq War began in September 1980, Saudi Arabia was one of Iraq's main foreign supporters. In 1981, following the destruction by the Israeli Air Force of the Osirak nuclear reactor, King Khalid of Saudi Arabia declared that Riyadh would finance the reconstruction of the plant. Iraq, for its part, embarked on the construction of two major pipelines to transport 2 million barrels of oil per day to Saudi ports on the Red Sea, thus accepting to link its most vital interests to its cooperation with the kingdom. In the spring of 1990, a non-aggression pact was concluded between Riyadh and Baghdad, while Saudi Arabia agreed to cancel Iraq's debt that it had accumulated during its war against Iran.\nThese relations deteriorated following the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq in 1990, following which Riyadh broke its relations with Baghdad, closed its land border with Iraq and participated in the Gulf War within the international coalition. A large part of the coalition forces stationed in Saudi Arabia, and their positions were bombed several times by the Iraqi army.\nIraqi-Saudi tensions intensified after the 2003 Iraq War which changed the Iraqi political system; Riyadh was accused by the now Shiite Iraqi government of supporting Sunni political opposition movements. Iran, for its part consolidated its political influence and placed Shiite militias affiliated with it in Iraq, further distancing the country from its other Saudi neighbor.\nIt was not until 2015 that the two states reestablished their diplomatic relations, under the influence of the United States which sought Arab unity in the framework of the fight against the Islamic State. After having been absent from the country after the fall of Saddam Hussein, which created a void filled by Iran, Saudi Arabia turned again towards Baghdad, and appointed its first ambassador there in January 2016. But he was recalled a few months later for controversial remarks on the action of Shiite militias Hashd al-Shaabi in the fighting against the jihadists of the Islamic State in Sunni areas. In August 2017, Saudi Arabia and Iraq announced their decision to reopen the Arar border crossing, in northern Saudi Arabia, closed since the Gulf War, to facilitate trade. In April 2018, Saudi Arabia announced its intention to offer a football stadium to Iraq, built in Baghdad, with a capacity of 100,000 spectators.\nIn April 2019, diplomatic relations officially resumed between the two countries with the inauguration of two Saudi consulates in Baghdad and in Najaf, an important place of pilgrimage for the Shiite community. The same year, the Iraqi Prime Minister, Adil Abdul-Mahdi went to Saudi Arabia and concluded thirteen political and economic agreements. Iraq notably signed with the Gulf Cooperation Council an agreement to import electricity, in order to alleviate a shortage that deprives Iraqis of electricity sometimes up to 20 hours a day.\nOn 7 May 2020, the arrival at the post of Prime Minister of Mustafa Al-Kadhimi, pro-American, was however favorably perceived by the Saudi monarchy, itself maintaining very strong bilateral relations with Washington. The new Iraqi government affirmed, in a nationalist speech, wanting to replace Iraq in its Arab environment in coherence with its majority population. Two weeks later, the Iraqi Minister of Finance and Oil, Ali Allawi went to Saudi Arabia. An agreement was concluded with Saudi companies to invest in the Akkas gas fields, in the Iraqi province of al-Anbar, while Riyadh announced the return to Baghdad of a new Saudi ambassador. Saudi Deputy Defense Minister, Prince Khalid bin Salman declared on Twitter: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We look forward to Iraq rising from its ashes to regain its status as one of the strong and resilient pillars of the Arab world.A meeting between Mustafa al-Kadhimi and Prince Mohammed bin Salman in Saudi Arabia was however canceled the following month, due to health problems of the latter. In November 2020, Iraq and Saudi Arabia announced the official reopening of the Arar border post, closed since 1990. Mustafa al-Kadhimi and Mohammed bin Salman finally met in Riyadh in March 2021, during a visit intended to strengthen trade ties between the two states, as well as economic cooperation and investments in energy and transport. The delegations signed five agreements in the financial, commercial, economic, cultural and media fields and agreed to establish a common fund with an estimated capital of three billion dollars. They also planned to complete an electrical interconnection project, and to maintain their cooperation to maintain stability on the world oil market, while Iraq and Saudi Arabia are the two main producers of black gold within OPEC.\nIn December 2022, on the occasion of the visit to Saudi Arabia of Chinese President Xi Jinping, the new Iraqi Prime Minister Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani represented his country at the Sino-Arab summit organized by Mohammed bin Salman. He declared there his intention to\"strengthen its ties with Arab countries\", while \"balancing its relations with its other neighbors\". Ten days later, Saudi Foreign Minister Faisal bin Farhan went to Jordan which organized the second \"Baghdad Conference\", and assured that his country stood \"alongside Iraq to preserve its stability and sovereignty\".\nIn May 2023, the kingdom's sovereign wealth fund (PIF) created a unit endowed with 3 billion dollars to invest in several Iraqi sectors \u2013 mines, infrastructure, finance, real estate and agriculture \u2013 as part of a 24 billion dollar plan intended for six countries in the region. In the wake, the oil company Saudi Aramco began talks with the Iraqi government to invest massively in the Akkas gas field in the Iraqi province of Al-Anbar.\nIn April 2024, Saudi Arabia and Iraq announced the opening of a direct airline between the cities of Dammam, in the east of the Saudi kingdom where its minority Shiite community is concentrated, and Najaf, Shiite holy city south of Baghdad. The following month, the Saudi ambassador to Iraq, Abdulaziz al-Shammari, met the governor of Karbala province Nassif al-Khattabi in the city of Karbala, also a Shiite holy city. These events have strong symbolic value, while the Shiites, majority in the Iraqi population, have long been oppressed, even persecuted, in Saudi Arabia.\nRelations with the United Arab Emirates.\nIraq and the United Arab Emirates are both members of the Arab League, and of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. Only the emirate of Abu Dhabi is a member of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, the other emirates of this federation having much lower and declining production.\nDuring the Gulf War, the United Arab Emirates integrated and actively participated in the intervention of the international coalition against the Iraqi army, but not during the 2003 Iraq War.\nIn 2008, a few years after the fall of Saddam Hussein, the United Arab Emirates decided to cancel the Iraqi debt they held, amounting to a little less than 7 billion dollars, in order to help the Iraqi government engage in the reconstruction of its country at war. The same year, the United Arab Emirates appointed an ambassador to Baghdad, Abdullah Ibrahim al-Shehi, while most Arab countries had withdrawn their diplomatic staff from the Iraqi capital due to insecurity. The UAE ambassador to Baghdad was briefly recalled in early 2014 to protest against the sectarian policy of Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, which they judged responsible for the civil war in Iraq.\nIn 2014, the United Arab Emirates also integrated the international coalition formed against the Islamic State by carrying out airstrikes and hosting French planes on their soil. The Emirates nevertheless decided to suspend their participation in airstrikes following the execution of a Jordanian pilot by the Islamic State. In September 2018, UNESCO launched an initiative aimed at gathering funds to rebuild the Iraqi city of Mosul, largely destroyed during its liberation by the Iraqi army in 2016-2017. Four months later, out of the 100 million dollars raised for this initiative, more than half came from a donation of 50.4 million dollars from the United Arab Emirates.\nIn 2023, Abu Dhabi committed to investing 500 million dollars in a hydraulic project in Sinjar.\nRelations with Qatar.\nIraq shares with Qatar affinities with Iran, rare for countries whose populations are majority Arab. Like for Iraq, the geographical position of Qatar explains this diplomatic proximity with Tehran: the small emirate has a maritime border with Iran where the North Dome offshore field is located, jointly exploited by the two countries. Thus, their simultaneous proximity with Iran, the Arab Gulf countries, and Western countries (since the overthrow of Saddam Hussein) creates natural affinities between Baghdad and Doha.\nBefore the fall of Saddam Hussein, Qatar participated in the coalition formed against Iraq during the Gulf War; but did not take sides in the Iran-Iraq Wars, nor in the 2003 Iraq War.\nIn June 2023, Qatar unveiled an investment plan of 5 billion dollars, in addition to the 9.5 billion dollars of agreements that private Qatari companies signed in the construction of two power plants in the country. QatarEnergy is a major investor and operator of hydrocarbon fields in Iraq. At the end of August, Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani attended the groundbreaking of the luxurious hotel and residential complex Rixos, first Qatari investment in Baghdad.\nRelations with Oman.\nOman's diplomatic opening at the beginning of the 1970s was coldly received by Iraq, which reproached the sultanate for its proximity to Great Britain, former colonial power from which Iraq freed itself like Egypt in the late 1950s. The Ba'athist Iraqi regime voted against the sultanate's admission to the Arab League in 1971 The Sultanate nevertheless integrated the organization that year, as well as the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation in 1970. Between 1964 and 1976, Iraq supported the Marxist rebellion against the pro-British Omani ruling family during the Dhofar War.\nIn June 1980 a military agreement signed between Oman and the United States accentuated the animosity of the Ba'athist Iraqi regime, but Sultan Qaboos played appeasement, favoring stability and security in the Gulf. Oman distinguished itself from its neighbors by its neutrality during the Iran\u2013Iraq War due to its good relations with Iran, while not being able to go against the Gulf Cooperation Council whose majority of member states were favorable to Iraq.\nDuring the invasion of Kuwait by Saddam Hussein in 1990, Oman distinguished itself again by keeping diplomatic relations with Iraq, even though, paradoxically, the sultanate supported the coalition led by the United States against the Iraqi army during the Gulf War. In 2003, part of Oman's air bases was also used by the British army during the Iraq War which caused the overthrow and execution of Saddam Hussein. On 12 May 2019, Oman announced the reopening of its embassy in Baghdad, closed since 1990.\nRelations with Yemen.\nIraq and Yemen are both members of the Arab League, and of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation.\nIn 1990, the year of its unification into a single country, Yemen was, with Jordan, the only country in the Middle East to oppose the outbreak of the Gulf War. Its president Ali Abdullah Saleh provided diplomatic and military support to Saddam Hussein, but nevertheless attempted, unsuccessfully to convince him to evacuate Kuwait in order to avoid war. The following years, Yemen was torn by a series of civil wars in 1994 then in the 2010s, during which, like Iraq, Sunni extremist groups like Al-Qaeda and the Islamic State attempted to establish themselves and committed numerous attacks.\nIn July 2023, Iraqi Foreign Minister Fuad Hussein received his Yemeni counterpart Ahmed Awad Bin Mubarak, to whom he proposed his help, as mediator, to end the Yemeni civil war ongoing since 2015. In April 2025, the Iraqi government committed to preventing any non-civilian activity of the Houthis in power in Yemen on its territory, after having welcomed the latter in the framework of the \"Axis of Resistance\" led by Iran. This decision was taken under the influence of Washington which feared that the Houthis would launch attacks against its bases in Iraq in retaliation for the American strikes targeting their forces in Yemen.\nRelations with Turkmenistan.\nIn October 2023, Iraq signed with Turkmenistan a memorandum of understanding to import natural gas from this Central Asian country, via Iranian pipelines. This agreement aims to secure imports of this hydrocarbon crucial for Iraqi power plants.\nRelations with Armenia.\nThe populations of Armenia and Iraq have very ancient relations dating back to the ancient era of Mesopotamia, then both having been part of the Ottoman Empire between the 15th and 20th centuries. After the conquest of Armenia by the Soviet Union, Armenia's foreign policy was integrated into that of the Soviet Union, to which Iraq got closer after the 1958 revolution which overthrew the pro-Western monarchy.\nArmenia and Iraq established relations when Armenia declared its independence from the Soviet Union in 1992. Armenia opened an embassy in Baghdad in 2000 and Iraq opened its in Yerevan a year later. In 2003, Armenia opposed the American invasion of Iraq, but sent troops to help the American mission in the country.\nIn the 2010s, Iraq was one of Armenia's most important trading partners. In 2016, trade between these two countries amounted to more than 140 million dollars, while trade between these two countries increased by 30%.\nIn February 2021, Armenian Deputy Foreign Minister Artak Apitonian and his Iraqi counterpart Nizar Khairallah met in Baghdad, and signed an agreement allowing visa-free entry for diplomatic personnel, as well as a memorandum of understanding on political consultations between the two countries During his visit to Iraq, Artak Apitonyan also met Iraqi Minister of Agriculture Mohammed al-Khafaji, the president of the Armenian-Iraqi Intergovernmental Commission Rehan Hanna Ayoubi, and the primate of the Armenian Apostolic Diocese in Iraq, Archbishop Avak Assadourian.\nRelations with Israel.\nBefore the founding of the State of Israel in May 1948, the Jewish community of Iraq numbered about 120,000 people, the majority being concentrated in Iraqi Kurdistan and Baghdad where they represented a third of the population. Their presence dates back to the 6th century BC, when the prophet of Judaism Ezekiel followed his people into exile in Babylon after the conquest of the Kingdom of Judah (which corresponds to the current territory of Israel) by Nebuchadnezzar II in 597 BC.\nThe beginning of the 20th century simultaneously saw the formation in the Middle East of an Arab nationalism against the Ottoman Empire, and Zionism carried by Jews wishing to establish an independent Hebrew state in Palestine. In January 1919, in the wake of the defeat of the Central Powers in the First World War, Emir Faisal ibn Hussein, future king of Iraq, met in London Chaim Weizmann, president of the World Zionist Organization, with whom he signed an agreement governing relations between Jews and Arabs in the Near and Middle East. This agreement was to initiate Judeo-Arab cooperation for the development of a Jewish national home in the State of Palestine (passed under the control of the United Kingdom) and of an Arab nation over most of the Middle East. But this Arab nation never saw the light of day, the territories taken by the allies from the Ottoman Empire being divided into zones under the control of the French and British (who placed Faisal I at the head of their protectorate over Iraq); the 1919 Faisal-Weizmann agreement thus remained a dead letter.\nDuring World War II, following the overthrow by British troops of the Prime Minister Rashid Ali al-Gaylani, pogroms took place against Jews in Baghdad and caused hundreds of victims.\nIn October 1947, it was therefore against the will of the Arab populations and neighboring countries that the UN voted the partition plan for Palestine, providing for the creation of the state of Israel, officially founded in May 1948. Transjordan attacked the state, with the support of Iraq. In 1951, two years after the defeat of the Arab coalition during the 1948-1949 war, Iraq expelled Israel dwellers from the territory; almost all were evacuated to Israel during Operation Ezra and Nehemiah.\nIn parallel, Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion, in search of non-Arab \"peripheral allies\" in the Middle East (for which he got closer to Iran and Turkey), took interest in the Kurds of Iraq, opposed to the central government. Mullah Mustafa Barzani, founder of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, led in the 1960s and 1970s a series of guerrillas against the Baghdad government, and went several times to Israel to obtain military support.\nIraq participated in the Arab-Israeli wars of the Six Days in June 1967, then and the Kippur in October 1973. Since these two conflicts, unlike Egypt and Jordan which made peace with Israel in 1978 and 1994, Iraq, like Syria, refused to recognize Israel.\nIn 1978, the Camp David peace agreements between Egypt and Israel caused the rupture of diplomatic relations between Baghdad and Cairo. Upon his arrival at the presidency in 1979, Saddam Hussein kept the opposition against Israel. For its part, Israel attacked and destroyed the Iraqi nuclear research reactor Osirak under construction, during Operation Opera in 1981.\nSince the overthrow of Saddam Hussein in 2003, despite a reversal of Iraqi foreign policy marked by a rapprochement with several former enemies of Iraq such as the United States, Iran and Syria, Israeli-Iraqi relations remain at a standstill.\nIn 2014, supporters of the independence of Iraqi Kurdistan again solicited support from Israel in their autonomist project. This contact attracted the attention of the \"Financial Times\" whose investigation revealed in 2015 the oil exports from Iraqi Kurdistan to Israel (via the pipeline connecting Kirkuk to Ceyhan, from where the oil is transported by tankers to the port of Haifa).\nRelations with Palestine.\nIn May 2025, Baghdad hosted an international summit in support of the Gaza Strip bombed by the Israeli army, providing for a fund of 50 billion dollars intended for the reconstruction of the Palestinian territory.\nRelations with European and Western countries.\nRelations with the United Kingdom.\nIraq under British influence between 1920 and 1958.\nThe history of relations between Great Britain and Iraq dates back to the creation of Iraq in 1920, when in the First World War, the British were concerned with controlling the oil fields on which the British navy depended. The Mesopotamian campaign saw the British army oppose the Ottoman Empire in the context of the great Arab revolt of 1916-1918 against the Turks, fueled by the British who sent liaison officers to the Sharif of Mecca Hussein bin Ali, including T.E. Lawrence known as \"Lawrence of Arabia\". The Indian troops under British command took the city of Basra in November 1914, whose port infrastructure was developed by the allies to supply the Middle Eastern front with men and materials. The city of Baghdad was taken in March 1917, which constituted a resounding political triumph and the first great British success of the war. British control of Mesopotamia was ratified by the Treaty of S\u00e8vres signed after the 1918 armistice, in August 1920. This treaty was supposed to grant the Kurdish populations an independent state, but this treaty was canceled and replaced by the Treaty of Lausanne (1923), more favorable to Turkey, after the victory of Turkish troops during the Turkish War of Independence between 1919 and 1922.\nAfter the enthronement by the British of Faisal I on the throne of Iraq, the British wished Iraq to recognize their mandate by a treaty; this was signed on 10 October 1922 then ratified on 10 June 1924. This treaty allowed Great Britain to oppose the decisions of the Iraqi government, while a British high commissioner controlled Iraqi policy.\nThe British occupation of Mesopotamia provoked strong resentment from the Arab populations, to whom the British had promised independence by supporting their revolt against the Ottomans. The British Mandate for Mesopotamia lasted until 1932, date on which the Kingdom of Iraq acceded to independence (while remaining a satellite state of Great Britain), and integrated the League of Nations. At the beginning of the Second World War, a coup d'\u00e9tat in Iraq brought Rashid Ali al-Gaylani to power as Prime Minister. He oriented the kingdom's policy towards neutrality, then towards rapprochement with the Axis powers, provoking the Anglo-Iraqi War won by the British in 1941, who occupied Iraq until 1945.\n1958 Iraqi Revolution.\nIraq remained a satellite of Great Britain until the Iraqi revolution of July 14, 1958. In 1955 the Baghdad Pact established a military alliance between Iraq, Turkey, Pakistan, Iran and the United Kingdom, but Iraq withdrew in 1959 following the change of regime. After 1958, although the revolution was carried out with anti-imperialist motivations, Iraq under the mandate of Abd al-Karim Qasim maintained close ties with London, which accommodated its rapprochement with the Soviet Union.\nThe Ba'ath party takeover in 1968 did not affect relations between Iraq and the United Kingdom, which supported Saddam Hussein during the Iran\u2013Iraq War between 1980 and 1988. But these deteriorated following the Invasion of Kuwait, while the United Kingdom was one of the main contributors, in military and materials, of the international coalition opposed to the Iraqi army.\nBritish military interventions alongside the United States.\nDuring the decade following the end of the Gulf War, the United Kingdom carried out alongside the United States a series of observation flights and airstrikes on Iraqi targets, to fight against the \"nuclear, chemical and biological armament programs\" and to enforce the no-fly zone imposed by the coalition on the Iraqi army. In 2003, the initiative of the United States to invade Iraq was widely contested in Europe and the Middle East, unlike the Gulf War which had gathered a large coalition.\nNevertheless, the heads of state of eight countries including Great Britain announced in a joint letter that they stood behind Washington, while France, Russia and Germany called for the continuation of inspections in Iraq. On 16 March 2003, Washington, London and Madrid announced a final attempt to have the UN endorse an ultimatum authorizing the use of force against Iraq. The three states renounced the next day to put their resolution to the vote at the UN, while operation \"Iraqi Freedom\" was launched four days later by an American-British coalition.\nIn total, about 45,000 British soldiers participated in the war between 2003 and 2009, causing 179 deaths in their ranks. During this period, two personalities of the British royal family went to Iraq to meet their troops deployed there: Prince Charles III and Prince Philip, son and husband of Queen Elizabeth II, in 2004 and 2006. In July 2016, an inquiry commission on the United Kingdom's engagement in the Iraq War published a report denouncing a \"premature\" intervention decided \"before all peaceful alternatives to obtain (the country's) disarmament were exhausted\".\nSince the fall of Saddam Hussein.\nDuring the second Iraqi civil war, the United Kingdom took part in air operations in Iraq against the Islamic State, initially sending six Panavia Tornado fighter planes stationed at the Akrotiri base, in southern Cyprus. In parallel, limited ground operations were carried out by British special forces.\nIn May 2023, the Duchess of Edinburgh Sophie Rhys-Jones, wife of Prince Edward and sister-in-law of King Charles III, went to Baghdad where she met Prime Minister Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani, President Abdul Latif Rashid and his wife Shanaz Ibrahim Ahmed, as well as Iraqi feminist activists.\nIn August 2024, the British oil giant BP signed an agreement with Iraq to develop four oil and gas fields in Kirkuk province. In January 2025, a new oil and gas exploitation agreement was signed in London between the British company and the Iraqi government. Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani, on a trip to the United Kingdom for the first time since the beginning of his term, was received by his counterpart Keir Starmer, as well as by King Charles III at Buckingham Palace. His visit focused on economic, energy, commercial, and security cooperation between the two countries.\nRelations with the United States.\nDuring the Cold War.\nIn 1958, the overthrow of the monarchy replaced by a republican government provoked tensions between Iraq and the United States. This was explained by the influence of the Iraqi Communist Party in Iraq, the pro-Soviet policy of the new government and Iraqi hostility to any Western military presence in the Middle East.\nOnly the interlude of the two governments of the Aref brothers (1963-1968) gave hope that Iraq would return to the Western fold, but the Arab-Israeli war of June 1967 and American support for Israel led to the Ba'athists overthrowing Aref in 1968 and displayed their hostility towards Washington. In 1973, Iraq participated in the Arab consultation causing the first oil shock which severely penalized Western economies. Meanwhile, Washington provided material and military support not only to Israel, but also to the autonomist project of Iraq's Kurds led by Mullah Mustafa Barzani.\nThe year 1979 was marked by several events that created the conditions for a rapprochement between Iraq and the United States. The main one was the Islamic Revolution in Iran, which went from strategic ally to Washington's worst enemy in the region, following which Iraq and the United States became objective allies against the Iranian threat; the arrival of Saddam Hussein to the presidency of Iraq, whose repression of the Iraqi Communist Party distanced Iraq from the Soviet Union. His arrival was also accompanied by a d\u00e9tente in relations between Iraq and the pro-American Saudi monarchy; the Israeli-Egyptian peace agreements which, if they caused a rupture in relations between Iraq and pro-American Egypt, reduced Arab pressure on Israel and made Iraq a \"manageable\" threat although still real for the Hebrew state.\nThese conditions favorable to a rapprochement between Iraq and the United States, which materialized by a resumption of their diplomatic relations in 1984. The Iran\u2013Iraq War begun in 1980 did not fit into the framework of a confrontation between the East-West blocs, each of the belligerents having allies and enemies in one camp and the other. The United States took the side of Iraq in a context of strong tensions with Iran following the hostage-taking of the American embassy in Tehran, and sealed in 1983 a military cooperation agreement with Saddam Hussein, considered the only one in the region able to oppose the mullahs' Iran. Nevertheless, the Iran-Contra scandal has since revealed that American weapons and funding were also provided to Iran during this war (although at a very lower level than the support provided to Iraq).\nWars and embargo between 1991 and 2011.\nThe image of Iraq within the administration of George H. W. Bush deteriorated in 1989, when Iraq undertook to rearm and place itself at the center of inter-Arab relations by advocating a security system independent of the United States. The collapse of the Soviet Union, which de facto put an end to the bipolar system made it urgent for Saddam Hussein to prevent the region from falling under the exclusive control of the United States at the same time as it gave Iraq the opportunity to fill, at least partially, the void left by the Soviet withdrawal from the Middle East.\nRelations between the United States and Iraq deteriorated following the Invasion of Kuwait, the United States taking the head of an international coalition opposed to the Iraqi army, which put an end to Saddam Hussein's expansionist ambitions and facilitated the birth of an autonomous Iraqi Kurdistan.\nDuring the decade following the end of the Gulf War, relations between the two states remained broken, and an embargo was imposed by the United States on Iraq. The United States carried out a series of observation flights and airstrikes on Iraqi targets, to fight against the \"nuclear, chemical and biological armament programs\" and to enforce the no-fly zone imposed by the coalition on the Iraqi army. In October 1998, President Bill Clinton signed the \"Iraq Liberation Act\" voted by the US Congress, allowing financial support for the Iraqi opposition, exiled abroad. In December 1999, faced with suspicions that Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction, the American and British armies bombed military objectives during operation \"Desert Fox\".\nOn 29 January 2002, the new US President George W. Bush, son of his predecessor George H. W. Bush, declared that Iraq, Iran and North Korea formed an \"Axis of evil\", against which he promised to act. The UN imposed on Iraq a disarmament program under the threat of an armed intervention by the United States. Despite Iraq's submission to the UN's injunctions, and strong international opposition to an armed intervention, the United States and their allies (mainly the United Kingdom) attacked Iraq on 20 March 2003 and overthrew Saddam Hussein's regime. After a lightning American victory over the Iraqi army, American General Jay Garner was appointed provisional civil administrator of Iraq, then replaced a month later by diplomat Paul Bremer, who put in place economic and social reforms. The UN Security Council resolution voted on 22 May 2003 ratified the American-British control of Iraq. Saddam Hussein was executed on 30 December 2006, after having been sentenced to death by an Iraqi tribunal.\nThe war against Iraq ended with operation \"New Dawn\" which aimed to stabilize the country before the departure of the last American troops on 18 December 2011.\nRapprochement and cooperation since 2011.\nSince the end of the Iraq War, the United States and Iraq consider themselves strategic partners, given the American political and military involvement alongside the post-2004 Iraqi governments. The United States provides each year significant military aid in equipment and training, and uses their military bases.\nIn 2014, during the second Iraqi civil war, the United States took the lead of the international coalition against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. The United States carried out about 90% of the airstrikes of this coalition against the jihadist group, while only 10% were carried out by other Arab and Western members. The United States also sent 1,500 military advisers to Iraq in 2014, then 450 men as reinforcements in June 2015, bringing American forces in Iraq to 3,500 men.\nIn 2019, a year after the defeat of the Islamic State, more than 5,000 American soldiers were still stationed in Iraq, while the United States participated in the reconstruction and consolidation of certain official Iraqi institutions. In parallel, the United States pressured Iraq to force it to apply the American embargo imposed by Donald Trump on Iran, putting the Iraqi government in great difficulty faced with the impossibility of complying with such an injunction due to its economic dependence on Iran. In October 2018, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, hesitating to pronounce himself before the Iraqi parliament on the American sanctions imposed on Iran, was overthrown by a coalition of pro-Iranian deputies reproaching him for his lack of firmness towards Washington.\nRelations between Iraq and the United States deteriorated during the 2019-2020 American-Iranian crisis marked by a series of clashes between American and pro-Iranian forces on Iraqi soil, whose culmination was the targeted assassination of General Qasem Soleimani and the leader of the Iranian-backed Shiite Iraqi militias Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis by an American drone on 3 January 2020.\nImportant anti-American demonstrations took place in Iraq (of which Iran was also the target), while the Iraqi Parliament voted a resolution asking the government to put an end to the presence of foreign troops in Iraq. This decision was rejected by US President Donald Trump who declared that a withdrawal of American troops \"would be the worst thing that could happen to Iraq\", and threatened Iraq with economic sanctions in case of expulsion by Iraq of the American troops deployed there. This threat of sanctions was worrying for Baghdad whose oil revenues which provide 90% of the state budget, are paid to it in dollars on an account at the US Federal Reserve, to which the United States could block access.\nIn May 2020, Mustafa Al-Kadhimi, head of Iraqi intelligence, major actor and fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and close to the United States, became Prime Minister of Iraq. His post and his pro-American orientation made him suspected by pro-Iran factions of having been complicit in the assassination of Qasem Soleimani. But his talents as diplomat and negotiator made him gradually accepted by the majority of rival political actors, in Iraq and internationally.\nIn January 2021, an Iraqi court issued an arrest warrant against US President Donald Trump as part of the investigation into the elimination of Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis. In March 2021, the American administration of Joe Biden elected four months earlier declared granting an additional three-month delay to the Iraqi government to comply with the sanctions imposed by Washington on Iran, a week before a \"strategic dialogue\" planned for 7 April 2021 by videoconference.\nIn July 2021, Iraqi Prime Minister Mustafa al-Kadhimi received in Baghdad Brett McGurk, White House emissary for the Middle East and former supervisor of the international military coalition against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. Two weeks later, he went to the United States for a several-day visit, and met President Joe Biden, new phase of the American military presence in Iraq, with an end to combat operations by 31 December 2021, replaced by a mission of advice and training. The US President did not specify how many soldiers would remain on site, but it appeared in 2022 that about 2,000 American soldiers were still deployed on Iraqi soil. In January 2023, Iraqi Prime Minister Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani declared, although more favorable to Iran than to the United States, that he still needed American troops to fight the Islamic State in Iraq. He further declared believing in the possibility that Iraq maintain good relations \"both with Iran and with the United States\". The following month, he received the US Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin in Baghdad in the presence of his Iraqi counterpart Thabit al-Abbasi, and affirmed to him his desire to \"strengthen and consolidate\" its ties with Washington. The Secretary of Defense, while expressing his optimism in the continuation of bilateral relations between Washington and Baghdad, declared for his part that the American military deployed in Iraq could remain there if the Iraqi government requested it. This subject was still delicate and divisive given the recent history of the two countries, this meeting marking the 20 years of the Iraq War which began in March 2003. In October 2023, the resumption of the war between Israel and Hamas cooled Iraqi-American relations, Baghdad reproaching Washington for its unconditional support for the Hebrew state, while clashes multiplied between American soldiers deployed in the Middle East and pro-Iranian militias, notably in Iraq. The following month, Antony Blinken went to Baghdad, his first visit to Iraq as head of American diplomacy, and met Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani, for an interview focused on tensions in the Middle East and the need to preserve Iraq from them.\nIn April 2024, Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani went to Washington for the first time since taking office in October 2022, with the main objective of promoting American economic engagement in Iraq. He met President Joe Biden, Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin, US Secretary of State Antony Blinken, and the president's senior advisor for Energy and Investments Amos Hochstein. If no military official was part of the Iraqi delegation, military cooperation was also on the agenda, notably a potential sale for 140 million dollars including logistical support and pilot training aid on Iraqi C-172 and AC/RC-208 aircraft. In November, following the election of Donald Trump for a second term as President of the United States, Mohamed Shia' Al Sudani addressed him a message of congratulations in which he expressed his wish to \"consolidate bilateral relations\" with Washington \"on the basis of mutual respect and common interests\".\nIn April 2025, Iraq signed a memorandum of understanding with the American energy giant GE Vernova for gas power plants and the production of 24,000 megawatts of electricity. Mohamed Shia' Al Sudani congratulated himself on the \"largest and most modern project in Iraq's history, with the possibility of obtaining external financing from international banks\".\nRelations with Russia.\nSoviet influence on Iraq during the Cold War.\nThe Iraqi Communist Party founded in 1934 was an important actor in the rapprochement between Iraq and the USSR (although this party never governed in Iraq), whose bilateral relations were, during the Cold War, largely influenced by those between this party and the Iraqi government. In the 1930s, the Iraqi population constituted fertile ground for the spread of communism. On the one hand, southern Iraq hosted disadvantaged rural environments receptive to a discourse on equality and social progress; on the other hand, the ideologies of Shi'ism and communism have several common ideas: equality, the fight against injustice, opposition to the monarchy, and the defense of the oppressed.\nThe 1958 Iraqi revolution put an end to the reign of the pro-Western monarchy, brought General Abd al-Karim Qasim to power, communist militant (although non-member of the ICP) and led to Iraq's withdrawal from the Baghdad Pact, military alliance constituted against the Soviet Union. Naziha al-Dulaimi feminist militant and ICP cadre, joined the Iraqi republican government, thus becoming the first woman minister in the Arab world. After establishing diplomatic relations with the USSR, Baghdad sent a delegation to Moscow on 16 March 1959, received by Nikita Khrushchev, who declared:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is natural that we pay more attention to governments and countries that make the interests of their people a priority. From the bottom of our heart, we salute Abd al-Karim Qasim, the Iraqi Prime Minister who leads his country on the path of progress to strengthen the Republic of Iraq, and we wish him much success.\nNevertheless, the attitude of the young Republic of Iraq towards communism at the end of the 1950s remained ambivalent. On the one hand, the Iraqi Shiite clergy (including Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, father-in-law of Muqtada al-Sadr), worried about the spread of non-religious ideas in the population, issued a fatwa against communism. On the other hand, the Iraqi government was worried about the rise in power of the ICP which it perceived as a threat to its power. In March 1959 in Mosul, tensions degenerated into clashes between the Iraqi army and militants of the ICP who demanded more participation in the government. The armed Kurdish groups rallied to the communists, and Mosul was bombed by the Iraqi army.\nWhen the Ba'ath party came to power in 1968, it also repressed communist militants at first. But in 1970, the death of Nasser distanced Egypt from the Soviet Union (Anwar Sadat officially made it pass into the American camp in 1976), pushing the latter to seek new Arab allies, and at the same time, to secure its oil supply. Aware of this opportunity and in search of legitimacy on the international scene, the new Iraqi government made peace with the ICP, and Saddam Hussein, vice-president of Iraq went to Moscow to reaffirm the ties between the Soviet Union and Iraq. Wary at first, the Pravda finally accepted this outstretched hand, and in January 1971, sent to Iraq economic, trade union, cultural, scientific, and political delegations. In February 1972, Ahmad Hassan al-Bakr and Saddam Hussein went again to the USSR, and committed to deepening their relations with Moscow, which announced for Iraq aid in the oil sector and support for the \"struggle of the Arab peoples in the Arabian Gulf\". Ahmad Hassan al-Bakr signed a treaty of friendship and cooperation with his Soviet counterpart Alexei Kosygin. With this agreement, Moscow ambitious to substitute Iraq for Egypt as the pillar of its influence in the Middle East. \nOn the national level, a pact bringing together the Ba'ath party, the communist party and the Kurdish Democratic Party was signed in 1973, and allowed two communist ministers to enter the government, although only the Ba'athists held power within the Revolutionary Command Council. The communists, denouncing this state of affairs, were excluded from the government in 1977, and suffered new repression in May and July 1978. This caused a new cooling of its relations with the Soviet Union, which Iraq compensated by a rapprochement with France of Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing.\nTwo years later, the attack on Iran by Iraq placed Pravda in a delicate position. Although linked to Iraq by the 1972 treaties, the use of Russian weapons to bomb Iran pushed the Soviet Union to reduce its deliveries, attracting violent criticism from Saddam Hussein, who at the same time, condemned the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan (1979-1989). The objective of the Soviets in the Middle East was then to forge relations with the \"anti-imperialist\" governments, which included the socialist Arab countries (including the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan), but also Iran, become enemy of the United States after the 1979 revolution.\nDecade between the disintegration of the USSR and the Iraq War.\nThe year 1991 was simultaneously marked by the Gulf War and by the disintegration of the Soviet Union, which made Russia an independent state with a strongly reduced zone of influence. The following years, Russia's attitude was characterized by a wait-and-see attitude and skepticism in matters of security and defense, in a \"new world order\" very largely dominated by the United States and NATO.\nBut post-Soviet Russia showed itself always cooperative with Iraq, which it supported politically against the United States, after the imposition of American economic sanctions in 1995. Russia participated notably in the \"Oil for Food\" program. Between 1990 and 1997, several Russian companies signed with Iraq agreements for the delivery of 25.2 million barrels of Iraqi crude. At the beginning of the year 2000, after the designation of Vladimir Putin to the presidency of Russia on an interim basis (before his election in March), Saddam Hussein addressed him in a letter his desire to maintain and develop the \"traditional good relations of friendship and cooperation between Iraq and Russia\".\nRussia-Iraq relations since 2003.\nIn 2003, Vladimir Putin's Russia was part with France and Germany of the \"Axis of Peace\", opposed to an armed intervention against Iraq as long as all peaceful means to negotiate Saddam Hussein have not all been exploited. This Paris Berlin-Moscow axis denied the United States the legitimacy of the \"self-defense\" thesis and of a \"necessary solidary organization of world security\", considering this invasion as a rejection of the UN, of multilateralism, and of international conventions. Paradoxically, it was the American military intervention leading to the overthrow of Saddam Hussein that allowed the Iraqi Communist Party to be reborn and to become active again on the Iraqi political scene.\nThe following year, Russia offered Iraq humanitarian assistance, in the form of medicines and medical equipment, blankets and tents, heating and lighting equipment, as well as books in Russian intended for University of Baghdad. The large Russian oil companies Lukoil and Rosneft are moreover among the main foreign investors in the country. In 2005, Russia became an observer state (but non-member) of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation.\nBetween 2004 and 2017, Russia suspended its commercial air links with Iraq due to the degradation of security in the country plagued by two successive civil wars. But at the same time, Russia and Iraq established an important military collaboration, which reached its peak during the second term of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki to whom the United States hesitated to deliver F-16s. In 2015, Iraq and Russia allied to set up an intelligence center in Baghdad to fight against the Islamic State, while Russia intervened militarily in neighboring Syria at war against the same jihadist group.\nRussian military support for the Alawite Syrian regime against Sunni rebels, and good Russian-Iranian diplomatic relations, allowed Russian President Vladimir Putin to acquire immense popularity in the Shiite countries and communities of the Middle East, notably Iraq. While a growing number of Shiite leaders see him as a guardian of their holy places, an Iraqi legend makes him a \"son of the region\" immigrated to Russia, originally from Nasiriyah (near Basra), whose original name would be \"Abdel Amir Aboul-Tine\", become Vladimir Putin. This rumor, although improbable, is viewed favorably by Moscow, and skillfully maintained by Russian propaganda via local relays.\nFrom 2016, Russia got closer to OPEC of which Iraq is part, to face the growing American competition due to the shale oil boom and the fall in the barrel price that resulted. In March 2018, for the first time in Iraq's history, the Shiite religious party of Moqtada al-Sadr formed an alliance with the ICP for the Iraqi legislative elections, entitled \"The March for Reforms\". This coalition came first with nearly one and a half million votes.\nIn February 2022, the invasion of Ukraine by Russia, placed Iraqis in an ambivalent position: compassionate towards the Ukrainians invaded and bombed by a great military power like Iraq in 2003, but also towards the Russians suffering severe international sanctions like Iraq in the 1990s. Officially, Baghdad adopted a position of neutrality given its ties with the United States on one side, and to a lesser extent with Russia on the other, and abstained during the vote at the UN General Assembly on 2 March.\nA year later, in February 2023, while the war in Ukraine continued in the east of the country, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov went to Baghdad at the head of a delegation including representatives of oil and gas companies and investors. He met his Iraqi counterpart Fuad Hussein, Prime Minister Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani, President Abdul Latif Rashid, and Parliament Speaker Mohammed al-Halbousi. The spokesman for Iraqi diplomacy Ahmed al-Sahhaf declared that his country was favorable to \"any dialogue process allowing to defuse this escalation and alleviate the crises [... ] particularly in the sectors of food security and energy\", while the war in Ukraine led to a surge in wheat prices on international markets.\nRelations with Ukraine.\nUntil 1991, Ukraine was part of the Soviet Union, and its foreign policy vis-\u00e0-vis Iraq was aligned with that of Moscow. Since Ukraine's independence, the ties maintained by Baghdad and Kyiv are essentially cultural and educational, with many Iraqis having gone to study in Ukraine, mainly medicine. However, Ukrainian troops were part of the coalition that invaded Iraq alongside the United States between 2003 and 2005. The decision to take part in the Iraq War was that of a pro-Russian president Leonid Kuchma, while the decision to withdraw Ukrainian troops from Iraq was taken by the pro-Western president Viktor Yushchenko.\nIn April 2023, the Iraqi and Ukrainian heads of state Mohammed al-Sudani and Volodymyr Zelenskyy spoke by telephone, while Ukraine has been for more than a year in war against Russia in which Baghdad, which maintains good relations with Kyiv and with Moscow, prefers to remain neutral. The Iraqi Prime Minister conveyed to his Ukrainian interlocutor his support in the search for a peaceful solution to the conflict in a context where Baghdad has successfully illustrated itself by its mediation between Saudi Arabia and Iran. The following week, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba went to Baghdad, marking the first visit of the Ukrainian Foreign Minister to Iraq since 2012. He met Mohammed al-Sudani as well as his counterpart Fuad Hussein whom he thanked for their solidarity with Ukraine at war, and with whom he evoked the future relations between Ukraine and Iraq.\nRelations with France.\nThe borders of Iraq and Syria stem from the Sykes\u2013Picot Agreement of 1916, names of the British and French diplomats sharing the Arab territories of the Ottoman Empire during its fall. While Iraq became a British protectorate following the victory of the Allies in the Mesopotamian campaign, France received a mandate from the League of Nations to administer Syria and Lebanon.\nAfter the Second World War, Iraq, in solidarity with Algeria in war of independence against France (between 1954 and 1962) broke its diplomatic relations with France in 1956, until the \u00c9vian Accords formalizing the independence of Algeria in 1962. But in the meantime, the 1958 Iraqi revolution, which took place on 14 July 1958 like the French Revolution of 1789, created a sympathy of the new Iraqi power towards France, the latter being inspired by republican ideals, and recalling that France had opposed the Baghdad Pact in 1955. Thus on 14 July 1958, the putschist generals alternated on \"Radio Baghdad\", the broadcast of Arab fields with \"La Marseillaise\", making the distinction with the colonial France against which it was necessary to fight, and France of \"human rights\", source of inspiration.\nIn the 1960s, following the restoration of Franco-Iraqi diplomatic relations, the sympathy of the Iraqi authorities for France created favorable conditions for a rapprochement, while General Charles de Gaulle reoriented his foreign policy in favor of Arab countries, to the detriment of Israel which he considered the aggressor in the Six-Day War.\nThe following year, when the Ba'ath Party took power, Saddam Hussein forged good personal relations with several French heads of state, particularly Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing (nephew of Fran\u00e7ois Georges-Picot), President from 1974 to 1981 and his Prime Minister Jacques Chirac.\nIraq then offered for Paris all the advantages to figure in the first rank of its Arab partners: a rich country, an interesting market by the importance of its population and by its large civil and military development projects, not dominated by the United States unlike the other Gulf countries, and whose regime sought to get out of its bilateral relation with the Soviet Union.\nIn 1975, following a visit by Saddam Hussein to France, an agreement was signed on the supply by France of a nuclear research reactor, Osirak (destroyed in 1981 by the Israeli Air Force). In September 1976, France agreed to supply between 60 and 80 Mirages, then 200 AMX-30 tanks the following year. At the end of the 1970s France was Iraq's second most important trading partner after the Soviet Union as supplier of civilian and military equipment. France could justify this relation with an autocratic government by claiming to extract Iraq from the Soviet grip.\nAfter the election of Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand in May 1981, the socialists announced their decision to maintain military commitments towards Iraq. Several weapons were delivered by France to Iraq during the war against Iran (notably five Super \u00c9tendard in 1983), while the \"Franco-Iraqi Friendships\" association was created in 1985 by Jean-Pierre Chev\u00e8nement. At the end of the Iran-Iraq War in 1988, Iraq became again, notwithstanding its heavy debt towards Paris, an interesting market in which France counted on enjoying privileged treatment in recognition of its support during the war.\nFrance officially broke its diplomatic relations with Iraq following the invasion of Kuwait in 1990, but unofficially, French envoys present in Baghdad tried to negotiate a solution to the crisis. When the United States launched operation \"Desert Storm\", Jean-Pierre Chev\u00e8nement, who became Minister of Defense in 1988, resigned from his post in protest against France's participation in the coalition against Iraq.\nAfter Iraq's defeat in the Gulf War, France remained one of the few Western countries favorable to Iraq, although having participated in the bombings against the Iraqi army in 1991. In 1995, Jacques Chirac key personality of bilateral Franco-Iraqi relations after having been minister in the governments of Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing and Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, was elected President of France.\nIn 2003, France opposed the US military intervention in Iraq. Jacques Chirac, then at the beginning of his second term as president, declared: \"Iraq does not represent today an immediate threat such that it justifies an immediate war\". At the end of February 2003, Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin delivered a speech before the United Nations Security Council, during which he declared: \"a use of force would be so heavy with consequences for men, for the region and for international stability that it could only be envisaged as a last extremity\". France even showed singular audacity by opposing, at the UN Security Council, the US project of invasion of Iraq. The following years, French and American diplomacies got closer on another file in the Middle East: the withdrawal of Syrian troops from Lebanon.\nFrom 2014 and the second Iraqi civil war, France actively participated in the international coalition against the Islamic State, by launching operation \"Chammal\" in support of the Iraqi army. About 3,200 men as well as several dozen combat aircraft, Dassault Rafale, Dassault Mirage 2000, Super-\u00c9tendard, as well as the aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle and other frigates were mobilized in this external operation. Support was also provided by the French Army, notably special forces and CAESAR guns, during the battle of Mosul in 2016-2017.\nIn September 2020, French President Emmanuel Macron went to Iraq and met his counterpart, Iraqi President Barham Salih and his Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi. The two heads of state evoked their security cooperation against the Islamic State, and a new project for the construction of a nuclear power plant under the control of the International Atomic Energy Agency, with many jobs at stake.\nIn August 2021, Emmanuel Macron went again to Iraq to participate in a regional summit in Baghdad devoted to the fight against terrorism following the taking of Kabul by the Taliban. France is the only country outside the Middle East to participate in this summit. The French president promised that the French army would remain and continue to support the Iraqi security forces. In the evening of the summit, he went to the Shiite shrine of Kadhimiya, in the company of Iraqi Prime Minister, Mustafa al-Kadhimi. The next day, the French head of state went to Mosul in a church and on the site of a mosque destroyed during the recapture of the city to the Islamic State group in 2017, in testimony of \"respect towards all Iraqi communities\". During a speech at the Our Lady of the Hour Church, Emmanuel Macron exhorted the Iraqis, tested by 40 years of conflicts and a social crisis, to \"work together\", before going to Erbil where he met the leaders of Iraqi Kurdistan.\nA year later, in May 2022, Catherine Colonna, the new head of French diplomacy appointed by Emmanuel Macron after his reelection a month earlier, received in Paris the Iraqi Oil Minister Ihsan Ismail in search of new investments in the energy sector of his country. Ihsan Ismail also had talks with representatives of the French employers' union Medef and with the CEO of the French group TotalEnergies Patrick Pouyann\u00e9, while marking with Catherine Colonna the will of the two countries to \"consolidate their relation\". On the one hand, many French companies are established in Iraq, mainly in the fields of tourism, catering or health. Of numerous Lebanese go each year to Iraq, to the holy places of Najaf and the city of Karbala. The total volume of Lebanese exports to Iraq is however quite limited, rarely crossing the threshold of 150 million dollars per year, due to competition from Iran and Turkey and logistical costs that the two poor countries have to bear.\nIn December 2022, Emmanuel Macron went to Jordan for a new international summit dedicated to support for Iraq. He reaffirmed there: \"France's attachment through its history, its diplomatic action for the stability of the region so that there is a way that is not that of a form of hegemony, imperialism, model that would be dictated from the outside\".\nThe following month, Iraqi Prime Minister Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani went to Paris on official invitation from President Emmanuel Macron, to strengthen relations between \"two friendly countries\". Their meeting focused on energy and security issues, notably oil exploitations and the Iraqi electricity network, as well as arms trade, Iraq having since the Saddam Hussein era a fairly largely French military arsenal as well as an army trained and experienced in its use. The discussion of the two heads of state during a dinner at the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Palace led to the signing of a \"strategic partnership treaty\" on which France commits notably to \"extend the export credit facilities repayable for an amount of one billion euros, to support French companies operating in Iraq\". Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani hailed relations engaged in \"a strategic path thanks to the signing of a strategic partnership agreement\", while the website of the Quai d\u2019Orsay describes Franco-Iraqi relations as \"particularly dynamic\". The Iraqi Prime Minister also met during this visit to Paris representatives of the groups Thales, Dassault, and Airbus, to discuss a potential Iraqi acquisition of radars, Rafale or Eurocopter. At the end of March, in the continuity of the official visit to France of the Iraqi Prime Minister, the latter exchanged by telephone with Emmanuel Macron who reaffirmed to him France's support for the stability and sovereignty of Iraq. A month later, France opened a visa office in Mosul to facilitate applications from inhabitants wishing to travel, in particular students, academics, businessmen and tourists. In July 2023, French Minister of the Armed Forces S\u00e9bastien Lecornu went to Iraq to meet the French soldiers deployed there. He spoke in Baghdad with his counterpart, Iraqi Defense Minister Thabit al-Abbasi, as well as with Iraqi Prime Minister, Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani, to evoke the continuation of France's military and material support to the Iraqi army. In August, after the death of a French soldier engaged in Iraq alongside government forces against the Islamic State group, Emmanuel Macron spoke by telephone with Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani, and reiterated to him his determination to fight the jihadist group. The Iraqi Prime Minister thanked him and paid tribute to the French soldiers killed in operation in Iraq, of which about 600 were then still deployed in the country.\nRelations with Germany.\nIn the first half of the 20th century, Iraq experienced two brief rapprochements with Germany: in 1914, when the Ottoman Empire to which Iraq was still integrated signed with Germany the German\u2013Ottoman alliance, then in 1941 when Prime Minister Rashid Ali al-Gaylani attempted to introduce Iraq into the camp of Nazi Germany. During the interwar period, the German chancelleries and consulates installed in Arab countries early understood the attachment of Arab peoples to independence, for which Nazi propaganda ingeniously fabricated the image of a sympathetic and benevolent Germany towards Arab peoples. Germany however had no political ambition in the Middle East, and essentially tried to extend its influence there to put pressure on the United Kingdom. But these two German-Iraqi rapprochements during the First and Second World War were followed by British military interventions (Mesopotamian campaign and Anglo-Iraqi War), which brought Iraq back into their sphere of influence. Germany which had just taken control of French Syria via the Vichy government favorable to it (established following the defeat of France in 1940) attempted to intervene in 1941, but the Luftwaffe arrived too late to prevent the British from landing.\nDuring the Cold War, Germany was divided into two independent zones, the West Germany pro-Western and the East Germany pro-Soviet, each of which aligned its foreign policy with the bloc in which it was integrated.\nDuring the Gulf War which took place the same year as the German reunification, Germany did not participate in the military operations of the coalition, but provided it with material and financial support. In 2003, Germany was part with France and Russia of the \"Axis of Peace\", opposed to an armed intervention against Iraq as long as all peaceful means to negotiate Saddam Hussein have not been exploited.\nIn 2015, during the second Iraqi civil war, Germany participated in the international coalition against the Islamic State by deploying 1,200 soldiers, six Panavia Tornado planes and a frigate, but its air forces did not carry out any bombing and confined themselves to reconnaissance missions. In October 2017, it was in Germany where he was hospitalized, that died the former Iraqi President Jalal Talabani in power from 2005 to 2014.\nIn January 2023, Iraqi Prime Minister Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani went to Berlin where he was received by German Chancellor Olaf Scholz. Their discussion focused on an energy agreement with the German company Siemens Energy to improve the Iraqi electricity sector in the field of production, transport and distribution, notably thanks to the valorization of the gas currently flared in oil exploitations in Iraq. The following month, Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani returned to Germany to participate in the Munich Security Conference.\nRelations with Austria.\nIn 1991, in the context of the Gulf War, Austria closed its embassy in Iraq and transferred its functions to its embassy in Jordan, allowing Vienna to maintain its relations with Baghdad.\nIn September 2023, Austrian Foreign Minister Alexander Schallenberg announced the official reopening of the Austrian embassy in Baghdad, during the opening ceremony in the Iraqi capital. About ten business leaders accompanied him, notably in the sectors of energy, health, telecommunications, but also infrastructure and transport, and declared themselves ready to invest in Iraq. According to the Austrian Federal Economic Chamber, Austrian exports to Iraq amounted to 94.5 million euros in 2022, an increase of 25% over one year.\nRelations with Spain.\nIn 2003, like the United Kingdom and Italy, Spain was part of the \"Axis of War\" accusing Iraq of possessing weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, and supported the international coalition sending troops to the country under the lead of the United States.\nIn 2014, Spain intervened again in Iraq under the lead of the United States, this time in support of the Iraqi government, and sent a thousand Italian soldiers to fight against the Islamic State. In December 2022, Italian head of state Giorgia Meloni went to Baghdad for her first bilateral visit outside Europe after her election to meet the troops there, on the occasion of the Christmas holidays. She was received there by her Iraqi counterpart Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani, who conveyed to her his desire to develop economic cooperation between their two countries in all fields, notably agriculture, water and health.\nRelations with the Vatican.\nUntil 2003, Iraq, a majority Shiite Muslim country, had one and a half million Christians. In December 1999, Pope John Paul II envisaged a trip to southern Iraq, but Saddam Hussein opposed it.\nIn October 2019, during the anti-government protests that shook Iraq, Pope Francis exhorted the Iraqi government to stop repressing its youth demanding justice. The Chaldean Catholic Church sided with the protesters, through the voice of Patriarch Louis-Rapha\u00ebl Sako, whose position was implicitly endorsed by Pope Francis, when he appointed him cardinal of the Roman Church.\nIn January 2020, Pope Francis received at the Vatican Iraqi President Barham Salih, before announcing a year later, his intention to go to Iraq in March 2021. This first historic visit for a sovereign pontiff was welcomed with enthusiasm by Iraqi Foreign Minister Fuad Hussein who evoked a \"message of peace for Iraq and for the whole region\".\nOn 5 March, Pope Francis landed in Baghdad, marking the first visit of a sovereign pontiff to Iraq, but also his first international trip for fifteen months due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Upon his arrival, he delivered a speech at the Presidential Palace, in which he called on leaders to defend a peaceful society and peaceful coexistence in a country eaten away by ethnic and religious divisionsHe celebrated a first mass at the Sayidat al-Nejat Cathedral, where he paid tribute to persecuted Christians and Yazidis, as well as to the victims of the Islamist attack that hit this cathedral in October 2010. The pope recalled the very ancient presence of Christians in Iraq where according to tradition Abraham was born, calling on them to remain in Iraq by pleading for \"their participation in public life as citizens fully enjoying rights, freedom and responsibility\". The same day, the pope met President Barham Salih, who saluted a guest appreciated by Iraqis, and declared \"One cannot imagine a Middle East without Christians\".\nThe next day, the pope went to the holy city of Najaf, where he met with the Shiite ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, who conveyed to him \"the attention he pays to the fact that Christian citizens live like all Iraqis in peace and security, strong in all their constitutional rights\".\nAfter this meeting, the pope went to Ur, birthplace of Abraham, to pray with Yazidi dignitaries, but also Sabians or Zoroastrians, as well as Muslims, Shiites and Sunnis. While paying tribute again to Iraqi victims of the Islamic State, he pleaded for the need to \"walk from conflict to unity throughout the Middle East and particularly in martyred Syria\". \nSunday 7 March 2021, the pope went to Mosul, former \"capital\" of the Islamic State in Iraq where he prayed on a platform built in the middle of the ruins for the victims of the war, then celebrated a mass in the just restored church of the neighboring Christian city of Qaraqosh (halfway between Mosul and Erbil), where the sovereign pontiff called on the crowd to \"rebuild\" and \"not to be discouraged\". He concluded his visit to Iraq the same day with a mass on the lawn of the Franso Hariri Stadium (name of an assassinated Christian politician), of Erbil capital of Iraqi Kurdistan in the presence of thousands of faithful, calling on Christians still in the country not to be discouraged. The pope declared there also \"Iraq will always remain with me\". The Vatican ambassador to Baghdad is the Italian diplomat and Apostolic Nuncio Mitja Leskovar.\nIn November 2021, two days after a drone assassination attempt against Iraqi Prime Minister Mustafa al-Kadhimi, the pope condemned in a communiqu\u00e9 from the Holy See an \"odious act of terrorism\" and \"prays that the Iraqi people receive wisdom and strength to continue on the path of peace, through dialogue and fraternal solidarity\".\nRelations with Sweden.\nSweden did not intervene in any of the wars waged by Iraq (or in Iraq) between 1980 and 2003, with the exception of limited humanitarian support, but provided military aid to the Iraqi government in its war against the Islamic State in 2015. Swedish military instructors were sent to Iraq to train Iraqi troops, while Sweden hosted a large number of Iraqi refugees, making Iraqis the second largest foreign-origin population in Sweden, with nearly 150,000 citizens in 2022.\nIn July 2023, an Iraqi refugee in Sweden publicly degraded a Quran in front of the Iraqi embassy in Stockholm, provoking important demonstrations in Iraq, the protesters reproaching the Swedish authorities for having authorized the gesture of this Iraqi refugee. These degenerated when supporters of the Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr set fire to a building of the Swedish embassy in Baghdad, but this attack was condemned as much by the Swedish authorities as by their Iraqi counterparts, who announced to bring to justice the authors of this fire. Sweden nevertheless summoned the Iraqi charg\u00e9 d'affaires to convey its protests, while Iraq ordered Thursday the expulsion of the Swedish ambassador in Baghdad. But this diplomatic crisis was judged without gravity by researcher Massaab al-Aloosy, who considered that the Iraqi retaliatory measures are more measures of domestic policy intended to calm the anger of the population, than measures of foreign policy. As for the Iraqi refugee author of this \"book burning\", he could have done this gesture out of opportunism, in order to voluntarily put himself in danger if he was sent back to Iraq, and thus obtain the acceptance of his request for permanent residence in Sweden. In addition, trade between Iraq and Sweden is limited, so there will be no consequences on the economic level such as risks of boycott.\nIn July 2024, three Swedes residing in Iraq were sentenced to death by an Iraqi court, accused of having participated in a shooting. In reaction, Stockholm summoned the Iraqi charg\u00e9 d'affaires to convey its opposition to these decisions and to demand that these sentences not be executed.\nRelations with the African continent.\nRelations with Egypt.\nIraq and Egypt are both members and co-founders of the Arab League, and of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. These two countries were the main Arab actors in the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, while Iraq participated in the Egyptian offensives of 1967 and 1973 against Israel. In February 1958, it was in reaction to the merger of Egypt and Syria into the United Arab Republic a week earlier, that Iraq and Jordan united in turn in the Arab Federation of Iraq and Jordan. Egyptian President Nasser, magnanimous, sent a message of congratulations to the two sovereigns who united their kingdoms, but the rivalry between the two federations was blatant, the first being pan-Arab, anti-colonial and socialist, the second being monarchical and pro-Western.\nIn July 1958, the Iraqi revolution that overthrew the pro-British monarchy was carried out with the support of Egypt, which had itself driven the British from its territory two years earlier. But quickly, tensions appeared in the new Iraqi government, between nationalists favorable to Iraq's independence, and Nasserists favorable to its attachment to the United Arab Republic. In December 1958, Abdul Salam Arif (Nasserist) was arrested and imprisoned on the order of the Prime Minister, his former brother in arms Abd al-Karim Qasim, provoking tensions with Nasser who at the same time, opposed the project of annexation of Kuwait by Iraq. This did not prevent Nasser from condemning at the same time the deployment of British forces in the small Emirate, of which he demanded withdrawal and had them replaced by a multinational Arab force.\nIn February 1963 Prime Minister Abd al-Karim Qasim was in turn overthrown and executed following a coup d'\u00e9tat by the Ba'ath Party, which placed his rival Abdul Salam Arif in the presidency of Iraq. He was received by Nasser in Alexandria in August 1963. But the affinity between the two heads of state did not long mark the common history of the two countries: Abdul Salam Arif died in a helicopter accident in April 1966 (his brother Abdul Rahman Arif succeeded him, but remained in power only for two years), and Gamal Abdel Nasser was carried away by a heart attack in September 1970.\nIraq and Egypt broke their relations in December 1977, following Iraq's opposition to the peace initiatives of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat with Israel. In 1978, Baghdad hosted an Arab League summit that condemned and sidelined Egypt for having accepted the Camp David Accords. However, Egypt's material and diplomatic support to Iraq in its war with Iran led to warmer relations and numerous contacts between high officials, despite the continued absence of representation at the ambassador level.\nIn January 1984, three years after the assassination of Anwar Sadat, Iraq successfully led Arab efforts within the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation to restore Egypt's membership, formalized in 1989. However, Iraqi-Egyptian relations were broken again in 1990 when Egypt joined the United Nations coalition during the Gulf War, which forced the Iraqi army to leave Kuwait.\nIn 2003, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak supported the US invasion of Iraq, triggering major protest movements and a sharp drop in his popularity in Egypt. Diplomatic relations between the two states resumed after the overthrow of Saddam Hussein, and Egypt became one of Iraq's main trading partners. But these were broken again for four years from July 2005, following the kidnapping and murder in Baghdad of the Egyptian charg\u00e9 d'affaires, Ihab al-Sharif claimed by Al-Qaeda, before being re-established in June 2009.\nSince 2013, Egypt and Iraq have both been engaged in the fight against Islamist insurgencies on their respective territories, and each benefit from substantial US aid to maintain peace and stability on their territory. Egypt broke its diplomatic relations with Iraq's three main bordering neighbors: Iran in 1979, Syria in June 2013, and Turkey in November 2013. In 2016 however, Egyptian President in power since 2014 Abdel Fattah el-Sisi took the opposite stance of his predecessor Mohamed Morsi by declaring his support for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi in their fights against \"terrorism and radical Islamism\". In the following years, diplomatic relations between Baghdad and Cairo improved with numerous high officials from the two countries making cross visits. \nOn 27 June 2021, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi went to Baghdad, becoming the first Egyptian head of state to go to Iraq since the break in diplomatic relations between the two countries in 1990. He met Iraqi Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi and King Abdallah II of Jordan in the framework of a tripartite summit between their three countries, focusing on political and economic cooperation, investments, and the fight against terrorism. This meeting was motivated by the observation that an alliance between Egypt which has significant military capabilities, Iraq which has considerable oil resources and Jordan rich in its human capital is promising if these countries capitalize on their complementarity. Several cooperation agreements were signed in the sectors of energy, health and education. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Mustafa Al-Kadhimi and King Abdallah II met again in Baghdad in August 2021 during an expanded Middle East summit including France, focused on security and regional economic development.\nIn addition to better economic cooperation, this Cairo-Baghdad-Amman axis was also motivated by shared geopolitical interests by the three countries: to counterbalance the influence of Iran, Turkey and the pro-American Gulf monarchies (mainly Saudi Arabia) in regional affairs. Indeed, these three countries have in common the desire to regain regional influence after having been sidelined by Donald Trump's policy in the Middle East, ultra-favorable to Israel, Turkey (via NATO and the friendly relations between Trump and Erdogan) and the Gulf monarchies.\nIn December 2022, Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi participated in the second Baghdad conference in Jordan, and affirmed \"Egypt's refusal of any external intervention in Iraq\".\nRelations with Libya.\nIraq and Libya are both members of the Arab League (Libya was the first non-founding country to join in 1953), of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, and of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries.\nIf these two countries had few direct interactions, they shared a common history, notably in their respective independences obtained by the overthrow of pro-British monarchies (in 1958 for Iraq and 1969 for Libya), and their adherence to Pan-Arabism and Nasserism during their \"post-colonial\" years. The Libyan officer Muammar Gaddafi, author of the military coup that overthrew King Idris I, considered himself a disciple then heir of Nasser, who died a year after his takeover. He moreover resumed like Abd al-Karim Qasim, instigator of the Iraqi revolution, the name \"free officers\" to designate his putschist soldiers, in homage to Nasser.\nBut this pan-Arabist turn in Libya came after a nationalist turn in Iraq (following the coup d'\u00e9tat by the Ba'ath Party in 1968), which meant that Baghdad and Tripoli ultimately had little affinity in their foreign policies, apart from their membership in the \"Non-Aligned Movement\". The two countries were also very hostile to Israel, and both condemned the Israeli-Egyptian peace accords of 1978 by excluding Egypt from the Arab League, and by breaking their diplomatic relations with Cairo.\nIn the following years, while Muammar Gaddafi's hostility towards his Egyptian counterpart radicalized, Saddam Hussein played appeasement, recognizing Egypt's support in its war against Iran. In addition to this diplomatic divergence, the two countries found themselves indirectly enemies in the Chadian\u2013Libyan conflict (from 1978 to 1987), and in the Iran\u2013Iraq War (1980-1988), during which the two Arab leaders, simultaneously at war, supported each other's enemies.\nIn 1990, nevertheless, in opposition to \"American imperialism\", Gaddafi's Libya was the only country, with Iraq, to oppose an Arab League resolution demanding the withdrawal of Iraqi troops from Kuwait. After the Gulf War, Libya (which did not participate in it), was like Iraq, subjected to United Nations economic sanctions due to Muammar Gaddafi's refusal to extradite those responsible for the Lockerbie bombing. These were lifted in 2003 following the overthrow of Saddam Hussein, which pushed Muammar Gaddafi, fearing for his own survival, to yield to Western pressure. He was in turn overthrown and killed in 2011 during a popular uprising supported by a military intervention (essentially aerial unlike the Iraq war) by NATO.\nThe \"historical similarities\" between Iraq and Libya continued in the following years, when the two countries faced two successive civil wars, the second of which allowed the Islamic State group to take several cities in their respective territories (Derna and Sirte in Libya). From then on, \"international\" units of the Islamic State such as the \"Katibat al-Battar\" participated simultaneously or successively in several battles on the Iraqi fronts (Battle of Baiji), Libyan (Battle of Derna), and Syrian (Battle of Deir ez-Zor (2014\u20132017)), which ended in defeats for the jihadist group, despite heavy losses caused to the opposing armies. Iraq and Libya, both supported by the US army, managed between 2016 and 2017 to drive the jihadist group from their territories, and took a pro-Western diplomatic turn.\nRelations with Algeria.\nAlgeria is like Iraq a member of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, of the Arab League, and of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. In 1956, Iraq, in solidarity with Algeria in the war of independence against France (between 1954 and 1962) broke its diplomatic relations with France, then re-established them in January 1963 after the \u00c9vian Accords formalizing the independence of Algeria. Algeria and Iraq fought in the same Arab coalition against Israel during the Yom Kippur War in 1973, while being allies during the Six-Day War in 1967, but their participation in this conflict was minimal due to its brevity.\nOne year after the Yom Kippur War, in March 1975, Saddam Hussein went to Algiers to meet the Shah of Iran Mohammad Reza Pahlavi in the presence of Algerian President Houari Boum\u00e9di\u00e8ne, to formalize an agreement on the tracing of the border between Iraq and Iran. But Saddam Hussein decided to go back on these agreements in September 1980 when he attacked Iran one year after the regime change. The Algerian government tried again to position itself as a mediator, and in 1982 sent a delegation of high Algerian officials, including Algerian Foreign Minister Mohammed Seddik Benyahia to meet the Iranian government in Tehran. But their plane was shot down, probably by mistake, by the Iraqi Air Force over the Turkish-Iranian border, causing the death of all passengers.\nIn 1990, during the Gulf War, Algeria did not participate in the international military coalition (unlike its neighbor Morocco), while Saddam Hussein's posture as the \"Arab hero defying the United States\" found a favorable echo in the Algerian population. In July 2001, while Iraq was still under embargo, an Algerian delegation went to Baghdad, where contracts totaling 67 million dollars were signed, notably on pharmaceutical cooperation projects, oil exploitation and the delivery to Iraq of heavy vehicles.\nIn September 2018, a football match between two Algerian and Iraqi clubs in Bologhine provoked a diplomatic crisis between the two states, after Algerian supporters chanted slogans favorable to Saddam Hussein. In reaction, the spokesperson for the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ahmed Mahjoub expressed \"the indignation of the Iraqi government and people\" and denounced a \"glorification of the horrible face of Saddam Hussein's murderous dictatorial regime\".\nRelations with Morocco.\nMorocco is like Iraq a member of the Arab League, and of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. Morocco did not participate in the first 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, obtaining its independence from France only in 1956, nor in the Six-Day War of 1967 during which King Hassan II, then in conflict with his counterparts in the Arab League, was even suspected of having provided intelligence to Israel. Moroccan ground troops were however deployed within the Arab coalition during the Yom Kippur War, part of which was incorporated into Syrian units, the other deployed on the Sinai front (but arrived too late to participate in the fighting). In total, 5,500 Moroccans were mobilized in support of the Arab offensive against Israel, which lasted between 6 October 1973 and 25 October 1973.\nIn 1990, Morocco distinguished itself as one of the Arab countries that sent a contingent to Kuwait alongside the Westerners during the Gulf War, despite strong disapproval from the Moroccan population. This participation of the Moroccan army in the war against Iraq provoked a general strike in December 1990, followed in February 1991 by demonstrations gathering more than 300,000 people in Rabat.\nIn 2016, Morocco participated in the international coalition in support of the Iraqi government against the Islamic State organization by sending several F-16 and pilots, placed under Emirati command. But divergences between Baghdad and Rabat appeared after the end of the war: in May 2018, Rabat broke its diplomatic relations with Tehran, Iraq's essential partner in the region, then normalized its relations with Israel, its sworn enemy in December 2020.\nTwo years later, despite these divergences in their strategic interests, the two states drew closer during a visit to the Iraqi capital by the head of Moroccan Diplomacy Nasser Bourita in January 2023. Received by his Iraqi counterpart Fuad Hussein, he announced the reopening of the Moroccan embassy in Baghdad, closed and transferred to Jordan in 2005 for security reasons. The head of Iraqi diplomacy evoked the beginning of a \"new era\" in Iraqi-Moroccan relations, declared his desire to encourage \"commercial and economic cooperation in all fields\", and brought Iraq's support for \"the territorial unity of the Kingdom of Morocco and the UN efforts to reach a final solution concerning the issue of Western Sahara\".\nRelations with Sudan.\nSudan is like Iraq a member of the Arab League, and of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation.\nSudanese volunteers joined the Arab coalition and fought alongside the Iraqi army during the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, while Sudan mobilized its army in 1967 during the Six-Day War, but did not have time to intervene because of the brevity of the conflict. The same year, Khartoum hosted an Arab League summit where the \"three no's\" were proclaimed: \"No peace with Israel, no recognition of Israel, no negotiation with Israel\".During the Iran\u2013Iraq War, Sudanese President Jaafar Nimeiry was one of the rare heads of state to support Saddam Hussein by sending fighters as reinforcements, while most of Iraq's allies were content with material and financial aid. The Sudanese reinforcements however intervened only in a defensive role, when Iraq was the target of large Iranian counter-offensives from 1982. During the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990 Sudan directed by the Islamist regime of Omar al-Bashir (who came to power a year earlier) was one of the only countries in the world to express its support for Saddam Hussein. In reaction, Saudi Arabia, one of its main funders, decided to cancel its financial aid granted to Sudan, depriving the country of an essential source of revenue.\nThe affinities between the two states were however quite limited and essentially held to their common animosity towards the United States and Israel, which at the same time, supported the rebellion during the Second Sudanese Civil War. But this situation changed in 2016 when Sudan broke its diplomatic relations with Iran, Iraq's main partner, then in 2020 when the new Sudanese government put in place after the revolution of 2018-2019 normalized its relations with Israel.\nRelations with Chad.\nChad is like Iraq a member of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, whose secretary general has been since 2020 the Chadian diplomat Hissein Brahim Taha. During the Chadian\u2013Libyan conflict which lasted from 1978 to 1987, Saddam Hussein's Iraq, although already at war with Iran, provided military support to Chad directed by Hiss\u00e8ne Habr\u00e9.\nRelations with Eritrea.\nEritrea has been an observer state of the Arab League since 2003. That year, as the American army prepared the Iraq War and sought bases in this region to station its troops, Eritrean President Isaias Afwerki tried to take advantage of the occasion to get closer to the United States by offering them to host an American naval base on its coastline on the Red Sea. But this offer was refused by Washington.\nRelations with Mauritania.\nIn 1990-1991, Mauritanian President Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya gave his support to Saddam Hussein's regime during the Gulf War.\nRelations with Uganda.\nIn 2003, Uganda was one of the rare African countries to support the invasion of Iraq by American troops. Thousands of Ugandans participated in the Iraq War as security agents, where the United States had strategic installations.\nRelations with Asia-Pacific.\nDuring the Cold War, one of Saddam Hussein's favorite themes was the need to promote the emergence of new centers of power in the world, capable of replacing the monopoly of the two superpowers, notably Europe, but also Japan, China.\nRelations with China.\nDuring the Iran\u2013Iraq War, China provided support to Iraq through arms deliveries, but also to a lesser extent to Iran, benefiting from its market left free by its diplomatic isolation.\nSince the overthrow of Saddam Hussein, China and Iraq have maintained strong economic relations, with China being a very important market for Iraq's oil exports. In 2013, half of Iraqi production (1.5 million barrels per day) was bought by Chinese companies. Chinese oil companies such as PetroChina and China National Petroleum Corporation have significant investments in Iraq, where PetroChina holds a 25% stake in West Qurna 1, one of the country's largest fields with 43 billion barrels. PetroChina also operates the Halfaya oil field alongside the French TotalEnergies and the Malaysian Petronas.\nIn February 2014, the visit to Baghdad by Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi was the first visit to Iraq by a high-ranking Chinese official since the fall of Saddam Hussein. During their meeting, his Iraqi counterpart Hoshyar Zebari hailed China as \"Iraq's largest trading partner, and the largest investor in the oil and electricity sectors\".\nIn 2019, China signed with Iraq an agreement called \"Oil for construction\" providing for Chinese construction projects in Iraq in exchange for the sale to China of 100,000 barrels of Iraqi oil per day. Under this agreement, in December 2021, the Iraqi government signed agreements with two Chinese companies, Power China and Sinotech, for the construction of a thousand schools in Baghdad and the rest of the country within two years. The bill is to be paid with oil, according to Hassan Mejaham, an official from the Ministry of Construction and Housing, who stated that the country needs 8,000 additional establishments to educate nearly 3.2 million Iraqi children of school age who are not in school. At the same time, China became the first customer for Iraqi oil, importing more than 350,000 barrels per day from Iraq, while Sino-Iraqi trade exceeded 30 billion dollars per year.\nIn December 2022, Iraqi Prime Minister Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani represented his country at a China-Arab summit organized in Saudi Arabia, where he met Chinese President Xi Jinping.\nRelations with Japan.\nIn 2003, although close to the United States, Japan was reluctant to support the American intervention in Iraq due to strong opposition from its public opinion (more than 80%). Under the influence of the United States, Japan accepted limited involvement in the conflict, starting with financial aid, humanitarian missions, then the deployment of about 600 soldiers from December 2003. This commitment, although very limited, constituted a historic turnaround on the part of Japan, which had not participated in any war since its demilitarization imposed by the United States after its surrender in World War II. The following year, Japan took the presidency of the \"Friends of Iraq\" group created by the UN to organize international support for the political transition in Iraq, having paid the largest financial contribution for the reconstruction of the country (450 million dollars).\nBetween 2014 and 2018, Japan was represented in Iraq by Fumio Iwai, an ambassador with an atypical personality, who enjoyed strong popularity among the Iraqi population during his mandate. His notoriety resulted from regular publications of short videos on social networks, in which he addressed the population in Arabic and local dialects, on popular subjects like football and Iraqi gastronomy. He notably appeared in the jersey of the Iraqi football team during the 2018 FIFA World Cup.\nRelations with North Korea.\nFormal relations between the two countries were established in 1968 after Saddam Hussein came to power in Iraq. They were initially marked by a cordial understanding before being broken in 1980 due to North Korea's support for Iran during the Iran\u2013Iraq War.\nDespite this, new negotiations were undertaken in 1999, establishing bilateral cooperation until 2002. North Korea reportedly supplied Scud missiles to Iraq, two dozen, while the Iraqi ballistic program had been largely neutralized during the Gulf War in 1991.\nIn 2003, the American invasion of Iraq followed by the overthrow of Saddam Hussein convinced North Korea of the need to possess nuclear weapons, as it was also located in the \"Axis of Evil\" by George W. Bush. On 21 September 2012, in the context of the Syrian civil war, Iraq refused a North Korean plane transporting weapons destined for the Syrian army to pass through its airspace.\nRelations with South Korea.\nIn 1990 and 2004, South Korea, the most pro-American country in Asia along with Japan, participated in the international coalition engaged in Iraq during the Gulf War, then in the Anglo-American coalition that invaded Iraq in 2003. While its participation in the Gulf War was very modest and symbolic, the South Korean army deployed 3,600 soldiers in Iraq in 2004, making it the largest contingent after those of the United States and Great Britain. South Korean troops withdrew from the country in December 2008.\nTwo months later, in February 2009, Iraqi President Jalal Talabani traveled to Seoul where he met his South Korean counterpart Lee Myung-bak. The two heads of state signed a $3.55 billion agreement to develop oil fields in the Basra region and carry out infrastructure work. In addition, a $31 million agreement was signed between the manager of Incheon International Airport and the Kurdistan government to export equipment to airports in that region. The following year, the South Korean company Korea Gas Corporation became the main operator of the Akkas gas field in western Iraq, but was forced to evacuate it four years later following the invasion by the Islamic State group in Iraq in Al-Anbar Governorate.\nIn 2023, the South Korean conglomerate Hyundai was solicited to build a fourth refinery in Iraq in the city of Karbala in the center of the country.\nRelations with Sri Lanka.\nA village in Sri Lanka bears the name of Saddam Hussein, the former Iraqi head of state, who financed its construction (housing and infrastructure) in 1978: the village of Saddam Hussein Nagar.\nPosition in the Middle East since 2003.\nAlthough located on several fault lines between Syria to the west and Iran to the east, Iraq has been relatively spared from regional conflicts since 2003.\nUnited States and Iran influences.\nIn 2003, although Iran had been designated as part of the \"Axis of Evil\" by George W. Bush, the United States and Iran were objective allies against Saddam Hussein, responsible for the last major conflict imposed on Iran between 1980 and 1988. The overthrow of Saddam Hussein in 2003 replaced a single-party regime with a governance system based on confessional distribution according to quotas, in which Iran and the United States exercised strong influence. In the following years, this particular situation made Iraq a \"sanctuary\" where the two powers avoided confronting each other, although enemies on the international scene. In 2014, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi was appointed after a tacit agreement between Washington and Tehran, who during the second Iraqi civil war, supported on different fronts the pro-government camp against the Islamic State group. In October 2018, he was overthrown by the Iraqi parliament after being ordered by Washington to apply the American embargo imposed on Iran.\nAfter the defeat of the Islamic State in Iraq in December 2017, the United States and Iran maintained a certain convergence of their interests in Iraq, which they wished to keep stable and under control. While a stable Iraq was vital as an export market for Tehran whose economy suffered from American sanctions, Washington wanted to keep the threat of the Islamic State group away. At the same time, maintaining a politically and economically weak Iraqi state also benefited the two powers who imposed their influence by benefiting from a favorable balance of power. In this context, Iraq found itself at the end of the 2010s at the center of contradictory injunctions, ordered by the United States to respect the American embargo imposed on Iran, while its dependence on its border neighbor was total to rebuild the country and its economy. Furthermore, complying with such an injunction would run the risk for the Iraqi government of being overthrown by the parliament in which the deputies of the \"Al-Binaa\" bloc favorable to Iran were in the majority, and provoke new clashes in the street, the latter still largely influenced by pro-Iranian militias.\nThe year 2020 opened with a flare-up of violence between American and Iranian forces deployed in Iraq following the murder of an American army subcontractor whose responsibility was attributed to pro-Iranian militias. Twenty-five pro-Iran fighters were killed in a series of airstrikes carried out in retaliation by the United States on 29 December 2019, while a new American strike in the night from January 2, 2020 to January 3, 2020 caused the death of Iranian General Qasem Soleimani and the head of Iraqi Hezbollah, Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis.\nIran retaliated by firing several missiles in the night from 7 January 2020 to 8 January 2020 on Iraqi bases housing American soldiers, without causing casualties in the targeted military bases, but accidentally shot down Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752 connecting Tehran to Kyiv, which crashed causing the death of 176 people.\nThe next day, while the circumstances of the crash were not yet known, the two countries played appeasement and confirmed that neither wished to engage in an open conflict. On 11 January 2020, Iran presented its apologies for the air accident, while emphasizing the responsibility of \"American adventurism\" in this disaster. On 22 January 2020, Iraqi President Barham Salih stated at the World Economic Forum in Davos, his country's refusal to take sides between Iran and the United States, while calling on the two states to respect the sovereignty and independence of Iraq. A year later, an Iraqi court issued an arrest warrant against American President Donald Trump as part of the investigation into the elimination of Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis.\nBut in the meantime, in May 2020, the arrival of Mustafa al-Kadhimi to the post of Iraqi Prime Minister allowed tensions to subside. Pro-American, he made his first trip to Tehran a month after taking office, before receiving Mohammad Javad Zarif in Baghdad a week later, in order to reassure about his intentions to preserve economic and commercial relations between Iran and Iraq. Paradoxically, his closeness to Washington was favorably perceived by the Iranian government, which hoped to use him as a mediator to negotiate with the American administration and convince it to ease its economic pressure on Iran. Iraq had everything to gain by playing on both tables, being both dependent on American investments and Iranian imports for reconstruction following the second civil war. \nIran's economic dependence under economic sanctions on Iraq increased further during the vast protests that shook the country from September 2022, which reinforced its international isolation. According to Abbas Kadhim, director of the \"Iraq Initiative\" research program at the Atlantic Council, Baghdad became more than ever for Tehran \"a window to the world\". Due to the persistent economic slump in Iraq, the Joe Biden administration consented to grant them a lasting waiver to the embargo imposed on Iran, which allowed the two neighboring countries to maintain bilateral trade exceeding 12 billion dollars annually. But despite a more magnanimous attitude than his predecessor, the Biden government kept a close eye on Iran-Iraq collaboration, and set limits by imposing targeted sanctions specifically targeting commercial entities linked to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps. In addition, the latter stated that it would not collaborate with Iraqi leaders and ministers affiliated with pro-Iran militias that the United States had placed on the list of terrorist organizations, such as the Minister of Higher Education, Naim al-Aboudi, a member of the Asa'ib Ahl al-Haq militia. From then on, according to researcher at the Middle East Institute Randa Slim, Iraqi leaders were aware that: \"if they let Tehran use their country as a back door to evade sanctions, it will endanger their relations with the United States and have serious consequences for their economic situation\".\nIn October 2023, the resumption of the war between Israel and Hamas indirectly increased tensions in Iraq between Iranian militias favorable to Hamas and the American army that supported Israel. Clashes in Iraq caused the death of several militiamen from the Popular Mobilization Forces group, killed by American strikes, which pushed the Iraqi government of Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani, under pressure, to demand the departure of the 2,500 American soldiers deployed on its territory. But this request was qualified as unrealistic by several analysts, both from the Iraqi point of view where a necessary political consensus for such a request seemed impossible \u2013 the Kurds and Sunnis considering American protection indispensable to them \u2013 and from the American point of view for whom this deployment, relatively low-cost (5 billion dollars per year), allowed counterbalancing Iran's influence in the Middle East. In addition, the United States feared that a departure of their troops would leave Iraq to become a new base to harass other pro-American countries in the region with which Iran maintained bad relations, such as Kuwait, Saudi Arabia or Jordan. It should also be noted that according to some American media, Iraqi Prime Minister Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani reportedly backtracked in private on his statements, stating on the contrary in early January 2024 that he wished to negotiate the maintenance of American troops in Iraq. In August 2024, Iraq announced the postponement of the end of the mission on its territory of the international anti-jihadist coalition led by the United States, without giving a new date for this postponement. On 6 September, an agreement was reached between Baghdad and Washington providing for the departure from Iraq of hundreds of American soldiers by September 2025. At the same time, Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani tried to keep Iraq away from the confrontation between Iran and Israel, despite Iranian pressure and militias favorable to it, in order to preserve Iraqi territory from a potentially destructive conflict. In October 2024, he declared that \"the decision of war or peace belongs to the State\" to reaffirm his authority on the domestic scene and against foreign interference. In 2025, following the overthrow of the Assad regime and the weakening of Hezbollah in its war against Israel, Iraq became an even more crucial line of defense for Iran whose regional network was withering. Feeling threatened by the installation in Syria of a pro-Turkish regime while Ankara did not hide its expansionist ambitions on Iraq, Baghdad relied on the American forces deployed on its soil to preserve its integrity. In June, following the Israeli bombings on Iran followed, in retaliation, by Iranian missile fire on Israel, Iraq whose territory was located between these two countries, affirmed its desire to stay away from this conflict, despite its alliance with Tehran directed in particular against Tel Aviv. Because the Iraqi government, wishing to preserve its alliance with Washington in the context of the anti-jihadist fight in Iraq, feared that Iran would direct part of its retaliations on American bases located on its territory, Donald Trump having clearly brought his support to the Israeli offensive.\nMediator between Saudi Arabia and Iran.\nAs a country with a population that is both Arab and majority Shiite (state religion in Iran), and borders with Saudi Arabia as with Iran, Iraq appeared as a natural buffer zone between the two enemy powers.\nThus, the years following the fall of Saddam Hussein, enemy of both Iran (since the Iran\u2013Iraq War) and Saudi Arabia (since the Gulf War) saw a warming of relations between Baghdad on one hand, Tehran and Riyadh on the other, until Iraq became one of the rare countries in the Middle East (with Oman) to simultaneously have good relations with these two states. It was from 2016 that Baghdad asserted itself as a mediator, in a context of strong deterioration of relations between Saudi Arabia and Iran following on one hand the 2015 Mina stampede which caused numerous Iranian victims, on the other hand, the execution of the Saudi Shiite ayatollah Nimr al-Nimr. This execution provoked in Iran important anti-Saudi demonstrations and the sacking of the Saudi embassy in Tehran and the consulate in Mashhad, leading to the rupture of Iranian-Saudi relations on 3 January 2016.\nIn May 2020, the arrival of Mustafa al-Kadhimi to the post of Iraqi Prime Minister strengthened and officialized this mediator role assumed by Baghdad. Close to the United States, and consequently to Saudi Arabia their main ally in the region, he affirmed his desire to strengthen ties between Baghdad and Riyadh, while affirming that he would not allow Iraqi territory to be used to threaten Iran. When Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif traveled to Baghdad in June 2020, his message was ambivalent; he warned Mustafa al-Kadhimi against too hasty strengthening of economic ties between Iraq and the Gulf countries (fearing losing the Iraqi market vital for Iran), but at the same time, hoped to take advantage of these developments to get Iran out of its regional isolation.\nThe following year, on 18 April 2021, the British daily \"Financial Times\" revealed a meeting between Iranian and Saudi representatives on 9 April 2021 in Baghdad, at the invitation of Mustafa al-Kadhimi, with a view to improving their bilateral relations. These delegations were composed of high-ranking figures within the state apparatuses, notably the head of Saudi intelligence, Khalid bin Ali al-Humaidan, and officials mandated by the secretary of the Iranian Supreme National Security Council, Ali Shamkhani. The two parties expressed their common desire to end the Yemeni civil war which had been ongoing since 2015 and in which their governments were involved by supporting enemy belligerents, but kept important divergences on other files. By convening this meeting, Mustafa al-Kadhimi's objectives were multiple: prove that his government was both worthy of the trust of Tehran and Riyadh to facilitate these talks, restrict Iraqi paramilitary groups with Iran's help, and on the domestic political level, gain credit ahead of the Iraqi legislative elections in October 2021.\nThe following week, Prince Mohammed bin Salman stated in an interview with the Saudi channel al-Arabiya, that Iran was \"a neighboring country with which Saudi Arabia hopes to maintain good relations\", while Iranian Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokesperson Saeed Khatibzadeh declared that Iran\"has always welcomed dialogue with the Saudi kingdom and considers it beneficial for the peoples of the two countries\". The Lebanese newspaper L'Orient-Le Jour revealed that a second series of Iranian-Saudi talks in Iraq was to take place in the following weeks. In August, the new Iranian president Ebrahim Raisi in turn commented on these talks by declaring that he \"saw no obstacles\" to the restoration of ties with Riyadh. \nIn August 2021, Iraqi Prime Minister Mustafa al-Kadhimi organized in Baghdad a regional summit also including France, where representatives from Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Qatar, Iran, Turkey, Egypt, and Jordan were invited. The stated objective was to defuse tensions in the region and reach agreements on pressing issues such as the Yemeni civil war, the economic and social crisis in Lebanon, maritime security or the scarcity of water in the region. At the end of September in Baghdad, two Iranian and Saudi officials met again, discussions between the regional rivals continuing after the election to the Iranian presidency of the ultraconservative Ebrahim Raisi.\nIn April 2022, Iranian and Saudi delegations met again in Baghdad a month after the suspension of their dialogue caused by the execution in Saudi Arabia of 81 people for \"terrorism\", including men linked to the Houthi (pro-Iranian) rebels in Yemen. These delegations notably included high officials from the secretariat of the Iranian Supreme National Security Council and the head of Saudi intelligence services. On 30 April, Iraqi Prime Minister Mustafa al-Kadhimi declared that an agreement was \"close\" and that talks would continue with the aim of leading to a \"restoration of diplomatic representations\" between the two rival powers. On 25 June, Mustafa al-Kadhimi announced that he was traveling to Saudi Arabia and Iran as part of his mediation, without however specifying the identity of his interlocutors on site.\nIn December 2022, a new \"Baghdad conference\" (following that of August 2021) was organized, this time in Jordan, intended to encourage dialogue between the countries of the region, notably Saudi Arabia and Iran represented by their foreign ministers, Faisal bin Farhan and Hossein Amir-Abdollahian. The latter declared having had during this summit a \"friendly interview with some of my counterparts, notably the foreign ministers of Oman, Qatar, Iraq, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia\". The new head of the Iraqi government Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani for his part affirmed his desire to \"strengthen his ties\" with Arab countries, while multiplying signs of closeness with Tehran, while Riyadh multiplied promises of investments in Iraq. According to researcher associated with the European Council on Foreign Relations Hamzeh Hadad: \"For the Saudis, it is clear that isolating Iraq will not end its relations with Iran. They now know that they must compete with Tehran to have good relations with Iraq.\".\nIn May 2025, Iraq hosted the Arab League Summit in Baghdad, with Saudi Arabia and the UAE pledging $6 billion in investments. Iraq sought to strengthen Arab cooperation to counterbalance Iranian influence while addressing domestic needs. The government introduced legislation to place the Popular Mobilisation Forces under the Prime Minister's authority to reduce foreign influence and support regional integration.\nIn February 2023, Iranian Foreign Minister Hossein Amir-Abdollahian traveled to Baghdad to exchange with his Iraqi counterpart on talks with Saudi Arabia. The latter also evoked a similar mediation in progress led by Baghdad (which he thanked) between Iran and Egypt which broke their diplomatic relations following the Iranian Revolution of 1979. The following month, Riyadh and Tehran announced the restoration of their diplomatic relations, a decision welcomed by Baghdad.\nDuring the summer of 2023, Iraq received several billion dollars in investment promises from Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Qatar. Analyses saw a double geopolitical objective in these decisions to invest: on one hand, to distance Baghdad from its economic dependence on Tehran; on the other hand, to ensure that these investments also indirectly benefit the Iranian economy, contributing to easing their diplomatic relations with Iran. At the end of July, Iraqi Foreign Minister Fouad Hussein received in Baghdad his Yemeni counterpart Ahmed Awad bin Mubarak, to whom he proposed Iraqi mediation to end the Yemeni civil war opposing pro-Iranian and pro-Saudi fighters since 2015.\nFollowing the fall of the Assad regime in Syria in December 2024, Baghdad positioned itself as a mediator between the new Sunni Islamist Syrian authorities and the Iranian government, for whom this overthrow was the loss of a precious ally. Although mistrustful, like Tehran, of its new Syrian counterpart, the Iraqi government had every interest in forging friendly relations with the latter to prevent a resurgence of ISIS.\nKurdish question.\nIraq is, along with Turkey, Iran, and Syria, one of the main countries where Kurdish populations are concentrated. Their total number varies, according to sources, from 25 to 35 million, including 12 to 15 million in Turkey (20% of the population), 6 million in Iran (8% of the population), 4.7 million in Iraq (15 to 20% of the population), and 2 million in Syria (15%).\nPersecuted under Saddam Hussein, the Kurds participated in the 1991 uprising after the Iraqi defeat in the Gulf War, and obtained de facto autonomy helped by a no-fly zone imposed from 1992 to 2003 by the United States and the United Kingdom, legalized by the 2005 Iraqi Constitution which established a federal republic. On the international scene, the United Nations Security Council mandated a \"United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq\" (UNAMI) to help the new Iraqi government to \"develop procedures for resolving internal border disputes\".\nNevertheless, despite this federal autonomy, no country in the region (with the exception of Israel) is clearly in favor of the independence of the Iraqi Kurdistan. Kurdish separatism is a particularly sensitive issue for Turkey, which has faced since the 1980s an insurrection by the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) in the southeast of the country that has caused tens of thousands of deaths. Kurdish independence aspirations are to a lesser extent present in Iran, where deadly clashes regularly occur between the Revolutionary Guards and certain Iranian Kurdish groups, including the Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran. Turkish and Iranian separatist groups also have bases and training camps in northern Iraq, provoking several bombings and armed incursions by these two countries (especially Turkey), condemned by Baghdad as violations of its sovereignty. An ambivalent behavior by the Iraqi government, which also feels threatened by the autonomist ambitions of Iraqi Kurds.\nDuring the second Iraqi civil war the capital of Iraqi Kurdistan Erbil rose in power on the international scene thanks to the crucial role played by the Peshmerga in the fight against the Islamic State, perceived as a global threat, while the Baghdad government was perceived as weak and unstable. While Erbil hosted for years a parade of diplomats and high military commanders, Masoud Barzani decided as early as July 2014 to take advantage of this unprecedented influence of his region to organize an independence referendum, counting on strong international support. But this prospect which would lead to a partition of Iraq provoked strong concerns in the Middle East and beyond, while a large part of the country, occupied by the Islamic State, already escaped the control of the government.\nIn June 2017, in view of this referendum planned for September, Turkish Foreign Minister Mevl\u00fct \u00c7avu\u015fo\u011flu declared that \"The territorial integrity of Iraq and its political unity are fundamental principles of Turkey's Iraq policy\". Two months later, Iranian General Mohamed Bagheri declared that such a geographical change \"could provoke tensions and clashes inside Iraq, and this will not be limited to this country\", while the Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al-Muallem, declared \"support for the unity of Iraq\", and that this \"separatist referendum is totally unacceptable\". \nThis convergence of interests in what they perceive as a threat to the integrity of their respective territories is an important factor in the rapprochement and cooperation between these four states hosting Kurdish communities with separatist ambitions. The United States, another influential actor in the region, sought to strengthen the Iraqi state, notably to counter Tehran's influence, and could not afford to see it weakened by a secession of Kurdish-populated territories. This lack of international support and the takeover by the Baghdad government of the main oil fields in the region, making it unable to subsist financially, caused the failure of the Iraqi Kurdistan secession attempt.\nAccess to the Persian Gulf.\nSimilar to Morocco's claims over Western Sahara, Iraqi claims over Kuwait have long affected its relations with the other countries of the Arabian Peninsula. While historical reasons have often been invoked by the Iraqi power to justify its sovereignty over the Emirate (the union of the two territories in the Basra vilayet under the Ottoman Empire), the main current geopolitical reasons concern access to the sea of the Persian Gulf. Indeed, while the Iraqi coastline measures only 58\u00a0km, the fact that most of the nearby islands belong to Iran or Kuwait contributes strongly to the enclavement of Iraqi territory.\nThus, starting from the 1950s, every time the Emir of Kuwait expressed his wish to fix the border route, Iraq demanded in exchange access to the islands of Warbah and Bubiyan. The repeated refusals of Kuwait led Great Britain to propose in 1954 a compromise under which the emirate would lease the island to Iraq, a compromise rejected by the emir in 1956.\nOn the Iranian side, the impasse in negotiations on the Shatt al-Arab, the river delimiting the two states and flowing into the Persian Gulf was an important factor in the outbreak of war in 1980. In 1988, hoping again for concessions from Kuwait which had been its ally against Iran, Iraq undertook major works to develop the ports of Umm Qasr and Zubair in order to increase their capacities. In doing so, having made the strategic decision to orient a significant part of its maritime trade towards the area whose access is controlled by the Kuwaiti islands, Iraq backed down from its absolute intransigence on the Shatt al-Arab file without Tehran having retreated from its position. One can then wonder if at the end of hostilities with Iran, Saddam Hussein had not already made the decision, while yielding to Iranian demands on the Shatt al-Arab, to invade Kuwait to gain access to the coveted islands.\nSince the overthrow of Saddam Hussein in 2003, although the Iraqi government has renounced its expansionist policy on Kuwait and Iran, conflicts remain between Iraq and its neighbors over their maritime sovereignty and competition between their port infrastructures.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14675", "revid": "146242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14675", "title": "Geography of the Republic of Ireland", "text": ""}
{"id": "14676", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14676", "title": "Demographics of the Republic of Ireland", "text": "Ireland had an estimated population of 5,380,000 as of 1 April 2024.\nDemographic history.\nThe island of Ireland's population has fluctuated over history. In the 18th and early 19th centuries, Ireland experienced a major population boom as a result of the Agricultural and Industrial Revolutions. In the 50-year period 1790\u20131840, the population of the island doubled from 4 million to 8\u00a0million. At its peak, Ireland's population density was similar to that of England and continental Europe.\nThis changed dramatically with the Great Famine of the mid-19th century, which led to mass starvation and consequent mass emigration. In the area covering the present day Republic of Ireland, the population reached about 6.5\u00a0million in the mid-1840s. Ten years later it was down to 5 million. The population continued a slow decline well into the 20th century, with the Republic recording a low of 2.8\u00a0million in the 1961 census.\nDuring the 1960s, the population started to grow once more, although slowly as emigration was still common. In the 1990s the country entered a period of rapid economic growth as a result of the Celtic Tiger Irish economic boom, and the Republic started to receive immigration. Many former Irish emigrants returned home, and Ireland became an attractive destination for immigrants, from other member states in the EU such as Central Europe, but also from outside the EU such as Africa, Asia and elsewhere. With the 2008 onset of the Irish economic and banking crisis, the state's economy suffered, and Ireland has once again been experiencing net emigration of its citizens, but immigration remains high.\nIn November 2013, Eurostat reported that the Republic had the largest net emigration rate of any member state, at 7.6 emigrants per 1,000 population. However, it has the youngest population of any European Union member state and its population size is predicted to grow for many decades, in contrast with the declining population predicted for most European countries. A report published in 2008 predicted that the population would reach 6.7\u00a0million by 2060. The Republic has also been experiencing a baby boom, with increasing birth rates and overall fertility rates. Despite this, the total fertility rate is still below replacement depending on when the measurement is taken. The Irish fertility rate is still the highest of any European country. This increase is significantly fuelled by non-Irish immigration \u2013 in 2009, one-quarter of all babies born in Ireland were born to foreign-born mothers.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation.\nThe population of Ireland was 5,123,536 people in 2022.\nDemographic statistics as of 2019.\nUrban population (\"areas with &gt;1,500 people\"): 62.0% (2011)\nRural population: 38.0% (2011)\nFertility.\nThe total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman.\nBirth rate; 13.8 births/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 137th\nTotal fertility rate; 1.96 children born/woman (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 125th\nMother's mean age at first birth; 30.7 years (2015 est.)\nLife expectancy.\nDeath rate; 6.6 deaths/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 140th\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nAge structure.\nAge structure\n\"0\u201314 years:\" 21.37% (male 554,110 /female 529,067)\n\"15\u201324 years:\" 11.92% (male 306,052 /female 297,890)\n\"25\u201354 years:\" 42.86% (male 1,091,495 /female 1,080,594)\n\"55\u201364 years:\" 10.53% (male 267,255 /female 266,438)\n\"65 years and over:\" 13.32% (male 312,694 /female 362,455) (2018 est.)\nMedian age; total: 37.1 years\n male: 36.8 years\n female: 37.5 years (2018 est.)\nVital statistics.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 10.IV.2011):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2021) (Data refer to usual resident population.):\nImmigration.\nIreland's immigration history (and of one of a multi-ethnic society) is most of that of a country of emigration, remaining exclusively homogeneous for the vast majority of 20th century history, rather than one of net migration and increased ethnic and racial diversity.\nHowever, from the 1990s, with the rise of the 'Celtic Tiger', the nation shifted to one of a net receiver of immigration at a rapid pace, changing from one of the most 'homogeneous countries in the EU, to a country with a rate of change almost unparalleled in speed and scale'. The Celtic Tiger economic boom saw a large expansion of the labour market, which contributed to the large increase of immigration towards the country, with the additional enlargement of the European Union in 2004 and the further 2007 enlargement contributing to increased levels of immigration.\nAdditionally, asylum seekers rose dramatically as well: from 364 in 1994 to 11,634 in 2002, before falling off towards the end of the decade.\nNationalities.\nIreland contains several immigrant communities, especially in Dublin and other cities across the country. The largest immigrant groups, with over 10,000 people, being Poles, British, Indians, Romanians, Lithuanians, Brazilians, Italians, Latvians, Spaniards, French, Croats, Americans, Chinese, Germans and Ukrainians.\nNationality of mothers.\nOf the 54,062 births in 2024, there were 39,024 babies (72.2%) born to mothers of Irish nationality compared to 45,381 (78%) in 2021. There were 7% of births to mothers of EU15 to EU27 nationality, 1.6% of mothers were of UK nationality, and 2.6% were of EU14 nationality (excluding Ireland). Mothers of nationalities other than Ireland, UK and the EU accounted for 16% of total births registered. There were 0.6% of mothers where the nationality was not stated.\nCountry of birth.\nIn 2022, 20% of the usually resident population in Ireland were born elsewhere, an increase of 3% since 2016. This represented 1,017,437 people, an increase of 207,031 from six years previously.\nSupport and opposition.\nMigrants are supported/represented by the Immigrant Council of Ireland, Irish Refugee Council, Movement of Asylum Seekers in Ireland, Nasc and the state's Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service. They are managed by the International Protection Accommodation Service under the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth (DCEDIY) as well being policed by the Garda National Immigration Bureau.\nSome minor parties have voiced opposition to immigration in the country and its capability to continue to let refugees in; that \"Ireland is full\". They include the National Party and the Irish Freedom Party. In May 2023, a Red C/The Business Post poll found that 75% of people thought that Ireland is taking in too many refugees.\nThe DCEDIY projected a shortfall of 15,000 beds for refugees in December 2022 and admitted that there was mounting pressure to house 65,000 people.\nApproximately 7,400 refugee adults and children were projected to be living in 38 \"direct provision\" centres across 17 counties in Ireland by the end of April 2020. The government of Ireland have said that they project to end direct provision by 2024 and are looking towards alternative forms of accommodation.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIreland is a predominantly Christian country. The majority are Catholic; however, the number of people who declare themselves Catholic has been declining in recent years. Irreligion has increased since 2016 with 14% declaring 'No Religion' in 2022, meaning this is the second largest religious affiliation in Ireland. Immigration has also brought other faiths, with Islam at 1.7%, or over 83,000 people. As well as Hinduism, with 33,043 Hindus in the state.\nLanguages.\nEnglish is the most commonly used language, with 84% of the population calling it their mother tongue. Irish is the first official language of the state, with 11% calling it their mother tongue. Irish is the main language of the Gaeltacht regions, where 102,973 people lived as of 2022. The main sign language used is Irish Sign Language.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nEducation.\nLiteracy rate; \"definition:\" age 15 and over who can read and write\n\"total population:\" 99%\n\"male:\" 99%\n\"female:\" 99% (2003 est.)\nSchool life expectancy (primary to tertiary education); total: 19 years\nmale: 19 years\nfemale: 19 years (2016)\nEmployment and income.\nFor May 2025 the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was:\n4.0% overall, down from a 4.1% in April 2025., and an annual basis, down from 4.4% in May 2024\n3.9% for males, down from 4.0% in April 2025, and down from 4.4% in May 2024.\n4.1% for females, down from 4.2% in April 2025, and down from 4.4% in May 2024.\n10.9% for persons aged 15\u201324 years (youth unemployment rate) from a revised rate of 11.2% in April 2025.\nUp to 3.1% for persons aged 25\u201374 years from 3.0% in April 2025.\nThe median household disposable income in 2024 was \u20ac58,922, an increase of \u20ac3,773 (+6.8%) from the previous year. Disposable household income is gross household income less total tax, social insurance contributions, pension contributions and inter-household transfers paid.\nSee also.\nGroups:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14677", "revid": "36418353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14677", "title": "Politics of the Republic of Ireland", "text": " \nIreland is a parliamentary, representative democratic republic and a member state of the European Union. While the head of state is the popularly elected President of Ireland, it is a largely ceremonial position, with real political power being vested in the Taoiseach, who is nominated by the D\u00e1il and is the head of the government.\nExecutive power is exercised by the government, which consists of no more than 15 cabinet ministers, inclusive of the Taoiseach and T\u00e1naiste (the deputy head of government). Legislative power is vested in the Oireachtas, the bicameral national parliament, which consists of D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann, Seanad \u00c9ireann and the President of Ireland. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The head of the judiciary is the Chief Justice, who presides over the Supreme Court.\nIreland has a multi-party system. Fianna F\u00e1il and Fine Gael, historically opposed and competing entities, which both occupy the traditional centre ground, trace their roots to the opposing sides of the Irish Civil War. All governments since 1932 have been led by one or the other party, with Fianna F\u00e1il having had sufficient support at many elections to govern alone. Fluctuations in seat levels allowed changes in governments through different coalitions. From 1932 to 2011, the parties were stable in their support, with Fianna F\u00e1il the largest at each election, Fine Gael the second largest, and on all but two occasions, the Labour Party the third party. The last three elections, however, have each had more volatile results. At the 2011 election, the largest parties in order were Fine Gael, Labour and Fianna F\u00e1il; at the 2016 election, the largest parties in order were Fine Gael, Fianna F\u00e1il and Sinn F\u00e9in; and at the 2020 election, the largest parties were Fianna F\u00e1il first in seats (second in votes), Sinn F\u00e9in second in seats (first in votes), and then Fine Gael. The result was historically good for Sinn F\u00e9in.\nIn June 2020, leader of Fianna F\u00e1il, Miche\u00e1l Martin, became the new Taoiseach (head of government). He formed a historic three-party coalition consisting of Fianna F\u00e1il, Fine Gael and the Green Party. It was the first time in history that Fianna F\u00e1il and Fine Gael were in the same government. The previous Taoiseach and leader of Fine Gael, Leo Varadkar, became the T\u00e1naiste (deputy head of government). Martin led the country as Taoiseach until 17 December 2022, when he changed posts with Varadkar.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Ireland a \"full democracy\" in . According to the V-Dem Democracy indices, Ireland was the 3rd most electoral democratic country in the world in 2024.\nConstitution.\nThe state operates under the Constitution of Ireland () which was adopted in 1937 by means of a plebiscite. The constitution falls within the liberal democratic tradition. It defines the organs of government and guarantees certain fundamental rights. The Constitution can only be amended by means of a referendum. Important constitutional referendums have concerned issues such as abortion, the status of the Catholic Church, divorce, the European Union and same-sex marriage.\nPresident.\nThe head of state is the President of Ireland. In keeping with the state's parliamentary system of government, the President exercises a mainly ceremonial role but does possess certain specific powers. The presidency is open to all Irish citizens who are at least 35. They are directly elected by secret ballot under the alternative vote. A candidate may be nominated for election as president by no fewer than 20 members of the Oireachtas or by four or more of Ireland's 31 County and City Councils. A retiring President may nominate themselves as a candidate for re-election. If only one valid candidate is nominated for election, for example if there is consensus among the political parties to nominate a single candidate, it is unnecessary to proceed to a ballot and that candidate is deemed elected. The President is elected to a seven-year term of office and no person may serve more than two terms.\nIn carrying out certain of their constitutional functions, the President is aided by the Council of State. There is no vice-president in Ireland. If for any reason the President is unable to carry out their functions, or if the Office of President is vacant, the duties of the President are carried out by the Presidential Commission.\nThe President may not veto bills passed by the Oireachtas but may, after consultation with the Council of State, refer them to the Supreme Court of Ireland for a ruling on whether they comply with the constitution. The President may refuse a request of the Taoiseach for a dissolution of D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann, although no request for a dissolution has ever been refused.\nLegislative branch.\nArticle 15 of the Constitution of Ireland established the Oireachtas as the national parliament of Ireland. The Oireachtas consists of the President of Ireland and two elected houses: D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann (the House of Representatives) and Seanad \u00c9ireann (the Senate). As the Oireachtas also consists of the President, the title of the two law-making houses is the Houses of the Oireachtas. The D\u00e1il is by far the dominant house of the legislature.\nD\u00e1il \u00c9ireann.\nMembers of the D\u00e1il are directly elected at least once in every five years under the single transferable vote form of proportional representation from multi-seat constituencies. Membership of the house is open to all Irish citizens who are at least 21 and permanently resident in the State. The electorate consists of all Irish and British citizens resident in Ireland over the age of 18. Members of the D\u00e1il are known as Teachta D\u00e1la or TDs. As of 2025, there are 174 TDs, of which one, the Ceann Comhairle (presiding officer), is automatically returned at an election. The Taoiseach, T\u00e1naiste and the Minister for Finance must be members of the D\u00e1il. The D\u00e1il is the only House which can introduce and amend money bills (i.e. financial and tax legislation). Since the early 1980s, no single party has had a majority in D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann, so that coalition governments have been the norm.\nSeanad \u00c9ireann.\nThe Seanad is a largely advisory body. It consists of sixty members called Senators. An election for the Seanad must take place no later than 90 days after a general election for the members of the D\u00e1il. Eleven Senators are nominated by the Taoiseach while a further six are elected by certain national universities. The remaining 43 are elected from special vocational panels of candidates, the electorate for which consists of the 60 members of the outgoing Senate, the 174 TDs of the incoming D\u00e1il and the 949 elected members of 31 local authorities. The Seanad has the power to delay legislative proposals and is allowed 90 days to consider and amend bills sent to it by the D\u00e1il (excluding money bills). The Seanad is only allowed 21 days to consider money bills sent to it by the D\u00e1il. The Seanad cannot amend money bills but can make recommendations to the D\u00e1il on such bills. No more than two members of a government may be members of the Seanad, and only twice since 1937 have members of the Seanad been appointed to government.\nExecutive branch.\nExecutive authority is exercised by a cabinet known simply as \"the Government\". Article 28 of the Constitution states that the Government may consist of no less than seven and no more than fifteen members, namely the Taoiseach (prime minister), the T\u00e1naiste (deputy prime minister) and up to thirteen other ministers. The Minister for Finance is the only other position named in the Constitution. The Taoiseach is appointed by the President, after being nominated by D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann. The remaining ministers are nominated by the Taoiseach and appointed by the President following their approval by the D\u00e1il. The Government must enjoy the confidence of D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann and, in the event that they cease to enjoy the support of the lower house, the Taoiseach must either resign or request the President to dissolve the D\u00e1il, in which case a general election follows.\nJudicial branch.\nIreland is a common law jurisdiction. The judiciary consists of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal and the High Court established by the Constitution and other lower courts established by statute law. Judges are appointed by the President after being nominated by the Government and can be removed from office only for misbehaviour or incapacity, and then only by resolution of both houses of the Oireachtas. The final court of appeal is the Supreme Court, which consists of the Chief Justice, nine ordinary judges and, the Presidents of the Court of Appeal and the High Court. The Supreme Court rarely sits as a full bench and normally hears cases in chambers of three, five or seven judges.\nThe courts established by the constitution have the power of judicial review and may declare to be invalid both laws and acts of the state which are repugnant to the constitution.\nPublic sector.\nThe Government, through the civil and public services and state-sponsored bodies, is a significant employer in the state; these three sectors are often called the \"public sector\". Management of these various bodies vary, for instance in the civil service there will be clearly defined routes and patterns whilst among public services a sponsoring minister or the Minister for Finance may appoint a board or commission. Commercial activities, where the state involves itself, are typically through the state-sponsored bodies which are usually organised in a similar fashion to private companies.\nA 2005 report on public sector employment, showed that in June 2005 the numbers employed in the public sector stood at 350,100; of these by sector they were 38,700 (civil service), 254,100 (public service) and 57,300 (state-sponsored). The total workforce of the state was 1,857,400 that year, thus the public sector represents approximately 20% of the total workforce.\nCivil service.\nThe civil service of Ireland consists of two broad components, the \"Civil Service of the Government\" and the \"Civil Service of the State\". Whilst these two components are largely theoretical, they do have some fundamental operational differences. The civil service is expected to maintain the political impartiality in its work, and some sections of it are entirely independent of Government decision making.\nPublic service.\nThe public service is a relatively broad term and is not clearly defined and sometimes is taken to include the civil service. The public service proper consists of Government agencies and bodies which provide services on behalf of the Government but are not the core civil service. For instance local authorities, Education and Training Boards and Garda S\u00edoch\u00e1na are considered to be public services.\nLocal government.\nArticle 28A of the constitution of Ireland provides a constitutional basis for local government. The Oireachtas is empowered to establish the number, size and powers of local authorities by law. Under Article 28A, members of local authorities must be directly elected by voters at least once every five years.\nLocal government in Ireland is governed by a series of Local Government Acts, beginning with the Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898. The most significant of these is the Local Government Act 2001, which established a two-tier structure of local government. The Local Government Reform Act 2014 abolished the bottom tier, the town councils, leaving 31 local authorities. There are 26 County Councils (County Dublin having been divided into three council areas), 3 City Councils (Dublin, Cork and Galway), and 2 City and County Councils (Limerick and Waterford).\nPolitical parties.\nA number of political parties are represented in the D\u00e1il and coalition governments are common. The Irish electoral system has been historically characterised as a two-and-a-half party system, with two large catch-all parties, this being the centre-right Fine Gael and the centrist Fianna F\u00e1il, dominating, and the \"half-party\", being Labour. This changed after the 2011 general election, following the large drop in support for Fianna F\u00e1il and the rise in support for other parties. Ireland's political landscape changed dramatically after the 2020 general election, when Sinn F\u00e9in made gains to become the joint-largest party in the D\u00e1il, making Ireland a three party system.\nFianna F\u00e1il, a traditionally Irish republican party founded in 1927 by \u00c9amon de Valera, is the largest party in the D\u00e1il and considered centrist in Irish politics. It first formed a government on the basis of a populist programme of land redistribution and national preference in trade and republican populism remains a key part of its appeal. It has formed government seven times since Ireland gained independence: 1932\u20131948, 1951\u20131954, 1957\u20131973, 1977\u20131981, 1982, 1987\u20131994, 1997\u20132011, and 2020-Present. Fianna F\u00e1il was the largest party in the D\u00e1il from 1932 to 2011. It lost a huge amount of support in the 2011 general election, going from 71 to 20 seats, its lowest ever. Its loss in support was mainly due to its handling of the 2008 economic recession. It has since regained some support, but is yet to recover to its pre-2011 levels.\nThe second largest party is Sinn F\u00e9in, established in its current form in 1970 as a breakaway faction from the original political party of the same name (the remaining part has had several changes of name since, and is now known as the Workers' Party). The original Sinn F\u00e9in party played a major role in the Irish War of Independence and the First D\u00e1il, and both Fine Gael and Fianna F\u00e1il trace their origins to this party, having split from it in 1922 and 1926, respectively. The current-day party split from this older Sinn F\u00e9in in a dispute over political ideology and a perceived lack of support for the so-called \u201carmed struggle\u201d against British rule in Northern Ireland, and as a result the newer party has been historically linked to the Provisional IRA. The party is a Republican party which takes a strongly left wing stance on economics and social policy, placing it to the left of the Labour party. Sinn F\u00e9in received the highest share of first-preference votes in the 2020 general election, but finished level with Fianna F\u00e1il in overall seats once vote transfers had been counted.\nThe third-largest party in the D\u00e1il is Fine Gael, which has its origins in the pro-Treaty faction of Michael Collins in the Irish Civil War. Traditionally regarded as the party of law and order, it is associated with strong belief in pro-enterprise and reward. Despite expressions of Social Democracy by previous leader Garret FitzGerald, today, it remains a Christian democratic, economically liberal party along European lines, with a strongly pro-European outlook. Fine Gael was formed in 1933 out of a merger of Cumann na nGaedheal (which had split from the original Sinn F\u00e9in in 1922), the National Centre Party and the paramilitary Blueshirts organisation. In more recent years it has generally been associated with a liberal, progressive, outlook. Fine Gael has formed governments in the periods 1922\u20131932 (as Cumann na nGaedheal), 1948\u20131951, 1954\u20131957, 1973\u20131977, 1981\u20131982, 1982\u20131987, 1994\u20131997, and from 2011 to present. In the 2011 general election, Fine Gael won 78 seats, its highest ever total, and a massive increase from the previous election.\nThe fourth-largest party in the D\u00e1il is the centre-left Labour Party which was founded by James Connolly and Jim Larkin in 1912. Labour has formal links with the trade union movement and has governed in seven coalition governments \u2013 six led by Fine Gael and one by Fianna F\u00e1il. This recurring role as a junior coalition partner has led to Labour being classed as the \"half\" party in Ireland's \"two-and-a-half party system\". Labour won a record number of seats, 37, at the 2011 general election, becoming the second-largest party for the first time in its history, following the collapse in support for Fianna F\u00e1il. In 2011, Labour went into coalition with Fine Gael, who had also won a record number of seats. Labour retained its place as one of Ireland's three largest parties up until the 2016 general election, when it suffered the worst general election defeat in its history, gaining just 7 seats. Much of this was due to being part of a government that had introduced unpopular austerity measures to deal with the economic crisis.\nThe fifth-largest D\u00e1il party is the centre-left Social Democrats. The Social Democrats were founded in 2015 and made gains at the 2020 and 2024 general elections.\nThe People Before Profit\u2013Solidarity electoral alliance, consisting of People Before Profit and Solidarity, is the 7th-largest party grouping within D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann. Formed in 2015, the group represents a left-wing, socialist viewpoint.\nAont\u00fa, a party formed in 2019 by Sinn F\u00e9in members who were opposed to repealing the eighth amendment, has two TDs.\nA party which gained at the 2024 election, was Independent Ireland, a party formed in November 2023. The leader, Michael Collins has said that the party seeks to provide \"a comfortable alternative\" to voters unhappy with the Fianna F\u00e1il\u2013Fine Gael\u2013Green Party coalition but unwilling to vote for Sinn F\u00e9in. It has 4 TDs and one MEP.\nSixteen of the 174 TDs in the 34th D\u00e1il are Independent.\nParty representation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nForeign relations.\nIreland's foreign relations are substantially influenced by its membership of the European Union, although bilateral relations with the United States and United Kingdom are also important to the country. It is one of the group of smaller nations in the EU, and has traditionally followed a non-aligned foreign policy.\nMilitary neutrality.\nIreland tends towards independence in foreign policy, thus it is not a member of NATO and has a longstanding policy of military neutrality.\nThis policy has helped the Irish Defence Forces to be successful in their contributions to UN peace-keeping missions since 1960 (in the Congo Crisis ONUC) and subsequently in Cyprus (UNFICYP), Lebanon (UNIFIL), Iran/Iraq Border (UNIIMOG), Bosnia and Herzegovina (SFOR &amp; EUFOR Althea), Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE), Liberia (UNMIL), East Timor (INTERFET), Darfur and Chad (EUFOR Tchad/RCA).\nNorthern Ireland.\nNorthern Ireland has been a major factor in Irish politics since the island of Ireland was divided between Northern Ireland and what is now the Republic in 1920. The creation of Northern Ireland led to conflict between northern nationalists (mostly Roman Catholic) who seek unification with the Republic and Unionists (mostly Protestant) who opposed British plans for Irish Home Rule and wished for Northern Ireland to remain within the United Kingdom. After the formation of Northern Ireland in 1921 following its opt out from the newly formed Irish Free State, many Roman Catholics and Republicans were discriminated against. The abolition of Proportional Representation and the gerrymandering of constituency boundaries led to Unionists being over-represented at Stormont and at Westminster. Even James Craig who was prime minister of Northern Ireland boasted of his Protestant Parliament for a Protestant People. In the 1960s NICRA was set up to end discrimination between Catholics and Protestants. There was a massive backlash to this from sections of the Unionist community. This conflict exploded into violence in the late sixties with the beginning of the Troubles, involving groups such as the Provisional IRA, loyalist paramilitaries, the police and the British army, the latter originally drafted in to protect Catholic communities from loyalist violence. These clashes were to result in the suspension of the Stormont Parliament and unsuccessful efforts by the British Government to encourage a power-sharing Executive in Northern Ireland which were only realised following the Good Friday Agreement in 1998. The Troubles caused thousands of deaths in Northern Ireland but also spilled over into bombings and acts of violence in England and the Republic.\nSince its foundation it has been the stated long-term policy of governments of what is now the Republic to bring an end to the conflict in Northern Ireland and to bring about a united Ireland. Northern Ireland has also, in the past, often been a source of tension between the Irish Government and the government of the United Kingdom. To find a solution to the Troubles the Irish Government became a partner in the Good Friday Agreement in 1998.\nWhile Sinn F\u00e9in have long organised in both Northern Ireland and the Republic, Fianna F\u00e1il did not register as a party in Derry until December 2007, when it also began recruiting members at Queen's University, Belfast although both are extremely small.\nNorth/South Ministerial Council.\nUnder the Good Friday Agreement and Article 3 of the Constitution a North-South Ministerial Council and six North-South Implementation Bodies co-ordinate activities and exercise a limited governmental role within certain policy areas across the whole island of Ireland. The Implementation Bodies have limited executive authority in six policy areas. Meetings of the Council take the form of meetings between ministers from both the Republic's Government and the Northern Ireland Executive. The council was suspended from 2002 to 2007. However, with the resumption of devolved government in Northern Ireland in May 2007, the council has now re-assumed its duties.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14679", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14679", "title": "Telecommunications in the Republic of Ireland", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Ireland operate in a regulated competitive market that provides customers with a wide array of advanced digital services. This article explores Ireland's telecommunications infrastructure including: fixed and mobile networks, The voice, data and Internet services, cable television, developments in next-generation networks and broadcast networks for radio and television.\nRegulation.\nTelecommunications, including radio frequency spectrum licensing and the postal sector, are regulated by the Commission for Communications Regulation (ComReg). ComReg was established on 1 December 2002. The Broadcasting Authority of Ireland (BAI) () is the regulator of both public and commercial broadcasting sector in Ireland. It was established on 1 October 2009, replacing the Broadcasting Commission of Ireland (BCI) ().\nThe Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment has overall responsibility for national policy and regulation of both telecommunications and broadcasting.\nThe telecommunications market in Ireland was opened to competition in 1998.\nEir's dominance has reduced and by Q3 2019 operators other than eir accounted for 61% of the Irish fixed voice market retail revenue and 54.7% market share by fixed-line retail and wholesale revenue and 80.9% of the mobile market (excluding mobile broadband and machine-to-machine subscriptions) or 84.4% of total subscriptions. Other operators accounted for 68.6% of retail fixed broadband subscriptions (comprising cable, FTTH, FTTC/VDSL and ADSL) and 57.3% of retail FTTP subscriptions\nEir remains the largest telecommunications company in Ireland, offering fixed, mobile, and broadband services. As Bord Telecom \u00c9ireann, the company was state owned until 1999, when it was floated on the Irish and New York Stock Exchanges.\nInfrastructure.\nIreland's telecommunications network is a modern digital system connected by an extensive national fibre optic network with multiple high-capacity fibre optic links to the UK, Continental Europe, North America and with dedicated capacity on routes to Asia and other parts of the globe.\nThere is an open and competitive telecommunications market regulated by ComReg. However, the fixed-line market is still dominated by the incumbent operator Eir.\nSeveral companies operate national fibre optic networks including Eir, BT Ireland, ESB Group and Virgin Media Ireland. Eir's fibre network is the most extensive covering most parts of the country with 12,000\u00a0km of fibre routes (&gt;40,000\u00a0km of fibres)\nEir's Next Generation Network upgrade rolled out dense wavelength-division multiplexing (DWDM) which is capable of delivering up to 320\u00a0Gbit/s along a single fibre route.\nThis upgrade also sees Eir's core infrastructure moving to an all-IP network. It has major aggregation nodes at 140 locations around Ireland and onward fibre connections to another 470 central office sites.\nIreland also has major connections to multiple international fibre optic networks.\n94 Irish towns and cities also have access to publicly owned, carrier-neutral metropolitan fibre networks managed by Enet.\nThese networks can be used by any licensed Irish telecommunications operator to provide commercial or residential end users with products.\nFor residential and small business providers, most major urban areas have access to Virgin Media Ireland's HFC network which provides speeds of up to 1\u00a0Gbit/s using EuroDOCSIS 3.1 cable modem technology.\nOpen Eir is also in the process of rolling out FTTH which provides speeds of up to 1\u00a0Gbit/s down and 100\u00a0Mbit/s up. They also provide an extensive vectored VDSL2 based FTTC access network, using the legacy copper network. This offers speeds of up to 100\u00a0Mbit/s down and 20\u00a0Mbit/s up.\nRetail services using this next-generation access infrastructure are provided by approximately 15 operators.\nSIRO, a joint venture between ESB Group and Vodafone Ireland, provides another open access fibre to home network, used by multiple ISPs to deliver service. Fibre is run alongside ESB Networks 230\u00a0V/400\u00a0V LV electricity distribution system, sharing underground ducts and poles, with fibre typically entering premises next to the electricity meter. This, similar to Eir's FTTH network, delivers speeds of up to 1\u00a0Gbit/s and is capable of delivery of 10\u00a0Gbit/s in the future.\nIreland has three mobile networks that own and operate their own network infrastructure and a number of MVNO operators that operate mobile phone services using one of these infrastructure providers' radio networks. The three infrastructure owning networks are Eir Mobile, Three, and Vodafone.\nMeteor and Eir Mobile were the first to launch 4G LTE services in Ireland on 26 September 2013, followed by Vodafone on 14 October 2013, and Three on 27 January 2014. O2 was due to launch its 4G services later in 2014, but plans were put on hold when its acquisition by Three was approved in May, and from the time of the merger in 2015, previous O2 customers gained 4G coverage through Three's network, albeit with initial service problems.\nIn 2016, 41.9% of Ireland's mobile subscriptions were using 4G technology. 3G remained the dominant technology with 44.6% share, however, it is likely to be overtaken by 4G in 2017.\nTelephone system.\nAs mobile phone services become more price competitive, more Irish customers are opting to drop landline services. This is reflected by a sharp fall in the number of fixed line channels in use and an equivalent increase in mobile subscriptions. Details are tracked on ComReg's ComStat website\nThere are three mobile telecommunications providers: Three Ireland, Eir Mobile and Vodafone Ireland.\nThere are also some MNVOs (Mobile Network Virtual Operators), such as: 48, GoMo, Lycamobile, An Post Mobile, Tesco Mobile, Virgin Mobile and Clear Mobile.\nHistory.\nThe original network was taken over by the Irish Department of Posts and Telegraphs (P&amp;T) from the British General Post Office in 1921 and used a mixture of manual and step-by-step automatic exchanges. Development of the network was relatively stagnant with slow rollout of automatic switching using step-by-step exchanges until after WWII.\nFrom 1957 onwards, P&amp;T began to roll out more modern crossbar switches primarily using equipment supplied by Ericsson built at their Athlone facility. ITT Pentaconta crossbar switches, built by CGCT (Compagnie g\u00e9n\u00e9rale de constructions t\u00e9l\u00e9phoniques) were also used in some areas. This saw significant improvements to many services, but the network was still quite underdeveloped in rural areas with long waits for new subscribers and the last operator-only exchanges only closing in 1987.\nDigital switching was introduced in 1980 using Ericsson AXE and Alcatel E10 switches both of which were manufactured at facilities in Ireland. This saw a total transformation of the telephone network with modern automatic and digital services reaching even the most rural parts of Ireland by the mid-1980s.\nThe fixed-line network is now made up of multiple operators using a diverse range of digital technologies including VoIP.\nIreland's first mobile telephone network, Eircell, went live in 1986 using the analogue TACS system.\n2G GSM services from Eircell launched on 1 July 1993. Digifone followed in 1997, then Meteor in 2001 (having been licensed in 1998) and 3 Ireland launched its UMTS 3G-only service in 2005.\n3G services launched in 2004 (Vodafone Ireland) and other networks quickly followed suit, and 4G launched in 2013 (Meteor) and is now available on most networks. Meteor was bought out by Eir in 2005 and eventually rebranded as Eir in 2017.\nInternet.\nBroadband Internet access is available in Ireland via DSL, cable, wireless, and satellite. By the end of 2011 Eircom announced that 75% of its working lines would be connected to Next Generation Broadband (NGB) enabled exchanges.\nCurrently available services (Q3 2014)\nA typical monthly broadband Internet subscription cost $26.02 in 2011, 14% less than the average of $30.16 for the 34 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries surveyed.\nIn August 2012 Pat Rabbitte, the Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural Resources, outlined a national broadband plan with goals of:\nFounded in 1996, the Internet Neutral Exchange (INEX) is an industry-owned association that provides IP peering and traffic exchange for its members in Ireland. The INEX switching centres are located in five secure data centres in Dublin and one in Cork: TeleCity Group in Kilcarbery Park, Dublin 22 &amp; TeleCity Group in Citywest Business Campus, Dublin 24 and Interxion DUB1, and Interxion DUB2 in Park West, and Vodafone Clonshaugh as well as at CIX, Hollyhill, Cork T23 R68N. The switches are connected by dedicated resilient fibre links. In June 2015 it listed 74 full and 21 associate members.\nEstablished in 1998, the Internet Service Providers Association of Ireland (ISPAI) listed 24 Internet access and hosting providers as members in 2012.\nRadio and television.\nInfrastructure.\nTelevision in Ireland is broadcast using DVB-T using the common platform specifications defined by NorDig which apply in the Nordic countries and Ireland. Video is encoded using the MPEG4 system.\nThe analogue PAL-I broadcasting system is no longer on air.\nCable systems operate using the DVB-C standard and Satellite is broadcast using DVB-S/S2.\nSome areas still carry a range of cable channels in analogue PAL-I format. Although, this is normally just a legacy service provided by default. It is not possible to subscribe to analogue cable as a new customer.\nRadio is broadcast primarily using FM 87-108\u00a0MHz.\nDigital DAB Radio from the UK is also available in some areas but domestic services have ceased as have \nRT\u00c9 Radio 1's Longwave and Mediumwave services.\n2RN operates a national FM network. However, most independent FM stations own their own broadcasting infrastructure.\nRaidi\u00f3 Teilif\u00eds \u00c9ireann (\"Radio [and] Television of Ireland\"; abbreviated as RT\u00c9) is a statutory semi-state company and the public service broadcaster that dominates the radio and TV sectors in Ireland. The first commercial radio stations began broadcasting in 1989. Prior to 1989 hundreds of pirate radio stations were a mainstay of radio listener-ship, particularly in Dublin, and a handful of pirate stations continue to operate illegally today. In 1998 TV3 (Now Virgin Media 1-4) became the first privately owned commercial TV station and it remains the main free-to-air service after RT\u00c9. Competition also comes from British public and private terrestrial TV. Satellite and cable TV are widely available. There are also non-commercial community and special interest radio stations.\nRT\u00c9 both produces programmes and broadcasts them on television, radio and the Internet in English and Irish. The radio service began on 1 January 1926, while regular television broadcasts began on 31 December 1961, making RT\u00c9 one of the oldest continuously operating public service broadcasters in the world. Some RT\u00c9 services are only funded by advertising, while other RT\u00c9 services are only funded by the television licence fee.\nSaorview ( ) is Ireland's national free-to-air digital terrestrial television (DTT) service operated by 2RN. Trial service began on 29 October 2010 with full service to the public from May 2011. Analogue television transmissions officially ended on 24 October 2012. with some deflectors continuing into 2013.\nSAORSAT is Ireland's national free-to-air digital satellite television service, also operated by 2RN. SAORSAT delivers Irish television services to the 1% to 2% of homes that are not covered by the SAORVIEW Digital Terrestrial Television service.\nA television licence is required for any address at which there is a television set or device that is not exempt. The annual licence fee is \u20ac160. The licence is free to senior citizens (to anyone over the age of 70, some over 66), some social welfare recipients, and individuals who are blind.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14680", "revid": "39971146", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14680", "title": "Transport in Ireland", "text": " \nMost of the transport system in Ireland is in public hands, either side of the Irish border. The Irish road network has evolved separately in the two jurisdictions into which Ireland is divided, while the Irish rail network was mostly created prior to the partition of Ireland.\nIn the Republic of Ireland, the Minister for Transport, acting through the Department of Transport, is responsible for the state's road network, rail network, public transport, airports and several other areas. Although some sections of road have been built using private or public-private funds, and are operated as toll roads, they are owned by the Government of Ireland. The rail network is also state-owned and operated, while the government currently still owns the main airports. Public transport is mainly in the hands of a statutory corporation, C\u00f3ras Iompair \u00c9ireann (CI\u00c9), and its subsidiaries, Dublin Bus, Bus \u00c9ireann (Irish Bus), and Iarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann (Irish Rail).\nOn 1 November 2005, the Irish government published the Transport 21 plan which includes \u20ac18bn for improved roads and \u20ac16bn for improved rail, including the Western Railway Corridor and the Dublin Metro.\nThe Republic of Ireland's transport sector is responsible for 21% of the state's greenhouse gas emissions.\nIn Northern Ireland, the road network and railways are in state ownership. The Department for Infrastructure is responsible for these and other areas (such as water services). Two of the three main airports in Northern Ireland are privately operated and owned. The exception is City of Derry Airport, which is owned and funded by Derry City and Strabane District Council A statutory corporation, the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company (which trades as Translink) operates public transport services through its three subsidiaries \u2013 NI Railways Company Limited, Ulsterbus Limited, and Citybus Limited (now branded as Metro).\n broad gauge\n (1998); electrified; double track; some additions and removals since 1997\n standard gauge\n (2004) (Luas tramway); electrified; double track; additional track under construction\n narrow gauge\n (2006) (industrial railway operated by Bord na M\u00f3na)\nRailways.\nIreland's railways are in State ownership, with Iarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann (Irish Rail) operating services in the Republic and NI Railways operating services in Northern Ireland. The two companies co-operate in providing the joint Enterprise service between Dublin and Belfast. InterCity services are provided between Dublin and the major towns and cities of the Republic, and in Ulster along the Belfast\u2013Derry railway line. Suburban railway networks operate in Dublin, Dublin Suburban Rail, and Belfast, Belfast Suburban Rail, with limited local services being offered in, or planned for, Cork, Limerick, and Galway.\nThe rail network in Ireland was developed by various private companies during the 19th century, with some receiving government funding. The network reached its greatest extent by 1920. A broad gauge of 1600mm (5\u00a0ft 3in) was agreed as the standard for the island, although there were also hundreds of kilometres of 914mm (3\u00a0ft) narrow-gauge railways.\nMany lines in the west were decommissioned in the 1930s under \u00c9amon de Valera, with a further large cull in services by both CI\u00c9 and the Ulster Transport Authority (UTA) during the 1960s, leaving few working lines in the northern third of the island. There is a campaign to bring some closed lines back into service, in particular the Limerick-Sligo line (the Western Railway Corridor), to facilitate economic regeneration in the west, which has lagged behind the rest of the country. There is also a move to restore service on the Dublin to Navan line, and smaller campaigns to re-establish the rail links between Sligo and Enniskillen/Omagh/Derry and Mullingar and Athlone/Galway. Under the Irish government's Transport 21 plan, the Cork to Midleton rail link was reopened in 2009. The re-opening of the Navan-Clonsilla rail link and the Western Rail Corridor are amongst future projects as part of the same plan.\nPublic transport services in Northern Ireland are sparse in comparison with those of the rest of Ireland or Great Britain. A large railway network was severely curtailed in the 1950s and 1960s. Current services includes suburban routes to Larne, Newry and Bangor, as well as services to Derry. There is also a branch from Coleraine to Portrush.\nSince 1984 an electrified train service run by Iarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann has linked Dublin with its coastal suburbs. Running initially between Bray and Howth, the Dublin Area Rapid Transit (DART) system was extended from Bray to Greystones in 2000 and further extended from Howth Junction to Malahide. In 2004 a light rail system, Luas, was opened in Dublin serving the central and western suburbs, run by Veolia under franchise from the Railway Procurement Agency. The construction of the Luas system caused much disruption in Dublin. Plans to construct a Dublin Metro service including underground lines were mooted in 2001, but stalled in the financial crisis at the end of that decade.\nIreland has one of the largest dedicated freight railways in Europe, operated by Bord na M\u00f3na and totalling nearly .\nSouth: including of motorway (2010)\nNorth: including of motorway (2008)\n\"paved\" \u2013 , \"unpaved\" \u2013 \nRoad transport.\nRoads and cars in Ireland.\nIreland's roads link Dublin with all the major cities (Belfast, Cork, Limerick, Derry, Galway, and Waterford). Driving is on the left. Signposts in the Republic of Ireland are shown in kilometres and speed limits in kilometres per hour. Distance and speed limit signs in Northern Ireland use imperial units in common with the rest of the United Kingdom.\nHistorically, land owners developed most roads and later turnpike trusts collected tolls so that as early as 1800 Ireland had a road network. In 2005 the Irish Government launched Transport 21, a plan envisaging the investment of \u20ac34 billion in transport infrastructure from 2006 until 2015. Several road projects were progressed but the economic crisis that began in 2008\u201309 has prevented its full implementation.\nBetween 2011 and 2015, diesel cars constituted 70% of new cars. In 2015, 27 new cars per 1,000 inhabitants were registered in Ireland, the same as the EU average.\nBus services.\nIreland's first mail coach services were contracted with the government by John Anderson with William Bourne in 1791 who also paid to improve the condition of the roads. The system of mail coaches, carriages and \"bians\" was further developed by Charles Bianconi, based in Clonmel, from 1815 as a fore-runner of the modern Irish public transportation system.\nState-owned Bus \u00c9ireann (Irish Bus) currently provides most bus services in the Republic of Ireland, outside Dublin, including an express coach network connecting most cities in Ireland, along with local bus services in the provincial cities. Dublin Bus, a sister company of Bus \u00c9ireann, provides most of the bus services in Dublin, with some other operators providing a number of routes. These include Aircoach, a subsidiary of FirstGroup which provides services to Dublin Airport from Dublin city centre, South Dublin City, Greystones and Bray. They also operate two intercity express non-stop services service between Dublin Airport, Dublin City Centre, and Cork and also a non-stop route between Belfast City Centre, Dublin Airport and Dublin City. Other operators such as Irish Citylink and GoBus.ie compete on the Dublin-Galway route. Matthews Coaches run a direct service from Bettystown, Laytown and Julianstown to Dublin whilst Dublin Coach operate services to Portlaoise and Limerick. JJ Kavanagh and Sons also operates regular services on the Portlaoise/Limerick route as well as offering services to Waterford, Carlow, Kilkenny, Clonmel and a selection of regional towns and villages in the south.\nTFI Local Link is a set of not-for-profit operators, funded via the National Transport Authority, that provide bus services in rural Ireland. Other private rural operators exist, such as Halpenny's in Blackrock, County Louth, which was the first private bus operator to run a public service in Ireland, Bus Feda (Feda O'Donnell Coaches), which operates twice daily routes from Ranafast, County Donegal to Galway and back.\nIn Northern Ireland Ulsterbus provides the bus network, with its sister company Metro providing services in Belfast. Both are part of state-owned Translink. Tiger Coaches operates a very late night bus service on Friday and Saturday nights between Belfast and Lisburn.\nPrivate hire companies offer groups travelling throughout Ireland with options ranging from cars to 56 passenger coaches. Private Coach Hire Companies can be found at http://.\nCross-border services (e.g. Dublin city centre to Belfast) are run primarily by a partnership of Ulsterbus and Bus \u00c9ireann with some services run across the border exclusively by one of the two companies (e.g. Derry\u2013Sligo run by Bus \u00c9ireann). Aircoach, a private operator, does however operate a competing Dublin to Belfast Express service via Dublin Airport.\nAccording to an \"Irish Times\" article in September 2022, 14.3% of national journeys in the Republic of Ireland were undertaken by bus, compared to the European average of 8.8%. However, this may be partly due to the lack of widespread train coverage in the country, as Ireland's figure of 3.1% usage of trains for journeys is well behind the European average of 7.9%.\n (pleasure craft only on inland waterways, several lengthy estuarine waterways)\nPipelines.\nNatural gas transmission network (2003). There is a much more extensive distribution network.\nPorts and harbours.\nIreland has major ports in Dublin, Belfast, Cork, Rosslare, Derry and Waterford. Smaller ports exist in Arklow, Ballina, Drogheda, Dundalk, D\u00fan Laoghaire, Foynes, Galway, Larne, Limerick, New Ross, Sligo, Warrenpoint and Wicklow.\nPorts in the Republic of Ireland handled 2.8 million travellers crossing the sea between Ireland and Great Britain in 2014, a decrease of 1 million passengers movements since 2003. This has been steadily dropping for a number of years (20% since 1999), probably as a result of low cost airlines.\nFerries.\nFerry connections between Britain and Ireland via the Irish Sea include the routes from Fishguard and Pembroke to Rosslare, and Cairnryan to Larne. The Stranraer to Belfast and Larne routes and the Swansea to Cork route have closed. There is also a connection between Liverpool and Belfast via the Isle of Man. The world's largest car ferry, \"Ulysses\", is operated by Irish Ferries on the Dublin\u2013Holyhead route.\nIn addition, there are ferries from Rosslare and Dublin to Cherbourg and Roscoff in France.\nThe vast majority of heavy goods trade is done by sea. Northern Irish ports handle 10 megatonnes (Mt) of goods trade with Britain annually, while ports in the Republic handle 7.6 Mt, representing 50% and 40% respectively of total trade by weight.\n\"Ships by type\" \u2013 bulk carrier 7, cargo ship 22, chemical tanker 1, container ship 3, roll-on/roll-off ship 1, short-sea passenger 1\n\"Foreign-owned\" \u2013 Germany 3, Italy 7, Norway 2\n\"Registered in other countries\" \u2013 18 (2003 est.)\nAviation.\nIreland has four main international airports: Dublin Airport, Cork Airport, Shannon Airport and Ireland West Airport (Knock). Dublin Airport is the busiest of these carrying almost 35 million passengers per year; a second terminal (T2) was opened in November 2010. All provide services to Great Britain and continental Europe, while Cork, Dublin and Shannon also offer transatlantic services.\nThe London to Dublin air route is the ninth busiest international air route in the world, and also the busiest international air route in Europe, with 14,500 flights between the two in 2017. In 2015, 4.5 million people took the route, at that time, the world's second-busiest. Aer Lingus is the flag carrier of Ireland, although Ryanair is the country's largest airline. Ryanair is Europe's largest low-cost carrier, the second largest in terms of passenger numbers, and the world's largest in terms of international passenger numbers. For several decades until 2007 Shannon was a mandatory stopover for transatlantic routes to the United States. In recent years it has opened a pre-screening service allowing passengers to pass through US immigration services before departing from Ireland.\nThere are also several smaller regional airports: George Best Belfast City Airport, City of Derry Airport, Galway Airport, Kerry Airport (Farranfore), Sligo Airport (Strandhill), Waterford Airport and Donegal Airport (Carrickfinn). Scheduled services from these regional points are in the main limited to flights travelling to other parts of Ireland and to Great Britain. Airlines based in Ireland include Aer Lingus (the former national airline of the Republic of Ireland), Ryanair, Aer Arann and CityJet. Services to the Aran Islands are operated from Aerfort na Minna (Connemara Regional Airport).\nIreland's national airline, Aer Lingus, provides services from Belfast City, Cork, Dublin and Shannon to Europe, North Africa and North America. Dublin and Cork airports are run by a State body, DAA (Dublin Airport Authority). Other Irish airlines are Ryanair, one of the largest in the world, CityJet, ASL Airlines Ireland and the Aer Lingus subsidiary Aer Lingus Regional. A number of other operators specialise in general aviation.\nAirport passenger numbers.\nFor 2018 the passenger numbers were as follows:\n \"This is an estimation distance guide only.\"\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14681", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14681", "title": "Military of Ireland", "text": ""}
{"id": "14682", "revid": "50813272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14682", "title": "Foreign relations of Ireland", "text": " \nThe foreign relations of Ireland are substantially influenced by its membership of the European Union, although bilateral relations with the United States and United Kingdom are also important. It is one of the group of smaller nations in the EU and has traditionally followed a non-aligned foreign policy. Ireland has historically tended towards independence in foreign military policy, thus it is not a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation and has a longstanding policy of military neutrality.\nMain relationships.\nIreland was not invited to join the United Nations when it was formed in 1945. Both Washington and London were opposed because of Ireland's neutrality during the war. Ireland applied in 1946 and the US and UK voted approval, but the Soviet Union vetoed it. Ireland was finally admitted to the UN in 1955. It joined the European Economic Community (EEC) in 1973; it is now known as the European Union (EU). In 1974 it began the Irish Aid programme to provide assistance to developing countries. In 1991 it established the Irish Institute of International and European Affairs to conduct research and analysis on international and European affairs. In 1992 the Irish Refugee Council began as a humanitarian advocate for the rights of refugees and asylum seekers in Ireland.\nUnited Kingdom.\nSince at least the 12th century Ireland, as a result of military conquest, has had political connections with the United Kingdom and its predecessor states, with the whole island becoming a part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland from 1801 to 1922. From the time Ireland became independent from the United Kingdom in 1922, the two countries have been involved in a dispute over the status of Northern Ireland. Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland formerly claimed Northern Ireland as a part of the \"national territory\", though in practice the Irish government did recognise the UK's jurisdiction over the region.\nFrom the onset of the Troubles in 1969, the two governments sought to bring the violence to an end. The Sunningdale Agreement of 1973 and the Anglo-Irish Agreement of 1985 were important steps in this process. In 1998, both states signed the Good Friday Agreement and now co-operate closely to find a solution to the region's problems. Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland were amended as part of this agreement, the territorial claim being replaced with a statement of aspiration to unite the people of the island of Ireland. As part of the Good Friday Agreement, the states also ended their dispute over their respective names: \"Ireland\" and the \"United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland\". Each agreed to accept and use the others' correct name.\nWhen the Troubles were raging in Northern Ireland, the Irish Government sought, with mixed success, to prevent the import of weapons and ammunition through its territory by illegal paramilitary organisations for use in their conflict with the security forces in Northern Ireland. In 1973 three ships of the Irish Naval Service intercepted a ship carrying weapons from Libya which were probably destined for Irish Republican paramilitaries. Law enforcement acts such as these additionally improved relations with the government of the United Kingdom. However, the independent judiciary blocked a number of attempts to extradite suspects between 1970 and 1998 on the basis that their crime might have been 'political' and thus contrary to international law at the time.\nIreland is one of the parties to the Rockall continental shelf dispute that also involves Denmark, Iceland, and the United Kingdom. Ireland and the United Kingdom have signed a boundary agreement in the Rockall area. However, neither has concluded similar agreements with Iceland or Denmark (on behalf of the Faroe Islands) and the matter remains under negotiation. Iceland now claims a substantial area of the continental shelf to the west of Ireland, to a point 49\u00b048'N 19\u00b000'W, which is further south than Ireland.\nThe controversial Sellafield nuclear fuel reprocessing plant in north-western England has also been a contentious issue between the two governments. The Irish government has sought the closure of the plant, taking a case against the UK government under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. However, the European Court of Justice found that the case should have been dealt with under EU law. In 2006, however, both countries came to a friendly agreement which enabled both the Radiological Protection Institute of Ireland and the Garda S\u00edoch\u00e1na (Irish Police Force) access to the site to conduct investigations.\nUnited States.\nThe United States recognised the Irish Free State on 28 June 1924 with diplomatic relations being established on 7 October 1924. In 1927, the United States opened an American Legation in Dublin. Due to the ancestral ties between the two countries, Ireland and the US have a strong relationship, both politically and economically, with the US being Ireland's biggest trading partner since 2000. Ireland also receives more foreign direct investment from the US than many larger nations, with investments in Ireland equal to France and Germany combined and, in 2012, more than all of developing Asia put together.\nThe use of Shannon Airport as a stop-over point for US forces en route to Iraq has caused domestic controversy in Ireland. Opponents of this policy brought an unsuccessful High Court case against the government in 2003, arguing that this use of Irish airspace violated Irish neutrality. Restrictions such as carrying no arms, ammunition, or explosives, and that the flights in question did not form part of military exercises or operations were put in place to defend Irish neutrality, however, allegations have been made against the Central Intelligence Agency that the airport has been used between 30 and 50 times for illegal extraordinary rendition flights to the U.S. without the knowledge of the Irish Government, despite diplomatic assurances by the US that Irish airspace would not be used for transport of detainees.\nIn July 2006, the former Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dermot Ahern voiced concern over the 2006 Lebanon War. A shipment of bombs being sent to Israel by the United States was banned using Irish airspace or airfields.\nIn 1995 a decision was made by the U.S. government to appoint a Special Envoy to Northern Ireland to help with the Northern Ireland peace process. During the 2008 presidential campaign in the United States, however, Democratic Party candidate Barack Obama was reported as having questioned the necessity to keep a US Special Envoy for Northern Ireland. His remarks caused an uproar within the Republican Party, with Senator John McCain questioning his leadership abilities and his commitment to the ongoing peace process in Northern Ireland.\nAs of 2023[ [update]], Geraldine Byrne Nason is the Irish ambassador to the United States while the position of U.S. ambassador to Ireland is held by Edward Sharp Walsh.\nChina.\nIreland's official relationship with the People's Republic of China began on 22 June 1979. Following his visit to China in 1999, former Taoiseach Bertie Ahern authorised the establishment of an Asia Strategy. This Strategy aimed to ensure that the Irish Government and Irish enterprise work coherently to enhance the important relationships between Ireland and Asia. In recent years due to the rapid expansion of the Chinese economy, China is becoming a key trade partner of Ireland, with over $6bn worth of bilateral trade between the two countries in 2010. In July 2013, the T\u00e1naiste and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade were invited to China by the Chinese foreign minister Wang Yi on a trade mission to boost both investment and political ties between the two countries.\nIreland has raised its concerns in the area of human rights with China on several occasions. On 12 May 2007, during a visit to Beijing, former Taoiseach Brian Cowen (then Minister for Finance) discussed human rights issues with Chinese Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing. Former T\u00e1naiste Mary Coughlan also raised human rights issues and concerns with visiting Chinese Vice-Premier Zeng Peiyan. Ireland also participates in the EU-China Human Rights Dialogue.\nConcerning the Taiwan issue, Ireland follows a One-China policy and emphasizes the Taiwan issue being best settled through dialogue \"between the parties concerned\". Ireland does not maintain official diplomatic ties with Taiwan although there is a Taipei Representative Office that has a representative function about economic and cultural promotion.\nIn July 2019, the UN ambassadors from 22 nations, including Ireland, signed a joint letter to the UNHRC condemning China's mistreatment of the Uyghurs as well as its mistreatment of other minority groups, urging the Chinese government to close the Xinjiang internment camps.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Ireland maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nAsia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0No formal diplomatic relations\nEurope.\nIreland is consistently the most pro-European of EU member states, with 88% of the population approving of EU membership according to a poll in 2022.https:// Ireland was a founding member of the euro single currency. In May 2004, Ireland was one of only three countries to open its borders to workers from the 10 new member states. EU issues important to Ireland include the Common Agricultural Policy, corporation tax harmonisation and the EU Constitution. The Irish electorate declined to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon in 2008. A second referendum in October 2009 passed the bill, allowing the treaty to be ratified. Before it was ratified Ireland required legal guarantees on issues such as the right of Ireland to remain militarily neutral (and not engage in any kind of \"European army\"), the right of the state to maintain its low levels of corporation tax and that the treaty would not change the Eighth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland making abortion illegal (since deleted). Ireland has held the Presidency of the Council of the European Union on seven occasions (in 1975, 1979, 1984, 1990, 1996, 2004 and 2013), and is due to hold it for the eight time from July to December 2026.\nOceania.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0No formal diplomatic relations\nUnited Nations.\nThe United Nations was founded in 1945, but Ireland's membership was blocked by the Soviet Union until 1955, \"partly because of Dublin's neutrality\" during the Second World War. Since 2017, the Irish ambassador to the UN Office at Geneva has been Michael Gaffey. Ireland has been elected to the UN Security Council as a non-permanent member on four occasions\u00a0\u2014 in 1962, in 1981\u20131982, in 2001\u20132002 and most recently in 2021\u20132022.\nIreland is a member state of the International Criminal Court, having signed the Rome Statute in 1998 and ratified it in 2002.\nIrish Aid, the Government of Ireland's programme of assistance to developing countries financed the redesign of the UNV Online Volunteering service website in 2008 and supported its operations from 2007 to 2010, which led to a significant growth in the number of online volunteers and the tasks they completed.\nIn 2017, Ireland signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.\nPeacekeeping missions.\nIreland has a long history of participation in UN peacekeeping efforts starting in 1958, just three years after joining the UN. As of August 2018[ [update]], 90 members of the Irish Defence Forces had been killed on peacekeeping missions.\n\"List of major peacekeeping operations:\"\nAs well as these missions, Irish personnel have served as observers in Central America, Russia, Cambodia, Afghanistan, Namibia, Western Sahara, Kuwait and South Africa.\nIreland and the Commonwealth of Nations.\nIreland was a member state of the British Commonwealth from 1922 until 1949, initially as a Dominion called the Irish Free State from 1922 until 1937, when Ireland adopted a new constitution and changed the name of the state to \"Ireland\". Although the King's position was removed from the Constitution in 1936, but included in the External Relations Act 1936 itself, a republic was only formally declared from 18 April 1949 when the Republic of Ireland Act 1948 came into effect. \nUnder the rules for membership at the time, a republic could not be a member state of the Commonwealth. Only a Dominion could be a British Commonwealth member state, along with King George VI as their head of state.\nThis was changed a week later with the adoption of the London Declaration, then India became the first Commonwealth republic on 26 January 1950. King George VI became the first Head of the Commonwealth as a result.\nSince 1998, some people in Ireland have advocated joining the Commonwealth of Nations, most notably \u00c9amon \u00d3 Cu\u00edv, Frank Feighan, and Mary Kenny.\nInternational organisations.\nIreland is a member of or otherwise participates in the following international organisations:\nForeign aid.\nIreland's aid programme was founded in 1974, and in 2017 its budget amounted to \u20ac651 million. The government had previously set a target of reaching the Millennium Development Goal of 0.7% of Gross National Product in aid by 2012, which was not met as aid was reduced as a result of the Irish financial crisis. Irish development aid is concentrated on eight priority countries: Lesotho, Mozambique, Tanzania, Ethiopia, Zambia, Uganda, Vietnam and East Timor. In 2006, Malawi was announced as the ninth priority country, with a tenth country to follow.\nHuman rights.\nThere have been no serious civil, human or social rights abuses/problems in the State, according to Amnesty International and the U.S. State Department. The country consistently comes among the top nations in terms of freedom and rights ratings.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14686", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14686", "title": "Israel/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "14687", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14687", "title": "Geography of Israel", "text": " \nThe geography of Israel is very diverse, with desert conditions in the south, and snow-capped mountains in the north. Israel is located at the eastern end of the Mediterranean Sea in West Asia. It is bounded to the north by Lebanon, the northeast by Syria, the east by Jordan and the West Bank, and to the southwest by Egypt. To the west of Israel is the Mediterranean Sea, which makes up the majority of Israel's coastline, and the Gaza Strip. Israel has a small coastline on the Red Sea in the south.\nIsrael's area is approximately , which includes of inland water. Israel stretches from north to south, and its width ranges from at its widest point to at its narrowest point. It has an Exclusive Economic Zone of .\nThe Israeli-occupied territories include the West Bank, , East Jerusalem, and the Golan Heights, . Geographical features in these territories will be noted as such. Of these areas, Israel has annexed East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights, an act not recognized by the international community.\nSouthern Israel is dominated by the Negev desert, covering some , more than half of the country's total land area. The north of the Negev contains the Judean Desert, which, at its border with Jordan, contains the Dead Sea which, at is the lowest point on Earth. The inland area of central Israel is dominated by the Judean Hills of the West Bank, whilst the central and northern coastline consists of the flat and fertile Israeli coastal plain. Inland, the northern region contains the Mount Carmel mountain range, which is followed inland by the fertile Jezreel Valley, and then the hilly Galilee region. The Sea of Galilee is located beyond this region and is bordered to the east by the Golan Heights, a plateau bordered to the north by the Israeli-occupied part of the Mount Hermon massif, which includes the highest point under Israel's control, a peak of . The highest point in territory internationally recognized as Israeli is Mount Meron at .\nLocation and boundaries.\nIsrael lies to the north of the equator around 31\u00b030' north latitude and 34\u00b045' east longitude. It measures from north to south and, at its widest point , from east to west. At its narrowest point, however, this is reduced to just . It has a land frontier of and a coastline of . It is ranked 153 on the List of countries and outlying territories by total area.\nPrior to the establishment of the British Mandate for Palestine, there was no clear-cut definition of the geographical and territorial limits of the area known as \"Palestine.\" On the eve of World War I it was described by \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" as a \"nebulous geographical concept.\" The Sykes-Picot Treaty in 1916 divided the region that later became Palestine into four political units. Under the British Mandate for Palestine, the first geo-political framework was created that distinguished the area from the larger countries that surrounded it. The boundary demarcation at this time did not introduce geographical changes near the frontiers and both sides of the border were controlled by the British administration.\nModern Israel is bounded to the north by Lebanon, the northeast by Syria, the east by Jordan and the West Bank, and to the southwest by Egypt. To the west of Israel is the Mediterranean Sea, which makes up the majority of Israel's coastline and the Gaza Strip. Israel has a small coastline on the Red Sea in the south. The southernmost settlement in Israel is the city of Eilat whilst the northernmost is the town of Metula. The territorial waters of Israel extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from the appropriate baseline.\nThe statistics provided by the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics include the annexed East Jerusalem and Golan Heights, but exclude the West Bank and Gaza Strip. The population of Israel includes Israeli settlers in the West Bank. The route of the Israeli West Bank barrier incorporates some parts of the West Bank.\nPhysiographic regions.\nGeography of Israel\nHula \nGalilee \nCarmel \nJezreel \nJordanValley \nSharon&lt;br&gt;(Coastal plain) \nShfela \nJudaeanMtns. \nHevel&lt;br&gt;Eshkol \nNegev \nArabah \nNegev&lt;br&gt;Mtns. \nEilat&lt;br&gt;Mtns. \nKinneret \nLevantine Sea(Mediterranean) \nDeadSea \nGulf of Eilat&lt;br&gt;(Red Sea) \n\"WestBank\" \n\"GazaStrip\" \n\"Lebanon\" \n\"Syria\" \n\"Jordan\" \n\"Egypt\" \nIsrael is divided into four physiographic regions: the Mediterranean coastal plain, the Central Hills, the Jordan Rift Valley and the Negev Desert.\nCoastal plain.\nThe Israeli Coastal Plain stretches from the Lebanese border in the north to Gaza in the south, interrupted only by Cape Carmel at Haifa Bay. It is about wide at Gaza and narrows toward the north to about at the Lebanese border. The region is fertile and humid (historically malarial) and is known for its citrus orchards and viticulture. The plain is traversed by several short streams. From north to south these are: Kishon, Hadera, Alexander, Poleg, and Yarkon. All of these streams were badly polluted, but in the last ten years much work has been done to clean them up. Today the Kishon, Alexander and Yarkon again flow year round, and also have parks along their banks.\nGeographically, the region is divided into five sub-regions. The northernmost section lays between the Lebanese border, the Western Galilee to the east, and the sea. It stretches from Rosh HaNikra in the north and down to Haifa, Israel's third-largest city. It is a fertile region, and off the coast there are many small islands. Along the Mount Carmel range is Hof HaCarmel, or the Carmel Coastal Plain. It stretches from the point where Mount Carmel almost touches the sea, at Haifa, and down to Nahal Taninim, a stream that marks the southern limit of the Carmel range. The Sharon Plain is the next section, running from Nahal Taninim (south of Zikhron Ya'akov) to Tel Aviv's Yarkon River. This area is Israel's most densely populated. South of this, running to Nahal Shikma, is the Central Coastal Plain, also known as the Western Negev. The last segment is the Southern Coastal Plain, which extends south around the Gaza Strip. It is divided into two \u2013 in the north, the Besor region, a savanna-type area with a relatively large number of communities, and south of it the Agur-Halutza region, which is very sparsely populated.\nCentral hills.\nInland (east) of the coastal plain lies the central highland region. In the north of this region lie the mountains and hills of Upper Galilee and Lower Galilee, which are generally in height, although they reach a maximum height of at Mount Meron. South of the Galilee, in the West Bank, are the Samarian Hills with numerous small, fertile valleys rarely reaching the height of . South of Jerusalem, also mainly within the West Bank, are the Judean Hills, including Mount Hebron. The central highlands average in height and reach their highest elevation at Har Meron, at , in Galilee near Safed. Several valleys cut across the highlands roughly from east to west; the largest is the Jezreel Valley (also known as the Plain of Esdraelon), which stretches from Haifa southeast to the valley of the Jordan River, and is across at its widest point.\nJordan Rift Valley.\nEast of the central highlands lies the Jordan Rift Valley, which is a small part of the -long Syrian-East African Rift. In Israel the Rift Valley is dominated by the Jordan River, the Sea of Galilee (an important freshwater source also known as Lake Tiberias and Lake Kinneret), and the Dead Sea. The Jordan, Israel's largest river (), originates in the Dan, Baniyas, and Hasbani rivers near Mount Hermon in the Anti-Lebanon Mountains and flows south through the drained Hula Basin into the freshwater Lake Tiberias. Lake Tiberias is in size and, depending on the season and rainfall, is at about below sea level. With a water capacity estimated at , it serves as the principal reservoir of the National Water Carrier (also known as the Kinneret-Negev Conduit). The Jordan River continues its course from the southern end of Lake Tiberias (forming the boundary between the West Bank and Jordan) to its terminus in the highly saline Dead Sea. The Dead Sea is in size and, at below sea level, is the lowest surface point on the earth. South of the Dead Sea, the Rift Valley continues in the Arabah (Hebrew \"Arava\", Arabic \"Wadi 'Arabah\"), which has no permanent water flow, for to the Gulf of Eilat.\nNegev Desert.\nThe Negev Desert comprises approximately , more than half of Israel's total land area. Geographically it is an extension of the Sinai Desert, forming a rough triangle with its base in the north near Beersheba, the Dead Sea, and the southern Judean Mountains, and it has its apex in the southern tip of the country at Eilat. Topographically, it parallels the other regions of the country, with lowlands in the west, hills in the central portion, and the Arava valley as its eastern border.\nUnique to the Negev region are the craterlike makhteshim cirques; Makhtesh Ramon, Makhtesh Gadol and Makhtesh Katan. The Negev is also sub-divided into five different ecological regions: northern, western and central Negev, the high plateau and the Arabah Valley. The northern Negev receives of rain annually and has fairly fertile soils. The western Negev receives of rain per year, with light and partially sandy soils. The central Negev has an annual precipitation of and is characterized by impervious soil, allowing minimum penetration of water with greater soil erosion and water runoff. This can result in rare flash floods during heavy rains as water runs across the surface of the impervious desert soil. The high plateau area of Ramat HaNegev stands between above sea level with extreme temperatures in summer and winter. The area gets of rain each year, with inferior and partially salty soils. The Arabah Valley along the Jordanian border stretches from Eilat in the south to the tip of the Dead Sea in the north and is very arid with barely of rain annually.\nGeology.\nIsrael is divided east\u2013west by a mountain range running north to south along the coast. Jerusalem sits on the top of this ridge, east of which lies the Dead Sea graben which is a pull-apart basin on the Dead Sea Transform fault.\nThe numerous limestone and sandstone layers of the Israeli mountains serve as aquifers through which water flows from the west flank to the east. Several springs have formed along the Dead Sea, each an oasis, most notably the oases at Ein Gedi and Ein Bokek (Neve Zohar) where settlements have developed. Israel also has a number of areas of karst topography. Caves in the region have been used for thousands of years as shelter, storage rooms, barns and as places of public gatherings.\nThe far northern coastline of the country has some chalk landscapes best seen at Rosh HaNikra, a chalk cliff into which a series of grottoes have been eroded.\nSeismic activity.\nThe Jordan Rift Valley is the result of tectonic movements within the Dead Sea Transform (DSF) fault system. The DSF forms the transform boundary between the African Plate to the west and the Arabian Plate to the east. The Golan Heights and all of Jordan are part of the Arabian Plate, while the Galilee, West Bank, Coastal Plain, and Negev along with the Sinai Peninsula are on the African Plate. This tectonic disposition leads to a relatively high seismic activity in the region.\nThe entire Jordan Valley segment is thought to have ruptured repeatedly, for instance during the last two major earthquakes along this structure in 749 and 1033. The deficit in slip that has built up since the 1033 event is sufficient to cause an earthquake of ~7.4.\nThe most catastrophic earthquakes occurred in 31 BCE, 363, 749, and 1033 CE, that is every ca. 400 years on average. Destructive earthquakes leading to serious loss of life strike about every 80 years. While stringent construction regulations are currently in place and recently built structures are earthquake-safe, as of 2007 the majority of the buildings in Israel were older than these regulations and many public buildings as well as 50,000 residential buildings did not meet the new standards and were \"expected to collapse\" if exposed to a strong quake. Given the fragile political situation of the Middle East region and the presence there of major holy sites, a quake reaching magnitude 7 on the Richter scale could have dire consequences for world peace.\nRivers and lakes.\nIsrael's longest and most famous river is the long River Jordan, which rises on the southern slopes of Mount Hermon in the Anti-Lebanon Mountains. The river flows south through the freshwater Sea of Galilee, and from there forms the boundary with the Kingdom of Jordan for much of its route, eventually emptying into the Dead Sea. The northern tributaries to the Jordan are the Dan, Banias, and Hasbani. Only the Dan is within undisputed Israel; the Hasbani flows from Lebanon and the Banias from territory captured from Syria in the Six-Day War.\nThe Sea of Galilee (also called the Kinneret) is Israel's largest and most important freshwater lake, located in the northeast of the country. The pear-shaped lake is long from north to south, with a maximum width of in the north, covering . The Kinneret lies below sea level and reaches depths of . In a previous geological epoch the lake was part of a large inland sea which extended from the Hula marshes in northern Israel to south of the Dead Sea. The bed of the lake forms part of the Jordan Rift Valley.\nSouth of the Kinneret lies the saltwater Dead Sea which forms the border between Israel and Jordan and is below sea level, making it the lowest water surface on Earth. The Dead Sea is long with a maximum width of and also makes up part of the Rift Valley. A peninsula juts out into the lake from the eastern shore, south of which the lake is shallow, less than deep. To the north is the lake's greatest depth.\nThere are no navigable, artificial waterways in Israel, although the National Water Carrier, a conduit for drinking water, might be classified as such. The idea of a channel connecting the Mediterranean and Dead Seas or the Red and Dead Seas has been discussed.\nSelected elevations.\nThe following are selected elevations of notable locations, from highest to lowest:\nClimate.\nThe northern half of Israel has a Mediterranean climate with long, hot, rainless summers and relatively short, mild to cool, rainy winters (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Csa\"). The southern half has hot semi-arid (\"BSh\") and hot desert (\"BWh\") climates. The climate is as such due to Israel's location between the subtropical aridity of the Sahara and the Arabian deserts, and the subtropical humidity of the Levant and Eastern Mediterranean. The climate conditions are highly variable within the state and modified locally by altitude, latitude, and the proximity to the Mediterranean.\nOn average, January is the coldest month with average temperatures ranging from , and July and August are the hottest months at , on average across the country. Summers are very humid along the Mediterranean coast but dry in the central highlands, the Rift Valley, and the Negev Desert. In Eilat, a desert city, summer daytime-temperatures are often the highest in the state, at times reaching . More than 70% of the average rainfall in Israel falls between November and March; June through September are usually rainless. Rainfall is unevenly distributed, significantly lower in the south of the country. In the extreme south, rainfall averages near annually; in the north, average annual rainfall exceeds . Rainfall varies from season to season and from year to year, particularly in the Negev Desert. Precipitation is often concentrated in violent storms, causing erosion and flash floods. In winter, precipitation often takes the form of snow at the higher elevations of the central highlands, including Jerusalem. Mount Hermon has seasonal snow which covers all three of its peaks in winter and spring. In rare occasions, snow gets to the northern mountain peaks and only in extremely rare occasions even to the coast. The areas of the country most cultivated are those receiving more than of rainfall annually, making approximately one-third of the country cultivable.\nThunderstorms and hail are common throughout the rainy season and waterspouts occasionally hit the Mediterranean coast, capable of causing only minor damage. However, supercell thunderstorms and a true F2 tornado hit the Western Galilee in April 2006, causing significant damage and 75 injuries.\nHeat waves are frequent. 2010 was the hottest year in the history of Israel with absolute record high in several places in August. The heat became stronger from August when temperatures were considerably above the average. October and November were also dry, and November was almost rainless when it was supposed to be rainy.\nNatural resources.\nUnlike much of the Middle East which is rich in lucrative crude oil, Israel has limited natural resources. These include copper, phosphates, bromide, potash, clay, sand, sulfur, asphalt, and manganese. Small amounts of natural gas and crude oil are present, often too little to merit commercial extraction. In 2009, significant reserves of natural gas were discovered at the Tamar 1 offshore drilling site, 90 kilometers west of Haifa. It is the largest natural gas reserve ever discovered in Israel.\nEnvironmental concerns.\nIsrael has a large number of environmental concerns ranging from natural hazards to man-made issues both resulting from ancient times to modern development. Natural hazards facing the country include sandstorms which sometimes occur during spring in the desert south, droughts which are usually concentrated in summer months, flash floods which create great danger in the deserts due to their lack of notice, and regular earthquakes, most of which are small, although there is a constant risk due to Israel's location along the Jordan Rift Valley. Current environmental concerns include the lack of arable land and natural fresh water resources. Whilst measures have been taken to irrigate and grow in the desert, the amount of water needed here poses issues. Desertification is also a risk possible on the desert fringe, whilst air pollution from industrial and vehicle emissions and groundwater pollution from industrial and domestic waste are also issues facing the country. Furthermore, the effects of the use of chemical fertilizers, and pesticides are issues facing the country.\nIsrael has signed many international environmental agreements and is party to:\nSigned but not ratified:\nRural settlements.\nIsrael's rural space includes several unique kinds of settlements, notably the moshav and the kibbutz. Originally these were collective and cooperative settlements respectively. Over time, the degree of cooperation in these settlements has decreased and in several of them the cooperative structure has been dismantled altogether. All rural settlements and many small towns (some of which are dubbed \"rurban settlements\") are incorporated in regional councils. Land use in Israel is 17% arable land, 4% permanent crops, and 79% other uses. As of 2003 were irrigated.\nThere are 242 Israeli settlements and civilian land use sites in the West Bank, 42 in the Golan Heights, and 29 in East Jerusalem.\nIslands.\nIsrael has the Rosh Hanikra Islands and the Achziv Islands within its territorial waters. The Israeli government plans to build artificial islands off the coast to house an airport, a seaport, a desalination plant, a power plant, and a military testing base, as an answer to Israel's lack of space.\nHuman geography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs of 2013, the population of Israel is 8 million, 6,015,000 of them Jewish.\nFor statistical purposes, the country has three metropolitan areas; Gush Dan-Tel Aviv (population 3,150,000), Haifa (population 996,000), and Beersheba (population 531,600). Some argue that Jerusalem, Israel's largest city with a population of 763,600, and Nazareth, should also be classified as metropolitan areas. In total, Israel has 74 cities, 14 of which have populations of over 100,000. Other forms of local government in Israel are local councils of which there are 144 governing small municipalities generally over 2,000 in population, and regional councils of which there are 53, governing a group of small communities over a relatively large geographical area.\nIsrael's population is diverse demographically; 76% Jewish, 20% Arab, and 4% unaffiliated. In terms of religion, 76% are Jewish, 16% Muslim, 2% Christian, 2% Druze, and 4% are unclassified by choice. 8% of Israeli Jews are haredi; 9% are \"religious\", 12% \"religious-traditionalists\", 27% are \"non-religious traditionalists\", and 43% are \"secular\". Other small, but notable groups in Israel, include Circassians of whom there are approximately 3,000 living mostly in two northern villages, 2,500 Lebanese, and 5,000 Armenians predominantly in Jerusalem.\nOvershoot index.\nIsrael is ranked 34th in the world in terms of population density with, as noted, a climate of long, hot, rainless summers and relatively short, cool, rainy winters. The Population Matters 2011 overshoot index ranked Israel as the third most dependent region in the World after Singapore and Kuwait.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14688", "revid": "8480552", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14688", "title": "Demographics of Israel", "text": "The demographics of Israel, monitored by the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics, encompass various attributes that define the nation's populace. Since its establishment in 1948, Israel has witnessed significant changes in its demographics. Formed as a homeland for the Jewish people, Israel has attracted Jewish immigrants from Europe, Asia, Africa, and the Americas.\nThe Israel Central Bureau of Statistics defines the population of Israel as including Jews living in all of the West Bank and Palestinians in East Jerusalem but excluding Palestinians anywhere in the rest of the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, and foreign workers anywhere in Israel. As of December 2023, this calculation stands at approximately 9,842,000 of whom: \nIsrael's annual population growth rate stood at 2.0% in 2015, more than three times faster than the OECD average of around 0.6%. With an average of three children per woman, Israel also has the highest fertility rate in the OECD by a considerable margin and much higher than the OECD average of 1.7.\nDefinitions.\nThe definition of what constitutes the population of Israel varies depending on which territories are counted and which population groups are counted in each territory.\nThe Israel Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) definition of the Area of the State of Israel:\nThe CBS' definition of the Population of Israel, however:\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTotal population.\n (most current update from the Israeli Central Bureau for Statistics, via live feed)\n\"Note:\" includes over 200,000 Israelis and 250,000 Arabs in East Jerusalem, about 421,400 Jewish settlers on the West Bank, and about 42,000 in the Golan Heights (July 2007 estimate). Does not include Arab populations in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Does not include 222,000 foreigners living in the country.\nDensity.\nGeographic deployment, as of 2018:\nPopulation growth rate.\nDuring the 1990s, the Jewish population growth rate was about 3% per year, as a result of massive immigration to Israel, primarily from the republics of the former Soviet Union. There is also a very high population growth rate among certain Jewish groups, especially adherents of Orthodox Judaism. The growth rate of the Arab population in Israel is 2.2%, while the growth rate of the Jewish population in Israel is 1.8%. The growth rate of the Arab population has slowed from 3.8% in 1999 to 2.2% in 2013, and for the Jewish population, the growth rate declined from 2.7% to its lowest rate of 1.4% in 2005. Due to a rise in fertility of the Jewish population since 1995 and immigration, the growth rate has since risen to 1.8%.\nFertility.\nThe total fertility rate (TFR) of a population is the average number of children that an average woman would have, in her lifetime.\nJewish total fertility rate increased by 10.2% during 1998\u20132009, and was recorded at 2.90 during 2009. During the same time period, Arab TFR decreased by 20.5%. Muslim TFR was measured at 3.73 for 2009, and 2.9 for 2022.\nIn 2000, the Jewish and Arab TFRs in Jerusalem were 3.79 and 4.43 respectively. By 2009, the Jewish TFR in Jerusalem was measured higher than the Arab TFR (2010: 4.26 vs 3.85, 2009: 4.16 vs 3.87). As of 2021, the Jewish and Arab TFRs in Jerusalem were 4.4 and 3.1 respectively. TFR for Arab residents in the West Bank was measured at 2.91 in 2013, while that for the Jewish residents was reported at 5.10 children per woman.\nThe ethnic group with highest recorded TFR is the Bedouin of Negev. Their TFR was reported at 10.06 in 1998, and 5.73 in 2009. TFR is also very high among Haredi Jews. For Ashkenazi Haredim, the TFR rose from 6.91 in 1980 to 8.51 in 1996. The figure for 2008 is estimated to be even higher. TFR for Sephardi/Mizrahi Haredim rose from 4.57 in 1980 to 6.57 in 1996. In 2020 the overall Jewish TFR in Israel (3.00) was for the first time measured higher than Arab Muslim TFR (2.99).\nAs of 2022, the fertility rates in Israeli cities dominated by specific demographic groups were: Haredi 6.1, Bedouin 4.4, Jewish non-Haredi 2.4, Arab 2.2, Druze 1.8.\nBirth rate.\n2021 :\nBirths, in absolute numbers, by mother's religion\nBetween the mid-1980s and 2000, the fertility rate in the Muslim sector was stable at 4.6\u20134.7 children per woman; after 2001, a gradual decline became evident, reaching 3.51 children per woman in 2011. By point of comparison, in 2011, there was a rising fertility rate of 2.98 children among the Jewish population.\nLife expectancy.\nAs of 2019:\nAge structure.\nThe table shows population estimates by sex and age group, as of July 1, 2019. It includes data for East Jerusalem and Israeli residents in certain other territories under occupation by Israeli military forces since June 1967. Data refer to Israeli citizens and permanent residents who are listed in the Population Register.\nMedian age.\nThe Jewish median age in Jerusalem district and the West Bank are 24.9 and 19.7, respectively, and both account for 16% of the Jewish population, but 24% of 0- to 4-year-olds. The lowest median age in Israel, and one of the lowest in the world, is found in two of the West Bank's biggest Jewish cities: Modi'in Illit (11), Beitar Illit (11) followed by Bedouin towns in the Negev (15.2).\nCities.\nWithin Israel's system of local government, an urban municipality can be granted a city council by the Israeli Interior Ministry when its population exceeds 20,000. The term \"city\" does not generally refer to local councils or urban agglomerations, even though a defined city often contains only a small portion of an urban area or metropolitan area's population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEthnic and religious groups.\nStatistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe most prominent ethnic and religious groups that live in Israel at present and that are Israeli citizens or nationals are as follows:\nJews.\nAccording to Israel's Central Bureau of Statistics, in 2008, of Israel's 7.3\u00a0million people, 75.6 percent were Jews of any background. Among them, 70.3 percent were Sabras (born in Israel), mostly second- or third-generation Israelis, and the rest are olim (Jewish immigrants to Israel)\u201420.5 percent from Europe and the Americas, and 9.2 percent from Asia and Africa, including the Arab countries.\nAccording to Israel's Central Bureau of Statistics, in April 2023, of Israel's 9.7 million people, 73.5 percent, or 7.145 million, were Jews of any background.\nThere are no government statistics categorizing Israeli Jews as \"Ashkenazi\", \"Mizrahi\", etc, but studies and estimates have been conducted. In a 2019 study, in a sample meant to be representative of the Israeli Jewish population, about 44.9% percent of Israel's Jewish population were categorized as Mizrahi (defined as having grandparents born in Asia or North Africa), 31.8% were categorized as Ashkenazi (defined as having grandparents born in Europe, the Americas, Oceania and South Africa), 12.4% as \"Soviet\" (defined as having progenitors who came from the ex-USSR in 1989 or later), about 3% as Beta Israel (Ethiopia) and 7.9% as a mix of these, or other Jewish groups.\nThe paternal lineage of the Jewish population of Israel as of 2015 is as follows:\nArabs.\nArab citizens of Israel are those Arab residents of Mandatory Palestine that remained within Israel's borders following the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War and the establishment of the State of Israel. It is including those born within the state borders subsequent to this time, as well as those who had left during the establishment of the state (or their descendants), who have since re-entered by means accepted as lawful residence by the Israeli state (primarily family reunifications).\nIn 2019, the official number of Arab residents in Israel was 1,890,000 people, representing 21% of Israel's population. This figure includes 209,000 Arabs (14% of the Israeli Arab population) in East Jerusalem, also counted in the Palestinian statistics, although 98 percent of East Jerusalem Palestinians have either Israeli residency or Israeli citizenship.\nArab Muslims\nMost Arab citizens of Israel are Muslim, particularly of the Sunni branch of Islam. A small minority are Ahmadiyya sect and there are also some Alawites (affiliated with Shia Islam) in the northernmost village of Ghajar with Israeli citizenship. As of 2019, Arab citizens of Israel composed 21 percent of the country's total population. About 82 percent of the Arab population in Israel are Sunni Muslims, a very small minority are Shia Muslims, another 9 percent are Druze, and around 9 percent are Christian (mostly Eastern Orthodox and Catholic denominations).\nBedouin\nThe Arab Muslim citizens of Israel include also the Bedouins, who are divided into two main groups: the Bedouin in the north of Israel, who live in villages and towns for the most part, and the Bedouin in the Negev, who include half-nomadic and inhabitants of towns and Unrecognized villages. According to the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs, as of 1999, 110,000 Bedouins live in the Negev, 50,000 in the Galilee and 10,000 in the central region of Israel. The vast majority of Arab Bedouins of Israel practice Sunni Islam.\nAhmadiyya\nThe Ahmadiyya community was first established in the region in the 1920s, in what was then Mandatory Palestine. There is a large community in Kababir, a neighborhood on Mount Carmel in Haifa. It is unknown how many Israeli Ahmadis there are, although it is estimated there are about 2,200 Ahmadis in Kababir alone.\nArab Christians\nAs of December 2013, about 161,000 Israeli citizens practiced Christianity, together comprising about 2% of the total population. The largest group consists of Melkites (about 60% of Israel's Christians), followed by the Greek Orthodox (about 30%), with the remaining ca. 10% spread between the Roman Catholic (Latin), Maronite, Anglican, Lutheran, Armenian, Syriac, Ethiopian, Coptic and other denominations.\nDruze\nThe Arab citizens of Israel include also the Druze, who numbered at an estimated 143,000 in April 2019. All of the Druze living in what was then British Mandate Palestine became Israeli citizens after the declaration of the State of Israel. Druze serve prominently in the Israel Defense Forces, and are represented in mainstream Israeli politics and business as well, unlike Muslim or Christian Arabs who are not required to and generally choose not to serve in the Israeli army. Though a few individuals identify themselves as \"Palestinian Druze\", the vast majority of Druze do not consider themselves to be 'Palestinian', and consider their Israeli identity stronger than their Arab identity. A 2017 Pew Research Center poll reported that the majority of the Israeli Druze identified as ethnically Arab.\nSyriac Christians.\nArameans\nIn 2014, Israel decided to recognize the Aramaic community within its borders as a national minority, allowing some of the Christians in Israel to be registered as \"Aramean\" instead of \"Arab\". As of October 2014, some 600 Israelis requested to be registered as Arameans, with several thousand eligible for the status \u2013 mostly members of the Maronite community with some Assyrians as well.\nThe Maronite Christian community in Israel of around 7,000 resides mostly in the Galilee, with a presence in Haifa, Nazareth and Jerusalem. It is largely composed of families that lived in Upper Galilee in villages such as Jish long before the establishment of Israel in 1948. In the year 2000, the community was joined by a group of Lebanese SLA militia members and their families, who fled Lebanon after 2000 withdrawal of IDF from South Lebanon.\nAssyrians\nThere are around 1,000 Assyrians living in Israel, mostly in Jerusalem and Nazareth. Assyrians are an Aramaic speaking, Eastern Rite Christian minority who are descended from the ancient Mesopotamians. The old Syriac Orthodox monastery of Saint Mark lies in Jerusalem. Other than followers of the Syriac Orthodox Church, there are also followers of the Assyrian Church of the East and the Chaldean Catholic Church living in Israel.\nOther citizens.\nCopts\nSome 1,000 Israeli citizens belong to the Coptic community, originating in Egypt.\nSamaritans\nThe Samaritans are an ethnoreligious group of the Levant. Ancestrally, they claim descent from a group of Israelite inhabitants who have connections to ancient Samaria from the beginning of the Babylonian Exile up to the beginning of the Common Era. 2007 population estimates show that 712 Samaritans live half in Holon, Israel and half at Mount Gerizim in the West Bank. The Holon community holds Israeli citizenship, while the Gerizim community resides at an Israeli-controlled enclave, holding dual Israeli-Palestinian citizenship.\nArmenians\nAbout 4,000 Armenians reside in Israel mostly in Jerusalem (including in the Armenian Quarter), but also in Tel Aviv, Haifa and Jaffa. Armenians have a Patriarchate in Jerusalem and churches in Jerusalem, Haifa and Jaffa. Although Armenians of Old Jerusalem have Israeli identity cards, they are officially holders of Jordanian passports.\nCircassians\nIn Israel, there are also a few thousand Circassians, living mostly in Kfar Kama (2,000) and Reyhaniye (1,000). These two villages were a part of a greater group of Circassian villages around the Golan Heights. The Circassians in Israel enjoy, like Druzes, a \"status aparte\". Male Circassians (at their leader's request) are mandated for military service, while females are not.\nPeople from post-Soviet states\nEthnic Russians, Ukrainians, and Belarusians, immigrants from the former Soviet Union, who were eligible to emigrate due to having, or being married to somebody who has, at least one Jewish grandparent and thus qualified for Israeli citizenship under the revised Law of Return. A number of these immigrants also belong to various ethnic groups from the Former Soviet Union such as Armenians, Georgians, Azeris, Uzbeks, Moldovans, Tatars, among others. Some of them, having a Jewish father or grandfather, identify as Jews, but being non-Jewish by Orthodox Halakha (religious law), they are not recognized formally as Jews by the state. Most of them are in the mainstream of Israel culture and are called \"expanded Jewish population\". In addition, a certain number of former Soviet citizens, primarily women of Russian and Ukrainian ethnicity, emigrated to Israel, after marrying Muslim or Christian Arab citizens of Israel, who went to study in the former Soviet Union in the 1970s and 1980s. 1,557,698 people from the current Russia and Ukraine live in Israel.\nFinns\nAlthough most people of Finnish origin in Israel are Finnish Jews who immigrated to Israel, and their descendants, a small number of Finnish Christians moved to Israel in the 1940s before independence and gained citizenship following independence. For the most part, many of the original Finnish settlers intermarried with the other communities in the country, and therefore remain very small in number. A Moshav shitufi near Jerusalem named Yad HaShmona, meaning the \"Memorial for the Eight\", was established in 1971 by a group of Finnish Christian-Israelis, although today, most members are Israeli, and are predominantly Hebrew speakers, and the moshav has become a center of Messianic Jews.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds\nThe population of followers of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith in Israel is almost entirely made up of volunteers serving at the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed World Centre. Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h (1817\u20131892), the Faith's founder, was banished to Akka and died nearby where his shrine is located. During his lifetime he instructed his followers not to teach or convert those living in the area, and the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds descending from those original immigrants were later asked to leave and teach elsewhere. For nearly a century there has been a policy by Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed leaders to not accept converts living in Israel. The 650 or so foreign national Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds living in Israel are almost all on temporary duty serving at the shrines and administrative offices.\nVietnamese\nThe number of Vietnamese people in Israel and their descendants is estimated at 150 to 200. Most of them came to Israel in between 1976 and 1979, after prime minister Menachem Begin authorized their admission to Israel and granted them political asylum. The Vietnamese people living in Israel are Israeli citizens who also serve in the Israel Defense Forces. Today, the majority of the community lives in the Gush Dan area in the center of Tel Aviv, but also a few dozen Vietnamese-Israelis or Israelis of Vietnamese origin live in Haifa, Jerusalem, and Ofakim.\nAfrican Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem\nThe African Hebrew Israelite Nation of Jerusalem is a religious sect of Black Americans, founded in 1960 by Ben Carter a metal worker in Chicago. The members of this sect believe they are descended from the tribes of Judah driven from the Holy Land by the Romans during the First Jewish War (70 AD), and who reportedly emigrated to West Africa before being taken as slaves to the United States. With a population of over 5,000, most members live in their own community in Dimona, Israel, with additional families in Arad, Mitzpe Ramon, and the Tiberias area. The group believes that the ancient Israelites are the ancestors of Black Americans and that the actual Jews are \"impostors\". Some scholarship does consider them to be of subsaharan African origin, rather than Levantine. Their ancestors were Black Americans who, after being expelled from Liberia, illegally immigrated to Israel in the late 1960s using tourist visas, requesting that Israel provide them legal citizenship status. Israel granted their requests. The African Hebrew Israelites, like the Haredim and most Israeli Arabs, are not required to serve in the military; however, some do.\nNaturalized foreign workers\nSome naturalized foreign workers and their children born in Israel, predominantly from the Philippines, Nepal, Nigeria, Senegal, Romania, China, Cyprus, Thailand, and South America (mainly Colombia).\nNon-citizens.\nAfrican migrants\nThe number and status of African migrants in Israel is disputed and controversial, but it is estimated that at least 70,000 refugees mainly from Eritrea, Sudan, South Sudan, Ethiopia, and the Ivory Coast reside and work in Israel. A count in late 2011 published in Ynet pointed out the number only in Tel Aviv is 40,000, which represents 10 percent of the city's population. The vast majority live in the southern parts of the city. There is a significant population in the southern Israeli cities of Eilat, Arad, and Beersheba.\nForeign workers\nThere are around 300,000 foreign workers, residing in Israel under temporary work visas, including Palestinians. Most of those foreign workers engage in agriculture and construction. The main groups of those foreign workers include the Chinese, Thai, Filipinos, Nigerians, Romanians, and Latin Americans.\nOther refugees\nApproximately 100\u2013200 refugees from Bosnia, Kosovo, Iraqi Kurdistan, and North Korea were absorbed in Israel as refugees. Most of them were also given Israeli resident status, and currently reside in Israel. As of 2006, some 200 ethnic Kurdish refugees from Turkey resided in Israel as illegal immigrants, fleeing the Kurdish\u2013Turkish conflict.\nLanguages.\nDue to its immigrant nature, Israel is one of the most multicultural and multilingual societies in the world. Hebrew is the official language of the country, and Arabic is given special status, while English and Russian are the two most widely spoken non-official languages. A certain degree of English is spoken widely, and is the language of choice for many Israeli businesses. Hebrew and English language are mandatory subjects in the Israeli school system, and most schools offer either Arabic, French, Spanish, German, Italian, or Russian.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to a 2010 Israel Central Bureau of Statistics study of Israeli Jews aged over 18:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWhile the ultra-Orthodox, or Haredim, represented only 5% of Israel's population in 1990, they are expected to represent more than one-fifth of Israel's Jewish population by 2028. By 2022, Haredim were 13.3% of the population and enumerated 1,280,000.\nEducation.\nEducation between ages 5 and 15 is compulsory. It is not free, but it is subsidized by the government, individual organizations (such as the Beit Yaakov System), or a combination. Parents are expected to participate in courses as well. The school system is organized into kindergartens, 6-year primary schools, and either 6-year secondary schools or 3-year junior secondary schools + 3-year senior secondary schools (depending on region), after which a comprehensive examination is offered for university admissions.\nLiteracy.\nAge 15 and over can read and write (2011 estimate):\nPolicy.\nIsrael is the thirtieth-most-densely-crowded country in the world. In an academic article, Jewish National Fund Board member Daniel Orenstein, argues that, as elsewhere, overpopulation is a stressor on the environment in Israel; he shows that environmentalists have conspicuously failed to consider the impact of population on the environment, and argues that overpopulation in Israel has not been appropriately addressed for ideological reasons.\nCitizenship and Entry Law.\nThe Citizenship and Entry into Israel Law (Temporary Order) 5763 was first passed on 31 July 2003, and has since been extended until 31 July 2008. The law places age restrictions for the automatic granting of Israeli citizenship and residency permits to spouses of Israeli citizens, such that spouses who are inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza Strip are ineligible. On 8 May 2005, the Israeli ministerial committee for issues of legislation once again amended the Citizenship and Entry into Israel Law, to restrict citizenship and residence in Israel only to Palestinian men over the age of 35, and Palestinian women over the age of 25. Those in favor of the law say the law not only limits the possibility of the entrance of terrorists into Israel, but, as Ze'ev Boim asserts, allows Israel \"to maintain the state's democratic nature, but also its Jewish nature\" (i. e., its Jewish demographic majority). Critics, including the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, say the law disproportionately affects Arab citizens of Israel, since Arabs in Israel are far more likely to have spouses from the West Bank and Gaza Strip than other Israeli citizens.\nIn the constitutional challenges to the Citizenship and Entry to Israel Law, the state, represented by the Attorney General, insisted that security was the only objective behind the law. The state also added that even if the law was intended to achieve demographic objectives, it is still in conformity with Israel's Jewish and democratic definition, and thus constitutional. In a 2012 ruling by the Supreme Court on the issue, some of the judges on the panel discussed demography, and were inclined to accept that demography is a legitimate consideration in devising family reunification policies that violate the right to family life.\nVital statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nMigration.\nImmigration.\nIn 2013 Israel had an estimated net migration rate of 1.81 migrant(s) per 1,000 population.\nImmigrants by last country of residence in recent years (according to CBS):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^a The vast majority of immigrants from Ethiopia come as part of a family reunification program, as opposed to the Law of Return. They are therefore not counted as \"olim\" for a given year by the Central Bureau of Statistics \nImmigration from the USSR.\nDuring the 1970s about 163,000 people of Jewish descent immigrated to Israel from the USSR.\nLater Ariel Sharon, in his capacity as Minister of Housing &amp; Construction and member of the Ministerial Committee for Immigration &amp; Absorption, launched an unprecedented large-scale construction effort to accommodate the new Russian population in Israel so as to facilitate their smooth integration and encourage further Jewish immigration as an ongoing means of increasing the Jewish population of Israel. Between 1989 and 2006, about 979,000 Jews emigrated from the former Soviet Union to Israel.\nEmigration.\nFor many years definitive data on Israeli emigration was unavailable. In \"The Israeli Diaspora\" sociologist Stephen J. Gold maintains that calculation of Jewish emigration has been a contentious issue, explaining, \"Since Zionism, the philosophy that underlies the existence of the Jewish state, calls for return home of the world's Jews, the opposite movement\u2014Israelis leaving the Jewish state to reside elsewhere\u2014clearly presents an ideological and demographic problem.\"\nIn the past several decades, emigration (yerida) has seen a considerable increase. From 1990 to 2005, 230,000 Israelis left the country; a large proportion of these departures included people who initially immigrated to Israel and then reversed their course (48% of all post-1990 departures and even 60% of 2003 and 2004 departures were former immigrants to Israel). 8% of Jewish immigrants in the post-1990 period left Israel, while 15% of non-Jewish immigrants did. In 2005 alone, 21,500 Israelis left the country and had not yet returned at the end of 2006; among them 73% were Jews, 5% Arabs, and 22% \"Others\" (mostly non-Jewish immigrants, with Jewish ancestry, from USSR). At the same time, 10,500 Israelis came back to Israel after over one year abroad; 84% were Jews, 9% Others, and 7% Arabs.\nAccording to the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics, as of 2005, 650,000 Israelis had left the country for over one year and not returned. Of them, 530,000 are still alive today. This number does not include the children born overseas. It should also be noted that Israeli law grants citizenship only to the first generation of children born to Israeli emigrants.\nFuture projections.\nIn June 2013, the Central Bureau of Statistics released a demographic report, projecting that Israel's population would grow to 11.4\u00a0million by 2035, with the Jewish population numbering 8.3\u00a0million, or 73% of the population, and the Arab population at 2.6\u00a0million, or 23%. This includes some 2.3\u00a0million Muslims (20% of the population), 185,000 Druze, and 152,000 Christians. The report predicts that the Israeli population growth rate will decline to 1.4% annually, with growth in the Muslim population remaining higher than the Jewish population until 2035, at which point the Jewish population will begin growing the fastest.\nIn 2017, the Central Bureau of Statistics projected that Israel's population would rise to about 18 million by 2059, including 14.4\u00a0million Jews and 3.6\u00a0million Arabs. Of the Jewish population, about 5.25\u00a0million would be Haredi. Overall, the forecast projected that 49% of the population would be either Haredi Jews (29%) or Arabs (20%). It also projected a population of 20 million in 2065. Jews and other non-Arabs are expected to compose 81% of the population in 2065, and Arabs 19%. About 32% of the population is expected to be Haredi.\nOther forecasts project that Israel could have a population as high as 23 million, or even 36\u00a0million, by 2050.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14690", "revid": "4711431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14690", "title": "Economy of Israel", "text": "The economy of Israel is a highly developed free-market economy. The prosperity of Israel's advanced economy allows the country to have a sophisticated welfare state, a powerful modern military said to possess a nuclear-weapons capability with a full nuclear triad, modern infrastructure equivalent to developed countries, and a high-technology sector competitively on par with Silicon Valley. It has the second-largest number of startup companies in the world after the United States, and the third-largest number of NASDAQ-listed companies after the U.S. and China. American companies, such as Intel, Microsoft, and Apple, built their first overseas research and development facilities in Israel. More than 400 high-tech multi-national corporations, such as IBM, Google, Hewlett-Packard, Cisco Systems, Facebook and Motorola have opened R&amp;D centers throughout the country. As of 2025, the IMF estimated Israel has the 25th largest economy in the world by nominal GDP, and one of the biggest economies in the Middle East.https://\nThe country's major economic sectors are high-technology and industrial manufacturing. The Israeli diamond industry is one of the world's centers for diamond cutting and polishing, amounting to 21% of all exports in 2017. As the country is relatively poor in natural resources, it consequently depends on imports of petroleum, raw materials, wheat, motor vehicles, uncut diamonds and production inputs. Nonetheless, the country's nearly total reliance on energy imports may change in the future as recent discoveries of natural gas reserves off its coast and the Israeli solar energy industry have taken a leading role in Israel's energy sector.\nIsrael's quality higher education and the establishment of a highly motivated and educated populace is largely responsible for ushering in the country's high technology boom and rapid economic development by regional standards. The country has developed a strong educational infrastructure and a high-quality business startup incubation system for promoting cutting edge new ideas to create value-driven goods and services. These developments have allowed the country to create a high concentration of high-tech companies across the country's regions. These companies are financially backed by a strong venture capital industry. Its central high technology hub, the \"Silicon Wadi\", is considered second in importance only to its Californian counterpart. Numerous Israeli companies have been acquired by global multinational corporations for their profit-driven technologies in addition to their reliable and quality corporate personnel.\nIn its early decades, the Israeli economy was largely state-controlled and shaped by social democratic ideas. In the 1970s and 1980s, the economy underwent a series of free-market reforms and was gradually liberalized. In the past three decades, the economy has grown considerably, though GDP per capita has increased faster than wages. Israel is the most developed and advanced country in West Asia, possessing the 17th largest foreign-exchange reserves in the world and the highest average wealth per adult in the Middle East (10th worldwide by financial assets per capita). Israel is the 9th largest arm exporter in the world and has the highest number of billionaires in the Middle East, ranked 18th in the world. In recent years, Israel has had among the highest GDP growth rates within the developed world along with Ireland. \"The Economist\" ranked Israel as the 4th most successful economy among developed countries for 2022. The IMF estimated Israel's GDP at US$564 billion and its GDP per capita at US$58,270 in 2023 (13th highest in the world), a figure comparable to other highly developed countries. Israel was invited to join the OECD in 2010. Israel has also signed free trade agreements with the European Union, the United States, the European Free Trade Association, Turkey, Mexico, Canada, Ukraine, Jordan, and Egypt. In 2007, Israel became the first non-Latin-American country to sign a free trade agreement with the Mercosur trade bloc.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe British Mandate for Palestine that came into effect in 1920 aimed at restricting land purchases by Jewish immigrants. For this reason, the Jewish population was initially more urban and had a higher share in industrial occupations. This particular development resulted economically in one of the few growth miracles of the region whereby the structure of firms was determined mainly by private businessmen rather than by the government.\nThe first survey of the Dead Sea in 1911, by the Russian Jewish businessman and engineer Moshe Novomeysky, led to the establishment of Palestine Potash Ltd. in 1930, later renamed the Dead Sea Works. In 1923, the businessman and hydraulic engineer Pinhas Rutenberg was granted an exclusive concession for the production and distribution of electric power. He founded the Palestine Electric Company, later the Israel Electric Corporation. Between 1920 and 1924, some of the country's largest factories were established, including the Shemen Oil Company, the Societe des Grand Moulins, the Palestine Silicate Company and the Palestine Salt Company.\nIn 1937, there were 86 spinning and weaving factories in the country, employing a workforce of 1,500. Capital and technical expertise were supplied by Jewish professionals from Europe. The Ata textile plant in Kiryat Ata, which went on to become an icon of the Israeli textile industry, was established in 1934. In 1939, the cornerstone was laid for one of the kibbutz industry's first factories: the Naaman brick factory, which supplied the growing need for construction materials.\nThe textile underwent rapid development during World War II, when supplies from Europe were cut off while local manufacturers were commissioned for army needs. By 1943, the number of factories had grown to 250, with a workforce of 5,630, and output increased tenfold.\nFrom 1924, trade fairs were held in Tel Aviv. The Levant Fair was inaugurated in 1932.\nAfter independence.\nAfter statehood, Israel faced a deep economic crisis. As well as having to recover from the devastating effects of the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, it also had to absorb hundreds of thousands of Jewish refugees from Europe and almost a million from the Arab world. Israel was financially overwhelmed and faced a deep economic crisis, which led to a policy of austerity from 1949 to 1959. Unemployment was high, and foreign currency reserves were scarce.\nIn 1952, Israel and West Germany signed an agreement stipulating that West Germany was to pay Israel to compensate for Jewish property stolen by the Nazis, material claims during the Holocaust, and absorption of refugees as a result. Over the next 14 years, West Germany paid Israel 3 billion marks (around US$714 million according to 1953\u20131955 conversion rates or equivalent to approximately US$7 billion in modern currency). The reparations became a decisive part of Israel's income, comprising as high as 87.5% of Israel's income in 1956. Israel never had any formal diplomatic relations with East Germany. In 1950, the Israeli government launched Israel Bonds for American and Canadian Jews to buy. In 1951, the final results of the bonds program exceeded $52 million. Additionally, many American Jews made private donations to Israel, which in 1956 were thought to amount to $100 million a year. In 1957, bond sales amounted to 35% of Israel's special development budget. Later in the century, Israel became significantly reliant on economic aid from the United States, a country that also became Israel's most important source of political support internationally.\nThe proceeds from these sources were invested in industrial and agricultural development projects, which allowed Israel to become economically self-sufficient. Among the projects made possible by the aid was the Hadera power plant, the Dead Sea Works, the National Water Carrier, port development in Haifa, Ashdod, and Eilat, desalination plants, and national infrastructure projects.\nAfter statehood, priority was given to establishing industries in areas slated for development, among them, Lachish, Ashkelon, the Negev and Galilee. The expansion of Israel's textile industry was a consequence of the development of cotton growing as a profitable agricultural branch. By the late 1960s, textiles were one of the largest industrial branches in Israel, second only to the foodstuff industry. Textiles constituted about 12% of industrial exports, becoming the second-largest export branch after polished diamonds. In the 1990s, cheap East Asian labor decreased the profitability of the sector. Much of the work was subcontracted to 400 Israeli Arab sewing shops. As these closed down, Israeli firms, among them Delta, Polgat, Argeman and Kitan, began doing their sewing work in Jordan and Egypt, usually under the QIZ arrangement. In the early 2000s, Israeli companies had 30 plants in Jordan. Israeli exports reached $370\u00a0million a year, supplying such retailers and designers as Marks &amp; Spencer, The Gap, Victoria's Secret, Walmart, Sears, Ralph Lauren, Calvin Klein, and Donna Karan.\nIn its first two decades of existence, Israel's strong commitment to development led to economic growth rates that exceeded 10% annually. Between 1950 and 1963, the expenditure among wage-earner's families rose 97% in real terms. Between 1955 and 1966, per capita consumption rose by 221%. In the 1970s, investment began to shift from agriculture and basic infrastructure to industry and defense programs. These latter investments would later become the foundation of Israel's technology sector. The years after the 1973 Yom Kippur War were a lost decade economically, as growth stalled, inflation soared and government expenditures rose significantly. Also worthy of mention is the 1983 Bank stock crisis. By 1984, the economic situation became almost catastrophic with inflation reaching an annual rate close to 450% and projected to reach over 1000% by the end of the following year. However, the successful economic stabilization plan implemented in 1985 and the subsequent introduction of market-oriented structural reforms reinvigorated the economy and paved the way for its rapid growth in the 1990s and became a model for other countries facing similar economic crises.\nTwo developments have helped to transform Israel's economy since the beginning of the 1990s. The first is waves of Jewish immigration, predominantly from the countries of the former USSR, that has brought over one million new citizens to Israel. These new Soviet Jewish immigrants, many of them highly educated, had a wellspring of scientific and technical expertise to help spur Israel's burgeoning technology sector, now constitute some 15% of Israel's population. The second development benefiting the Israeli economy is the peace process that begun at the Madrid conference of October 1991, which led to the signing of accords and later to a peace treaty between Israel and Jordan (1994).\nDuring the early 2000s, the Israeli economy went into a downturn due to the crashing of the global dot-com bubble which bankrupted many startups established during the height of the bubble. The Second Intifada, which cost Israel billions of dollars in security costs, and a decline in investment and tourism, sent unemployment in Israel to the double digits; growth in one quarter of 2000 was 10%. In 2002, the Israeli economy declined about 4% in one quarter. Afterward, Israel managed to create a remarkable recovery by opening up new markets to Israeli exporters farther afield, such as in the rapidly growing countries of East Asia. This was possible thanks to a rebound in the Israeli tech sector, spurred on by the gradual bottoming out of the dotcom crash and a growing increase in demand for computer software, which in turn was due to burgeoning rates of global internet usage at this time. The explosion in demand for security and defense products following 9/11 also allowed Israel to sell even more of its technologies abroad \u2013 a situation only made possible due to Israel's prior investments in the technology sector in an effort to curb high levels of domestic unemployment.\nIn the 2000s, there was an influx of foreign investment in Israel from companies that formerly shunned the Israeli market. In 2006, foreign investment in Israel totalled $13\u00a0billion, according to the Manufacturers Association of Israel. The \"Financial Times\" said that \"bombs drop, yet Israel's economy grows\". Moreover, while Israel's total gross external debt is US$95\u00a0billion, or approximately 41.6% of GDP, since 2001 it has become a net lender nation in terms of net external debt (the total value of assets vs. liabilities in debt instruments owed abroad), which as of \u00a02012[ [update]] stood at a significant surplus of US$60\u00a0billion. The country also maintains a current account surplus in an amount equivalent to about 3% of its gross domestic product in 2010. In 2023, Israel's account surplus was 25.3 billion U.S. dollars.\nThe Israeli economy weathered and withstood the late-2000s recession, registering positive GDP growth in 2009 and ending the decade with an unemployment rate lower than that of many of its Western counterparts. There are several reasons behind this economic resilience, for example, the fact that the country is a net lender rather than a borrower nation and the government and the Bank of Israel's generally conservative macro-economic policies. Two policies, in particular, can be cited, one is the refusal of the government to succumb to pressure by the banks to appropriate large sums of public money to aid them early in the crisis, thus limiting their risky behavior. The second is the implementation of the recommendations of the Bach'ar commission in the early to mid-2000s which recommended decoupling the banks' depository- and Investment banking activities, contrary to the then-opposite trend, particularly in the United States, of easing such restrictions which had the effect of encouraging more risk-taking in the financial systems of those countries. American investors today make up the most significant portion of investors in Israel.\nOECD membership.\nIn May 2007, Israel was invited to open accession discussions with the OECD. In May 2010, the OECD voted unanimously to invite Israel to join, despite Palestinian objections. It became a full member on 7 September 2010. The OECD praised Israel's scientific and technological progress and described it as having \"produced outstanding outcomes on a world scale.\"\nChallenges.\nDespite economic prosperity, the Israeli economy faces many challenges, some short-term and some long-term. In the short term, its inability to duplicate its success in the telecommunication industry in other growing industries hampers its economic outlook. Its inability to foster large multinational companies in the last decade also calls into question its ability to employ many people in advanced industries. On the long term, Israel is facing challenges of high dependency on the growing number of Ultra-Orthodox Jews, who have a low level of official labor force participation among men. This situation could lead to a materially lower employment-to-population ratio and a higher dependency ratio in the future. The governor of the Bank of Israel, Stanley Fischer, stated that the growing poverty amongst the Ultra-Orthodox is hurting the Israeli economy. According to the data published by Ian Fursman, 60% of the poor households in Israel are of the Haredi Jews and the Israeli Arabs. Together, these two groups represent 25\u201328% of the Israeli population. Organizations such as The Kemach Foundation, Gvahim, Jerusalem Village, and The Jerusalem Business Networking Forum are addressing these challenges with job placement services and networking events.\nWealth Migrate.\nThe 2024 Henley &amp; Partners Report, indicates that around 1,700 millionaires have departed the country since 2023, seeking investment migration opportunities to mitigate risks and explore alternative residency options. The report announced a remarkable 232% increase in investment migration applications from Israeli citizens in 2023. Factors driving this trend include a 5% depreciation in the shekel's value against the US dollar, a 10% decline in real estate prices in Tel Aviv, Israel's growing international isolation, and the financial pressure resulting from the war in 2023.\nRed Sea crisis.\nThe Red Sea crisis caused by the Houthi attacks has severely affected the Israeli economy, disrupting shipping routes, increasing costs, and causing job losses. The port of Eilat, Israel's southern gateway, has suffered almost shut down and bankruptcy, leading to requests for government support. Half of the port's workers were at risk of losing their jobs. Many ships are avoiding the Red Sea and rerouting around Africa, which makes the journey three weeks longer and more expensive. Insurance costs for ships in the Red Sea surged, with some Israeli ships seeing a 250% increase or being denied coverage altogether.\n2023 Israeli judicial reform.\nFollowing the 2023 Israeli judicial reform, banks in the country experienced a significant surge in fund withdrawals, occurring at a rate ten times higher than normal. Executives warned that these political changes could adversely affect the economy, resulting in a decline in the shekel's value and a loss of investor confidence. A report from The Times of Israel on March 5, 2023, noted that as the shekel depreciated against the dollar and euro, the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange fell compared to stock markets in the EU and the US. Numerous companies, particularly in the technology sector, have withdrawn their investments from Israel, leading to an outflow of over $4 billion in just a few weeks.\nGaza war (2023\u2013present).\nAfter the Gaza war began on 7 October 2023, the Israeli stock markets and currency nosedived. It is estimated that Israel would lose around $400 billion in the next decade and experience a significant economic shock. Ninety percent of this will result from indirect consequences such as reduced investment, labor market disruptions, and hindered productivity growth. On August 2024, Fitch Ratings downgraded Israel's credit rating. The Bank of Israel has counted war-related costs from 2023 to 2025 at up to $55.6 billion. Another consequence of the war was that consumer spending dropped by 27%, imports fell by 42%, and exports declined by 18%.\nOn 19 July 2024, the International Court of Justice released an important advisory opinion stating that countries must not recognize, assist, or support the illegal circumstances arising from Israel's occupation of Palestinian territories. The court declared that all nations must avoid any economic or trade relations with Israel concerning the Occupied Palestinian territories (OPT) or any areas that could reinforce its unlawful presence there. Additionally, it emphasized the need to take steps to prevent trade or investment activities that contribute to sustaining the illegal situation established by Israel in the OPT. \nOn May 26, 2023, the European Trade Union Confederation (ETUC), which represents over 45 million workers and their trade unions across Europe, announced a boycott of products made in illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories. The ETUC emphasized the need for regulatory measures to ban the import and export of goods produced in these illicit settlements by entities within the European Union, as stipulated by EU treaties and international law.\nIran-Israel war.\nAccording to preliminary estimates by the Central Bureau of Statistics, the Israeli economy contracted by 3.5 percent in the April-June quarter of 2025, as the war with Iran shut down many businesses and negatively impacted consumer spending, exports, and investment. Trade reportedly contracted by 6.2 percent during this period. However, the first economic contraction of 2.8 percent occurred in the last quarter of 2023, coinciding with the war in Gaza.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2022\u20132027). Inflation under 5% is in green.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSectors.\nAgriculture.\nIn 2017, 2.4% of the country's GDP is derived from agriculture. Of a total labor force of 2.7\u00a0million, 2.6% are employed in agricultural production while 6.3% in services for agriculture. While Israel imports substantial quantities of grain (approximately 80% of local consumption), it is largely self-sufficient in other agricultural products and foodstuffs. For centuries, farmers of the region have grown varieties of citrus fruits, such as grapefruit, oranges and lemons. Citrus fruits are still Israel's major agricultural export. In addition, Israel is one of the world's leading greenhouse-food-exporting countries. Israel also produces and exports flowers and cotton. The country exports more than $1.3 billion worth of agricultural products every year, including farm produce as well as $1.2 billion worth of agricultural inputs and technology. Israeli technological innovations in agriculture and water technology have given the Israeli AgTech sector a competitive edge and allows Israeli agtech companies to operate in numerous countries around the world.\nAutomobile.\n\"The Sussita\" (Hebrew: \u05e1\u05d5\u05e1\u05d9\u05ea\u05d0) was an Israeli automobile manufactured by Autocars Co. between 1960 and 1978, initially in Haifa and later in Tirat Carmel. Produced in station wagon, commercial van, and pickup truck versions, the Sussita became an iconic symbol of early Israeli industry and is now considered a collector's item, alongside the sports car Sabra, also produced by Autocars Co. \nFinancial services.\nIsrael has over 100 active venture capital funds operating throughout the country with US$10 billion under management. In 2004, international foreign funds from various nations around the world committed over 50 percent of the total dollars invested exemplifying the country's strong and sound reputation as an internationally sought after foreign investment by many countries. Israel's venture capital sector has rapidly developed from the early 1990s, and has about 70 active venture capital funds (VC), of which 14 international VCs have Israeli offices. Israel's thriving venture capital and business-incubator industry played an important role in financing the country's flourishing high-tech sector. In 2008, venture capital investment in Israel, rose 19 percent to $1.9\u00a0billion.\n\"Between 1991 and 2000, Israel's annual venture-capital outlays, nearly all private, rose nearly 60-fold, from $58\u00a0million to $3.3\u00a0billion; companies launched by Israeli venture funds rose from 100 to 800; and Israel's information-technology revenues rose from $1.6\u00a0billion to $12.5\u00a0billion. By 1999, Israel ranked second only to the United States in invested private-equity capital as a share of GDP. Israel led the world in the share of its growth attributable to high-tech ventures: 70 percent.\"\nIsrael's thriving venture capital industry has played an important role in funding the country's booming high-technology sector, with hundreds of prosperous Israeli private equity and venture capital firms. The 2008 financial crisis negatively affected the availability of venture capital locally. In 2009, there were 63 mergers and acquisitions in the Israeli market worth a total of $2.54 billion; 7% below 2008 levels ($2.74 billion), when 82 Israeli companies were merged or acquired, and 33% lower than 2007 proceeds ($3.79 billion) when 87 Israeli companies were merged or acquired. Numerous Israeli high tech companies have been acquired by various global multinational corporations for their ability to produce profit-driven technologies in addition to their arsenal of reliable corporate management and quality administrative personnel. In addition to venture capital funds, many of the world's leading investment banks, pension funds, and insurance companies have a strong presence in Israel committing their funds to financially back Israeli high-tech firms and benefit from its prosperous high tech sector. These institutional investors include Goldman Sachs, Bear Stearns, Deutsche Bank, JP Morgan, Credit Suisse First Boston, Merrill Lynch, CalPERS, Ontario Teachers Pension Plan, and AIG.\nIsrael also has a small but fast growing hedge fund industry. Within five years between 2007 and 2012, the number of active hedge funds doubled to 60. Israel-based hedge funds have registered an increase of 162% from 2006 to 2012, when they managed a total of $2 billion (\u20aa8 billion) and employed about 300 people. The ever-growing hedge fund industry in Israel is also attracting a myriad of investors from around the world, particularly from the United States.\nIn 2022, Tel Aviv was ranked 53rd on the Global Financial Centres Index.\nIn 2023, despite the occurrence of war and significant events like a legal reform and interest rate rise that shook the capital market and created uncertainty, about 40% of the companies traded on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange continued to distribute dividends to their shareholders. This was particularly evident in the energy, oil and gas industries, and in the banking and financial services sector. The year marked a record in the total dividend distributed to public shareholders, with about 62% of the distributed amount (16.8 billion shekels), compared to about 55% of the dividends (15.8 billion shekels) in 2022, with the remainder being paid to stakeholders. The average dividend yield of the exchange-listed companies in 2023 was approximately 2.9%, compared to about 2.8% in the previous year. This was the highest return since 2017 and higher than that of 2022, the record year, as the average market value in 2023 was about 9% lower than in 2022, while the total dividend was only about 5% lower than the previous year.\nHigh technology.\nScience and technology in Israel is one of the country's most highly developed and industrialized sectors. The modern Israeli ecosystem of high technology is highly optimized making up a significant bulk of the Israeli economy. The percentage of Israelis engaged in scientific and technological inquiry, and the amount spent on research and development (R&amp;D) concerning gross domestic product (GDP), is among the highest in the world, with 140 scientists and technicians per 10,000 employees. In comparison, the same is 85 per 10,000 in the United States and 83 per 10,000 in Japan. Israel ranks fourth in the world in scientific activity, as measured by the number of scientific publications per million citizens. Israel's percentage of the total number of scientific articles published worldwide is almost 10 times higher than its percentage of the world's population. The country is home to over 1,400 life science companies, including about 300 pharmaceutical companies, 600 medical device companies, 450 digital health companies, and 468 biotechnology companies. Israeli scientists, engineers, and technicians have contributed to the modern advancement of the natural sciences, agricultural sciences, computer sciences, electronics, genetics, medicine, optics, solar energy and various fields of engineering. The country has one of the world's technologically most literate populations. Israel has the second largest number of startup companies globally, behind only the United States, and remains one of the largest centers in the world for technology start-up enterprises. As of 2013, around 200 start-ups were being created annually in Israel. In 2019, there were nearly 7,000 active start-ups operating throughout the country. In 2021, there were 79 Israeli-established tech unicorns, with 32 of them headquartered in Israel. More than one-third of cybersecurity unicorns in the world were Israeli in 2021. Israel is also home to nearly 400 research and development centers owned by various multinational companies, including prominent high-technology giants such as Google, Microsoft, and Intel.\nIsrael is also a major semiconductor design hub. The country is home to numerous chip design centers owned by major multinational corporations, and is considered as having one of the most advanced chip design industries in the world. In 2021, a total of 37 multinational corporations were operating in Israel in the semiconductor field.\nIn 1998, Tel Aviv was named by \"Newsweek\" as one of the ten technologically most influential cities in the world. In 2012, the city was also named one of the best places for high-tech startup companies, placed second behind its California counterpart.\nIn 2013, \"The Boston Globe\" ranked Tel Aviv as the second-best city for business start-ups, after Silicon Valley. In 2020, StartupBlink ranked Israel as having the third best startup ecosystem in the world, behind only the United States and United Kingdom.\nAs a result of the country's highly prolific and dynamic start-up culture, Israel is often referred to as the \"Start-Up Nation.\" and the \"Silicon Valley of the Middle East\". Programs that send people to Israel to explore the \"Start-Up Nation\" economy include TAVtech Ventures and TAMID Group. This success has been attributed by some to widespread service in the Israel Defense Forces and its development of talent which then fuels the high-tech industry upon discharge.\nIn recent years, the industry has faced a shortage of technology specialists; 15% of positions in the high technology sector of Israel were unfilled as of 2019. However, the largest number of unfilled job positions (31%) are in software engineering specialities: DevOps, back-end, data science, machine learning and artificial intelligence. Therefore, salaries of specialists in the Israeli market also increased significantly. To solve this problem, IT companies look for filling the gaps abroad. Consequently, they employ about 25% of their entire workforce overseas. Most companies choose to hire employees from Ukraine (45%) and the United States (with 16%) are the second most popular offshoring destination country. In 2017, the Council for Higher Education in Israel launched a five-year program to increase the number of graduates from computer science and engineering programs by 40%.\nEnergy.\nHistorically, Israel relied on external imports for meeting most of its energy needs, spending an amount equivalent to over 5% of its GDP per year in 2009 on imports of energy products. The transportation sector relies mainly on gasoline and diesel fuel, while the majority of electricity production is generated using imported coal. As of 2013, Israel was importing about 100 mln barrels of oil per year. The country possesses negligible reserves of crude oil but does have domestic natural gas resources which were discovered in more significant quantities starting in 2009, after many decades of previously unsuccessful exploration.\nNatural gas.\nUntil the early 2000s, natural gas use in Israel was minimal. In the late 1990s, the government of Israel decided to encourage the usage of natural gas because of environmental, cost, and resource diversification reasons. At the time however, there were no domestic sources of natural gas and the expectation was that gas would be supplied from overseas in the form of LNG and by a future pipeline from Egypt (which eventually became the Arish\u2013Ashkelon pipeline). Plans were made for the Israel Electric Corporation to construct several natural gas-driven power plants, for erecting a national gas distribution grid, and for an LNG import terminal.\nRecent discoveries.\nIn 2000, a 33-billion-cubic-metre (BCM), or 1,200-billion-cubic-foot, natural-gas field was located offshore Ashkelon, with commercial production starting in 2004. As of 2014[ [update]] however, this field is nearly depleted\u2014earlier than expected due to increased pumping to partially compensate for the loss of imported Egyptian gas in the wake of unrest associated with the fall of the Mubarak regime in 2011. In 2009, a significant gas find named Tamar, with proven reserves of 223 BCM or (307 BCM total proven + probable) was located in deep water approximately west of Haifa, as well as a smaller 15 BCM () field situated nearer the coastline. Furthermore, results of 3D seismic surveys and test drilling conducted since 2010 have confirmed that an estimated 621 BCM () natural-gas deposit named Leviathan exists in a large underwater geological formation nearby the large gas field already discovered in 2009.\nThe Tamar field began commercial production on 30 March 2013 after four years of development. The supply of gas from Tamar was expected to aid the Israeli economy, which had suffered losses of more than \u20aa20 billion, , between 2011 and 2013, resulting from the disruption of gas supplies from neighboring Egypt (and which are not expected to resume due to Egypt's decision to indefinitely suspend its gas supply agreement to Israel). As a result, Israel, as well as its other neighbor Jordan, which also suffered from disruption of gas deliveries from Egypt, had to resort to importing significantly more expensive and polluting liquid heavy fuels as substitute sources of energy. The ensuing energy crisis in Israel was lifted once the Tamar field came online in 2013, while Jordan committed to a US$10 billion, 15-year gas supply deal totaling 45 BCM from the Israeli Leviathan field which is scheduled to come online in late 2019. The agreement is estimated to save Jordan US$600 million per year in energy costs. In 2018, the owners of the Tamar and Leviathan fields announced that they are negotiating an agreement with a consortium of Egyptian firms for the supply of up to 64 BCM of gas over 10 years valued at up to US$15 billion. In early 2012 the Israeli cabinet announced plans to set up a sovereign wealth fund (called \"the Israeli Citizens' Fund\").\nElectricity.\nSince the founding of the state through the mid-2010s decade, the state-owned utility, Israel Electric Corporation (IEC) had an effective monopoly on power generation in the country. In 2010 the company sold 52,037\u00a0GWh of electricity. Until the mid-2010s the country also faced a persistently low operating reserve, which is mostly the result of Israel being an \"electricity island\". Most countries have the capability of relying on power drawn from producers in adjacent countries in the event of a power shortage. Israel's grid however, is unconnected to those of neighboring countries. This is mostly due to political reasons but also to the considerably less-developed nature of the power systems of Jordan and Egypt, whose systems constantly struggle to meet domestic demand and whose per-capita electric generation is less than one fifth that of Israel's. Nevertheless, while operating reserves in Israel were low, the country possessed sufficient generation and transmission capacity to meet domestic electricity needs and unlike in the countries surrounding it, rolling blackouts have historically been quite rare, even at periods of extreme demand.\nFacing the increasing demand for electricity and concerned about the low reserve situation, the government of Israel began taking steps to increase the supply of electricity and operating reserve, as well to reduce the monopoly position of the IEC and increase competition in the electricity market starting in the second half of the 2000s decade. It instructed the IEC to construct several new power stations and encouraged private investment in the generation sector. By 2015, the IEC's share of total nationwide installed electric generation capacity had fallen to about 75%, with the company then possessing an installed generation capacity of about 13.6 gigawatts (GW). Since 2010, Independent Power Producers have constructed three new gas-fired combined cycle power stations with a total generation capacity of about 2.2 GW, while various industrial concerns constructed on-premises cogeneration facilities with a total electricity output of about 1 GW, and which are licensed by the electric authority to sell surplus electricity to the national grid at competitive rates. Also under construction is a 300 MW pumped storage facility, with two more in planning, plus several solar-powered plants.\nIn addition to the above steps, Israel and Cyprus are considering implementing the proposed EuroAsia Interconnector project. This consists of laying a 2000MW HVDC undersea power cable between them and between Cyprus and Greece, thus connecting Israel to the greater European power grid. If carried out, this will allow a further increase in the country's operating reserve as well as sell surplus electricity abroad.\nIn 2016, total nationwide electricity production was 67.2 GWh, of which 55.2% was generated using natural gas and 43.8% using coal \u2013 the first time the share of electricity production using natural gas exceeded that generated using coal.\nSolar power.\nSolar power in Israel and the Israeli solar energy industry has a history that dates to the founding of the country. In the 1950s, Levi Yissar developed a solar water heater to help assuage an energy shortage in the new country. By 1967 around one in twenty households heated their water with the sun and 50,000 solar heaters had been sold. With the 1973 oil crisis, Harry Zvi Tabor, the father of Israel's solar industry, developed the prototype solar water heater that is now used in over 90% of Israeli homes.\nIndustrial manufacturing.\nIsrael has a large industrial capacity. It has a well-developed chemical industry with many of its products aimed at the export market. Most of the chemical plants are located in Ramat Hovav, the Haifa Bay area and near the Dead Sea. Israel Chemicals is one of the largest fertilizer and chemical companies in Israel and its subsidiary, the Dead Sea Works in Sdom is the world's fourth-largest producer and supplier of potash products. The company also produces other products such as magnesium chloride, industrial salts, de-icers, bath salts, table salt, and raw materials for the cosmetic industry. Industrial production of metals, machinery and electrical equipment, construction materials, consumer goods, and textiles, as well as food processing also form a significant part of the manufacturing sector. Machinery and equipment manufactured in Israel includes computer equipment, medical equipment, agricultural equipment, and robots. Israel has a successful semiconductor device fabrication industry, with several semiconductor manufacturing facilities in the country.\nOne of the country's largest employers is Israel Aerospace Industries which produces mainly aviation, space, and defense products. In 2017 the company had an order backlog of 11.4 billion US dollars. There are numerous other aerospace companies. Israeli aerospace companies are primarily sub-suppliers, focusing on fields such as machining, electronic systems and components, and composite materials. Israel is a major manufacturer and exporter of unmanned aerial vehicles. Israel also has a significant pharmaceutical industry and is home to Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, one of the world's largest pharmaceutical companies, which employed 40,000 people as of 2011. It specializes in generic and proprietary pharmaceuticals and active pharmaceutical ingredients. It is the largest generic drug manufacturer in the world and one of the 15 largest pharmaceutical companies worldwide. In addition, Israel also has a shipbuilding industry through the company Israel Shipyards, which has one of the largest shipbuilding and repair facilities in the Eastern Mediterranean. For the civilian market, it builds merchant ships and other civilian watercraft as well as machinery for ports and heavy industries. It also builds naval craft for the defense market.\nDiamond industry.\nIsrael is one of the world's three major centers for polished diamonds, alongside Belgium and India. Israel's net polished diamond exports slid 22.8 percent in 2012 as polished diamond exports fell to $5.56 billion from $7.2 billion in 2011. Net exports of rough diamonds dropped 20.1 percent to $2.8 billion and net exports of polished diamonds slipped 24.9 percent to $4.3 billion, while net rough diamond imports dropped 12.9 percent to $3.8 billion. Net exports and imports dropped during the Great Recession, particularly within the Eurozone, affected by the European sovereign-debt crisis, and the United States. The United States is the largest market accounting for 36% of overall export market for polished diamonds while Hong Kong remains at second with 28 percent and Belgium at 8 percent coming in third. As of 2016[ [update]], cut diamonds were Israel's largest export product, comprising 23.2% of all exports.\nDefense contracting.\nIsrael is one of the world's major exporters of military equipment, accounting for 10% of the world total in 2007. Three Israeli companies were listed on the 2010 Stockholm International Peace Research Institute index of the world's top 100 arms-producing and military service companies: Elbit Systems, Israel Aerospace Industries and RAFAEL. The Defense industry in Israel is a strategically important sector and a large employer within the country. It is also a major player in the global arms market and is the 11th largest arms exporter in the world as of 2012. Total arms transfer agreements topped 12.9 billion between 2004 and 2011. Israeli defense equipment exports have reached 7 billion U.S. dollars in 2012, making it a 20 percent increase from the amount of defense-related exports in 2011. Much of the exports are sold to the United States and Europe. Other major regions that purchase Israeli defense equipment include Southeast Asia and Latin America. India is also major country for Israeli arms exports and has remained Israel's largest arms market in the world. Israel is considered to be the leading UAV exporter in the world. According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, Israeli defense companies were behind 41% of all drones exported in 2001\u20132011. Israel's defense exports in 2021 reached US$11.2 billion in sales. Exports to Arab countries that joined the Abraham Accords made up 7% of all Israeli defense exports.\nTourism.\nIsrael is a major tourist destination, especially for those of Jewish ancestry, with 4.55 million foreign tourists visiting the country in 2019 (about one tourist per two Israelis), yielding a 25% growth since 2016 and contributed \u20aa20 billion to the economy, making it an all-time record at that time. The most popular paid visited site is Masada.\nExternal trade.\nIn 2016, Israeli goods exports totaled US$55.8 billion. It imported US$61.9 billion worth of goods in the same year. In 2017 total exports (goods and services) amounted to US$102.3 billion, while imports totaled $96.7 billion.\nIsrael usually posts a modest trade deficit in goods. Its main goods imports consist of raw materials, crude oil, production inputs and finished consumer goods. Most of its exports are high-value-added items such as electronic components and other high-technology equipment, tools, and machinery, cut diamonds, refined petrochemicals, and pharmaceuticals. It normally posts a substantial trade surplus in services thanks to tourism and service industries such as software development, engineering services, and biomedical and scientific research and development. Therefore, overall external trade is positive, contributing to a significant current account surplus which as of 2017 stood at 4.7% of GDP.\nThe United States is Israel's largest trading partner, and Israel is the United States' 26th-largest trading partner; two-way trade totaled some $24.5\u00a0billion in 2010, up from $12.7\u00a0billion in 1997. The principal U.S. exports to Israel include computers, integrated circuits, aircraft parts and other defense equipment, wheat, and automobiles. Israel's chief exports to the U.S. include cut diamonds, jewelry, integrated circuits, printing machinery, and telecommunications equipment. The two countries signed a free trade agreement (FTA) in 1985 that progressively eliminated tariffs on most goods traded between the two countries over the following ten years. An agricultural trade accord was signed in November 1996, which addressed the remaining goods not covered in the FTA. Some non-tariff barriers and tariffs on goods remain, however. Israel also has trade and cooperation agreements in place with the European Union and Canada, and is seeking to conclude such agreements with a number of other countries, including Turkey, Jordan and several countries in Eastern Europe.\nIn regional terms, the European Union is the top destination for Israeli exports. In the four-month period between October 2011 and January 2012, Israel exported goods totalling $5 billion to the EU \u2013 amounting to 35% of Israel's overall exports. During the same period, Israeli exports to East Asia and the Far East totaled some $3.1 billion.\nUntil 1995, Israel's trade with the Arab world was minimal due to the Arab League boycott, which was begun against the Jewish community of Palestine in 1945. Arab nations not only refused to have direct trade with Israel (the primary boycott), but they also refused to do business with any corporation that operated in Israel (secondary boycott), or any corporation that did business with a corporation that did business with Israel (tertiary boycott).\nIn 2013, commercial trade between Israel and the Palestinian territories were valued at US$20 billion annually.\nIn 2012, ten companies were responsible for 47.7% of Israel's exports. These companies were Intel Israel, Elbit Systems, Oil Refineries Ltd, Teva Pharmaceuticals, Iscar, Israel Chemicals, Makhteshim Agan, Paz Oil Company, Israel Aerospace Industries and the Indigo division of Hewlett-Packard. The Bank of Israel and Israel's Export Institute have warned that the country is too dependent on a small number of exporters.\nRankings.\nThe Global Competitiveness Report of 2016 to 2017 ranked Israel as having the world's second most innovative economy. It was also ranked 19th among 189 world nations on the UN's Human Development Index. As of 2018, Israel ranks 20th out of 133 countries on the economic complexity index. The IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook of 2016 ranked Israel's economy as world 21st most competitive out of the 61 economies surveyed. The Israeli economy was ranked as the world's most durable economy in the face of crises, and was also ranked first in the rate research and development center investments. The Bank of Israel was ranked first among central banks for its efficient functioning, up from the 8th place in 2009. Israel was ranked first also in its supply of skilled manpower. Israeli companies, particularly in the high-tech area, have enjoyed considerable success raising money on Wall Street and other world financial markets: as of 2010[ [update]] Israel ranked second among foreign countries in the number of its companies listed on U.S. stock exchanges.\nHaving moved away from the socialist economic model since the mid-1980s and early 1990s, Israel has made dramatic moves toward the free-market capitalist paradigm. As of 2020[ [update]], Israel's economic freedom score is 74.0, making its economy the 26th freest in the 2020 Index of Economic Freedom. Israel ranks 35th on the World Bank's ease of doing business index. Israel's economic competitiveness is helped by strong protection of property rights, relatively low corruption levels, and high openness to global trade and investment. Income and corporate tax rates remain relatively high. As of 2020[ [update]], Israel ranks 35th out of 179 countries in Transparency International's Corruption Perceptions Index. Bribery and other forms of corruption are illegal in Israel, which is a signatory to the OECD Bribery Convention since 2008.\nIn April 2024, one of the three leading US credit rating agencies, Fitch, issued a warning that the Gaza war could result in a significant decline in Israel's credit metrics. In August 2024, Fitch downgraded Israel's credit rating. The credit rating of Israel was downgraded to Baa1 by another agency, Moody's, in the upcoming month. In October 2024, Israel was also downgraded by the third agency, S&amp;P.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14693", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14693", "title": "Israel/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "14696", "revid": "6488475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14696", "title": "Israeli Declaration of Independence", "text": "1948 establishment of a Jewish state\nThe Israeli Declaration of Independence, formally the Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel (), was proclaimed on 14 May 1948 (5 Iyar 5708), at the end of the civil war phase and beginning of the international phase of the 1948 Palestine war, by David Ben-Gurion, the executive head of the World Zionist Organization and chairman of the Jewish Agency for Palestine.\nIt declared the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine (or the Land of Israel in the Jewish tradition), to be known as the State of Israel, which would come into effect on termination of the British Mandate at midnight that day. The event is celebrated annually in Israel as Independence Day, a national holiday on 5 Iyar of every year according to the Hebrew calendar. Palestinians view the declaration of independence as marking the start of the Nakba and commemorate it annually on May 15 as Nakba Day.\nBackground.\nThe possibility of a Jewish homeland in Palestine had been a goal of Zionist organisations since the late 19th century. In 1917 British foreign secretary Arthur Balfour stated in a letter to British Jewish community leader Walter, Lord Rothschild that:\nHis Majesty's government view with favour the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people, and will use their best endeavours to facilitate the achievement of this object, it being clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine, or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country.\nThrough this letter, which became known as the Balfour Declaration, British government policy officially endorsed Zionism. After World War I, the United Kingdom was given a mandate for Palestine, which it had conquered from the Ottomans during the war. In 1937 the Peel Commission suggested partitioning Mandate Palestine into an Arab state and a Jewish state, though the proposal was rejected as unworkable by the government and was at least partially to blame for the renewal of the 1936\u201339 Arab revolt.\nIn the face of increasing violence after World War II, the British handed the issue over to the recently established United Nations. The result was Resolution 181(II), a plan to partition Palestine into \"Independent Arab and Jewish States and the Special International Regime for the City of Jerusalem\". The Jewish state was to receive around 56% of the land area of Mandate Palestine, encompassing 82% of the Jewish population, though it would be separated from Jerusalem. The plan was accepted by most of the Jewish population, but rejected by much of the Arab populace. On 29 November 1947, the resolution to recommend to the \"United Kingdom, as the mandatory Power for Palestine, and to all other Members of the United Nations the adoption and implementation, with regard to the future government of Palestine, of the Plan of Partition with Economic Union\" was put to a vote in the United Nations General Assembly.\nThe result was 33 to 13 in favour of the resolution, with 10 abstentions. Resolution 181(II): \"PART I: Future constitution and government of Palestine: A. TERMINATION OF MANDATE, PARTITION AND INDEPENDENCE: Clause 3\" provides:Independent Arab and Jewish States and the Special International Regime for the City of Jerusalem, ... shall come into existence in Palestine two months after the evacuation of the armed forces of the mandatory Power has been completed but in any case not later than 1 October 1948.\nThe Arab countries (all of which had opposed the plan) proposed to query the International Court of Justice on the competence of the General Assembly to partition a country, but the resolution was rejected.\nDrafting the text.\nThe first draft of the declaration was made by Zvi Berenson, the legal advisor of the Histadrut trade union and later a Justice of the Supreme Court, at the request of Pinchas Rosen. A revised second draft was made by three lawyers, Mordechai Baham, Uri Yadin and Zvi Eli Baker, and was framed by a committee including David Remez, Pinchas Rosen, Haim-Moshe Shapira, Moshe Sharett and Aharon Zisling. A second committee meeting, which included David Ben-Gurion, Yehuda Leib Maimon, Sharett and Zisling produced the final text.\nMinhelet HaAm Vote.\nOn 12 May 1948, the Minhelet HaAm (, lit. \"People's Administration\") was convened to vote on declaring independence. Three of the thirteen members were absent, with Yehuda Leib Maimon and Yitzhak Gruenbaum being blocked in besieged Jerusalem, while Yitzhak-Meir Levin was in the United States.\nThe meeting started at 13:45 and ended after midnight. The decision was between accepting the American proposal for a truce, or declaring independence. The latter option was put to a vote, with six of the ten members present supporting it:\nChaim Weizmann, the Chairman of the World Zionist Organization, and soon to be first President of Israel, endorsed the decision, after reportedly asking \"What are they waiting for, the idiots?\"\nFinal wording.\nThe draft text was submitted for approval to a meeting of Moetzet HaAm at the JNF building in Tel Aviv on 14 May. The meeting started at 13:50 and ended at 15:00, an hour before the declaration was due to be made. Despite ongoing disagreements, members of the Council unanimously voted in favour of the final text. During the process, there were two major debates, centering on the issues of borders and religion.\nBorders.\nThe borders were not specified in the Declaration, although its 14th paragraph indicated a readiness to cooperate in the implementation of the UN Partition Plan. The original draft had declared that the borders would be decided by the UN partition plan. While this was supported by Rosen and Bechor-Shalom Sheetrit, it was opposed by Ben-Gurion and Zisling, with Ben-Gurion stating, \"We accepted the UN Resolution, but the Arabs did not. They are preparing to make war on us. If we defeat them and capture western Galilee or territory on both sides of the road to Jerusalem, these areas will become part of the state. Why should we obligate ourselves to accept boundaries that in any case the Arabs don't accept?\" The inclusion of the designation of borders in the text was dropped after the provisional government of Israel, the Minhelet HaAm, voted 5\u20134 against it. The Revisionists, committed to a Jewish state on both sides of the Jordan River (that is, including Transjordan), wanted the phrase \"within its historic borders\" included, but were unsuccessful.\nReligion.\nThe second major issue was over the inclusion of God in the last section of the document, with the draft using the phrase \"and placing our trust in the Almighty\". The two rabbis, Shapira and Yehuda Leib Maimon, argued for its inclusion, saying that it could not be omitted, with Shapira supporting the wording \"God of Israel\" or \"the Almighty and Redeemer of Israel\". It was strongly opposed by Zisling, a member of the secularist Mapam. In the end the phrase \"Rock of Israel\" was used, which could be interpreted as either referring to God, or the land of Eretz Israel, Ben-Gurion saying \"Each of us, in his own way, believes in the 'Rock of Israel' as he conceives it. I should like to make one request: Don't let me put this phrase to a vote.\" Although its use was still opposed by Zisling, the phrase was accepted without a vote.\nName.\nThe writers also had to decide on the name for the new state. Eretz Israel, Ever (from the name Eber), Judea, and Zion were all suggested, as were Ziona, Ivriya and Herzliya. Judea and Zion were rejected because, according to the partition plan, Jerusalem (Zion) and most of the Judaean Mountains would be outside the new state. Ben-Gurion put forward \"Israel\" and it passed by a vote of 6\u20133. Official documents released in April 2013 by the State Archive of Israel show that days before the establishment of the State of Israel in May 1948, officials were still debating about what the new country would be called in Arabic: Palestine (, \"Filas\u1e6d\u012bn\"), Zion (, \"\u1e62ahy\u016bn\") or Israel (, \"'Isr\u0101\u2019\u012bl\"). Two assumptions were made: \"That an Arab state was about to be established alongside the Jewish one in keeping with the UN's partition resolution the year before, and that the Jewish state would include a large Arab minority whose feelings needed to be taken into account\". In the end, the officials rejected the name Palestine because they thought that would be the name of the new Arab state and could cause confusion so they opted for the most straightforward option of Israel.\nOther items.\nAt the meeting on 14 May, several other members of Moetzet HaAm suggested additions to the document. Meir Vilner wanted it to denounce the British Mandate and military but Sharett said it was out of place. Meir Argov pushed to mention the Displaced Persons camps in Europe and to guarantee freedom of language. Ben-Gurion agreed with the latter but noted that Hebrew should be the main language of the state.\nThe debate over wording did not end completely even after the Declaration had been made. Declaration signer Meir David Loewenstein later claimed, \"It ignored our sole right to Eretz Israel, which is based on the covenant of the Lord with Abraham, our father, and repeated promises in the Tanach. It ignored the aliya of the Ramban and the students of the Vilna Gaon and the Ba'al Shem Tov, and the [rights of] Jews who lived in the 'Old Yishuv'.\"\nDeclaration ceremony.\nThe ceremony was held in the Tel Aviv Museum (today known as Independence Hall) but was not widely publicised as it was feared that the British Authorities might attempt to prevent it or that the Arab armies might invade earlier than expected. An invitation was sent out by messenger on the morning of 14 May telling recipients to arrive at 15:30 and to keep the event a secret. The event started at 16:00 (a time chosen so as not to breach the sabbath) and was broadcast live as the first transmission of the new radio station Kol Yisrael.\nThe final draft of the declaration was typed at the Jewish National Fund building following its approval earlier in the day. Ze'ev Sherf, who stayed at the building in order to deliver the text, had forgotten to arrange transport for himself. Ultimately, he had to flag down a passing car and ask the driver (who was driving a borrowed car without a licence) to take him to the ceremony. Sherf's request was initially refused but he managed to persuade the driver to take him. The car was stopped by a policeman for speeding while driving across the city though a ticket was not issued after it was explained that he was delaying the declaration of independence. Sherf arrived at the museum at 15:59.\nAt 16:00, Ben-Gurion opened the ceremony by banging his gavel on the table, prompting a spontaneous rendition of Hatikvah, soon to be Israel's national anthem, from the 250 guests. On the wall behind the podium hung a picture of Theodor Herzl, the founder of modern Zionism, and two flags, later to become the official flag of Israel.\nAfter telling the audience \"I shall now read to you the scroll of the Establishment of the State, which has passed its first reading by the National Council\", Ben-Gurion proceeded to read out the declaration, taking 16 minutes, ending with the words \"Let us accept the Foundation Scroll of the Jewish State by rising\" and calling on Rabbi Fishman to recite the Shehecheyanu blessing.\nSignatories.\nAs leader of the Yishuv, David Ben-Gurion was the first person to sign. The declaration was due to be signed by all 37 members of Moetzet HaAm. However, twelve members could not attend, with eleven of them trapped in besieged Jerusalem and one abroad. The remaining 25 signatories present were called up in alphabetical order to sign, leaving spaces for those absent. Although a space was left for him between the signatures of Eliyahu Dobkin and Meir Vilner, Zerach Warhaftig signed at the top of the next column, leading to speculation that Vilner's name had been left alone to isolate him, or to stress that even a communist had agreed with the declaration. However, Warhaftig later denied this, stating that a space had been left for him (as he was one of the signatories trapped in Jerusalem) where a Hebraicised form of his name would have fitted alphabetically, but he insisted on signing under his actual name so as to honour his father's memory and so moved down two spaces. He and Vilner would be the last surviving signatories, and remained close for the rest of their lives. Of the signatories, two were women (Golda Meir and Rachel Cohen-Kagan).\nWhen Herzl Rosenblum, a journalist, was called up to sign, Ben-Gurion instructed him to sign under the name Herzl Vardi, his pen name, as he wanted more Hebrew names on the document. Although Rosenblum acquiesced to Ben-Gurion's request and legally changed his name to Vardi, he later admitted to regretting not signing as Rosenblum. Several other signatories later Hebraised their names, including Meir Argov (Grabovsky), Peretz Bernstein (then Fritz Bernstein), Avraham Granot (Granovsky), Avraham Nissan (Katznelson), Moshe Kol (Kolodny), Yehuda Leib Maimon (Fishman), Golda Meir (Meyerson/Myerson), Pinchas Rosen (Felix Rosenblueth) and Moshe Sharett (Shertok). Other signatories added their own touches, including Saadia Kobashi who added the phrase \"HaLevy\", referring to the tribe of Levi.\nAfter Sharett, the last of the signatories, had put his name to paper, the audience again stood and the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra played \"Hatikvah\". Ben-Gurion concluded the event with the words \"The State of Israel is established! This meeting is adjourned!\"\nThe 37 signatories were:\nAftermath.\nThe declaration was signed in the context of civil war between the Arab and Jewish populations of the Mandate that had started the day after the partition vote at the UN six months earlier. Neighbouring Arab states and the Arab League were opposed to the vote and had declared they would intervene to prevent its implementation. In a on 15 May 1948 to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States claimed that \"the Arab states find themselves compelled to intervene in order to restore law and order and to check further bloodshed\".\nOver the next few days after the declaration, armies of Egypt, Trans-Jordan, Iraq, and Syria engaged Israeli troops inside the area of what had just ceased to be Mandatory Palestine, thereby starting the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War. A truce began on 11 June, but fighting resumed on 8 July and stopped again on 18 July, before restarting in mid-October and finally ending on 24 July 1949 with the signing of the armistice agreement with Syria. By then Israel had retained its independence and increased its land area by almost 50% compared to the 1947 UN Partition Plan.\nFollowing the declaration, Moetzet HaAm became the Provisional State Council, which acted as the legislative body for the new state until the first elections in January 1949.\nMany of the signatories would play a prominent role in Israeli politics following independence; Moshe Sharett and Golda Meir both served as Prime Minister, Yitzhak Ben-Zvi became the country's second president in 1952, and several others served as ministers. David Remez was the first signatory to pass away, dying in May 1951, while Meir Vilner, the youngest signatory at just 29, was the longest living, serving in the Knesset until 1990 and dying in June 2003. Eliyahu Berligne, the oldest signatory at 82, died in 1959.\nEleven minutes after midnight, the United States \"de facto\" recognised the State of Israel. This was followed by Iran (which had voted against the UN partition plan), Guatemala, Iceland, Nicaragua, Romania, and Uruguay. The Soviet Union was the first nation to fully recognise Israel de jure on 17 May 1948, followed by Poland, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Ireland, and South Africa. The United States extended official recognition after the first Israeli election, as Truman had promised on 31 January 1949. By virtue of General Assembly Resolution 273 (III), Israel was admitted to membership in the United Nations on 11 May 1949.\nIn the three years following the 1948 Palestine war, about 700,000 Jews immigrated to Israel, residing mainly along the borders and in former Arab lands. Around 136,000 were some of the 250,000 displaced Jews of World War II. And from the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War until the early 1970s, 800,000\u20131,000,000 Jews left, fled, or were expelled from their homes in Arab countries; 260,000 of them reached Israel between 1948 and 1951; and 600,000 by 1972.\nAt the same time, a large number of Arabs left, fled or were expelled from, what became Israel. In the \"Report of the Technical Committee on Refugees (Submitted to the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine in Lausanne on 7 September 1949) \u2013 (A/1367/Rev.1)\", in paragraph 15, the estimate of the statistical expert, which the Committee believed to be as accurate as circumstances permitted, indicated that the number of refugees from Israel-controlled territory amounted to approximately 711,000.\nStatus in Israeli law.\nParagraph 13 of the Declaration provides that the State of Israel would \"be based on freedom, justice and peace as envisaged by the prophets of Israel; it will ensure complete equality of social and political rights to all its inhabitants irrespective of religion, race or sex;\". However, the Knesset maintains that the declaration is neither a law nor an ordinary legal document. The Supreme Court has ruled that the guarantees were merely guiding principles, and that the declaration is not a constitutional law making a practical ruling on the upholding or nullification of various ordinances and statutes.\nIn 1994 the Knesset amended two basic laws, and Freedom of Occupation, introducing (among other changes) a statement saying \"the fundamental human rights in Israel will be honored (...) in the spirit of the principles included in the declaration of the establishment of the State of Israel.\"\nThe scroll.\nAlthough Ben-Gurion had told the audience that he was reading from the scroll of independence, he was actually reading from handwritten notes because only the bottom part of the scroll had been finished by artist and calligrapher Otte Wallish by the time of the declaration (he did not complete the entire document until June). The scroll, which is bound together in three parts, is generally kept in the country's National Archives.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14699", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14699", "title": "Geography of Italy", "text": " \nThe geography of Italy includes the description of all the physical geographical elements of Italy. Italy, whose territory largely coincides with the homonymous geographical region, is located in southern Europe and comprises the long, boot-shaped Italian Peninsula crossed by the Apennines, the southern side of Alps, the large plain of the Po Valley and some islands including Sicily and Sardinia. Italy is part of the Northern Hemisphere. Two of the Pelagie Islands (Lampedusa and Lampione) are located on the African continent.\nThe total area of Italy is , of which is land and is water. It lies between latitudes 35\u00b0 and 47\u00b0 N, and longitudes 6\u00b0 and 19\u00b0 E. Italy borders Switzerland (), France (), Austria () and Slovenia (). San Marino () and Vatican City () are enclaves. The total border length is . Including islands, Italy has a coastline of on the Adriatic Sea, Ionian Sea, Tyrrhenian Sea, Ligurian Sea, Sea of Sardinia and Strait of Sicily.\nThe Italian geographical region, in its traditional and most widely accepted extent, has an area of approximately , which is greater than the area of the entire Italian Republic (). The Italian geographical region also includes territories that are sovereign parts of Croatia, France, Slovenia and Switzerland, as well as the four small independent states of the Principality of Monaco, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of San Marino and the Vatican City State (the Holy See).\nGeneral features.\nItaly is joined to the central-western section of the European continent by the Alps. Due to its position, it constitutes a bridge between Europe and Africa. In particular, the Italian peninsula is located in the center of the Mediterranean Sea, between the Balkans and Hellenic peninsula to the east, the Iberian peninsula to the west, North Africa to the south and continental Europe to the north separated by the Alps.\nItaly also separates the western basin of the Mediterranean Sea from the eastern basin \u2014 that is, the Tyrrhenian Sea from the Ionian Sea \u2014 extending towards the west with Calabria and Sicily, which together geologically form a peninsular extension. Only separate Sicily and Africa (the Tunisian peninsula), by the channel of Sicily.\nTo the east, Salento is from the Albanian coast, at the narrowest point of the Strait of Otranto. It is Capo d'Otranto (also called \"Punta Palasc\u00eca\"), located at 40\u00b0 7' north latitude and 18\u00b0 31' east longitude. To the north of Salento lies the long and narrow inlet of the Adriatic Sea.\nThe islands of Sardinia and Corsica then divide the Tyrrhenian Sea from the Sardinian Sea.\nThe coastal development of the Italian peninsula and islands is vast; about , which is much larger than that of the Iberian peninsula, but much less than that of the Balkans.\nItaly has a prevalence of hilly areas (41.6% of the territory) compared to mountainous areas (35.2% of the territory), or flat areas (23.2%).\nThe Italian soil today is the result of anthropization and is partly mountainous, partly hilly, partly volcanic, partly endolagunar with bumps, polesine, islands, dried up by reclamation (Bonifiche Circeo, Ferraresi, Comacchio, Ostiense, Pisana and so on) with ever greater raising of embankments (for example the withdrawal of 1.7 billion cubic meters per year of fresh water, from 20 consortia from Veneto alone).\nNo inhabited center in Italy is more than from the sea and the Italian municipality farthest from the sea is Madesimo (province of Sondrio) which is from the Ligurian Sea.\nBoundaries.\nItaly borders Switzerland (), France (), Austria () and Slovenia (). San Marino () and Vatican City () are enclaves. The total border length is . Including islands, Italy has a coastline of on the Adriatic Sea, Ionian Sea, Tyrrhenian Sea, Ligurian Sea, Sea of Sardinia and Strait of Sicily.\nLatitude and longitude.\nThe distance that separates the Testa Gemella Occidentale from Punta Pesce Spada is ; the maximum distance between the eastern and western borders is about . The municipalities at the ends of Italy are:\nGeographical centre.\nAlthough the Istituto Geografico Militare of Florence has repeatedly declared that it is impossible to uniquely determine the center of a non-geometric shape such as that of Italy, there are several locations that, depending on the measurement criteria adopted, compete for the primacy of the geographical centre of Italy:\nDivisions.\nThe Italian geographical region, in its traditional and most widely accepted extent, has an area of approximately , which is greater than the area of the entire Italian Republic (). The Italian geographical region also includes territories that are sovereign parts of Croatia, France, Slovenia and Switzerland, as well as the four small independent states of the Principality of Monaco, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of San Marino and the Vatican City State (the Holy See). Italy and the Italian geographical region are both divided into three parts, albeit with some differences.\nContinental Italy.\nContinental Italy defined as the southern side of the Alps, the Po Valley, Liguria and the portion of the Apennines bounded by the conventional line that connects La Spezia to Rimini. The region of Nice (corresponding to the historic County of Nice), Italian Switzerland, part of Julian March and other less extensive portions of territory such as Valle Stretta, Gondo and Val Monastero, are not part of the Italian Republic in its continental part but they are part of the Italian geographical region. Conversely, the Val di Lei, the Val di Livigno, the San Candido basin, the Rio Sesto valley and the Tarvisio basin, although part of the Italian Republic, are not included in the Italian geographical region.\nPeninsular Italy.\nPeninsular Italy refers to the entire southern part of the aforementioned line, up to Punta Melito in Calabria (which is the southernmost point of the peninsula) and Santa Maria di Leuca in Apulia. San Marino and the Vatican City are foreign territories, although included in the Italian geographical region.\nThe Italian peninsula occupies a median position between the three main peninsulas of southern Europe, emerging right in the center of the Mediterranean Sea, with large islands and some archipelagos.\nInsular Italy.\nInsular Italy is made up of Sardinia, Sicily and numerous smaller islands, scattered or grouped into archipelagos in the seas that bathe the coasts of the peninsula. Corsica is not politically included in insular Italy since it belongs to France, however, it is included in the Italian geographical region.\nThe five largest islands belonging to the Italian state are, in order of size:\nOther islands belonging to Italy are grouped into the following archipelagos:\nOrography.\nMountains.\nAlmost 40% of the Italian territory is mountainous, with the Alps as the northern boundary and the Apennine Mountains forming the backbone of the peninsula and extending for . The Alpine mountain range is linked with the Apennines with the Colle di Cadibona pass in the Ligurian Alps. Nineteen Italian regions are crossed by either the Alps or the Apennines, or their offshoots. Sardinia has mountains with their own characteristics and are included in the Sardinian-Corsican relief, since it also affects Corsica.\nThe Alps (formed during the Mesozoic and Cenozoic) surround the Po Valley to the north, east and west, and develop along the entire northern border of Italy (about ), creating a natural border. The Alps contain the highest peak in the European Union, Mont Blanc, at above sea level, located between the Aosta Valley and France.\nThe Apennines (formed during the Oligocene) rise south of the Po Valley and run from north to south throughout the Italian peninsula, from Liguria to Calabria and continue in northern Sicily ending in the Madonie, acting as a watershed between the Tyrrhenian and Adriatic-Ionian coast.\nThe highest peaks in Italy are found in the Western Alps, where there are numerous peaks that exceed including Monte Rosa (), the Cervino () and Mont Blanc which with its . The maximum height of the Apennines is the Gran Sasso d'Italia ().\nFamous mountains in Italy are Monte Cervino (Matterhorn), Monte Rosa, Gran Paradiso in the West Alps, and Bernina, Stelvio and Dolomites along the eastern side of the Alps.\nHills.\nThe hills cover most of the Italian territory. They are mainly located in the central-southern part of the peninsula, along the sides of the Apennine ridge, but also in the pre-Alpine area, close to the Alps.\nThe hilly reliefs, which alternate with hollows and valleys, have slight slopes and do not exceed .\nThe first two hilly systems are the subalpine hills and the Preappennino, two hilly strips arranged between the Alps and the Po Valley and between the Apennines and the Adriatic coast respectively. The subalpine hills widen more in the western part of the Po Valley, where they form the hills of the Langhe and Montferrat. Two other hill systems are the Tyrrhenian Anti-Apennine, which extends from the Colline Metallifere of Tuscany to Vesuvius and the Beneventane Hills in Campania, and the Adriatic Anti-Apennine, present in Puglia with the Murge and Gargano hills.\nThe Italian hills have different origins:\nPlains.\nThe plains make up 23.2% of the Italian national territory. In between the two lies a large plain in the valley of the Po, the largest river in Italy, which flows eastward from the Cottian Alps to the Adriatic. The Po Valley is the largest plain in Italy, with , and it represents over 70% of the total plain area in the country. The Po Valley is divided into two bands: the high plain, which borders the Alpine and Apennine hills, and the low plain located in the center and extended up to the Po delta.\nIn the peninsular part and in the islands there are only small plains often located along the coasts and at the mouth of the major rivers, near which they formed: this is the case, for example, of the Tavoliere delle Puglie, of the Campidano in Sardinia or the Maremma in Tuscany.\nThe Italian plains have different origins:\nHydrography.\nItaly is surrounded, except to the north, by the sea, and its territory has a rich reserve of inland waters (rivers and lakes). The southern regions, however, are drier than the northern ones, due to the scarcity of rains and the absence of glaciers that can feed the rivers.\nRivers.\nItalian rivers are shorter than those of other European regions due to the Apennines that run along the entire length of the peninsula, dividing the waters into two opposite sides. They are numerous however, due to the relative abundance of rains in Italy in general, and to the presence of the Alpine chain, rich in snowfields and glaciers, in northern Italy.\nThe fundamental watershed follows the ridge of the Alps and the Apennines and defines five main slopes, corresponding to the seas into which the rivers flow: the Adriatic, Ionic, Tyrrhenian, Ligurian and Mediterranean sides. Italian rivers are categorized into two main groups: the Alpine-Po river rivers and the Apennine-island rivers.\nThe longest Italian river is the Po (), which flows from the Monviso, runs through the entire Po Valley from west to east, and then flows, with a delta, into the Adriatic Sea. In addition to being the longest, it is also the river with the largest basin and the largest flow at its mouth. The second longest Italian river is the Adige (), which originates near Lake Resia and flows into the Adriatic Sea, after having made a north\u2013south route, near Chioggia. The third longest river in Italy is the Tiber (), the second longest Italian river in terms of hydrographic basin; it was formed on Monte Fumaiolo (in Emilia-Romagna) and flows into the Tyrrhenian Sea after having crossed the center of Rome. After the Tiber, in order of length are the rivers Adda (), Oglio (), Tanaro () and Ticino (, of which is in Italy).\nMost of Italy's rivers drain either into the Adriatic Sea (such as Po, Piave, Adige, Brenta, Tagliamento, Reno) or into the Tyrrhenian (like Arno, Tiber and Volturno), though the waters from some border municipalities drain into the Black Sea through the basin of the Drava (Innichen and Sexten in Trentino-Alto Adige/S\u00fcdtirol, Tarvisio in Friuli-Venezia-Giulia) or the Inn (Livigno in Lombardy), both tributaries of the Danube, and the waters from the Lago di Lei in Lombardy drain into the North Sea through the basin of Rhine.\nLakes.\nIn Italy there are more than 1,000 lakes, mostly artificially created by the damming of river valleys.\nIn the north of the country are a number of subalpine moraine-dammed lakes (the Italian Lakes), including the largest in Italy, the Garda (). Other well known of these subalpine lakes are Lake Maggiore (), whose most northerly section is part of Switzerland, Como (which holds the record of depth in the Italian Republic, which amounts to ) (), Orta, Lugano, Iseo, Idro. These lakes occupy wide valleys carved by ancient glaciers.\nIn Italy there are also coastal lakes, such as Lake Lesina, separated from the sea by a narrow strip of land, and volcanic lakes (Lake Bolsena, Lake Vico, Lake Bracciano), which occupy the craters of extinct volcanoes. Lake Trasimeno, on the other hand, formed in a hollow in the territory. Other notable lakes in the Italian peninsula are Varano and Omodeo in Sardinia.\nThe swamps and ponds that in the past covered vast flat areas of Italy, in recent centuries have been largely dried up; the few remaining wetlands, such as the Valli di Comacchio in Emilia-Romagna or the Stagno di Cagliari in Sardinia, are protected as very precious natural environments.\nAlong the Italian coasts there are lagoons, among which the Venetian Lagoon, that of Grado Lagoon and that of Marano Lagoon in the northern Adriatic stand out for their size and importance, and the Orbetello Lagoon on the Tuscan coast.\nSeas and coasts.\nThe Italian peninsula overlooks the Mediterranean Sea, which around it is divided into various seas.\nThe Ligurian Sea bathes the coasts of Liguria and, according to the cartography of the Hydrographic Institute of the Navy, the northern Tuscan coasts to the south as far as the island of Elba.\nThe Tyrrhenian Sea bathes the western coasts of the peninsula south of the island of Elba (and therefore all the regions from Tuscany to Calabria), the northern coasts of Sicily and the eastern coasts of Sardinia.\nThe Adriatic Sea bathes the eastern coasts of the peninsula, from Friuli-Venezia Giulia to the Cape of Santa Maria di Leuca, Apulia.\nThe Ionian Sea bathes the eastern coasts of Sicily and Calabria, the coast of Basilicata and the western coasts of Apulia.\nTo the south of Sicily lies the Strait of Sicily, while to the west of Sardinia lies the Sea of Sardinia.\nItaly has a coastline of approximately , with a great variety of shapes that depends both on the nature of the mainland and on the action of the sea.\nThe Adriatic coasts are quite straight, characterized to the north by the gulfs of Trieste and Venice, in the center by the Conero promontory, to the south by that of the Gargano, which forms the Gulf of Manfredonia. The Adriatic coasts are low and sandy, with lagoons in the northern section. Only in the Trieste area, in correspondence with the Gargano, the Conero and the lower eastern Salento (between Otranto and Santa Maria di Leuca) do rocky sections follow one another.\nThe Ionian coasts are mainly low and sandy and are characterized by the wide Gulf of Taranto, closed to the east by the Salento Peninsula (which divides it from the Adriatic) and to the west by the Calabrian peninsula (which divides it from the Tyrrhenian Sea).\nThe Strait of Messina connects the Ionian and the Tyrrhenian seas.\nThe Tyrrhenian coasts are very articulated, with rocky stretches alternating with sandy beaches, with numerous gulfs and headlands. Among the many gulfs include Naples, Salerno and Gaeta, between the peninsulas that of Sorrento and the promontories that of Circeo and that of Piombino. In the Tyrrhenian Sea, there are three important channels: between the island of Elba and the Tuscan coast the Strait of Piombino, between Elba and Corsica the Strait of Corsica, and between Sardinia and Corsica the Strait of Bonifacio.\nThe Ligurian Sea, which has the Gulf of Genoa at its center, has high and rocky coasts in the Riviera di Levante and mixed coasts in the Riviera di Ponente.\nGeology.\nThe underground thrusts that millions of years ago gave rise to the reliefs of Italy still continue: the earthquakes and the eruptive activity of volcanoes testify to this.\nEarthquakes.\nSqueezed between two plates, the African Plate and the Eurasian Plate, Italy is very subject to earthquakes, even intense ones, so much so that it holds the record in Europe. In particular, the areas at greatest seismic risk are the north and south-west of Sicily, the whole Apennines (but in particular the central-southern area), northern Apulia, almost all of Friuli-Venezia Giulia and finally the north-west of Veneto. On the contrary, the areas with little or no seismic risk are the Alps (excluding the extreme western and eastern area), most of the Po Valley, the Tyrrhenian coasts up to Lazio, central-southern Apulia, Sardinia and central Sicily.\nVolcanoes.\nItaly is also known for the presence of numerous volcanoes, the most well-known being Vesuvius near Naples, Etna near Catania (which with its is the highest volcano in Europe), Stromboli and Vulcano, in the Aeolian Islands in the province of Messina, in addition to the large caldera formed by the Campi Flegrei in Campania.\nThe peninsula also has many extinct volcanoes, that is, which have ceased their eruptive activity, such as the Euganean Hills in the province of Padua, Mount Amiata in Tuscany, the Berici Hills in the province of Vicenza and the Castelli Romani area, where there are several lakes that occupy the craters of ancient volcanoes. The lakes of Bracciano, Vico and Bolsena in northern Lazio also had a similar origin.\nIn recent years, numerous studies have also been conducted to better understand the structure and destructive potential of the submarine volcano Marsili, located about north of Sicily and about west of Calabria. With its of length and of width (equal to of surface) the Marsili is one of the largest volcanoes in Europe.\nMany elements of the Italian territory are of volcanic origin. Most of the small islands and archipelagos in the south, like Capraia, Ponza, Ischia, Eolie, Ustica and Pantelleria are volcanic islands.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14700", "revid": "51003330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14700", "title": "Demographics of Italy", "text": "The demography of Italy is monitored by the Italian National Institute of Statistics (Istat).\nAt the beginning of 2024, Italy had an estimated population of 58.9\u00a0million. Its population density, at , is higher than both the EU (106.6/km2) and European (72.9/km2) average. However, the distribution of the population is very uneven: the most densely populated areas are the Po Valley (with about a third of the country's population) in northern Italy and the metropolitan areas of Rome and Naples in central and southern Italy; landlocked, rural and mountainous areas are very sparsely populated, notably the Alps and Apennines ranges, the plateaus of Basilicata and Puglia, the inland highlands of Sicily and the Mediterranean island of Sardinia.\nThe population of the country almost doubled during the 20th century, but the pattern of growth was extremely uneven due to large-scale internal migration from the impoverished, largely rural South to the industrial cities of the North, especially during the Italian economic miracle of the 1950s and 1960s. In addition, after decades of net emigration, since the late 1980s Italy has experienced large-scale international immigration. As a result, in 2024 there were 5.4 million foreign-born residents in the country, or about 9.2% of Italy's total population.\nHigh fertility and birth rates persisted through the 1970s, then declined sharply in the 1980s and 1990s, leading to rapid population aging. At the end of the 2000s, one in five Italians was over 65 years old. In 2024, Italy's total fertility rate was 1.18, well below the EU average (1.38) and one of the lowest in the world.\nSince the revision of the Lateran Treaty in 1984, Italy has no official religion, although the Catholic Church enjoys a privileged legal status and plays a prominent role in Italian society and politics. In 2017, 78% of the population identified as Catholic, 15% as non-believers or atheists, 2% as other Christians and 6% adhered to other religions.\nHistorical overview.\n1861 to early 20th century.\nAfter achieving its unification in 1861, Italy experienced a prolonged period of net emigration, mainly caused by the breakdown of traditional agrarian structures coupled with slow industrialization, that peaked in the years before World War I. Between 1898 and 1914, at the height of Italian diaspora, up to 750,000 Italians left the country every year in search of brighter prospects. As a consequence, significant numbers of people with Italian ancestry are found in Brazil (32\u00a0million Italian Brazilians), Argentina (25\u00a0million Italian Argentines), United States (18\u00a0million Italian Americans), France (5\u00a0million Italian French), Venezuela (5\u00a0million Italian Venezuelans), Paraguay (2.5\u00a0million Italian Paraguayans), Colombia (2\u00a0million Italian Colombians), Uruguay (1.5\u00a0million Italian Uruguayans), Peru (1.5\u00a0million Italian Peruvians), Canada (1.5\u00a0million Italian Canadians), Germany (1.2\u00a0million Italian Germans) and Australia (1\u00a0million Italian Australians).\nIn addition, Italian communities once thrived in the former Italian colonial empire. There were about 100,000 settlers living in Eritrea and Somalia, and about 150,000 in Libya; that mostly left Africa after World War II and decolonization.\nAfter 1945.\nOutcomes of World War II and decolonization.\nAfter communist Yugoslavia annexed Istria, Kvarner, most of the Julian March as well as the Dalmatian city of Zara following the Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947, up to 350,000 local ethnic Italians (Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians) fled to Italy in the Istrian\u2013Dalmatian exodus. In addition, World War II itself caused half a million military and civilian casualties. Finally, in 1970 about 20,000 Italians were expelled from Libya by Muammar Gaddafi's regime.\nPost-war economic miracle.\nRapid economic growth in the 1950s, 1960s and early 1970s caused massive inflows of migrants from rural areas of Southern Italy to the so-called \"industrial triangle\", the area containing the major industrial cities of Milan and Turin and the seaport of Genoa, in north-west Italy. Between 1955 and 1971, around 9 million people are estimated to have been involved in inter-regional migrations, uprooting entire communities and creating large metropolitan areas.\n21st century.\nThe rapid transition from agrarian to post-industrial society accelerated numerous demographic trends, including a sharp decline in fertility and birth rates, fast population aging and a shrinking workforce; by the 1980s emigration had all but stopped and Italy started to have a positive net migration rate. By the 1990s, as Italy's TFR dropped below 1.2 and deaths outpaced births, international migration became the main driver of population growth. Foreign-born residents in Italy increased from 1.3 million in 2001, to 4 million in 2011, and 5.2 million in 2021.\nIn the 2010s, as a combined effect of the global financial crisis, the Eurozone crisis double-dip recession and the Arab Spring, Italy experienced a significant slowdown in legal international migration, that coincided with the arrival of more than 150,000 illegal asylum seekers.\nAs a direct effect of the 2020-2023 COVID-19 pandemic, Italy registered more than 198,000 excess deaths, while the associated economic uncertainty and disruption of social relations have been linked to a marked decline in fertility rates across numerous Western countries, including Italy. In subsequent years, the average number of births in Italy fell from 494,000 in 2010\u201319 to 399,000 in 2020\u201322, while deaths increased from 617,000 to 719,000; as a result, the natural balance declined form -123,000 to -320,000, largely not compensated by net migration, discouraged by COVID-19 restrictions and the Economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nLife expectancy.\nSources: Our World In Data and the United Nations.\n1871\u20131950\n1950\u20132020\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nFertility.\nItaly experienced a short-term growth in fertility and birth rates in the 2000s. The TFR temporarily rose from an all-time low of 1.18 children per woman in 1995 to 1.46 in 2010. By 2024, Italy's TFR dropped again to 1.18. The decline in fertility, that in Italy and Spain is more pronounced that in northern European countries, has long puzzled demographers; some tentative explanations could be rooted in the lack of affordable childcare services and sociocultural norms regarding family building and female work participation.\nIn 2021 this was 1.47 children born/woman\nMother's mean age at first birth; 31.1 years (2017 est.)\n\"0-14 years:\" 0\u201314 years: 13.45% (male 4,292,431/female 4,097,732)\n\"15-24 years:\" 9.61% (male 3,005,402/female 2,989,764)\n\"25-54 years:\" 40.86% (male 12,577,764/female 12,921,614)\n\"55-64 years:\" 14% (male 4,243,735/female 4,493,581)\n\"65 years and over:\" 22.08% (male 5,949,560/female 7,831,076) (2020 est.)\nAge structure.\nMedian age\ntotal: 46.5 years. Country comparison to the world: 5th\nmale: 45.4 years\nfemale: 47.5 years (2020 est.)\nCities.\n70.4% of Italian population is classified as urban, a relatively low figure among developed countries. Italy's administrative boundaries have seen significant devolution in recent decades; the metropolitan area was created as a new administrative unit, and major cities and metro areas now have a provincial status.\nAccording to OECD, the largest conurbations are:\nUrbanization\nurban population: 71% of total population (2020)\nrate of urbanization: 0.29% annual rate of change (2015\u201320 est.)\nVital statistics.\nStatistics since 1862.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nIn the year 2024, 80,761 babies were born to at least one foreign parent which makes up 21.83 percent of all newborns in that year (20,336 or 5.50 percent were born to foreign mothers, 9,832 or 2.66 percent to foreign fathers, and 50,593 or 13.68 percent to two foreign parents). In Southern Italy (including Sicily and Sardinia) only 9.47 percent of all newborns had 1 or 2 foreign parents, while in Central and Northern Italy their share reached 23.98 and 30.55 percent, respectively.\nTotal fertility rates by region.\nTotal fertility rate (TFR) in Italy by region as of 2024:\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2021):\nHealth.\nObesity \u2013 adult prevalence rate\n 19.9% (2016) Country comparison to the world: 108\nEmployment and income.\nUnemployment, youth ages 15\u201324:\ntotal: 32.2%. Country comparison to the world: 26th\nmale: 30.4%\nfemale: 34.8% (2018 est.)\nImmigration.\nSince the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, and more recently, the 2004 and 2007 enlargements of the European Union, Italy received growing flows of migrants from the former socialist countries of Eastern Europe (especially Romania, Albania, Ukraine and Poland). The second most important area of immigration to Italy has always been the neighboring North Africa (especially Morocco, Egypt, Tunisia and Algeria). Furthermore, in recent years, growing migration fluxes from the Far East (notably, China and the Philippines) and Latin America (Ecuador, Peru) have been recorded.\nItaly does not collect data on ethnicity or race of the country, but does collect data on nationality of its residents.\nIn 2021, Istat estimated that 5,171,894 foreign citizens lived in Italy, representing about 8.7% of the total population. These figures do not include naturalized foreign-born residents (121,457 foreigners acquired Italian citizenship in 2021) as well as illegal immigrants, the so-called \"clandestini\", whose numbers, difficult to determine, are thought to be at least 670,000. Romanians made up the largest community in the country (1,145,718; around 10% of them being ethnic Romani people), followed by Albanians (441,027) and Moroccans (422,980).\nThe fourth largest community of foreign residents in Italy was represented by the Chinese. The majority of Chinese living in Italy are from the city of Wenzhou in the province of Zhejiang. Breaking down the foreign-born population by continent, in 2020 the figures were as follows: Europe (54%), Africa (22%), Asia (16%), the Americas (8%) and Oceania (0.06%). The distribution of immigrants is largely uneven in Italy: 83% of immigrants live in the northern and central parts of the country (the most economically developed areas), while only 17% live in the southern half of the peninsula.\n 3.21 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2021 est.) Country comparison to the world: 34th\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nThere are, as of 2022, 5,030,716 Foreign-born residents, accounting for 8.5% of the total population.\nTheir distribution by country of origin was as follows:\nLanguages.\nItaly's official language is Italian; Ethnologue has estimated that there are about 55 million speakers of Italian in the country and a further 6.7\u00a0million outside of it, primarily in the neighboring countries and in the Italian diaspora worldwide. Italian, adopted by the central state after the unification of Italy, is a language based on the Florentine variety of Tuscan and is somewhat intermediate between the Italo-Dalmatian languages and the Gallo-Romance languages. Its development was also influenced by the Germanic languages of the post-Roman invaders. When Italy unified in 1861, only 3% of the population spoke Italian, even though an estimated 90% of Italians speak Italian as their L1 nowadays.\nItaly is in fact one of the most linguistically diverse countries in Europe, as there are not only varieties of Italian specific to each cultural region, but also distinct regional and minority languages. The establishment of the national education system has led to the emergence of the former and a decrease in the use of the latter. The spread of Italian was further expanded in the 1950s and 1960s, because of the economic growth and the rise of mass media and television, with the state broadcaster (RAI) setting a colloquial variety of Italian to which the population would be exposed.\nAs a way to distance itself from the Italianization policies promoted because of nationalism, Italy recognized twelve languages as the Country's \"historical linguistic minorities\", which are promoted alongside Italian in their respective territories. French is co-official in the Aosta Valley as the province's prestige variety, under which the more commonly spoken Franco-Provencal dialects have been historically roofed. German has the same status in the province of Bolzano as, in some parts of that province and in parts of the neighbouring Trentino, does Ladin. Slovene and Friulian are officially recognised in the provinces of Trieste, Gorizia and Udine in Venezia Giulia. In Sardinia, the Sardinian language has been the language traditionally spoken and is often regarded by linguists as constituting its own branch of Romance; in the 1990s, Sardinian has been recognized as \"having equal dignity\" with Italian, the introduction of which to the island officially started under the rule of the House of Savoy in the 18th century.\nIn these regions, official documents are either bilingual (trilingual in Ladin communities) in the co-official language(s) by default, or available as such upon request. Traffic signs are also multilingual, except in the Valle d'Aosta where French toponyms are generally used, with the exception of Aosta itself, which has retained its Latin form in Italian as well as English. Attempts to Italianize them, especially during the Fascist period, have been formally abandoned. Education is possible in minority languages where such schools are operating.\nUNESCO and other authorities recognize a number of other languages which are not legally protected by Italian government: Piedmontese, Venetian, Ligurian, Lombard, Emilian-Romagnolo, Neapolitan and Sicilian.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCatholicism is by far the largest religion in the country, although the Catholic Church is no longer officially the state religion. In 2006, 87.8% of Italy's population self-identified as Catholic, although only about one-third of these described themselves as active members (36.8%). In 2016, 71.1% of \"Italian citizens\" self-identified as Catholic. This increased again to 78% in 2018.\nMost Italians believe in God, or a form of a spiritual life force. According to a Eurobarometer Poll in 2005: 74% of Italian citizens responded that 'they believe there is a God', 16% answered that 'they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force' and 6% answered that 'they do not believe there is any sort of spirit, God, or life force'. There are no data collected through census.\nChristianity.\nThe Italian Catholic Church is part of the global Catholic Church, under the leadership of the Pope, curia in Rome, and the Conference of Italian Bishops. In addition to Italy, two other sovereign nations are included in Italian-based dioceses, San Marino and Vatican City. There are 225 dioceses in the Italian Catholic Church, see further in this article and in the article List of Catholic dioceses in Italy. Even though by law Vatican City is not part of Italy, it is in Rome, and along with Latin, Italian is the most spoken and second language of the Roman Curia.\nItaly has a rich Catholic culture, especially as numerous Catholic saints, martyrs and popes were Italian themselves. Catholic art in Italy especially flourished during the Middle Ages, Renaissance and Baroque periods, with numerous Italian artists, such as Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, Raphael, Caravaggio, Fra Angelico, Gian Lorenzo Bernini, Sandro Botticelli, Tintoretto, Titian and Giotto. Catholic architecture in Italy is equally as rich and impressive, with churches, basilicas and cathedrals such as St Peter's Basilica, Florence Cathedral and St Mark's Basilica. Catholicism is the largest religion and Christian denomination in Italy, with around 71.1% of Italians considering themselves Catholic. Italy is also home to the greatest number of cardinals in the world, and is the country with the greatest number of Catholic churches per capita.\nEven though the main Christian denomination in Italy is Catholicism, there are some minorities of Protestant, Waldensian, Eastern Orthodox and other Christian churches.\nImmigration from Western, Central, and Eastern Africa at the beginning of the 21st century has increased the size of Baptist, Anglican, Pentecostal and Evangelical communities in Italy, while immigration from Eastern Europe has produced large Eastern Orthodox communities.\nIn 2006, Protestants made up 2.1% of Italy's population, and members of Eastern Orthodox churches comprised 1.2% or more than 700,000 Eastern Orthodox Christians including 180,000 Greek Orthodox, 550,000 Pentecostals and Evangelists (0.8%), of whom 400,000 are members of the Assemblies of God, about 250,000 are Jehovah's Witnesses (0.4%), 30,000 Waldensians, 25,000 Seventh-day Adventists, 22,000 Mormons, 15,000 Baptists (plus some 5,000 Free Baptists), 7,000 Lutherans, 4,000 Methodists (affiliated with the Waldensian Church).\nOther religions.\nThe longest-established religious faith in Italy is Judaism, Jews having been present in Ancient Rome before the birth of Christ. Italy has seen many influential Italian-Jews, such as prime minister Luigi Luzzatti, who took office in 1910, Ernesto Nathan served as mayor of Rome from 1907 to 1913 and Shabbethai Donnolo (died 982). During the Holocaust, Italy took in many Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany. However, with the creation of the Nazi-backed puppet Italian Social Republic, about 15% of 48,000 Italian Jews were killed. This, together with the emigration that preceded and followed the Second World War, has left only a small community of around 45,000 Jews in Italy today.\nDue to immigration from around the world, there has been an increase in non-Christian religions. As of 2009, there were 1.0\u00a0million Muslims in Italy forming 1.6 percent of population; independent estimates put the Islamic population in Italy anywhere from 0.8\u00a0million to 1.5\u00a0million. 50,000 Italian Muslims hold Italian citizenship.\nThere are more than 200,000 followers of faiths originating in the Indian subcontinent, including some 70,000 Sikhs with 22 gurdwaras across the country, 70,000 Hindus, and 50,000 Buddhists. There were an estimated 4,900 Bah\u00e1'\u00eds in Italy in 2005.\nEducation.\nLiteracy (defined as: ages 15 and over can read and write)\n total population: 99.2%\nmale: 99.4%\nfemale: 99% (2018 est.)\nSchool life expectancy (primary to tertiary education)\ntotal: 16 years\nmale: 16 years\nfemale: 17 years (2018)\nGenetics and ethnic groups.\nThe genetic history of Italy is greatly influenced by geography and history. The ancestors of Italians are mostly Indo-European speakers (Italic peoples such as Latins, Umbrians, Samnites, Oscans, Sicels and Adriatic Veneti, as well as Celts, Iapygians and Greeks) and pre-Indo-European speakers (Etruscans, Ligures, Rhaetians and Camunni in mainland Italy, Sicani and Elymians in Sicily and the Nuragic people in Sardinia). During the imperial period of Ancient Rome, the city of Rome was also home to people from various regions throughout the Mediterranean basin, including Southern Europe, North Africa and the Middle East. Based on DNA analysis, there is evidence of ancient regional genetic substructure and continuity within modern Italy dating to the pre-Roman and Roman periods.\nThe Italian population is marked by considerable cultural, linguistic, genetic and historical diversity which results in the presence of several distinct groups throughout the peninsula. In this regard, peoples like the Friulians, the Ladins, the Sardinians and the Tyrolese, who are recognized linguistic minorities, or even the Sicilians who are not, serve as cases in point attesting to such internal diversity.\nLinguistic minorities in Italy include Sardu-speakers 1 million, Tyrolese German-speakers 350,000, Albanians 70,000 \u2013 100,000, Slovenes 60,000, Franco-Proven\u00e7al-speakers 50,000 \u2013 70,000, Occitans 20,000 \u2013 40,000, Ladins 30,000, Catalans 15,000, Greek-speakers 12,000, Croatians 3,000 and Friulians 600,000. The Roma community is one of the largest ethnic minorities in Italy. Due to the lack of disaggregated data the size of the Italian Roma community remains unknown. The Council of Europe estimates that between 120,000 and 180,000 Roma live in Italy. A significant proportion of Roma in Italy do not have Italian citizenship.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14701", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14701", "title": "Politics of Italy", "text": "Political system of Italy\nThe politics of Italy are conducted through a parliamentary republic with a multi-party system. Italy has been a democratic republic since 2 June 1946, when the monarchy was abolished by popular referendum and a constituent assembly, formed by the representatives of all the anti-fascist forces that contributed to the defeat of Nazi and Fascist forces during the liberation of Italy, was elected to draft a constitution, which was promulgated on 1 January 1948.\nExecutive power is exercised by the Council of Ministers, which is led by the Prime Minister, officially referred to as \"President of the Council\" (\"Presidente del Consiglio\"). Legislative power is vested primarily in the two houses of Parliament and secondarily in the Council of Ministers, which can introduce bills and holds the majority in both houses. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislative branches. It is headed by the High Council of the Judiciary, a body presided over by the President, who is the head of state, though this position is separate from all branches. The current president is Sergio Mattarella, and the current prime minister is Giorgia Meloni.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Italy as a \"flawed democracy\" in 2024.:16 According to the 2025 V-Dem Democracy indices Italy was the 30th most liberal democratic country in the world. A high degree of fragmentation and instability, leading to often short-lived coalition governments, is characteristic of Italian politics. Since the end of World War II in 1945, Italy has had 69 governments, at an average of one every 1.11 years.\nGovernment.\nThe Italian constitution is the result of the work of the Constituent Assembly, which was formed by the representatives of all the anti-fascist forces that contributed to the defeat of Nazi and Fascist forces during the liberation of Italy. Article 1 of the Italian constitution states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Italy is a democratic Republic, founded on labour. Sovereignty belongs to the people and is exercised by the people in the forms and within the limits of the Constitution\u2014\u200a\nBy stating that Italy is a democratic republic, the article solemnly declares the results of the constitutional referendum which took place on 1 June 1946. The State is not a hereditary property of the ruling monarch, but it is instead a \"Res Publica\", belonging to everyone.\nThe people who are called to temporarily administer the republic are not owners, but servants; and the governed are not subjects, but citizens. And the sovereignty, that is the power to make choices that involve the entire community, belongs to the people, in accordance with the concept of a democracy, from the Greek \"demos\" (people) and \"krat\u00eca\" (power). However, this power is not to be exercised arbitrarily, but in the forms and within the limits established by the rule of law.\nHead of state.\nAs the head of state, the President of Italy, officially denoted as President of the Italian Republic, represents national unity, and guarantees that Italian politics comply with the Constitution. The president serves as a point of connection between the three branches of the government, but has got considerably less powers than those previously given to the King of Italy. The President of Italy is the commander-in-chief of the Italian Armed Forces and chairs the High Council of the Judiciary. A president's term of office lasts for seven years.\nThe President of Italy is elected by an electoral college of minimum 658 members (according to the number of senators for life). It comprises both chambers of the Italian Parliament\u2014the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate of the Republic\u2014meeting in joint session, combined with 58 special electors appointed by the regional councils of the 20 regions of Italy. Three representatives come from each region (save for the Aosta Valley, which due to its small size only appoints one), so as to guarantee representation for localities and minorities.\nLegislative branch.\nWith article 48 of the Constitution, which guarantees the right to vote, the people exercise their power through their elected representatives in the Parliament. The Parliament has a bicameral system, and consists of the Chamber of deputies and the Senate, elected every five years. The two houses together form a perfect bicameral system, meaning they perform identical functions, but do so separately.\nThe Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of the bicameral Italian Parliament, has 400 members, of which 392 are elected from Italian constituencies and 8 from Italian citizens living abroad. Members of the Chamber of Deputies are styled \"The Honourable\" (Italian: \"Onorevole\") and meet at Palazzo Montecitorio in Rome.\nThe Senate of the Republic, the upper house of the bicameral Italian Parliament, has 200 members, of which 196 are elected from Italian constituencies and 4 from Italian citizens living abroad. In addition, there is a variable number (currently 6) of senators for life (\"senatori a vita\"), either appointed by the President of the Republic or rightfully so as former Presidents of the Republic. Members of the Senate are styled \"Senator\" or \"The Honourable Senator\" (Italian: \"Onorevole Senatore\") and meet at Palazzo Madama in Rome.\nExecutive branch.\nThe Constitution establishes the Government of Italy as composed of the president of the council (Prime Minister of Italy) and ministers. The President of Italy appoints the prime minister and, on their proposal, the ministers that form its cabinet.\nThe Prime Minister of Italy, officially the President of the Council of Ministers of the Italian Republic, is the head of government of the Italian Republic. The Prime Minister of Italy must have the confidence of the Italian Parliament to stay in office. The Prime Minister of Italy is the president of the Council of Ministers which holds executive power and the position is similar to those in most other parliamentary systems. The formal Italian order of precedence lists the office as being, ceremonially, the fourth-highest Italian state office after the president and the heads of the legislative chambers.\nThe Council of Ministers is the principal executive organ of the Government of Italy. It comprises the President of the council (the Prime Minister of Italy), all the ministers, and the undersecretary to the President of the council. Deputy ministers () and junior ministers () are part of the government, but are not members of the Council of Ministers.\nJudicial branch.\nThe law of Italy has a plurality of sources of production. These are arranged in a hierarchical scale, under which the rule of a lower source cannot conflict with the rule of an upper source (hierarchy of sources). The Constitution of 1948 is the main source.\nThe Constitution states that justice is administered in the name of the people and that judges are subject only to the law. So the judiciary is a branch that is completely autonomous and independent of all other branches of power, even though the Minister of Justice is responsible for the organization and functioning of those services involved with justice and has the power to originate disciplinary actions against judges, which are then administered by the High Council of the Judiciary, presided over by the President.\nThe judiciary of Italy is based on Roman law, the Napoleonic Code and later statutes. It is based on a mix of the adversarial and inquisitorial civil law systems, although the adversarial system was adopted in the Appeal Courts in 1988. Appeals are treated almost as new trials, and three degrees of trial are present. The third is a legitimating trial.\nIn November 2014, Italy accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nBefore 2021, the minimum voting age for all elections was 18 years old, aside for Senate elections, where the minimum voting age was 25 years old. Following the approval of Constitutional Law No. 1/2021, the minimum voting age for the Senate of the Republic became the same as for the Chamber of Deputies (18 years old and no longer 25). The 2022 Italian general election was the first one in which both chambers had identical electoral bodies.\nPolitical parties.\nItaly's dramatic self-renewal transformed the political landscape between 1992 and 1997. Scandal investigations touched thousands of politicians, administrators and businessmen; the shift from a proportional to the scorporo system (with the requirement to obtain a minimum of 4% of the national vote to obtain representation) also altered the political landscape. Party changes were sweeping. The Christian Democratic party dissolved; the Italian People's Party and the Christian Democratic Center emerged. Other major parties, such as the Socialists, saw support plummet. A new liberal movement, , gained wide support among moderate voters. The National Alliance broke from the neo-fascist Italian Social Movement (MSI). A trend toward two large coalitions (one on the center-left and the other on the center-right) emerged from the April 1995 regional elections. For the 1996 national elections, the center-left parties created the Olive Tree coalition while the center-right united again under the House of Freedoms. These coalitions continued into the 2001 and 2007 national elections.\nThis emerging bipolarity represents a major break from the fragmented, multi-party political landscape of the postwar era, although it appears to have reached a plateau since efforts via referendums to further curtail the influence of small parties were defeated in 1999, 2000 and 2009.\nRegional governments.\nFive regions (Aosta Valley, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Sardinia, Sicily and Trentino-Alto Adige/S\u00fcdtirol) have special charters granting them varying degrees of autonomy. The \"raisons d'\u00eatre\" of these charters is in most cases the presence of significant linguistic and cultural minorities, but in the case of Sicily it was to calm down separatist movements. The other 15 regions were in practice established in 1970, even if their ideation had been a much earlier idea.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory of the post-war political landscape.\nFirst Republic: 1946\u20131994.\nThere have been frequent government turnovers since 1945, indeed there have been 66 governments in this time. The dominance of the Christian Democratic party (DC) during much of the post-war period lent continuity and comparative stability to Italy's political situation, mainly dominated by the attempt of keeping the Italian Communist Party (PCI) out of power in order to maintain Cold War equilibrium in the region (see May 1947 crisis).\nThe Italian Communists were in the government only in the national unity governments before 1948, in which their party's secretary Palmiro Togliatti was minister of Justice. After the first democratic elections with universal suffrage in 1948 in which the Christian Democracy and their allies won against the popular front of the Italian Communist and Socialist (PSI) parties, the Italian Communist Party never returned in the government.\nThe system had been nicknamed the \"imperfect bipolarism\", referring to more proper bipolarism in other Western countries (such as France, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States) where right-wing and left-wing parties alternated in government. Meanwhile, rising post-war tensions between right-wing and left-wing parties in Italy brought to the radicalization and proliferation of numerous far-left and far-right terrorist organizations throughout the country.\nEntrance of the Socialists to the government.\nThe main event in the First Republic in the 1960s was the inclusion of the Italian Socialist Party in the government after the reducing edge of the Christian Democracy (DC) had forced them to accept this alliance. In 1960, attempts to incorporate the Italian Social Movement (MSI) within the Tambroni Cabinet, a neo-fascist far-right party and the only surviving political remnant of the Republican Fascist Party that was disbanded in the aftermath of the Italian Civil War (1943\u20131945), led to short-lived riots in the summer of the same year; as a consequence, Fernando Tambroni was eventually replaced by the Christian Democrat politician Amintore Fanfani as Prime Minister of Italy.\nAldo Moro, a relatively left-leaning Christian Democrat, inspired the alliance between the Christian Democracy and the Italian Socialist Party. He would later try to include the Italian Communist Party as well with a deal called the \"historic compromise\". However, this attempt at compromise was stopped by the kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro in 1978 by the Red Brigades (BR), an extremist left-wing terrorist organization.\nThe Italian Communist Party was at this point the largest communist party in Western Europe, and remained such for the rest of its existence. Their ability to attract members was largely due to their pragmatic stance, especially their rejection of political extremism and to their growing independence from the Soviet Union (see Eurocommunism). The Italian Communist Party was especially strong in regions like Emilia-Romagna and Tuscany, where communists had been elected to stable government positions. This practical political experience may have contributed to their taking a more pragmatic approach to politics.\nYears of Lead.\nOn 12 December 1969, a roughly decade-long period of extremist left- and right-wing political terrorism, known as The Years of Lead (as in the metal of bullets, ), began with the Piazza Fontana bombing in the center of Milan. Neofascist Vincenzo Vinciguerra later declared the bombing to be an attempt to push the Italian state to declare a state of emergency in order to lead to a more authoritative state. A bomb left in a bank killed about twenty and was initially blamed on anarchist Giuseppe Pinelli. This accusation was hotly contested by left-wing circles, especially the Maoist Student Movement, which had support in those years from some students of Milan's universities and who considered the bombing to have all the marks of a fascist operation. Their guess proved correct, but only after many years of difficult investigations.\nThe strategy of tension attempted to blame the left for bombings carried out by right-wing terrorists. Fascist \"black terrorists\", such as \"Ordine Nuovo\" and the \"Avanguardia Nazionale\", were in the 1980s and 1990s found to be responsible for several terrorist attacks. On the other extreme of the political spectrum, the leftist Red Brigades carried out assassinations against specific persons, but were not responsible for any blind bombings. The Red Brigades killed socialist journalist Walter Tobagi and in their most famous operation kidnapped and assassinated Aldo Moro, president of the Christian Democracy, who was trying to involve the Communist Party in the government through the \"compromesso storico\" (\"historic compromise\"), to which the radical left as well as Washington were opposed.\nThe last and largest of the bombings, known as the Bologna massacre, destroyed the city's railway station in 1980. This was found to be a neofascist bombing, in which Propaganda Due was involved. On 24 October 1990, Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti (DC) revealed to the Parliament the existence of Gladio, NATO's secret \"stay-behind\" networks which stocked weapons in order to facilitate an armed resistance in case of a communist coup. In 2000, a Parliament Commission report from the Olive Tree (centre-left) coalition concluded that the strategy of tension followed by Gladio had been supported by the United States to \"stop the PCI and, to a certain degree, the PSI [Italian Socialist Party] from reaching executive power in the country\".\n1980s.\nWith the end of the lead years, the Communist Party gradually increased their votes under the leadership of Enrico Berlinguer. The Italian Socialist Party, led by Bettino Craxi, became more and more critical of the communists and of the Soviet Union; Craxi himself pushed in favor of Ronald Reagan's positioning of Pershing II missiles in Italy, a move many communists strongly disapproved of.\nAs the Socialist Party moved to more moderate positions, it attracted many reformists, some of whom were irritated by the failure of the communists to modernize. Increasingly, many on the left began to see the communists as old and out of fashion while Craxi and the socialists seemed to represent a new liberal socialism. The Communist Party surpassed the Christian Democrats only in the European elections of 1984, held barely two days after Berlinguer's death, a passing that likely drew sympathy from many voters. The election of 1984 was to be the only time the Christian Democrats did not emerge as the largest party in a nationwide election in which they participated.\nIn 1987, one year after the Chernobyl disaster following a referendum in that year, a nuclear phase-out was commenced. Italy's four nuclear power plants were closed down, the last in 1990. A moratorium on the construction of new plants, originally in effect from 1987 until 1993, has since been extended indefinitely.\nIn these years, corruption began to be more extensive, a development that would be exposed in the early 1990s and nicknamed \"Tangentopoli\". With the \"mani pulite\" investigation, starting just one year after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the whole power structure faltered and seemingly indestructible parties, such as the Christian Democrats and the Socialist Party, disbanded whereas the Communist Party changed its name to the Democratic Party of the Left and took the role of the Socialist Party as the main social democratic party in Italy. What was to follow was then called the transition to the Second Republic.\nSecond Republic: 1994\u2013present.\nFrom 1992 to 1997, Italy faced significant challenges as voters, disenchanted with past political paralysis, massive government debt, extensive corruption and organized crime's considerable influence, collectively called \"Tangentopoli\" after being uncovered by \"mani pulite\", demanded political, economic and ethical reforms.\nIn the Italian referendums of 1993, voters approved substantial changes, including moving from a proportional to the scorporo system which is largely dominated by a majoritarian electoral system and the abolition of some ministries, some of which have been reintroduced with only partly modified names, such as the Ministry of Agriculture reincarnated as the Ministry of Agricultural Resources.\nMajor political parties, beset by scandal and loss of voter confidence, underwent far-reaching changes. New political forces and new alignments of power emerged in the March 1994 national elections. This election saw a major turnover in the new parliament, with 452 out of 630 deputies and 213 out of 315 senators elected for the first time.\nThe 1994 elections also swept media magnate Silvio Berlusconi (leader of Pole of Freedoms coalition) into office as prime minister. However, Berlusconi was forced to step down in December 1994 when the Northern League withdrew support. The Berlusconi government was succeeded by a technical government headed by Prime Minister Lamberto Dini, which left office in early 1996.\nA series of center-left coalitions dominated Italy's political landscape between 1996 and 2001. In April 1996, national elections led to the victory of a center-left coalition, The Olive Tree, under the leadership of Romano Prodi. Prodi's government became the third-longest to stay in power before he narrowly lost a vote of confidence, by three votes, in October 1998.\nIn May 1999, the Parliament selected Carlo Azeglio Ciampi as the President of the Republic. Ciampi, a former prime minister and Minister of the Treasury and before entering the government also the governor of the Bank of Italy, was elected on the first ballot by a comfortable margin over the required two-thirds of the votes.\nA new government was formed by the Democrats of the Left leader and former communist Massimo D'Alema, but in April 2000 he resigned following poor performance by his coalition in regional elections.\nThe succeeding center-left government, including most of the same parties, was headed by Giuliano Amato, a social democrat, who had previously served as prime minister in 1992\u20131993 and had at the time sworn never to return to active politics.\nNational elections held on 13 May 2001 returned Berlusconi to power at the head of the five-party center-right House of Freedoms coalition, comprising the Prime Minister's own party, Forza Italia, the National Alliance, the Northern League, the Christian Democratic Centre and the United Christian Democrats.\nBetween 17 May 2006 and 21 February 2007, Romano Prodi served as prime minister of Italy following the narrow victory of his The Union coalition over the House of Freedoms led by Silvio Berlusconi in the April 2006 Italian elections. Following a government crisis, Prodi submitted his resignation on 21 February 2007. Three days later, he was asked by President Giorgio Napolitano to stay on as prime minister and he agreed to do so. On 28 February 2007, Prodi narrowly survived a senate no confidence vote.\nOn 24 January 2008, the Prodi II Cabinet went through a new crisis because Minister of Justice Clemente Mastella retracted his support to the Cabinet. Consequently, the Prodi Cabinet lost the vote of confidence and the President Giorgio Napolitano called a new general election.\nThe election set against two new parties, the Democratic Party (founded in October 2007 by the union of the Democrats of the Left and The Daisy) led by Walter Veltroni: and The People of Freedom (federation of Forza Italia, National Alliance and other parties) led by Silvio Berlusconi. The Democratic Party was in alliance with Italy of Values while The People of Freedom forged an alliance with the Northern League and the Movement for Autonomy. The coalition led by Berlusconi won the election and the leader of the centre-right created the Berlusconi IV Cabinet.\nThe Monti government had the highest average age in the western world (64 years), with its youngest members being 57. The previous Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti is 70, his predecessor Silvio Berlusconi was 75 at the time of resignation (2011), the previous head of the government Romano Prodi was 70 when he stepped down (2008), the Italian President Giorgio Napolitano is 88 and his predecessor Carlo Azeglio Ciampi was 86. In 2013, the youngest among the candidates for prime minister (Pier Luigi Bersani) is 62, the others being 70 and 78. The current average age of Italian university professors is 63, of bank directors and CEOs 67, of members of parliament 56 and of labor union representatives 59.\nThe new Italian government headed by Enrico Letta took two months to form and made international news when Luigi Preiti shot at policemen near the building where they were swearing in the new government on Sunday 28 April 2013.\nFormer Prime Minister Matteo Renzi became the youngest prime minister at 39 years and his government had the youngest average age in Europe.\nGrand coalition governments.\nAt different times since his entering the Italian Parliament, Silvio Berlusconi, leader of the centre-right, had repeatedly vowed to stop the \"communists\", while leftist parties had insisted that they would oust Berlusconi. Thus, despite the fact that the executive branch bears responsibility toward the Parliament, the governments led by Mario Monti (since 2011) and by Enrico Letta (since 2013) were called \"unelected governments\" because they won a vote of confidence by a Parliament coalition formed by centre-right and left-right parties that had in turn obtained parliamentary seats by taking part in the elections as competitors, rather than allies. While formally complying with law and procedures, the creation of these governments did not comply with the decision made by people through the election.\nMeanwhile, in 2013, a ruling by the Constitutional Court of Italy established that the Italian electoral system employed to elect the Parliament breached a number of Constitutional requirements. Notably, the Court observed the following four facts: 1) \"such a legislation deprives the elector of any margin of choice of its representatives\"; 2) \"all of the elected parliamentarians, with no exception, lack the support of a personal designation by the citizens\"; 3) the electoral law has regulations which \"exclude any ability on the part of the elector to have an influence on the election of his/her representatives\"; 4) and contains conditions such that \"they alter the representative relationship between electors and elected people...they coerce the electors' freedom of choice in the election of their representatives to the Parliament...and consequently they are at odds with the democratic principle, by affecting the very freedom of vote provided for by art. 48 of the Constitution\". This implies that, despite being called \u2013 and acting as \u2013 a legitimate \"parliament\", the legislative assembly of Italy was chosen with a vote system by which the right to vote was not exercised according to the Italian fundamental chart of citizen's rights and duties. The issue was a major one, to the extent that the Constitutional Court itself ruled that the Italian Parliament should remain in charge only to reform the electoral system and then should be dissolved.\nThe new government led by Matteo Renzi proposed a new electoral law. The so-called Italicum was approved in 2015 and came into force on 1 July 2016.\nSince 2016.\nRenzi resigned after losing a constitutional referendum in December 2016, and was succeeded by Paolo Gentiloni. The centre-left cabinets were plagued by the aftermath of the European debt crisis and the European migrant crisis, that fueled support for populist and right-wing parties. In 2017, the so-called Italicum was replaced by a new electoral law, which uses a parallel voting system to assign seats.\nThe 2018 general election produced once again a hung parliament that resulted in the birth of an unlikely populist government between the anti-system Five Star Movement (M5S) and Salvini's League, led by Giuseppe Conte. After fourteen months, the League withdrew its support to Conte. The M5S subsequently allied with the Democratic Party and other smaller left-wing parties to form a new cabinet, once again headed by Conte.\nIn 2020, Italy was severely hit by the COVID-19 pandemic. From March to May, Conte's government imposed a national quarantine as a measure to limit the spread of the pandemic. The measures, despite being widely approved by public opinion, were also described as the largest suppression of constitutional rights in the history of the republic. With more than 100,000 confirmed victims, Italy was one of the countries with the highest total number of deaths in the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic caused also a severe economic disruption, which resulted in Italy being one of the most affected countries. In February 2021, these extraordinary circumstances brought to the formation of a national coalition government led by former president of the European Central Bank Mario Draghi, following IV's decision to withdraw its support to the second Conte cabinet. On 13 February 2021, Draghi was sworn in as Italy's new prime minister. The Draghi Cabinet had support across the broad political spectrum. In January 2022, Italian President Sergio Mattarella was re-elected to serve a second consecutive seven-year term.\nOn 21 July 2022, following a government crisis which ended with FI, League and the M5S deciding to withdraw their support to the government, Prime Minister Draghi resigned. President Sergio Mattarella consequently dissolved the Parliament and called a snap election, which resulted in the centre-right coalition, led by Giorgia Meloni, gaining an absolute majority of seats. Meloni was formally sworn in as Italy's first female prime minister on 22 October 2022.\nDemocratic performance.\nItaly is generally described as a high-performing or middling democracy by democracy indices. The Economist described Italy as a flawed democracy in its 2024 Democracy Index, notably due to Italy's bad 'political culture' (6.88 out of 10 points). This measures popular support for democracy as opposed to military or expert rule.:11,16 By contrast, Italy received almost full marks for its 'electoral process and pluralism' (9.58 points). In the global ranking, Italy came in 37th place. Similarly, according to the 2025 V-Dem Democracy indices Italy was the 30th most liberal democratic country in the world. It scored top 4 in the world for participative democracy, i.e. active citizen participation via civil society and local elections.\nFreedom House qualified Italy as free with 89 out of 100 points in 2024, citing its competitive multiparty elections and general granting of civil liberties. For press freedom however, Freedom House awarded Italy only five out of six points, citing common defamation suits against journalists with serious financial costs for defendants, even if acquitted after a lengthy procedure. The think tank also raised substantial concerns about Italian LGBT and migrant rights, substantial regional inequalities and endemic corruption in Italy and organised crime. Global State of Democracy classified Italy as a high-range performer in all categories, except for the rule of law. As an example of flawed rule of law, the ranking cites that the central government reassigned the judges responsible for migrant detention, in what the opposition called retaliation. The Polity project describes Italy as a full democracy (10 out of 10) since 1948.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDiscusses political historians such as Silvio Lanaro, Aurelio Lepre, and Nicola Tranfaglia, and studies of Fascism, the Italian Communist party, the role of the Christian Democrats in Italian society, and the development of the Italian parliamentary Republic. https://"}
{"id": "14702", "revid": "50441676", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14702", "title": "Economy of Italy", "text": "Italy has a highly developed social market economy. It is the third-largest national economy in the European Union, the 8th-largest economy in the world by nominal GDP, and the 11th-largest by PPP-adjusted GDP. The country has the second-largest manufacturing industry in Europe, which is also the 7th-largest in the world. Italy has a diversified economy which is dominated by the tertiary service sector. The country is a great power, and is a founding member of the European Union, the eurozone, the Schengen Area, the OECD, the G7 and the G20; it is the eighth-largest exporter in the world, with $611\u00a0billion exported in 2021. Its closest trade ties are with the other countries of the European Union, with whom it conducts about 59% of its total trade. Its largest trading partners are Germany (12.5%) and France (10.3%), followed by the United States (9%), Spain (5.2%), the United Kingdom (5.2%) and Switzerland (4.6%).\nIn the post-World War II period, Italy saw a transformation from an agricultural-based economy which had been severely affected by the consequences of the World Wars, into one of the world's most advanced nations, and a leading country in world trade and exports. According to the Human Development Index, the country enjoys a very high standard of living. According to \"The Economist\", Italy has the world's 8th highest quality of life. Italy owns the world's third-largest gold reserve, and is the third-largest net contributor to the budget of the European Union. Furthermore, the advanced country private wealth is one of the largest in the world. In terms of private wealth, Italy ranks second, after Hong Kong, in private wealth to GDP ratio. Among OECD members, Italy has a highly efficient and strong social security system, which comprises roughly 24.4% of GDP.\nItaly is the world's seventh-largest manufacturing country, characterised by a smaller number of global multinational corporations than other economies of comparable size and many dynamic small and medium-sized enterprises, notoriously clustered in several industrial districts, which are the backbone of the Italian economy. Italy is a large manufacturer and exporter of a significant variety of products. Its products include machinery, vehicles, pharmaceuticals, furniture, food and clothing. Italy has a significant trade surplus. The country is also well known for its influential and innovative business economic sector, an industrious and competitive agricultural sector (Italy is the world's largest wine producer), and manufacturers of creatively designed, high-quality products: including automobiles, ships, home appliances, and designer clothing. Italy is the largest hub for luxury goods in Europe and the third-largest luxury hub globally. Italy has a strong cooperative sector, with the largest share of the population (4.5%) employed by a cooperative in the EU.\nDespite these important achievements, the country's economy today suffers from few structural and non-structural problems. Annual growth rates have often been below the EU average. Italy was somewhat hit by the late-2000s recession. Massive government spending from the 1980s onwards has produced a severe rise in public debt. In addition, Italian living standards are extremely high on average, but have a considerable North\u2013South divide: the average GDP per capita in the much richer Northern Italy significantly exceeds the EU average, while some regions and provinces in Southern Italy are significantly below the average. In Central Italy, GDP per capita is instead average. In recent years, Italy's GDP per capita growth slowly caught-up with the eurozone average, while its employment rate also did. However, economists dispute the official figures because of the large number of informal jobs (estimated to be between 10% and 20% of the labour force) that lift the inactivity or unemployment rates. The shadow economy is highly represented in Southern Italy, while it becomes less intense as one moves north. In real economic conditions, Southern Italy almost matches Central Italy's level.\nHistory.\nThe Italian Renaissance was remarkable in economic development. Venice and Genoa were the trade pioneers, first as maritime republics and then as regional states, followed by Milan, Florence, and the rest of northern Italy. Reasons for their early development are for example the relative military safety of Venetian lagoons, the high population density and the institutional structure which inspired entrepreneurs. The Republic of Venice was the first real international financial center, which slowly emerged from the 9th century to its peak in the 15th century. Tradeable bonds as a commonly used type of security, were invented by the Italian city-states (such as Venice and Genoa) of the late medieval and early Renaissance periods.\nAfter 1600 Italy experienced an economic catastrophe. In 1600 Northern and Central Italy comprised one of the most advanced industrial areas of Europe. There was an exceptionally high standard of living. By 1870 Italy was an economically backward and depressed area; its industrial structure had almost collapsed, its population was too high for its resources, its economy had become primarily agricultural. Wars, political fractionalization, limited fiscal capacity and the shift of world trade to north-western Europe and the Americas were key factors.\nThe economic history of Italy after 1861 can be divided in three main phases: an initial period of struggle after the unification of the country, characterised by high emigration and stagnant growth; a central period of robust catch-up from the 1890s to the 1980s, interrupted by the Great Depression of the 1930s and the two world wars; and a final period of sluggish growth that has been exacerbated by a double-dip recession following the 2008 global financial crush, and from which the country is slowly reemerging only in recent years.\nAge of Industrialization.\nPrior to unification, the economy of the many Italian statelets was overwhelmingly agrarian; however, the agricultural surplus produced what historians call a \"pre-industrial\" transformation in North-western Italy starting from the 1820s, that led to a diffuse, if mostly artisanal, concentration of manufacturing activities, especially in Piedmont-Sardinia under the liberal rule of the Count of Cavour.\nAfter the birth of the unified Kingdom of Italy in 1861, there was a deep consciousness in the ruling class of the new country's backwardness, given that the per capita GDP expressed in PPS terms was roughly half of that of Britain and about 25% less than that of France and Germany. During the 1860s and 1870s, the manufacturing activity was backward and small-scale, while the oversized agrarian sector was the backbone of the national economy. The country lacked large coal and iron deposits and the population was largely illiterate. In the 1880s, a severe farm crisis led to the introduction of more modern farming techniques in the Po valley, while from 1878 to 1887 protectionist policies were introduced with the aim to establish a heavy industry base. Some large steel and iron works soon clustered around areas of high hydropower potential, notably the Alpine foothills and Umbria in central Italy, while Turin and Milan led a textile, chemical, engineering and banking boom and Genoa captured civil and military shipbuilding.\nHowever, the diffusion of industrialisation that characterised the northwestern area of the country largely excluded Venetia and, especially, the South. The resulting Italian diaspora concerned up to 26 million Italians, the most part in the years between 1880 and 1914; by many scholars, it is considered the biggest mass migration of contemporary times. During the Great War, the still frail Italian state successfully fought a modern war, being able of arming and training some 5 million recruits. But this result came at a terrible cost: by the end of the war, Italy had lost 700,000 soldiers and had a ballooning sovereign debt amounting to billions of lira.\nFascist regime.\nItaly emerged from World War I in a poor and weakened condition. The National Fascist Party of Benito Mussolini came to power in 1922, at the end of a period of social unrest. However, once Mussolini acquired a firmer hold of power, laissez-faire and free trade were progressively abandoned in favour of government intervention and protectionism.\nIn 1929, Italy was hit hard by the Great Depression. In order to deal with the crisis, the Fascist government nationalized the holdings of large banks which had accrued significant industrial securities, establishing the Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale. A number of mixed entities were formed, whose purpose was to bring together representatives of the government and of the major businesses. These representatives discussed economic policy and manipulated prices and wages so as to satisfy both the wishes of the government and the wishes of business.\nThis economic model based on a partnership between government and business was soon extended to the political sphere, in what came to be known as corporatism. At the same time, the aggressive foreign policy of Mussolini led to increasing military expenditure. After the invasion of Ethiopia, Italy intervened to support Franco's nationalists in the Spanish Civil War. By 1939, Italy had the highest percentage of state-owned enterprises after the Soviet Union.\nItaly's involvement in World War II as a member of the Axis powers required the establishment of a war economy. The Allied invasion of Italy in 1943 eventually caused the Italian political structure \u2013 and the economy \u2013 to rapidly collapse. The Allies, on the one hand, and the Germans on the other, took over the administration of the areas of Italy under their control. By the end of the war, Italian per capita income was at its lowest point since the beginning of the 20th century.\nPost-war economic miracle.\nAfter the end of World War II, Italy was in rubble and occupied by foreign armies, a condition that worsened the chronic development gap among the more advanced European economies. However, the new geopolitical logic of the Cold War made possible that the former enemy Italy, a hinge country between Western Europe and the Mediterranean, and now a new, fragile democracy threatened by the NATO occupation forces, the proximity of the Iron Curtain and the presence of a strong Communist party, was considered by the United States as an important ally for the Free World, and received under the Marshall Plan over US$1.2\u00a0billion from 1947 to 1951.\nThe end of aid through the Plan could have stopped the recovery but it coincided with a crucial point in the Korean War whose demand for metal and manufactured products was a further stimulus of Italian industrial production. In addition, the creation in 1957 of the European Common Market, with Italy as a founding member, provided more investment and eased exports.\nThese favourable developments, combined with the presence of a large labour force, laid the foundation for spectacular economic growth that lasted almost uninterrupted until the \"Hot Autumn's\" massive strikes and social unrest of 1969\u201370, which then combined with the later 1973 oil crisis and put an abrupt end to the prolonged boom. It has been calculated that the Italian economy experienced an average rate of growth of GDP of 5.8% per year between 1951 and 1963, and 5% per year between 1964 and 1973. Italian rates of growth were second only, but very close, to the West German rates, in Europe, and among the OEEC countries only Japan had been doing better.\nThe 1970s and 1980s: from stagflation to \"il sorpasso\".\nThe 1970s were a period of economic, political turmoil and social unrest in Italy, known as Years of lead. Unemployment rose sharply, especially among the young, and by 1977 there were one million unemployed people under the age of 24. Inflation continued, aggravated by the increases in the price of oil in 1973 and 1979. The budget deficit became permanent and intractable, averaging about 10 per cent of the gross domestic product (GDP), higher than any other industrial country. The lira fell steadily, from Lire\u00a0560 to the U.S. dollar in 1973 to Lire\u00a01,400 in 1982.\nThe economic recession went on into the mid-1980s until a set of reforms led to the independence of the Bank of Italy and a big reduction of the indexation of wages that strongly reduced inflation rates, from 20.6% in 1980 to 4.7% in 1987. The new macroeconomic and political stability resulted in a second, export-led \"economic miracle\", based on small and medium-sized enterprises, producing clothing, leather products, shoes, furniture, textiles, jewellery, and machine tools. As a result of this rapid expansion, in 1987 Italy overtook the UK's economy (an event known as \"il sorpasso\"), becoming the fourth richest nation in the world, after the US, Japan and West Germany. The Milan stock exchange increased its market capitalization more than fivefold in the space of a few years.\nHowever, the Italian economy of the 1980s presented a problem: it was booming, thanks to increased productivity and surging exports, but unsustainable fiscal deficits drove the growth. In the 1990s, the new Maastricht criteria boosted the urge to curb the public debt, already at 104% of GDP in 1992. The consequent restrictive economic policies worsened the impact of the global recession already underway. After a brief recovery at the end of the 1990s, high tax rates and red tape caused the country to stagnate between 2000 and 2008.\nGreat Recession.\nItaly was among the countries hit hardest by the Great Recession of 2008\u20132009 and the subsequent European debt crisis. The national economy shrunk by 6.76% during the whole period, totaling seven-quarters of recession. In November 2011 the Italian bond yield was 6.74 per cent for 10-year bonds, nearing a 7 per cent level where Italy is thought to lose access to financial markets. According to Eurostat, in 2015 the Italian government debt stood at 128% of GDP, ranking as the second biggest debt ratio after Greece (with 175%). However, the biggest chunk of Italian public debt is owned by Italian nationals and relatively high levels of private savings and low levels of private indebtedness are seen as making it the safest among Europe's struggling economies. As a shock therapy to avoid the debt crisis and kick-start growth, the national unity government led by the economist Mario Monti launched a program of massive austerity measures, that brought down the deficit but precipitated the country in a double-dip recession in 2012 and 2013, receiving criticism from numerous economists.\nEconomic recovery.\nIn the period 2014-2019, the economy partially recovered from the disastrous losses incurred during the Great Recession, primarily thanks to strong exports, but nonetheless, growth rates remained well below the Euro area average, meaning that Italy's GDP in 2019 was still 5 per cent below its level in 2008.\nEconomic impact of COVID-19 pandemic (2020-2021).\nStarting from February 2020, Italy was the first country of Europe to be severely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, that eventually expanded to the rest of the world.\nThe economy suffered a massive shock as a result of the lockdown of most of the country's economic activity. After three months, at the end of May 2020, the pandemic was put under control, and the economy started to recover, especially, the manufacturing sector. Overall, it remained surprisingly resilient, although GDP plummeted like in most western countries.\nThe Italian government issued special treasury bills, known as BTP Futura as a COVID-19 emergency funding, waiting for the approval of the E.U. response to the outbreak. Eventually, in July 2020, the European Council approved the 750 billion \u20ac Next Generation EU fund, of which \u20ac209 billion will go to Italy.\nDespite the hard times faced during COVID, Italy's economy had a better recovery after COVID than after the Great Recession. Policies were understandably stricter during the Great Recession causing growth to be more difficult. As a result of the 2008 Financial Crisis, fiscal policy declined, revenue and profits fell, unemployment doubled, household disposable income fell, and a lot of businesses went bankrupt. In comparison, as a result of the COVID pandemic, fiscal response was countercyclical as opposed to procyclical during the Great Recession, investment eventually boosted, and there were less strict credit standards. All of these things plus more helped Italy\u2019s economy recover better post-pandemic as opposed to post-Great Recession. While these are only a few examples, they help explain why Italy was able to recover better after the recession caused by COVID than after the Great Recession.\nEconomic resilience.\nBeginning in 2022, after the COVID-19 pandemic, Italy restarted with a resilient economy which nonetheless had to face the global energy crisis of 2021-2023, involving an increase in gas and other energy prices due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022. This crisis created the need to find an alternative supplier to Russia, subject to European Union sanctions.\nWith rising energy prices, inflation rose in Europe, which was addressed by the European Central Bank with a progressive increase in interest rates.\nFurthermore, the PNRR (Piano Nazionale di Ripresa e Resilienza) had to be re-calibrated and re-agreed with the European Union, to address the new geopolitical situation which led to the energy crisis and damage to supply chains, causing shortages in raw materials. \nIn March 2023, the United States banking crisis occurred with some bankruptcies and restructuring of American banks, however it was soon understood that it was a short-lived economic-financial phenomenon limited to the United States, although with some concern, it has not had an impact in the European area, with the exception of the collapse of Credit Suisse, in Switzerland. As a consequence, Italy is witnessing a tightening of its credit policies.\nFor Italian banks, there was an opportunity to strengthen themselves, thanks to the high rates imposed by the European Central Bank. The new BTP Valore bonds were released, which were very successful among the private operators to whom they were marketed due to the high interest rates. From October 7, 2023, geopolitical tensions are becoming more intense, related to the conflict in the Middle East. In 2024, however, the Italian economy continues to maintain its resilient strength, thanks to the reduction in energy prices, and the maintenance or reduction of oil prices, this stability allows a reduction in inflation. In September 2024, the European Central Bank has decreased interest rates by 0.25 percentage points. The Italian economy copes with a geopolitical scenario that was significantly deteriorating with the exacerbation of ongoing war conflicts. Strategic assets are better protected, in particular the defense sector. Furthermore, the implementation of the PNRR plan, which must be completed by 2026, has brought benefits to many economic sectors.\nLongevity Economy.\nThe Italian economy could appear to be disadvantaged by demographic decline, However, new technologies, including artificial intelligence and robotics, could reduce this disadvantage and help companies grow and develop, as well as the public sector to be efficient, ensuring resilience. In this framework of economic transformation, between environmental sustainability and the application of artificial intelligence in industry, disadvantaged by the persistence and entrenchment of geopolitical conflicts and tensions, trade protectionism and de-globalization, Italian companies are more flexible and optimized to respond to the change in market demand.\nThe Italian economy, in addition to being resilient, is evolving into an economy of longevity.\nOn 23 May 2025, Moody's confirmed Italy\u2019s rating at Baa3 and improved the outlook from stable to positive. Public debt refinancing auctions were a success, with excellent demand among investors, with an ever-increasing percentage held by foreing investors. The work done by the Italian government in controlling public debt and the high savings and low debt of Italian families, combined with a strengthening of the Italian banking sector, which saw the cutting of their tax burden, are a guarantee for the future sustainability of the debt.\nEven Southern Italy, historically characterized by few investment and low growth, is showing significant economic progress.\nOn 10 October 2025, S&amp;P confirmed Italy's rating at BBB+ with a stable outlook.\nHowever, these credit rating agencies' assessment of Italy's rating do not adequately take into account the continued appreciation of Italy's gold reserves, which, as of September 2025, still rank third in the world, providing further assurance for the solvency of Italian public debt.\nOn 21 November 2025, Moody's upgraded Italy's rating from Baa3 to Baa2 with a stable outlook.\nCurrency.\nItaly has a long history of different coinage types, which spans thousands of years. Italy has been influential at a coinage point of view: the medieval Florentine florin, one of the most used coinage types in European history and one of the most important coins in Western history, was struck in Florence in the 13th century, while the Venetian sequin, minted from 1284 to 1797, was the most prestigious gold coin in circulation in the commercial centers of the Mediterranean Sea.\nDespite the fact that the first Italian coinage systems were used in the Magna Graecia and Etruscan civilization, the Romans introduced a widespread currency throughout Italy. Unlike most modern coins, Roman coins had intrinsic value. The early modern Italian coins were very similar in style to French francs, especially in decimals, since it was ruled by the country in the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy. They corresponded to a value of 0.29 grams of gold or 4.5\u00a0grams of silver.\nSince Italy has been for centuries divided into many historic states, they all had different coinage systems, but when the country became unified in 1861, the Italian lira came into place, and was used until 2002. The term originates from \"libra\", the largest unit of the Carolingian monetary system used in Western Europe and elsewhere from the 8th to the 20th century. In 1999, the euro became Italy's unit of account and the lira became a national subunit of the euro at a rate of 1\u00a0euro = 1,936.27\u00a0lire, before being replaced as cash in 2002.\nOverview.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132023 (with IMF staff estimates in 2024\u20132029). Inflation below 5% is in green.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCompanies.\nItalian Companies on 2024 \"Fortune\" Global 500 List.\nThis list displays all 5 Italian companies on the Fortune Global 500 List, which ranks the world's largest companies by annual revenue. The figures below are given in millions of US dollars and are for the fiscal year 2018. Also listed are the headquarters location, net profit and industry sector of each company.\nIn 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Italy is Services with 654,065 companies followed by Retail Trade and Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate with 519,448 and 348,881 companies respectively.\nWealth.\nItaly has 1.3\u00a0million people with a net wealth greater than $1\u00a0million, a total national wealth of $11.020\u00a0trillion, and represents the 9th largest cumulative net wealth globally (it accounts for 2.4% of the net wealth in the world). According to the UBS's Global Wealth Databook 2024, the median wealth per adult is $113,754 (14th in the world), while according to the Allianz's Global Wealth Report 2024, the net financial wealth per capita is \u20ac76,930 (14th in the world).\nThe following top 10 list of Italian billionaires is based on an annual assessment of wealth and assets compiled and published by Forbes in 2017.\nSouthern question.\nIn the decades following the unification of Italy, the northern regions of the country, Lombardy, Piedmont and Liguria in particular, began a process of industrialization and economic development while the southern regions remained behind. At the time of the unification of the country, there was a shortage of entrepreneurs in the south, with landowners who were often absent from their farms as they lived permanently in the city, leaving the management of their funds to managers, who were not encouraged by the owners to make the agricultural estates to the maximum. Landowners invested not in agricultural equipment, but in such things as low-risk state bonds.\nIn southern Italy, the unification of the country broke down the feudal land system, which had survived in the south since the Middle Ages, especially where land had been the inalienable property of aristocrats, religious bodies or the king. The breakdown of feudalism, however, and redistribution of land did not necessarily lead to small farmers in the south winding up with land of their own or land they could work and make profit from. Many remained landless, and plots grew smaller and smaller and so less and less productive, as land was subdivided amongst heirs.\nThis gap between northern and southern Italy, called \"southern question\", was also induced by the region-specific policies selected by the post-unitary governments. For example, the 1887 protectionist reform, instead of safeguarding the arboriculture sectors crushed by 1880s fall in prices, shielded the Po Valley wheat breeding and those Northern textile and manufacturing industries that had survived the liberal years due to state intervention. A similar logic guided the assignment of monopoly rights in the steamboat construction and navigation sectors and, above all, the public spending in the railway sector, which represented 53% of the 1861\u20131911 total.\nThe resources necessary to finance the public spending effort were obtained through highly unbalanced land property taxes, which affected the key source of savings available for investment in the growth sectors absent a developed banking system. Given the inability of the government to estimate the land profitability, especially because of the huge differences among the regional cadasters, this policy irreparably induced large regional discrepancies. This policy destroyed the relationship between the central state and the Southern population by unchaining first a civil war called Brigandage, which brought about 20,000 victims by 1864 and the militarization of the area, and then favouring emigration, especially from 1892 to 1921.\nThe north\u2013south gap was intensified by language differences. Southerners spoke the Sicilian language or a variation of it: a language that developed from Latin and other influences independently of and prior to the Tuscan dialect that was adopted as the official Italian language (\"standard Italian\"). The Sicilian language is a complete, distinct language with its own vocabulary, syntax and grammar rules, the latter being less complex than standard Italian. But because of its similarity to Italian, northerners incorrectly assumed that it was an imperfect dialect of Italian and denigrated it as the \"dialect of the poor and ignorant\". This has led to continued bias by the North against southerners who \"don't speak proper Italian\".\nAfter the rise of Benito Mussolini, the \"Iron Prefect\" Cesare Mori tried to defeat the already powerful criminal organizations flourishing in the South with some degree of success. Fascist policy aimed at the creation of an Italian Empire and Southern Italian ports were strategic for all commerce towards the colonies. With the invasion of Southern Italy during World War II, the Allies restored the authority of the mafia families, lost during the Fascist period, and used their influence to maintain public order. Mussolini also established laws requiring standard Italian to be taught in school, and discouraging the use of local Italian dialects throughout the nation, as well as the Sicilian language.\nIn the 1950s the Cassa per il Mezzogiorno was set up as a huge public master plan to help industrialize the South, aiming to do this in two ways: through land reforms creating 120,000 new smallholdings, and through the \"Growth Pole Strategy\" whereby 60% of all government investment would go to the South, thus boosting the Southern economy by attracting new capital, stimulating local firms, and providing employment. However, the objectives were largely missed, and as a result, the South became increasingly subsidized and state-dependent, incapable of generating private growth itself.\nThe imbalance between North and South was reduced in the 1960s and 1970s through the construction of public works, the implementation of agrarian and scholastic reforms, the expansion of industrialization and the improved living conditions of the population. This convergence process was interrupted, however, in the 1980s. To date, the per capita GDP of the South is just 58% of that of the Center-North, but this gap is mitigated by the fact that there the cost of living is around 10-15% lower on average (with even more differences between small towns and big cities) than that in the North of Italy. In the South the unemployment rate is more than double (6.7% in the North against 14.9% in the South). A study by Censis blames the pervasive presence of criminal organizations for the delay of Southern Italy, estimating an annual loss of wealth of 2.5% in the South in the period between 1981\u20132003 due to their presence, and that without them the per capita GDP of the South would have reached that of the North.\nEconomic sectors.\nPrimary.\nAccording to the last national agricultural census, there were 1.6\u00a0million farms in 2010 (\u221232.4% since 2000) covering (63% of which are located in Southern Italy). The vast majority (99%) are family-operated and small, averaging only in size. Of the total surface area in agricultural use (forestry excluded), grain fields take up 31%, olive tree orchards 8.2%, vineyards 5.4%, citrus orchards 3.8%, sugar beets 1.7%, and horticulture 2.4%. The remainder is primarily dedicated to pastures (25.9%) and feed grains (11.6%). The northern part of Italy produces primarily maize corn, rice, sugar beets, soybeans, meat, fruits and dairy products, while the South specializes in wheat, olive and citrus fruits. Livestock includes 6 million head of cattle, 8.6\u00a0million head of swine, 6.8\u00a0million head of sheep, and 0.9\u00a0million head of goats. The total annual production of the fishing industry in Italy from capture and aquaculture, including crustaceans and molluscs, is around 480,000 tons.\nItaly is the largest producer of wine in the world, and one of the leading producers of olive oil, fruits (apples, olives, grapes, oranges, lemons, pears, apricots, hazelnuts, peaches, cherries, plums, strawberries, and kiwifruits), and vegetables (especially artichokes and tomatoes). The most famous Italian wines are the Tuscan Chianti and the Piedmontese Barolo. Other famous wines are Barbaresco, Barbera d'Asti, Brunello di Montalcino, Frascati, Montepulciano d'Abruzzo, Morellino di Scansano, Amarone della Valpolicella DOCG and the sparkling wines Franciacorta and Prosecco. Quality goods in which Italy specialises, particularly the already mentioned wines and regional cheeses, are often protected under the quality assurance labels DOC/DOP. This geographical indication certificate, which is attributed by the European Union, is considered important to avoid confusion with low-quality mass-produced ersatz products.\nIn fact, Italian cuisine is one of the most popular and copied around the world. The lack or total unavailability of some of its most characteristic ingredients outside of Italy, also and above all to falsifications (or food fraud), leads to the complete denaturalization of Italian ingredients. This phenomenon, widespread in all continents, is better known as \"Italian Sounding\", consisting in the use of words as well as images, colour combinations (the Italian tricolour), geographical references, brands evocative of Italy to promote and market agri-food products which in reality have nothing to do with Italian cuisine.\nSecondary.\nItaly is the world's sixth-largest manufacturing country. Italy has a smaller number of global multinational corporations than other economies of comparable size, but it has a large number of small and medium-sized enterprises, many of them grouped in clusters, which are the backbone of the Italian industry. This results in a manufacturing sector often focused on the export of niche market and luxury products, that is less capable of competing on quantity but is more capable of facing the competition of emerging economies based on lower labour costs, given the higher quality of its products.\nThe industrial districts are regionalized: in the Northwest, there is a large modern group of industries, as in the so-called \"industrial triangle\" (Milan-Turin-Genoa), where there is an area of intense machinery, automotive, aerospace production and shipbuilding; in the Northeast, an area that experienced social and economic development mostly around family-based firms, there are mostly small and medium enterprises of lower technology but high craftsmanship, specializing in machinery, clothing, leather products, footwear, furniture, textiles, machine tools, spare parts, home appliances, and jewellery. In central Italy, there are mostly small and medium-sized companies specializing in products such as textiles, leather, jewellery but also machinery. According to a study carried out in 2015 by the Edison Foundation and Confindustria on the most industrialized provinces in Europe, of the five most industrialized provinces in Europe, three are Italian provinces. Brescia turns out to be the first European province for value added by industry, with an added value over 10 billion euros.\nThe automotive industry in Italy is a significant part of the manufacturing sector, with over 144,000 firms and almost 485,000 employed people in 2015, and a contribution of 8.5% to Italian GDP. Italy's automotive industry is best known for its automobile designs and small city cars, sports and supercars. Italy is one of the significant automobile producers both in Europe and around the world. Today the Italian automotive industry is almost totally dominated by Fiat Group (now included in Stellantis corporation). As well as its own, predominantly mass market model range, Stellantis owns the mainstream Fiat brand, the upmarket Alfa Romeo and Lancia brands, and the exotic Maserati brand. Luxury cars such as Ferrari, Lamborghini, Maserati and Ducati motorcycles are also made in the Northeast region of Emilia-Romagna. Italian cars have won the annual European Car of the Year award several times (with Fiat winning more than any other manufacturer), and have also been awarded the World Car of the Year award.\nTertiary.\nIn Italy, services represent the most important sector of the economy, both in terms of number of employees (67% of the total) and value-added (71%). Furthermore, the sector is by far the most dynamic: over 51% of the more than 5,000,000 companies operating in Italy today belong to the services sector, and in this sector over 67% of new businesses are born. Very important activities in Italy are tourism, trade, services to people and businesses (advanced tertiary).\nIn 2006 the main sectoral data are: for trade, there are 1,600,000 enterprises, equal to 26% of the Italian entrepreneurial fabric, and over 3,500,000 work units. Transport, communications, tourism and consumption outside the home, over 582,000 businesses, equal to 9.5% of the entrepreneurial fabric, almost 3,500,000 work units. Business services: 630,000 registered companies, equal to 10.3% of the entrepreneurial fabric, over 2,800,000 work units. In 2004 the transport sector in Italy generated a turnover of about 119.4\u00a0billion euros, employing 935,700 persons in 153,700 enterprises.\nItalian Bourse, based in Milan, is the Italian stock exchange. It manages and organises the domestic market, regulating procedures for admission and listing of companies and intermediaries and supervising disclosures for listed companies. Following exchange privatisation in 1997, the Italian Bourse was established and became effective on 2 January 1998. On 23 June 2007, the Italian Bourse became a subsidiary of the London Stock Exchange Group. As of April 2018, overall capitalisation for listed companies on Borsa Italiana was worth \u20ac644.3 billion, representing 37.8% of Italian GDP.\nItaly is the fourth most visited country, with a total of 57 million arrivals in 2023. The total contribution of the tourism in Italy to GDP (including wider effects from investment, the supply chain and induced income impacts) was EUR162.7bn in 2014 (10.1% of GDP) and generated 1,082,000 jobs directly in 2014 (4.8% of total employment). Factors of tourist interest in Italy are mainly culture, cuisine, history, fashion, architecture, art, religious sites and routes, wedding tourism, naturalistic beauties, nightlife, underwater sites and spas. Winter and summer tourism are present in many locations in the Alps and the Apennines, while seaside tourism is widespread in coastal locations on the Mediterranean Sea. Italy is the leading cruise tourism destination in the Mediterranean Sea. Small, historical and artistic Italian villages are promoted through the association \"I Borghi pi\u00f9 belli d'Italia\" (literally \"The Most Beautiful Villages of Italy\").\nThe origins of modern banking can be traced to medieval and early Renaissance Italy, to the rich cities like Florence, Lucca, Siena, Venice and Genoa. The Bardi and Peruzzi families dominated banking in 14th-century Florence, establishing branches in many other parts of Europe. One of the most famous Italian banks was the Medici Bank, set up by Giovanni di Bicci de' Medici in 1397. The earliest known state deposit bank, the Bank of Saint George, was founded in 1407 in Genoa, while Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena, founded in 1472, is the world's oldest or second oldest bank in continuous operation, depending on the definition, and the third-largest Italian commercial and retail bank. Today, among the financial services companies, UniCredit is one of the largest banks in Europe by capitalization and Assicurazioni Generali is second largest insurance group in the world by revenue after Axa.\nThe following is a list of the main Italian banks and insurance groups ranked by total assets and gross premiums written.\n \"As of 31 December 2013\"\nInfrastructure.\nEnergy and natural resources.\nItaly consumed about 185 Mtoe of primary energy in 2010. This came mostly from fossil fuels. Among the most used resources are petroleum (mostly used for the transport sector), natural gas (used for electric energy production and heating), coal and renewables. Electricity is produced mainly from natural gas, which accounts for the source of more than half of the total final electric energy produced. Another important source is hydroelectric power, which was practically the only source of electricity until 1960.\nEni, with operations in 79 countries, is considered one of the seven \"Supermajor\" oil companies in the world, and one of the world's largest industrial companies. The Val d'Agri area, Basilicata, hosts the largest onshore hydrocarbon field in Europe. Moderate natural gas reserves, mainly in the Po Valley and offshore Adriatic Sea, have been discovered in recent years and constitute the country's most important mineral resource. \nMost raw materials needed for manufacturing and more than 80% of the country's energy sources are imported (99.7% of the solid fuels demand, 92.5% of oil, 91.2% of natural gas and 13% of electricity). Due to its reliance on imports, Italians pay approximately 45% more than the EU average for electricity.\nIn the last decade, Italy has become one of the world's largest producers of renewable energy, ranking as the second largest producer in the European Union and the ninth in the world. Wind power, hydroelectricity, and geothermal power are also important sources of electricity in the country. Italy was the first country to exploit geothermal energy to produce electricity. The first Italian geothermal power plant was built in Tuscany, which is where all currently active geothermal plants in Italy are located. In 2014 the geothermal production was 5.92 TWh.\nSolar energy production alone accounted for almost 9% of the total electric production in the country in 2014, making Italy the country with the highest contribution from solar energy in the world. The Montalto di Castro Photovoltaic Power Station, completed in 2010, is the largest photovoltaic power station in Italy with 85 MW. Other examples of large PV plants in Italy are San Bellino (70.6 MW), Cellino san Marco (42.7 MW) and Sant\u2019 Alberto (34.6 MW). Italy was also the first country to exploit geothermal energy to produce electricity.\nRenewable sources account for 27.5% of all electricity produced in Italy, with hydro alone reaching 12.6%, followed by solar at 5.7%, wind at 4.1%, bioenergy at 3.5%, and geothermal at 1.6%. The rest of the national demand is covered by fossil fuels (38.2% natural gas, 13% coal, 8.4% oil) and by imports.\nItaly has managed four nuclear reactors until the 1980s, but in 1987, after the Chernobyl disaster, a large majority of Italians passed a referendum opting for phasing out nuclear power in Italy. The government responded by closing existing nuclear power plants and stopping work on projects underway, continuing to work to the nuclear energy program abroad. The national power company Enel operates seven nuclear reactors in Spain (through Endesa) and four in Slovakia (through Slovensk\u00e9 elektr\u00e1rne), and in 2005 made an agreement with \u00c9lectricit\u00e9 de France for a nuclear reactor in France. With these agreements, Italy has managed to access nuclear power and direct involvement in design, construction, and operation of the plants without placing reactors on Italian territory.\nIn the early 1970s Italy was a major producer of pyrites (from the Tuscan Maremma), asbestos (from the Balangero mines), fluorite (found in Sicily), and salt. At the same time, it was self-sufficient in aluminium (from Gargano), sulphur (from Sicily), lead, and zinc (from Sardinia). By the beginning of the 1990s, however, it had lost all its world-ranking positions and was no longer self-sufficient in those resources. There are no substantial deposits of iron, coal, or oil. Italy is one of the world's leading producers of pumice, pozzolana, and feldspar. Another mineral resource for which Italy is well-known is marble, especially the world-famous white Carrara marble from the Massa and Carrara quarries in Tuscany.\nTransportation.\nRegarding the national road network, in 2002 there were of serviceable roads in Italy, including of motorways, state-owned but privately operated by Atlantia. In 2005, about 34,667,000 passenger cars (590 cars per 1,000 people) and 4,015,000 goods vehicles circulated on the national road network.\nItaly was the first country in the world to build motorways, the so-called \"autostrade\", reserved for fast traffic and for motor vehicles only. The \"Autostrada dei Laghi\" (\"Lakes Motorway\"), the first built in the world, connecting Milan to Lake Como and Lake Maggiore, and now parts of the A8 and A9 motorways, was devised by Piero Puricelli and was inaugurated in 1924. He received the first authorization to build a public-utility fast road in 1921. By the end of the 1930s, over 400 kilometres of multi- and dual-single-lane motorways were constructed throughout Italy, linking cities and rural towns. Italy is one of the countries with the most vehicles per capita, with 690 per 1000 people in 2010.\nThe national railway network is also extensive, especially in the north, totalizing 16,862\u00a0km of which 69% are electrified and on which 4,937 locomotives and railcars circulate. It is the 12th largest in the world, and is operated by state-owned Ferrovie dello Stato, while the rail tracks and infrastructure are managed by Rete Ferroviaria Italiana. While a number of private railroads exist and provide mostly commuter-type services, the national railway also provides sophisticated high-speed rail service that joins the major cities. The Florence\u2013Rome high-speed railway was the first high-speed line opened in Europe when more than half of it opened in 1977. In 1991 the TAV was created for the planning and construction of high-speed rail lines along Italy's most important and saturated transport routes (Milan-Rome-Naples and Turin-Milan-Venice). High-speed trains include ETR-class trains, with the Frecciarossa 1000 reaching 400\u00a0km/h. Higher-speed trains are divided into three categories: Frecciarossa () trains operate at a maximum speed of 300\u00a0km/h on dedicated high-speed tracks; Frecciargento () trains operate at a maximum speed of 250\u00a0km/h on both high-speed and mainline tracks; and Frecciabianca () trains operate on high-speed regional lines at a maximum speed of 200\u00a0km/h. Italy has 11 rail border crossings over the Alpine mountains with its neighbouring countries.\nSince October 2021, Italy's flag carrier airline is ITA Airways, which took over the brand, the IATA ticketing code, and many assets belonging to the former flag carrier Alitalia, after its bankruptcy. ITA Airways serves 44 destinations (as of October 2021[ [update]]) and also operates the former Alitalia regional subsidiary, Alitalia CityLiner. The country also has regional airlines (such as Air Dolomiti), low-cost carriers, and Charter and leisure carriers (including Neos, Blue Panorama Airlines and Poste Air Cargo). Major Italian cargo operators are Alitalia Cargo and Cargolux Italia. Italy is the fifth in Europe by number of passengers by air transport, with about 148 million passengers or about 10% of the European total in 2011. There are approximately 130 airports in Italy, of which 99 have paved runways (including the two hubs of Leonardo Da Vinci International in Rome and Malpensa International in Milan).\nItaly has been the final destination of the Silk Road for many centuries. In particular, the construction of the Suez Canal intensified sea trade with East Africa and Asia from the 19th century. Since the end of the Cold War and increasing European integration, trade relations, which were often interrupted in the 20th century, have intensified again. In 2004 there were 43 major seaports including the Port of Genoa, the country's largest and the third busiest by cargo tonnage in the Mediterranean Sea. Due to the increasing importance of the maritime Silk Road with its connections to Asia and East Africa, the Italian ports for Central and Eastern Europe have become important in recent years. In addition, the trade in goods is shifting from the European northern ports to the ports of the Mediterranean Sea due to the considerable time savings and environmental protection. In particular, the deep water port of Trieste in the northernmost part of the Mediterranean Sea is the target of Italian, Asian and European investments. The national inland waterway network comprises of navigable rivers and channels. In 2007 Italy maintained a civilian air fleet of about 389,000 units and a merchant fleet of 581 ships.\nPoverty.\nIn 2015, poverty in Italy hit the highest levels in the previous 10 years. The level of absolute poverty for a two-person family was \u20ac1050.95/month. The poverty line per capita changed by region from \u20ac552.39/month to \u20ac819.13/month. The number of those in absolute poverty rose nearly an entire per cent in 2015, from 6.8% in 2014 to 7.6% in 2015. In Southern Italy the numbers are even higher, with 10% living in absolute poverty, up from 9 per cent in 2014. Northern Italy is better off at 6.7%, but this is still an increase from 5.7% in 2014.\nThe national statistics reporting agency, ISTAT, defines absolute poverty as those who can not buy goods and services which they need to survive. In 2015, the proportion of poor households in relative poverty also increased to 13.7 from 12.9 in 2014. ISTAT defines relative poverty as people whose disposable income is less than around half the national average. The unemployment rate in February 2016 remained at 11.7%, which has been the same for almost a year, but even having a job does not guarantee freedom from poverty.\nThose who have at least one family member employed still suffer from 6.1% to 11.7% poverty, the higher number being for those who have factory jobs. The numbers are even higher for the younger generations because their unemployment rate is over 40%. Also, children are hit hard. In 2014, 32% of those aged 0\u201317 were at risk of poverty or social exclusion, which is one child out of three. While in the north the poverty rate is about the same as that of France and Germany, in the south it is almost double that figure. In the last ISTAT report, poverty is in decline. According to the 2022 ISTAT Poverty Report, 2.18 million households and 5.6 million people live in absolute poverty in Italy.\nAccording to Eurostat, by 2023, 63% of Italian households will struggle to make ends meet, making it one of the European countries with the most widespread economic difficulties, surpassing France, Poland, Spain and Portugal. The European average is 45.5%.\nThe average annual gross salary in Italy was \u20ac41,646 ($44,893) in 2022, placing the country at the twenty-first position in the OECD area, with lower wages compared to the EU average. Many Italians still face significant challenges in meeting basic living expenses due to high living costs and regional economic disparities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "14703", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14703", "title": "Telecommunications in Italy", "text": "The most important telecommunications in Italy are telephone, radio, television and the Internet.\nTelevision channels.\nSee also: \nMediaset.\nSee also: Mediaset\nInternet.\nThe Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Italy is .it and is sponsored by National Research Council. The .eu domain is also used, as it is shared with other European Union member states. Currently Internet access is available to businesses and home users in various forms, including dial-up, fiber, cable, DSL and wireless.\nAccording to netindex.com, the Italian average for fixed connections is below the global average (96.98\u00a0Mbit/s download and 51.28\u00a0Mbit/s Up) with an average speed of 79.62\u00a0Mbit/s download and 31.41\u00a0Mbit/s in upload.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14704", "revid": "35494297", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14704", "title": "Transport in Italy", "text": " \nItaly has a well developed transport infrastructure. The Italian rail network is extensive (), especially in the north, and it includes a high-speed rail network that joins the major cities of Italy from Naples through northern cities such as Milan and Turin. The Florence\u2013Rome high-speed railway was the first high-speed line opened in Europe when more than half of it opened in 1977. Italy has 2,507 people and 12.46\u00a0km2 per kilometer of rail track, giving Italy the world's 13th largest rail network. The Italian rail network is operated by state-owned Ferrovie dello Stato, while the rail tracks and infrastructure are managed by Rete Ferroviaria Italiana.\nItaly's paved road network is also widespread, with a total length of about . \nIt comprises both an extensive motorway network (), mostly toll roads, and national and local roads. Italy was the first country in the world to build motorways, the so-called \"autostrade\", reserved for fast traffic and for motor vehicles only. The \"Autostrada dei Laghi\" (\"Lakes Motorway\"), the first built in the world, connecting Milan to Lake Como and Lake Maggiore, and now parts of the A8 and A9 motorways, was devised by Piero Puricelli and was inaugurated in 1924. The Strade Statali is the Italian national network of state highways. The total length for this network is about . The routes of some state highways derive from ancient Roman roads, such as the Strada statale 7 Via Appia, which broadly follows the route of the Roman road of the same name.\nItaly is the fifth in Europe by number of passengers by air transport, with about 148 million passengers or about 10% of the European total in 2011. In 2012 there were 130 airports in Italy, including the two hubs of Malpensa International Airport in Milan and Leonardo da Vinci International Airport in Rome. Since October 2021, Italy's flag carrier airline is ITA Airways, which took over the brand, the IATA ticketing code, and many assets belonging to the former flag carrier Alitalia, after its bankruptcy. The country also has regional airlines (such as Air Dolomiti), low-cost carriers, and Charter and leisure carriers (including Neos, Blue Panorama Airlines and Poste Air Cargo). Major Italian cargo operators are ITA Airways Cargo and Cargolux Italia.\nBecause of its long seacoast, Italy also has many harbors for the transportation of both goods and passengers. In 2004 there were 43 major seaports including the Port of Genoa, the country's largest and the third busiest by cargo tonnage in the Mediterranean Sea. Due to the increasing importance of the maritime Silk Road with its connections to Asia and East Africa, the Italian ports for Central and Eastern Europe have become important in recent years. In addition, the trade in goods is shifting from the European northern ports to the ports of the Mediterranean Sea due to the considerable time savings and environmental protection. In particular, the deep water port of Trieste in the northernmost part of the Mediterranean Sea is the target of Italian, Asian and European investments. Transport networks in Italy are integrated into the Trans-European Transport Networks.\nRailways.\nThe Italian rail network is extensive, especially in the north, and it includes a high-speed rail network that joins the major cities of Italy from Naples through northern cities such as Milan and Turin. Italy has 2,507 people and 12.46\u00a0km2 per kilometer of rail track, giving Italy the world's 13th largest rail network. Italy has 11 rail border crossings over the Alpine mountains with its neighbouring countries.\nHigher-speed trains are divided into three categories: Frecciarossa () trains operate at a maximum speed of on dedicated high-speed tracks; Frecciargento () trains operate at a maximum speed of on both high-speed and mainline tracks; and Frecciabianca () trains operate on high-speed regional lines at a maximum speed of .\nThe Italian railway system has a length of , of which standard gauge and electrified. The active lines are . The network is recently growing with the construction of the new high-speed rail network.\nThe narrow gauge tracks are: \nA major part of the Italian rail network is managed and operated by Ferrovie dello Stato Italiane, a state owned company. Other regional agencies, mostly owned by public entities such as regional governments, operate on the Italian network. The rail tracks and infrastructure are managed by Rete Ferroviaria Italiana. The Italian railways are subsidised by the government, receiving \u20ac8.1 billion in 2009.\nTravellers who often make use of the railway during their stay in Italy might use Rail Passes, such as the European Inter-Rail or Italy's national and regional passes. These rail passes allow travellers the freedom to use regional trains during the validity period, but all high-speed and intercity trains require a 10-euro reservation fee. Regional passes, such as \"Io viaggio ovunque Lombardia\", offer one-day, multiple-day and monthly period of validity. There are also saver passes for adults, who travel as a group, with savings up to 20%. Foreign travellers should purchase these passes in advance, so that the passes could be delivered by post prior to the trip. When using the rail passes, the date of travel needs to be filled in before boarding the trains.\nHigh speed trains.\nThe Italian high-speed service began in 1938 with an electric-multiple-unit ETR 200, designed for , between Bologna and Naples. It too reached in commercial service, and achieved a world mean speed record of between Florence and Milan in 1938.\nMajor works to increase the commercial speed of the trains already started in 1967: the Rome-Florence \"super-direct\" line was built for trains up to , and reduced the journey time to less than two hours. The Florence\u2013Rome high-speed railway was the first high-speed line opened in Europe when more than half of it opened in 1977.\nIn 2009 a new high-speed line linking Milan and Turin, operating at , opened to passenger traffic, reducing the journey time from two hours to one hour. In the same year, the Milan-Bologna line was open, reducing the journey time to 55 minutes. Also the Bologna-Florence high-speed line was upgraded to for a journey time of 35 minutes.\nSince then, it is possible to travel from Turin to Salerno (ca. ) in less than five hours. More than 100 trains per day are operated.\nThe main public operator of high-speed trains (\"alta velocit\u00e0 AV\", formerly Eurostar Italia) is Trenitalia, part of FSI. Trains are divided into three categories (called \"Le Frecce\"): \"Frecciarossa\" (\"Red arrow\") trains operate at a maximum of on dedicated high-speed tracks; \"Frecciargento\" (Silver arrow) trains operate at a maximum of on both high-speed and mainline tracks; \"Frecciabianca\" (White arrow) trains operate at a maximum of on mainline tracks only.\nSince 2012, a new and Italy's first private train operator, NTV (branded as Italo), run high-speed services in competition with Trenitalia. Even nowadays, Italy is the only country in Europe with a private high-speed train operator.\nConstruction of the Milan-Venice high-speed line has begun in 2013 and in 2016 the Milan-Treviglio section has been opened to passenger traffic; the Milan-Genoa high-speed line (Terzo Valico dei Giovi) is also under construction.\nToday it is possible to travel from Rome to Milan in less than three hours (2h 55') with the Frecciarossa 1000, the new high-speed train. To cover this route, there's a train every 30 minutes.\nNight trains.\nThe \"Nightjet\" of the Austrian Federal Railways (\u00d6BB) serves different big cities in Italy like Rome, Venice, Florence and Milano. The trains can be used for rides inside Italy as well as for journeys abroad.\n\"Nightjet\" trains offers beds in sleeper carriages (Nightjet's most comfortable service category), couchette carriages, and seated carriages. On certain connections, cars can also be transported on the train. Bikes can be transported in a bike transport bag, or on some connections also in special bike racks.\nIntercity trains.\nWith the introduction of high-speed trains, intercity trains are limited to few services per day on mainline and regional tracks.\nThe daytime services (\"InterCity\" IC), while not frequent and limited to one or two trains per route, are essential in providing access to cities and towns off the railway's mainline network. The main routes are Trieste to Rome (stopping at Venice, Bologna, Prato, Florence and Arezzo), Milan to Rome (stopping at Genoa, La Spezia, Pisa and Livorno (stopping at Parma, Modena, Bologna, Prato, Florence and Arezzo), Bologna to Lecce (stopping at Rimini, Ancona, Pescara, Bari and Brindisi) and Rome to Reggio di Calabria (stopping at Latina and Naples). In addition, the Intercity trains provide a more economical means of long-distance rail travel within Italy.\nThe night trains (\"Intercity Notte\" ICN) have sleeper compartments and washrooms, but no showers on board. Main routes are Rome to Bolzano/Bozen (calling at Florence, Bologna, Verona, Rovereto and Trento), Milan to Lecce (calling at Piacenza, Parma, Reggio Emilia, Modena, Bologna, Faenza, Forl\u00ec, Cesena, Rimini, Ancona, Pescara, Bari and Brindisi), Turin to Lecce (calling at Alessandria, Voghera, Piacenza, Parma, Bologna, Rimini, Pescara, Termoli, San Severo,Foggia, Barletta, Bisceglie, Molfetta, Bari, Monopoli, Fasano, Ostuni and Brindisi) and Reggio di Calabria to Turin (calling at Naples, Rome, Livorno, La Spezia and Genova). Most portions of these ICN services run during the night; since most services take 10 to 15 hours to complete a one-way journey, their day-time portion provide extra train connections to complement with the Intercity services.\nThere are a total of 86 intercity trains running within Italy per day.\nRegional trains.\nTrenitalia operates regional services (both fast \"veloce RGV\" and stopping \"REG\") throughout Italy.\nRegional train agencies exist: their train schedules are largely connected to and shown on Trenitalia, and tickets for such train services can be purchased through Trenitalia's national network. Other regional agencies have separate ticket systems which are not mutually exchangeable with that of Trenitalia. These \"regional\" tickets could be purchased at local newsagents or tobacco stores instead.\nIn addition to these agencies, there's a great deal of other little operators, such as AMT Genova for the Genova-Casella railway.\nRail links with adjacent countries.\nItaly has 11 rail border crossings over the Alpine mountains with her neighbouring countries: six are designated as mainline tracks and two are metre-gauge tracks. The six mainline border crossings are: two with France (one for Nice and Marseille; the other for Lyon and Dijon), two with Switzerland (one for Brig, Bern and Geneva; the other for Chiasso, Lugano, Lucerne and Z\u00fcrich), and two with Austria (one for Innsbruck; the other for Villach, Graz and Vienna). The two-metre-gauge track crossings are located at the border town of Tirano (enters Switzerland's Canton Graub\u00fcnden/Grisons) and Domodossola (enters Switzerland's Locarno).\nThere is a railway line connecting Italy's northeastern port of Trieste to Slovenia, but no passenger or freight services operate on this track. Consequently, there is no direct connections between Trieste and Ljubljana, the capital of Slovenia, despite the proximity of both cities.\nThe Vatican City is also linked to Italy with a railway line serving a single railway station, the Vatican City railway station. This line is used only for special occasions.\nSan Marino used to have a narrow gauge rail connection with Italy; this was dismantled in 1944.\nStations.\nItaly's top ten railway stations by annual passengers are:\nRapid transit.\nMetro.\nThe Rome Metro is a rapid transit system that operates in Rome, Italy. It started operation in 1955, making it the oldest in the country. The Metro comprises three lines \u2013 A (orange), B (blue) and C (green) \u2013 which operate on of route, serving 73 stations. It has a daily ridership of approximately 820,000 passengers, and an annual traffic of approximately 320 million passengers.\nMilan Metro is the largest rapid transit system in Italy in terms of length, number of stations and ridership; and the fifth longest in the European Union and the eighth in the Europe. The network consists of five lines (two of which driverless) with a total network length of , and a total of 125 stations, mostly underground. The first line, Line 1, opened in 1964; Line 2 opened 5 years later in 1969, Line 3 in 1990, Line 5 (driverless) in 2013, and Line 4 (driverless) in 2022. \nThe Naples Metro is a rapid transit system serving the city of Naples, Campania, Italy and some parts of the adjacent \"comuni\" of its metropolitan area through Line 11. The system comprises three underground rapid transit lines (Line 1, Line 6 and Line 11). It is the third largest underground network in Italy, behind Milan and Rome. The Art Stations of the Naples Metro consist of 12 stations along Line 1 and Line 6 of the Naples Metro with art installations. In total, there are more than 250 works of art. On 30 November 2012, the Toledo station was elected by \"The Daily Telegraph\" as the most beautiful subway station in Europe and the world, a recognition echoed by CNN\u2019s rankings; while the Materdei station resulted at 13th place.\nSeven Italian cities have metro systems:\nCommuter rail.\n15 cities have commuter rail systems; cities without wikilink are those listed just above for their metro rail system.\nAirport shuttles.\nAirport shuttle buses are highly developed and convenient for rail travellers. Most airports in Italy are not connected to the railway network, except for Rome Fiumicino Airport, Milan Malpensa Airport and Turin Caselle Airport. In Bologna, there is the monorail Marconi Express, connecting Bologna Airport to the main railway station. Linate Airport in Milan has been connected to line 4 of the Milan Metro since 2022.\nTram-train.\n2 cities have tram-train system, Rome and Sassari. The Rome\u2013Giardinetti railway connects Laziali (a regional train station some from Termini's main concourse) with Giardinetti to the east just past the Grande Raccordo Anulare, Rome's orbital motorway. It is run by ATAC, the company responsible for public transportation in the city, which also operates the Rome Metro. The present railway is the only part of the old and longer Rome\u2013Fiuggi\u2013Alatri\u2013Frosinone railway to be in service. The latest shortening of the line occurred in 2008 with the closing of the Giardinetti\u2013Pantano section, which has now become part of the Metro Line C. The line had been due to be dismantled in 2016 to be replaced with a bus lane along Via Casilina, but in March 2015 it was announced that the line would instead be retained and modernised.\nMetrosassari, also called \"Sassari tramway\", \"Sassari tram-train\" or \"Sassari metro-tramway\" ( or ) is the commercial name of a tram-train line in Sassari, Sardinia, Italy, operated by the regional public transport company \"ARST\" (\"Azienda Regionale Sarda Trasporti\"). Despite having been built in the early 2000s, in the urban section the line was built with single track and narrow gauge, to connect with the same gauge used in the secondary railway lines in Sardinia. The tramway part of the line (\"Stazione\" - \"Emiciclo Garibaldi\") opened in October 2006, linking the railway station with the city centre via the hospital district. On 27 September 2009 the line was extended into the peripheral district of Santa Maria di Pisa, running on the electrified portion of the Sassari\u2013Sorso railway. The main part of the network is in 2013 in advanced development phase. It is under construction is the extension of the line from Santa Maria di Pisa to Li Punti and Baldinca, and the electrification of the railway to Sorso, 10\u00a0km from Sassari. It is also planned to convert and electrify the 28\u00a0km Sassari-Alghero railway to allow the trams to reach the village of Olmedo, Fertilia Airport and the town of Alghero.\nRoads.\nRoads in Italy are an important mode of transport in Italy. The classification of the roads of Italy is regulated by the Italian traffic code, both from a technical and administrative point of view. The street nomenclature largely reflects the administrative classification. Italy's paved road network is well developed.\nItaly is one of the countries with the most vehicles per capita, with 690 per 1000 people in 2010. Italy has a total of of paved roads, of which are motorways with a general speed limit of , which since 2009 was provisioned for extension up to . The speed limit in towns is usually and less commonly .\nThe planned Strait of Messina Bridge was approved in August 2025 and will connect Calabria with Sicily when it opens in 2032 and will become the longest suspension bridge in the world.\nTechnical classification.\nMotorways.\nItaly was the first country in the world to build motorways, the so-called \"autostrade\", reserved for fast traffic and for motor vehicles only. The \"Autostrada dei Laghi\" (\"Lakes Motorway\"), the first built in the world, connecting Milan to Lake Como and Lake Maggiore, and now parts of the Autostrada A8 and the Autostrada A9, was devised by Piero Puricelli and was inaugurated in 1924.\nOther motorways (or \"autostrade\") built before World War II in Italy were Naples-Pompeii, Florence-Pisa, Padua-Venice, Milan-Turin, Milan-Bergamo-Brescia and Rome-Ostia. The total length of the Italian motorway system is about , as of 30 July 2022. To these data are added 13 motorway spur routes, which extend for . The density is of motorway for every of Italian territory.\nItaly was the first country in the world to build motorways, the so-called \"autostrade\", reserved for fast traffic and for motor vehicles only. The \"Autostrada dei Laghi\" (\"Lakes Motorway\"), the first built in the world, connecting Milan to Lake Como and Lake Maggiore, and now parts of the Autostrada A8 and the Autostrada A9, was devised by Piero Puricelli and was inaugurated in 1924.\nOther motorways (or \"autostrade\") built before World War II in Italy were Naples-Pompeii, Florence-Pisa, Padua-Venice, Milan-Turin, Milan-Bergamo-Brescia and Rome-Ostia. The total length of the Italian motorway system is about , as of 30 July 2022. To these data are added 13 motorway spur routes, which extend for . The density is of motorway for every of Italian territory.\nIn particular, of the Italian motorway network have three lanes per carriageway, km have four lanes per carriageway, have five lanes per carriageway, while the remaining part is two lanes per carriageway. The density is of motorway for every of Italian territory.\nItalian motorways (or \"autostrade\") are mostly managed by concessionaire companies. From 1 October 2012 the granting body is the Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport and no longer Anas and the majority ( in 2009) are subject to toll payments. On Italian motorways, the toll applies to almost all motorways not managed by Anas. The collection of motorway tolls, from a tariff point of view, is managed mainly in two ways: either through the \"closed motorway system\" (km travelled) or through the \"open motorway system\" (flat-rate toll).\nItaly's motorways (or \"autostrade\") have a standard speed limit of for cars. Limits for other vehicles (or when visibility is poor due to weather) are lower. Legal provisions allow operators to set the limit to on their concessions on a voluntary basis if there are three lanes in each direction and a working SICVE, or Safety Tutor, which is a speed-camera system that measures the average speed over a given distance.\nExtra-urban roads.\nIn Italy, a dual carriageway is often called \"superstrada\" (meaning \"expressway\"), but this name is unofficial. Italian traffic code (\"Codice della strada\") divides extra-urban dual carriageways into two different classifications:\nUrban roads.\nThese are the roads present within inhabited centers. Urban roads are of three types:\nAdministrative classification.\nState roads.\nThe Strade Statali (; sg. ), abbreviated \"SS\", is the Italian national network of state highways. The total length for this network is about . The Italian state highway network are maintained by ANAS. From 1928 until 1946 state highways were maintained by Azienda Autonoma Statale della Strada (AASS). The routes of some state highways derive from ancient Roman roads, such as the Strada statale 7 Via Appia, which broadly follows the route of the Roman road of the same name.\nState highways can be technically defined as main extra-urban roads (type B road) or as secondary extra-urban roads (type C road). State highways that cross towns with a population of at least 10,000 inhabitants are urban roads (type D and E) under the jurisdiction of the relevant \"comuni\". The state highway that cross towns or villages with a population of less than 10,000 inhabitants are urban roads (type D and E) under the jurisdiction of the \"comune\", subject to authorization from ANAS.\nThe Italian state highway network has approximately of roads identified with the acronym SS. The body that manages these roads, with full state participation, is ANAS (National Autonomous Roads Company), founded in 1946, on the ashes of the old AASS (Autonomous State Roads Company) which in turn was established in 1928. Due to urbanization processes, it has abandoned some sections of state highways, following their acquisition by the interested \"comuni\", who now take care of their maintenance.\nRegional roads.\nA Strada Regionale (Italian for \"regional road\"; pl. \"strade regionali\"), abbreviated SR, is a type of Italian road maintained by the regions they traverse. A regional road is less important than a state highway, but more important than a provincial road. The concept of regional road was introduced for the first time in Italy, limited to the autonomous region of Aosta Valley (where no provincial body exists), with regional law no. 1 of 10 October 1950.\nThe first roads (excluding Aosta Valley) classified as SR (acronym for \"strada regionale\"; \"regional road\") were created following legislative decree no. 112 of 1998, in 2001. In particular, articles 99 and 101 provided for the transfer of ownership and responsibilities relating to state highways not included in the national road network from the State to the regions, which then regulated the matter autonomously. For organizational reasons, many regions have entrusted the former state highways to the provinces, while maintaining the acronym SR.\nIn addition to these regional roads created following the downgrading of the state network, there are regional roads immediately classified as such (for example SR 6 in Apulia although subsequently downgraded to provincial) or former provincial regional roads such as SR 89, ex SP 62, in Veneto.\nThe regional roads can be technically classified as \"strade extraurbane principali\" (type B road; \"main extra-urban roads\") or as \"strade extraurbane secondarie\" (type C road; \"secondary extra-urban roads\"). If they cross inhabited centers with a population greater than 9,999 inhabitants, they are roads under municipal jurisdiction and therefore urban (type D and E). If they pass through centers or inhabited areas with a population of less than 9,999 inhabitants, they are urban (type D and E), but the responsibility remains with the manager.\nIn addition to the roads identified by the acronym SR, there are roads managed by the region but identified by the acronym SP (for example, many SPs in the province of Belluno are managed by the Veneto Strade company with a 30% stake in the region of the same name).\nProvincial roads.\nA Strada Provinciale (Italian for \"provincial road\"; pl. \"strade provinciali\"), abbreviated SP, is an Italian road that is maintained by provinces or metropolitan cities. In Veneto from 2002, state highways downgraded as provincial roads are maintained by the regional company Veneto Strade. A provincial road is less important than a regional road, but more important than municipal roads.\nBefore the entry into force of the new Italian traffic code (legislative decree n\u00b0 285 of 30 April 1992) the provincial classification of a road had to take place by decree of the Minister of Public Works; over the years, this has made the same procedures too centralized and therefore slower and more difficult, until the new Italian traffic code assigned the competence on classification to the regions (Veneto, however, has further devolved the competences of classification and declassification to the provinces themselves).\nMunicipal roads.\nA Strada Comunale (Italian for \"municipal road\"; pl. \"strade comunali\"), abbreviated SC, is an Italian road that is maintained by \"comune\", hence the name. They can be roads owned by \"comune\" (inside population centers) or roads managed by the \"comune\" (outside population centers). The category of strade comunali includes extra-urban roads considered to be of municipal importance, all urban roads as well as the urban sections of state, regional or provincial roads, which pass through centers with 10,000 or more inhabitants. The urban sections of state, regional or provincial roads that pass through towns with fewer than 10,000 inhabitants are not municipal.\nStrade comunali within inhabited centers can be classified from a construction-technical point of view either as urban roads (type D and E) or as local roads (type F). Extra-urban municipal roads (outside inhabited centers) can be technically classified as \"strade extraurbane principali\" (type B; \"main extra-urban roads\"), \"strade extraurbane secondarie\" (type C; \"secondary extra-urban roads\"), \"strade urbane di scorrimento\" (type D; \"urban traffic roads\") or \"strada locale\" (type F; local roads).\nOther classifications.\nThese classifications are not provided for by the Italian traffic code.\nMajor communication road.\nIn Italy, some roads of national importance are called \"strada di grande comunicazione\" (abbreviated to SGC; \"major communication roads\"), an expression coined by the Touring Club Italiano and used in its maps and publications since the 1920s.\nLaw no. 126 of 12 February 1958, as amended by law no. 167 of 9 April 1971, classified state roads either as major trunk roads or as ordinary state roads.\nFor law n. 531 of 12 August 1982 (GU no. 223 of 14/08/1982), the main roads were classified as motorways, Alpine tunnels, motorway junctions, and roads that connect the main road network with the neighboring states, roads that constitute the major routes of national traffic (including Sicily and Sardinia), roads that constitute the main inter-regional connections and roads connecting to the first category ports and the most important airports.\nThe acronym SGC is not used to identify other types of roads (as is the case with the acronyms A, SS, SR, SP) but is used in address documents.\nSuperstrada.\nA \"superstrada\" (\"super road\") is a fast road, often with separate carriageways in each direction, reserved for the circulation of motor vehicles and without at-grade intersections and urban crossings. The colloquial classification of \"superstrada\" refers to all roads classified \"technically\" as main extra-urban roads and, in general, to secondary two-lane extra-urban roads.\nEuropean classification.\nSome Italian roads, if they are part of the International E-road network, are also identified by another alphanumeric abbreviation. This acronym is made up of the letter \"E\" and one or two digits. The symbol used is a rectangle with a green background with the acronym in white. This classification, which evaluates the importance (being neither a technical nor an administrative classification) of the road in the European Union, complements the usual Italian ones. European road acronyms are mostly absent or reported inorganically on signs in Italy. The European classification is foreseen by the Italian traffic code which defines it as additional.\nToll roads.\nIn Italy the only toll roads are the \"autostrade\" (Italian for motorways). Major exceptions are the beltways around some larger cities (\"tangenziali\") which are not part of a thoroughfare motorway, and the section of the A3 motorway between Salerno and Reggio di Calabria which is operated by the government-owned ANAS. Both are toll free.\nOn Italian motorways, the toll applies to almost all motorways not managed by Anas. The collection of motorway tolls, from a tariff point of view, is managed mainly in two ways: either through the \"closed motorway system\" (km travelled) or through the \"open motorway system\" (flat-rate toll).\nWaterways.\nItaly has of navigable waterways for various types of commercial traffic, although of limited overall value.\nIn the northern regions of Lombardy and Veneto, commuter ferry boats operate on Lake Garda and Lake Como to connect towns and villages at both sides of the lakes. The waterways in Venice, including the Grand Canal, serve as the vital transportation network for local residents and tourists.\nFrequent shuttle ferries (\"vaporetta\") connect different points on the main island of Venice and other outlying islands of the lagoon. In addition, there are direct shuttle boats between Venice and the Venice Marco Polo Airport.\nPorts and harbours.\nItaly has been the final destination of the Silk Road for many centuries. In particular, the construction of the Suez Canal intensified sea trade with East Africa and Asia from the 19th century. Since the end of the Cold War and increasing European integration, the trade relations, which were often interrupted in the 20th century, have intensified again. Because of its long seacoast, Italy also has many harbors for the transportation of both goods and passengers. In 2004 there were 43 major seaports including the Port of Genoa, the country's largest and the third busiest by cargo tonnage in the Mediterranean Sea.\nDue to the increasing importance of the maritime Silk Road with its connections to Asia and East Africa, the Italian ports for Central and Eastern Europe have become important in recent years. In addition, the trade in goods is shifting from the European northern ports to the ports of the Mediterranean Sea due to the considerable time savings and environmental protection. In particular, the deep water port of Trieste in the northernmost part of the Mediterranean Sea is the target of Italian, Asian and European investments.\nAir transport.\nAirlines.\nSince October 2021, Italy's flag carrier airline is ITA Airways, which took over the brand, the IATA ticketing code, and many assets belonging to the former flag carrier Alitalia, after its bankruptcy. ITA Airways serves 44 destinations (as of October 2021[ [update]]) and also operates the former Alitalia regional subsidiary, Alitalia CityLiner.\nThe country also has regional airlines (such as Air Dolomiti), low-cost carriers, and Charter and leisure carriers (including Neos, Blue Panorama Airlines and Poste Air Cargo). Major Italian cargo operators are ITA Airways Cargo and Cargolux Italia. In 2012 there were 130 airports in Italy, including the two hubs of Malpensa International Airport in Milan and Leonardo da Vinci International Airport in Rome.\nAirports.\nItaly is the fifth in Europe by number of passengers by air transport, with about 148 million passengers or about 10% of the European total in 2011. Most of passengers in Italy are on international flights (57%). A big share of domestic flights connect the major islands (Sardinia and Sicily) to the mainland. Domestic flights between major Italian cities as Rome and Milan still play a relevant role but are declining since the opening of the Italian high-speed rail network in recent years.\nItaly has a total as of 130 airports in 2012, of which 99 have paved runways:\nAirports - with unpaved runways in 2012:\nBusiest airports.\nThis is a list of the top ten busiest airports in Italy in 2017. \nBuses, trams and coaches.\nLocal buses.\nLocal buses are usually divided into urban (\"urbano\") and suburban (\"interurbano\" or \"extraurbano\") lines.\nTrolleybuses.\nMany Italian cities have trolleybus networks, which were particularly promulgated by the government of Fascist Italy. Though many trolleybus networks were decommissioned in the late 20th century, major Italian cities that continue to operate trolleybus networks, or have built new ones, include Ancona, Avellino, Bologna, Cagliari, Chieti, Genoa, La Spezia, Lecce, Milan, Modena, Naples, Parma, Rimini, Rome, and Sanremo.\nCoaches.\nItaly does not have a nationwide coach operator. Many coach companies operate regionally, and particularly offer intercity connections and airport shuttle services. The largest nationwide coach operators include Baltour, Marinobus, Buscenter.it, .italo, and FlixBus.\nTram.\n13 cities have tram system:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "14705", "revid": "49589087", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14705", "title": "Italian Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Italy\nThe Italian Armed Forces (, ) encompass the Italian Army, the Italian Navy and the Italian Air Force. A fourth branch of the armed forces, known as the Carabinieri, take on the role as the nation's military police and are also involved in missions and operations abroad as a combat force. Despite not being a branch of the armed forces, the Guardia di Finanza and Polizia di Stato is organized along military lines. \nThese five forces comprise a total of 340,885 men and women with the official status of active military personnel, of which 167,057 are in the Army, Navy and Air Force. The President of Italy heads the armed forces as the President of the High Council of Defence established by article 87 of the Constitution of Italy. According to article 78, the Parliament has the authority to declare a state of war and vest the powers to lead the war in the Government.\nHistory.\nThe military history of Italy chronicles a vast time period, lasting from the military conflicts fought by the ancient peoples of Italy, most notably the conquest of the Mediterranean world by the ancient Romans, through the expansion of the Italian city-states and maritime republics during the medieval period and the involvement of the historical Italian states in the Italian Wars and the wars of succession, to the Napoleonic period, the Italian unification, the campaigns of the colonial empire, the two world wars, and into the modern day, with world peacekeeping operations under the aegis of NATO, the EU or the UN. The Italian Peninsula has been a centre of military conflict throughout European history due to its geostrategic position: because of this, Italy has a long military tradition.\nThe Risorgimento movement emerged to unite Italy in the 19th century. The Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia took the lead in a series of wars to liberate Italy from foreign control. Following three Wars of Italian Independence against the Habsburg Austrians in the north, the Expedition of the Thousand against the Bourbons of the Two Sicilies in the south, and the Capture of Rome, the unification of the country was completed in 1871 when Rome was declared capital of Italy.\nThe presidential standard of Italy () is the distinctive standard of the presence of the President of Italy. The presidential standard is one of the National symbols of Italy. The standard recalls the colors of the flag of Italy, with particular reference to the standard of the historic Italian Republic of 1802\u20131805; the square shape and the savoy blue border, whose use was maintained even in the Republican era, symbolize the four Italian Armed Forces, which are commanded by the President of Italy. Blue in heraldry also metaphorically symbolizes command.\nOrganization.\nThe office of the Chief of Defence is organised as follows:\nThe four branches of Italian Armed Forces.\nItalian Army.\nThe Italian Army (; abbreviated as EI) is the land force branch of the Italian Armed Forces. The army's history dates back to the Italian unification in the 1850s and 1860s. The army fought in colonial engagements in China and Libya. It fought in Northern Italy against the Austro-Hungarian Empire during World War I, Abyssinia before World War II and in World War II in Albania, Balkans, North Africa, the Soviet Union, and Italy itself. During the Cold War, the army prepared itself to defend against a Warsaw Pact invasion from the east. \nSince the end of the Cold War, the army has seen extensive peacekeeping service and combat in Afghanistan and Iraq. Its best-known combat vehicles are the Dardo infantry fighting vehicle, the Centauro tank destroyer and the Ariete tank and among its aircraft the Mangusta attack helicopter, recently deployed in UN missions. The headquarters of the Army General Staff are located in Rome opposite the Quirinal Palace, where the president of Italy resides. The army is an all-volunteer force of active-duty personnel.\nThe Italian Army originated as the Royal Army (\"Regio Esercito\"), which dates from the proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy following the seizure of the Papal States and the unification of Italy (\"Risorgimento\"). In 1861, under the leadership of Giuseppe Garibaldi, Victor Emmanuel II of the House of Savoy was invited to take the throne and of the newly created kingdom.\nThe Italian Army has participated in operations to aid populations hit by natural disasters. It has, moreover, supplied a remarkable contribution to the forces of police for the control of the territory of the province of Bolzano/Bozen (1967), in Sardinia (\"Forza Paris\" 1992), in Sicily (\"Vespri Siciliani\" 1992) and in Calabria (1994). Currently, it protects sensitive objectives and places throughout the national territory (\"Operazione Domino\") since the September 11 attacks in the United States. \nThe army is also engaged in Missions abroad under the aegis of the UN, the NATO, and of Multinational forces, such as Beirut in Lebanon (1982), Namibia (1989), Albania (1991), Kurdistan (1991), Somalia (1992), Mozambique (1993), Bosnia (1995), East Timor and Kosovo (both in 1999), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (2001), Darfur (2003), Afghanistan (2002), Iraq (2003) and Lebanon again (2006).\nItalian Navy.\nThe Italian Navy (; abbreviated as MM) is one of the four branches of Italian Armed Forces and was formed in 1946 from what remained of the \"Regia Marina\" (Royal Navy) after World War II. As of \u00a02014[ [update]], the Italian Navy had a strength of 30,923 active personnel, with approximately 184 vessels in service, including minor auxiliary vessels. It is considered a multiregional and a blue-water navy.\nThe navy of Italy was created in 1861, following the proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy. The new navy's baptism of fire came during the Third Italian War of Independence against the Austrian Empire. During the First World War, it spent its major efforts in the Adriatic Sea, fighting the Austro-Hungarian Navy. In the Second World War, it engaged the Royal Navy in a two-and-a-half-year struggle for the control of the Mediterranean Sea. After the war, the new \"Marina Militare\", being a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), has taken part in many coalition peacekeeping operations. It is a blue-water navy. The \"Guardia Costiera\" (Coast Guard) is a component of the navy.\nToday's Italian Navy is a modern navy with ships of every type. The fleet is in continuous evolution, and as of today oceangoing fleet units include: 2 light aircraft carriers, 4 amphibious assault ships, 3 destroyers, 11 frigates and 8 attack submarines. Patrol and littoral warfare units include: 10 offshore patrol vessels, 10 mine countermeasure vessels, 4 coastal patrol boats, and a varied fleet of auxiliary ships are also in service. The flagship of the fleet is the carrier \"Cavour\".\nThe ensign of the Italian Navy is the flag of Italy bearing the coat of arms of the Italian Navy. The shield's quarters refer to the four Medieval Italian Maritime Republics:\nThe coat of arms is surmounted by a golden crown, which distinguishes military vessels from those of the merchant navy.\nItalian Air Force.\nThe Italian Air Force (; AM, lit.\u2009'military aeronautics') is the air force of the Italian Republic. Since its formation, the service has held a prominent role in modern Italian military history. The acrobatic display team is the . Italy was among the earliest adopters of military aviation. Its air arm dates back to 1884, when the Italian Royal Army () was authorised to acquire its own air component. The Air Service () operated balloons based near Rome.\nIn 1911, reconnaissance and bombing sorties during the Italo-Turkish War by the \"Servizio Aeronautico\" represented the first use of heavier-than-air aircraft in armed conflict. On 28 March 1923, the Italian Air Force was founded as an independent service by King Vittorio Emanuele III of the Kingdom of Italy.\nDuring the 1930s, it was involved in its first military operations in Ethiopia in 1935, and later in the Spanish Civil War between 1936 and 1939. Eventually, Italy entered World War II alongside Germany. After the armistice of 8 September 1943, Italy was divided into two sides, and the same fate befell the \"Regia Aeronautica\". The Air Force was split into the \"Italian Co-Belligerent Air Force\" in the south aligned with the Allies, and the pro-Axis \"Aeronautica Nazionale Repubblicana\" in the north until the end of the war. When Italy was made a republic by referendum, the air force was given its current name \"Aeronautica Militare\". The cockade of Italy is one of the symbols of the Italian Air Force, and is widely used on all Italian state aircraft, not only military.\nArmed conflicts in Somalia, Mozambique and the nearby Balkans led to the Italian Air Force becoming a participant in multinational air forces, such as that of NATO over the former Yugoslavia, just a few minutes flying time east of the Italian Peninsula. The commanders of the Italian Air Force soon saw the need to improve the Italian air defences.\nCarabinieri.\nThe Carabinieri (, , ; formally \"Arma dei Carabinieri\", \"Arm of Carabineers\"; previously \"Corpo dei Carabinieri Reali\", \"Royal Carabineers Corps\") are the national gendarmerie of Italy who primarily carry out domestic and foreign policing duties. It is one of Italy's main law enforcement agencies, alongside the Polizia di Stato and the Guardia di Finanza. As with the Guardia di Finanza but in contrast to the Polizia di Stato, the Carabinieri are a military force. As the fourth branch of the Italian Armed Forces, they come under the authority of the Ministry of Defence; for activities related to inland public order and security, they functionally depend on the Ministry of the Interior. In practice, there is a significant overlap between the jurisdiction of the Polizia di Stato and Carabinieri, and both of them are contactable through 112, the European Union's Single Emergency number. Unlike the Polizia di Stato, the Carabinieri have responsibility for policing the military, and a number of members regularly participate in military missions abroad.\nThe corps was instituted in 1814 by King Victor Emmanuel I of Savoy with the aim of providing the Kingdom of Sardinia, the forerunner of the Kingdom of Italy, with a police corps. It is therefore older than Italy itself. During the process of Italian unification, the Carabinieri were appointed as the \"First Force\" of the new national military organization. Although the Carabinieri assisted in the suppression of opposition during the rule of Benito Mussolini, they were also responsible for his downfall and many units were disbanded during World War II by Nazi Germany, which resulted in large numbers of Carabinieri joining the Italian resistance movement.\nIn 2000, they were separated from the Army to become a separate branch of the Italian Armed Forces. Carabinieri have policing powers that can be exercised at any time and in any part of the country, and they are always permitted to carry their assigned weapon as personal equipment (Beretta 92FS pistols). The Carabinieri are often referred to as \"La Benemerita\" (The Reputable or The Meritorious) as they are a trusted and prestigious law enforcement institution in Italy. The first official account of the use of this term to refer to the Carabinieri dates back to 24 June 1864.\nThe new force was divided into divisions on the scale of one division for each province of Italy. The divisions were further divided into companies and subdivided into lieutenancies, which commanded and coordinated the local police stations and were distributed throughout the national territory in direct contact with the public. They carry out peacekeeping mission abroad, such as Kosovo, Afghanistan, and Iraq. At the Sea Islands Conference of the G8 in 2004, the Carabinieri were given the mandate to establish a Center of Excellence for Stability Police Units (CoESPU) to spearhead the development of training and doctrinal standards for civilian police units attached to international peacekeeping missions.\nTomb of the Unknown Soldier.\nThe Tomb of the Italian Unknown Soldier () is a war memorial located in Rome under the statue of the goddess Roma at the Altare della Patria. It is a \"sacellum\" dedicated to the Italian soldiers killed and missing during war.\nIt is the scene of official ceremonies that take place annually on the occasion of the Italian Liberation Day (April 25), the Italian Republic Day (June 2) and the National Unity and Armed Forces Day (November 4), during which the President of the Italian Republic and the highest offices of the State pay homage to the shrine of the Unknown Soldier with the deposition of a laurel wreath in memory of the fallen and missing Italians in the wars.\nThe reason for his strong symbolism lies in the metaphorical transition from the figure of the soldier to that of the people and finally to that of the nation: this transition between increasingly broader and generic concepts is due to the indistinct traits of the non-identification of the soldier.\nHis tomb is a symbolic shrine that represents all the fallen and missing in the war. The side of the tomb of the Unknown Soldier that gives outward at the Altare della Patria is always guarded by a guard of honour and two flames that burn perpetually in braziers.\nThe allegorical meaning of the perpetually burning flames is linked to their symbolism, which is centuries old, since it has its origins in classical antiquity, especially in the cult of the dead. A fire that burns eternally symbolizes the memory, in this case of the sacrifice of the Unknown Soldier moved by patriotic love, and his everlasting memory of the Italians, even in those who are far from their country: not by chance on the two perennial braziers next to the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier a plaque is placed whose text reads \"Italians Abroad to the Motherland\" in memory of donations made by Italian emigrants between the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century for the construction of the Vittoriano.\nInternational stance.\nItaly has joined in many UN, NATO and EU operations as well as with assistance to Russia and the other CIS nations, Middle East peace process, peacekeeping, and combating the illegal drug trade, human trafficking, piracy and terrorism.\nItaly did take part in the 1982 Multinational Force in Lebanon along with US, French and British troops. Italy also participated in the 1990\u201391 Gulf War, with the deployment of eight Panavia Tornado IDS bomber jets; Italian Army troops were subsequently deployed to assist Kurdish refugees in northern Iraq following the conflict.\nAs part of Operation Enduring Freedom, Italy contributed to the international operation in Afghanistan. Italian forces have contributed to ISAF, the NATO force in Afghanistan, and to the Provincial reconstruction team. Italy has sent 3,800 troops, including one infantry company from the 2nd Alpini Regiment tasked to protect the ISAF HQ, one engineer company, one NBC platoon, one logistic unit, as well as liaison and staff elements integrated into the operation chain of command. Italian forces also command a multinational engineer task force and have deployed a platoon of Carabinieri military police.\nThe Italian Army did not take part in combat operations of the 2003 Iraq War, dispatching troops only when major combat operations were declared over by the U.S. President George W. Bush. Subsequently, Italian troops arrived in the late summer of 2003, and began patrolling Nasiriyah and the surrounding area. Italian participation in the military operations in Iraq was concluded by the end of 2006, with full withdrawal of Italian military personnel except for a small group of about 30 soldiers engaged in providing security for the Italian embassy in Baghdad. Italy played a major role in the 2004\u20132011 NATO Training Mission to assist in the development of Iraqi security forces training structures and institutions.\nCurrent operations.\nSince the second post-war the Italian armed force has become more and more engaged in international peace support operations, mainly under the auspices of the United Nations and European Union. The Italian armed forces are currently participating in 17 missions.\nPast operations.\nThe Italian armed forces participated in 10 operations since the second post-war.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "14706", "revid": "41294494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14706", "title": "Foreign relations of Italy", "text": " \nThe foreign relations of the Italian Republic are the Italian government's external relations with the outside world. Located in Europe, Italy has been considered a major European power since its unification in 1860. Its main allies are the NATO countries and the EU states, two entities of which Italy is a founding member. Italy was admitted to the United Nations in 1955, and it is a member and a strong supporter of a wide number of international organisations, such as the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and World Trade Organization (GATT and WTO), the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the Council of Europe, and the Central European Initiative.\nIts turns in the rotating presidency of international organisations include the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, the G7 and the EU Council. Italy is also a recurrent non-permanent member of the UN Security Council. Italy is an important actor in the Mediterranean region and has close relations with the Romance-speaking countries in Europe and Latin America. Although it is a secular state, Rome hosts the Pope and the headquarters of the Catholic Church, which operates a large diplomatic system of its own. Italy is currently commanding various multinational forces and has significant troops deployed all over the world for peacekeeping missions, and for combating organized crime, illegal drug trade, human trafficking, piracy and terrorism.\nHistory.\nNational unification.\nThe \"Risorgimento\" was the era from 1829 to 1871 that saw the emergence of a national consciousness. The Northern Italy monarchy of the House of Savoy in the Kingdom of Sardinia, whose government was led by Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour, had ambitions of establishing a united Italian state. In the context of the 1848 liberal revolutions that swept through Europe, an unsuccessful first war of independence was declared on Austria. In 1855, the Kingdom of Sardinia became an ally of Britain and France in the Crimean War, giving Cavour's diplomacy legitimacy in the eyes of the great powers. The Kingdom of Sardinia again attacked the Austrian Empire in the Second Italian War of Independence of 1859, with the aid of France, resulting in liberating Lombardy. On the basis of the Plombi\u00e8res Agreement, the Kingdom of Sardinia ceded Savoy and Nice to France, an event that caused the Ni\u00e7ard exodus, that was the emigration of a quarter of the Ni\u00e7ard Italians to Italy, and the Ni\u00e7ard Vespers.\nIn 1860\u20131861, Giuseppe Garibaldi led the drive for unification in Naples and Sicily conquering the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies (the Expedition of the Thousand), while the House of Savoy troops occupied the central territories of the Italian peninsula, except Rome and part of Papal States. This allowed the Sardinian government to declare a united Italian kingdom on 17 March 1861. In 1866, Italy allied with Prussia during the Austro-Prussian War, waging the Third Italian War of Independence which allowed Italy to annex Venetia.\nAfter the Third Italian War of Independence (1866), when the Veneto and Friuli regions were ceded by the Austrians to the newly formed Kingdom Italy, Istria and Dalmatia remained part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, together with other Italian-speaking areas on the eastern Adriatic. This triggered the gradual rise of Italian irredentism among many Italians in Istria, Kvarner and Dalmatia, who demanded the unification of the Julian March, Kvarner and Dalmatia with Italy. The Italians in Istria, Kvarner and Dalmatia supported the Italian Risorgimento: as a consequence, the Austrians saw the Italians as enemies and favored the Slav communities of Istria, Kvarner and Dalmatia. During the meeting of the Council of Ministers of 12 November 1866, Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria outlined a wide-ranging project aimed at the Germanization or Slavization of the areas of the empire with an Italian presence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His Majesty expressed the precise order that action be taken decisively against the influence of the Italian elements still present in some regions of the Crown and, appropriately occupying the posts of public, judicial, masters employees as well as with the influence of the press, work in South Tyrol, Dalmatia and Littoral for the Germanization and Slavization of these territories according to the circumstances, with energy and without any regard. His Majesty calls the central offices to the strong duty to proceed in this way to what has been established.\u2014\u200a\nFinally, in 1870, as France abandoned its garrisons in Rome during the disastrous Franco-Prussian War to keep the large Prussian Army at bay, the Italians rushed to fill the power gap by taking over the Papal States. Italian unification was completed and shortly afterwards Italy's capital was moved to Rome. Later Italy formed the Triple Alliance (1882) with Germany and Austria.\nWorld War I.\nEven after 1870, after the unification of Italy, many ethnic Italian-speakers (Italians in Trentino-Alto Adige/S\u00fcdtirol, Savoyard Italians, Corfiot Italians, Ni\u00e7ard Italians, Swiss Italians, Corsican Italians, Maltese Italians, Istrian Italians, and Dalmatian Italians) remained outside the borders of the Kingdom of Italy, planting the seeds of Italian irredentism.\nItaly entered into the World War I in 1915 with the aim of completing national unity: for this reason, the Italian intervention in the World War I is also considered the Fourth Italian War of Independence, in a historiographical perspective that identifies in the latter the conclusion of the unification of Italy, whose military actions began during the revolutions of 1848 with the First Italian War of Independence.\nItaly defeated the Ottoman Empire in 1911\u20131912. By 1915, Italy had acquired in Africa a colony on the Red Sea coast (Eritrea), a large protectorate in Somalia and administrative authority in formerly Turkish Libya. Outside of Africa, Italy possessed a small concession in Tientsin in China (following the Boxer Rebellion) and the Dodecanese Islands off the coast of Turkey.\nIn 1915, Italy abrogated its alliance and declared war on the Austro-Hungarian Empire, leading to bloody conflict mainly on the Isonzo and Piave fronts. Britain, France and Russia had been \"keen to bring neutral Italy into World War I on their side. However, Italy drove a hard bargain, demanding extensive territorial concessions once the war had been won\".\nIn a deal to bring Italy into the war, under the London Pact, Italy would be allowed to annex not only Italian-speaking Trentino and Trieste, but also German-speaking South Tyrol, Istria (which included large non-Italian communities), and the northern part of Dalmatia including the areas of Zadar (Zara) and \u0160ibenik (Sebenico). Mainly Italian Fiume (present-day Rijeka) was excluded.\nIn November 1918, after the surrender of Austria-Hungary, Italy occupied militarily Trentino Alto-Adige, the Julian March, Istria, the Kvarner Gulf and Dalmatia, all Austro-Hungarian territories. On the Dalmatian coast, Italy established the first Governorate of Dalmatia, which had the provisional aim of ferrying the territory towards full integration into the Kingdom of Italy, progressively importing national legislation in place of the previous one. The administrative capital was Zara. The Governorate of Dalmatia was evacuated following the Italo-Yugoslav agreements which resulted in the Treaty of Rapallo (1920). After the war, the Treaty of Rapallo between the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (later the Kingdom of Yugoslavia) and the Kingdom of Italy (12 November 1920), Italy annexed Zadar in Dalmatia and some minor islands, almost all of Istria along with Trieste, excluding the island of Krk, and part of Kastav commune, which mostly went to the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes. By the Treaty of Rome (27 January 1924), the Free State of Fiume (Rijeka) was divided between Italy and Yugoslavia. Also, Italy occupied southern Albania and established a protectorate over Albania, which remained in place until 1920.\nThe Allies defeated the Austrian Empire in 1918 and Italy became one of the main winners of the war. At the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, Prime Minister Vittorio Emanuele Orlando focused almost exclusively on territorial gains, but he got far less than he wanted, and Italians were bitterly resentful when they were denied control of the city of Fiume. The conference, under the control of Britain, France and the United States refused to assign Dalmatia and Albania to Italy as had been promised in the Treaty of London. Britain, France and Japan divided the German overseas colonies into mandates of their own, excluding Italy. Italy also gained no territory from the breakup of the Ottoman Empire.\nItaly did not receive other territories promised by the Treaty of London, so this outcome was denounced as a \"Mutilated victory\". The rhetoric of \"Mutilated victory\" was adopted by Benito Mussolini and led to the rise of Italian fascism, becoming a key point in the propaganda of Fascist Italy. Historians regard \"Mutilated victory\" as a \"political myth\", used by fascists to fuel Italian imperialism and obscure the successes of liberal Italy in the aftermath of World War I. Italy also gained a permanent seat in the League of Nations's executive council.\nFascism and World War II.\nThe Fascist government that came to power with Benito Mussolini in 1922 sought to increase the size of the Italian empire and to satisfy the claims of Italian irredentists. Italian Fascism is based upon Italian nationalism and imperialism, and in particular seeks to complete what it considers as the incomplete project of the unification of Italy by incorporating \"Italia Irredenta\" (unredeemed Italy) into the state of Italy. To the east of Italy, the Fascists claimed that Dalmatia was a land of Italian culture whose Italians, including those of Italianized South Slavic descent, had been driven out of Dalmatia and into exile in Italy, and supported the return of Italians of Dalmatian heritage. Mussolini identified Dalmatia as having strong Italian cultural roots for centuries, similarly to Istria, via the Roman Empire and the Republic of Venice. To the south of Italy, the Fascists claimed Malta, which belonged to the United Kingdom, and Corfu, which instead belonged to Greece; to the north claimed Italian Switzerland, while to the west claimed Corsica, Nice, and Savoy, which belonged to France. The Fascist regime produced literature on Corsica that presented evidence of the island's \"italianit\u00e0\". The Fascist regime produced literature on Nice that justified that Nice was an Italian land based on historic, ethnic, and linguistic grounds.\nMussolini promised to bring Italy back as a great power in Europe, building a \"New Roman Empire\" and holding power over the Mediterranean Sea. In propaganda, Fascists used the ancient Roman motto \"Mare Nostrum\" (Latin for \"Our Sea\") to describe the Mediterranean. For this reason the Fascist regime engaged in interventionist foreign policy. In 1923, the Greek island of Corfu was briefly occupied by Italy, after the assassination of General Tellini in Greek territory. In 1925, Italy forced Albania to become a \"de facto\" protectorate. In 1935, Mussolini invaded Ethiopia and founded Italian East Africa, resulting in an international alienation and leading to Italy's withdrawal from the League of Nations; Italy allied with Nazi Germany and the Empire of Japan and strongly supported Francisco Franco in the Spanish Civil War. In 1939, Italy formally annexed Albania. Italy entered World War II on 10 June 1940. The Italians initially advanced in British Somaliland, Egypt, the Balkans (establishing the Governorate of Dalmatia and Montenegro, the Province of Ljubljana, and the puppet states Independent State of Croatia and Hellenic State), and eastern fronts. They were, however, subsequently defeated on the Eastern Front as well as in the East African campaign and the North African campaign, losing as a result their territories in Africa and in the Balkans.\nAn Allied invasion of Sicily began in July 1943, leading to the collapse of the Fascist regime and the fall of Mussolini on 25 July. In the north, the Germans set up the Italian Social Republic (RSI), a Nazi puppet state with Mussolini installed as leader after he was rescued by German paratroopers. Some Italian troops in the south were organised into the Italian Co-belligerent Army, which fought alongside the Allies for the rest of the war, while other Italian troops, loyal to Mussolini and his RSI, continued to fight alongside the Germans in the National Republican Army. Also, the post-armistice period saw the rise of a large anti-fascist resistance movement, the \"Resistenza\". As result, the country descended into civil war; the Italian resistance fought a guerrilla war against the Nazi German occupiers and Italian Fascist forces, while clashes between the Fascist RSI Army and the Royalist Italian Co-Belligerent Army were rare. In late April 1945, with total defeat looming, Mussolini attempted to escape north, but was captured and summarily executed near Lake Como by Italian partisans. His body was then taken to Milan, where it was hung upside down at a service station for public viewing and to provide confirmation of his demise. Hostilities ended on 29 April 1945, when the German forces in Italy surrendered.\nRepublican era.\nItaly became a republic after the 1946 Italian institutional referendum held on 2 June 1946, a day celebrated since as \"Festa della Repubblica\". This was the first time that Italian women voted at the national level, and the second time overall considering the local elections that were held a few months earlier in some cities. Under the Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947, Istria, Kvarner, most of the Julian March as well as the Dalmatian city of Zara was annexed by Yugoslavia causing the Istrian-Dalmatian exodus, which led to the emigration of between 230,000 and 350,000 of local ethnic Italians (Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians), the others being ethnic Slovenians, ethnic Croatians, and ethnic Istro-Romanians, choosing to maintain Italian citizenship. Later, the Free Territory of Trieste was divided between the two states. Italy also lost all of its colonial possessions, formally ending the Italian Empire. In 1950, Italian Somaliland was made a United Nations Trust Territory under Italian administration until 1 July 1960. The Italian border that applies today has existed since 1975, when Trieste was formally re-annexed to Italy.\nIn 1949 Italy became a member of NATO. The Marshall Plan helped to revive the Italian economy which, until the late 1960s, enjoyed a period of sustained economic growth commonly called the \"Economic Miracle\". In the 1950s, Italy became one of the six founding countries of the European Communities, following the 1952 establishment of the European Coal and Steel Community, and subsequent 1958 creations of the European Economic Community and European Atomic Energy Community. In 1993, the former two of these were incorporated into the European Union.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Italy maintains diplomatic relations with:\nInternational institutions.\nItaly is part of the UN, EU, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the DAC, the WTO, the G7, the G20, the Union for the Mediterranean, the Latin Union, the Council of Europe, the Central European Initiative, the ASEM, the MEF, the ISA, the Uniting for Consensus and several Contact Groups.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14708", "revid": "50918973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14708", "title": "Italian language", "text": "Romance language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nItalian (, , or , ) is a Romance language of the Indo-European language family. It evolved from the colloquial Latin of the Roman Empire, and is the least divergent language from Latin, together with Sardinian. It is spoken by 68 to 85 million people, including 64 million native speakers as of 2024. Some speakers of Italian are native bilinguals of both Italian (either in its standard form or regional varieties) and a local language of Italy, most frequently the language spoken at home in their place of origin.\nItalian is an official language in Italy, San Marino, Switzerland (Ticino and the Grisons), and Vatican City, and it has official minority status in Croatia, Slovenia (Istria), Romania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in 6 municipalities of Brazil. It is also spoken in other European and non-EU countries, most notably in Malta (by 66% of the population), Albania and Monaco, as well as by large immigrant and expatriate communities in the Americas, Australia and on other continents.\nItalian is a major language in Europe, being one of the official languages of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and one of the working languages of the Council of Europe. It is the third-most-widely spoken native language in the European Union (13% of the EU population) and it is spoken as a second language by 13 million EU citizens (3%). Italian is the main working language of the Holy See, serving as the lingua franca in the Roman Catholic hierarchy and the official language of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta.\nItalian influence led to the development of derivated languages and dialects worldwide. It is also widespread in various sectors and markets, with its loanwords used in arts, luxury goods, fashion, sports and cuisine; it has a significant use in musical terminology and opera, with numerous Italian words referring to music that have become international terms taken into various languages worldwide, including in English. Almost all native Italian words end with vowels, and the language has a 7-vowel sound system (\"e\" and \"o\" have mid-low and mid-high sounds). Italian has contrast between short and long consonants and gemination (doubling) of consonants.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe Italian language has developed through a long and slow process, which began after the Western Roman Empire's fall and the onset of the Middle Ages in the 5th century.\nLatin, the predominant language of the western Roman Empire, remained the established written language in Europe during the Middle Ages, although most people were illiterate. Over centuries, the Vulgar Latin popularly spoken in various areas of Europe\u2014including the Italian peninsula\u2014evolved into local varieties, or dialects, unaffected by formal standards and teachings. These varieties are not in any sense \"dialects\" of standard Italian, which itself started off as one of these local tongues, but sister languages of Italian. The Latin-speaking class referred to the collective Romance vernaculars of Europe as \"Romanz\", \"Romance\", or, in Italy, \"Romanzo\" or \"Volgare\".\nThe linguistic and historical demarcations between late Vulgar Latin and early Romance varieties in Italy are imprecise. The earliest surviving texts that can definitely be called vernacular (as distinct from its predecessor Vulgar Latin) are legal formulae known as the Placiti Cassinesi from the province of Benevento that date from 960 to 963, although the Veronese Riddle, probably from the 8th or early 9th century, contains a late form of Vulgar Latin that can be seen as a very early sample of a vernacular dialect of Italy. The Commodilla catacomb inscription likewise probably dates to the early 9th century and appears to reflect a language somewhere between late Vulgar Latin and early vernacular.\nThe language that came to be thought of as Italian developed in central Tuscany and was first formalized in the early 14th century through the works of Tuscan writer Dante Alighieri, written in his native Florentine. Dante's epic poems, known collectively as the \"Commedia\", to which another Tuscan poet Giovanni Boccaccio later affixed the title \"Divina\", were read throughout the Italian peninsula. His written vernacular became the touchstone for elaborating a \"canonical standard\" that all educated Italians could understand. The poetry of Petrarch was also widely admired and influential in the development of the literary language, and would be identified as a model for vernacular writing by Pietro Bembo in the 16th century.\nIn addition to the widespread exposure gained through literature, Florentine also gained prestige due to the political and cultural significance of Florence at the time and the fact that it was linguistically a middle way between the northern and the southern Italian dialects.\nItalian was progressively made an official language of most of the Italian states predating unification, slowly replacing Latin, even when ruled by foreign powers (such as Spain in the Kingdom of Naples, or Austria in the Kingdom of Lombardy\u2013Venetia), although the masses kept speaking primarily their local vernaculars. Italian was also one of the many recognised languages in the Austro-Hungarian Empire.\nItaly has always had a distinctive dialect for each city because the cities, until recently, were thought of as city-states. Those dialects now have considerable variety. As Tuscan-derived Italian came to be used throughout Italy, features of local speech were naturally adopted, producing various versions of Regional Italian. The most characteristic differences, for instance, between Roman Italian and Milanese Italian are syntactic gemination of initial consonants in some contexts and the pronunciation of stressed \"e\", and of \"s\" between vowels in many words: e.g. \"va bene\" 'all right' is pronounced by a Roman (and by any standard Italian speaker), by a Milanese (and by any speaker whose native dialect lies to the north of the La Spezia\u2013Rimini Line); \"a casa\" 'at home' is for Roman, or for standard, for Milanese and generally northern.\nIn contrast to the Gallo-Italic linguistic panorama of northern Italy, the Italo-Dalmatian, Neapolitan and its related dialects were largely unaffected by the Franco-Occitan influences introduced to Italy mainly by bards from France during the Middle Ages, but after the Norman conquest of southern Italy, Sicily became the first Italian land to adopt Occitan lyric moods (and words) in poetry. Even in the case of northern Italian languages, however, scholars are careful not to overstate the effects of outsiders on the natural indigenous developments of the languages.\nThe economic might and relatively advanced development of Tuscany at the time (Late Middle Ages) gave its language weight, although Venetian remained widespread in medieval Italian commercial life, and Ligurian (or Genoese) remained in use in maritime trade alongside the Mediterranean. The increasing political and cultural relevance of Florence during the periods of the rise of the Medici Bank, humanism, and the Renaissance made its dialect, or rather a refined version of it, a standard in the arts.\nRenaissance.\nThe Renaissance era, known as in Italian, was seen as a time of rebirth, which is the literal meaning of both (from French) and (Italian). Among its many manifestations, the Renaissance saw a reinvigorated interest in both classical antiquity and vernacular literature.\nAdvancements in technology played a crucial role in the diffusion of the Italian language. The printing press was invented in the 15th century, and spread rapidly. By the year 1500, there were 56 printing presses in Italy, more than anywhere else in Europe. The printing press enabled the production of literature and documents in higher volumes and at lower cost, further accelerating the spread of Italian.\nItalian became the language used in the courts of every state in the Italian peninsula, and the prestige variety used on the island of Corsica (but not in the neighbouring Sardinia, which on the contrary underwent Italianization well into the late 18th century, under Savoyard sway: the island's linguistic composition, roofed by the prestige of Spanish among the Sardinians, would therein make for a rather slow process of assimilation to the Italian cultural sphere). The rediscovery of Dante's , and a renewed interest in linguistics in the 16th century, sparked a debate that raged throughout Italy concerning the criteria that should govern the establishment of a modern Italian literary and spoken language. This discussion, known as questione della lingua (i.e., the \"problem of the language\"), ran through the Italian culture until the end of the 19th century, often linked to the political debate on achieving a united Italian state. Renaissance scholars divided into three main factions:\nA fourth faction claimed that the best Italian was the one that the papal court adopted, which was a mixture of the Tuscan and Roman dialects. Eventually, Bembo's ideas prevailed, and the foundation of the in Florence (1582\u20131583), the official legislative body of the Italian language, led to the publication of Agnolo Monosini's Latin tome in 1604 followed by the first Italian dictionary in 1612.\nModern era.\nAn important event that helped the diffusion of Italian was the conquest and occupation of Italy by Napoleon (himself of Italian-Corsican descent) in the early 19th century. This conquest propelled the unification of Italy some decades after and pushed the Italian language into the status of a lingua franca, used not only among clerks, nobility, and functionaries in the Italian courts, but also by the bourgeoisie.\nContemporary times.\nThe publication of Italian literature's first modern novel, (\"The Betrothed\") by Alessandro Manzoni, both reflected and furthered the growing trend towards Italian as a national standard language. Manzoni, a Milanesian, chose to write the book in the Florentine dialect, describing this choice, in the preface to his 1840 edition, as \"rinsing\" his Milanese \"in the waters of the Arno\" (Florence's river). The novel is commonly described as \"the most widely read work in the Italian language\". It became a model for subsequent Italian literary fiction, helping to galvanize national linguistic unity around the Florentine dialect.\nThis growth was initially relative; linguistic diversity continued during the unification of Italy (1848\u20131871). The Italian linguist Tullio De Mauro estimated that only 2.5% of Italy's population could speak the Italian standardized language properly in 1861, while Arrigo Castellani estimated the same value as 10%..\nActually Italian is spoken as mother language by 95% of the Italian population and is promoted -mainly between the Italians emigrated and their descendants- in the world by associations like the \"Dante Alighieri\".\nAfter unification, a huge number of civil servants and soldiers recruited from all over the country introduced many more words and idioms from their home languages. For example, is derived from the Venetian word ('slave', that is 'your servant'), and comes from the Lombard word that means \"big bread\".\nClassification.\nItalian is a Romance language, a descendant of Vulgar Latin (colloquial spoken Latin). Standard Italian is based on Tuscan, especially its Florentine dialect, and is, therefore, an Italo-Dalmatian language, a classification that includes most other central and southern Italian languages and the extinct Dalmatian. As in most Romance languages, stress is distinctive in Italian.\nAccording to \"Ethnologue\", lexical similarity is 89% with French, 87% with Catalan, 85% with Sardinian, 82% with Spanish, 82% with Portuguese, 78% with Ladin, 77% with Romanian. Estimates may differ according to sources.\nA 1949 study by the linguist Mario Pei concluded that out of seven Romance languages, Italian's stressed vowel phonology was the second-closest to that of Vulgar Latin (after Logudorese Sardinian). The study emphasized, however, that it represented only \"a very elementary, incomplete and tentative demonstration\" of how statistical methods could measure linguistic change, assigned \"frankly arbitrary\" point values to various types of change, and did not compare languages in the sample with respect to any characteristics or forms of divergence other than stressed vowels, among other caveats.\nGeographic distribution.\nItalian is the official language of Italy and San Marino and is spoken fluently by the majority of the countries' populations. Italian is the third most spoken language in Switzerland (after German and French; see Swiss Italian). It is official both on the national level and on regional level in two cantons: Ticino and Grisons. Ticino, which includes Lugano, the largest Italian-speaking city outside Italy, is the only canton where Italian is predominant. Italian is also used in administration and official documents in Vatican City.\nItalian is also spoken by a minority in Monaco and France, especially in the southeastern part of the country. Italian was the official language in Savoy and in Nice until 1860, when they were both annexed by France under the Treaty of Turin, a development that triggered the \"Ni\u00e7ard exodus\", or the emigration of a quarter of the Ni\u00e7ard Italians to Italy, and the Ni\u00e7ard Vespers. Giuseppe Garibaldi complained about the referendum that allowed France to annex Savoy and Nice, and a group of his followers (among the Italian Savoyards) took refuge in Italy in the following years. Corsica passed from the Republic of Genoa to France in 1769 after the Treaty of Versailles. Italian was the official language of Corsica until 1859. Giuseppe Garibaldi called for the inclusion of the \"Corsican Italians\" within Italy when Rome was annexed to the Kingdom of Italy, but King Victor Emmanuel II did not agree to it. Italian is generally understood in Corsica by the population resident therein who speak Corsican, which is an Italo-Romance language similar to Tuscan. Francization occurred in Nice case, and caused a near-disappearance of the Italian language as many of the Italian speakers in these areas migrated to Italy. In Corsica, on the other hand, almost everyone still speaks the Corsican language, which, due to its linguistic proximity to the Italian standard language, appears both linguistically as an Italian dialect and therefore as a carrier of Italian culture, despite the French government's decades-long efforts to cut Corsica off from the Italian motherland. Italian was the official language in Monaco until 1860, when it was replaced by the French. This was due to the annexation of the surrounding County of Nice to France following the Treaty of Turin (1860).\nIt formerly had official status in Montenegro (because of the Venetian Albania), parts of Slovenia and Croatia (because of the Venetian Istria and Venetian Dalmatia), parts of Greece (because of the Venetian rule in the Ionian Islands and by the Kingdom of Italy in the Dodecanese). Italian is widely spoken in Malta, where nearly two-thirds of the population can speak it fluently (see Maltese Italian). Italian served as Malta's official language until 1934, when it was abolished by the British colonial administration amid strong local opposition. Italian language in Slovenia is an officially recognised minority language in the country. The official census, carried out in 2002, reported 2,258 ethnic Italians (Istrian Italians) in Slovenia (0.11% of the total population). Italian language in Croatia is an official minority language in the country, with many schools and public announcements published in both languages. The 2001 census in Croatia reported 19,636 ethnic Italians (Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians) in the country (some 0.42% of the total population). Their numbers dropped dramatically after World War II following the Istrian\u2013Dalmatian exodus, which caused the emigration of between 230,000 and 350,000 Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians. Italian was the official language of the Republic of Ragusa from 1492 to 1807.\nIt formerly had official status in Albania due to the annexation of the country to the Kingdom of Italy (1939\u20131943). Albania has a large population of non-native speakers, with over half of the population having some knowledge of the Italian language. The Albanian government has pushed to make Italian a compulsory second language in schools. The Italian language is well-known and studied in Albania, due to its historical ties and geographical proximity to Italy and to the diffusion of Italian television in the country.\nDue to heavy Italian influence during the Italian colonial period, Italian is still understood by some in former colonies such as Libya. Although it was the primary language in Libya since colonial rule, Italian greatly declined under the rule of Muammar Gaddafi, who expelled the Italian Libyan population and made Arabic the sole official language of the country. A few hundred Italian settlers returned to Libya in the 2000s.\nItalian was the official language of Eritrea during Italian colonisation. Italian is today used in commerce, and it is still spoken especially among elders; besides that, Italian words are incorporated as loan words in the main language spoken in the country (Tigrinya). The capital city of Eritrea, Asmara, still has several Italian schools, established during the colonial period. In the early 19th century, Eritrea was the country with the highest number of Italians abroad, and the Italian Eritreans grew from 4,000 during World War I to nearly 100,000 at the beginning of World War II. In Asmara there are two Italian schools, the Istituto Italiano Statale Omnicomprensivo di Asmara (Italian primary school with a Montessori department) and the Liceo Sperimentale \"G. Marconi\" (Italian international senior high school).\nItalian was also introduced to Somalia through colonialism and was the sole official language of administration and education during the colonial period but fell out of use after government, educational and economic infrastructure were destroyed in the Somali Civil War.\nItalian is also spoken by large immigrant and expatriate communities in the Americas and Australia. Although over 17 million Americans are of Italian descent, only a little over one million people in the United States speak Italian at home. Nevertheless, an Italian language media market does exist in the country. In Canada, Italian is the second most spoken non-official language when varieties of Chinese are not grouped together, with 375,645 claiming Italian as their mother tongue in 2016.\nItalian immigrants to South America have also brought a presence of the language to that continent. According to some sources, Italian is the second most spoken language in Argentina after the official language of Spanish, although its number of speakers, mainly of the older generation, is decreasing. Italian bilingual speakers can be found scattered across the southeast of Brazil and in the south. In Venezuela, Italian is the most spoken language after Spanish and Portuguese, with around 200,000 speakers. In Uruguay, people who speak Italian as their home language are 1.1% of the total population of the country. In Australia, Italian is the second most spoken foreign language after Chinese, with 1.4% of the population speaking it as their home language.\nThe main Italian-language newspapers published outside Italy are the \"L'Osservatore Romano\" (Vatican City), the \"L'Informazione di San Marino\" (San Marino), the \"Corriere del Ticino\" and the \"laRegione Ticino\" (Switzerland), the \"La Voce del Popolo\" (Croatia), the \"Corriere d'Italia\" (Germany), the \"L'italoeuropeo\" (United Kingdom), the \"Passaparola\" (Luxembourg), the (United States), the \"Corriere Canadese\" and the \"Corriere Italiano\" (Canada), the \"Il punto d'incontro\" (Mexico), the \"L'Italia del Popolo\" (Argentina), the \"Fanfulla\" (Brazil), the \"Gente d'Italia\" (Uruguay), the \"La Voce d'Italia\" (Venezuela), the \"Il Globo\" (Australia) and the \"La gazzetta del Sud Africa\" (South Africa).\nEducation.\nItalian is widely taught in many schools around the world. In the 21st century, technology also allows for the continual spread of the Italian language, as people have new ways to learn how to speak, read, and write languages at their own pace and at any given time. For example, the free website and application Duolingo has 4.94\u00a0million English speakers learning the Italian language.\nAccording to the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, every year there are more than 200,000 foreign students who study the Italian language; they are distributed among the 90 Institutes of Italian Culture that are located around the world, in the 179 Italian schools located abroad, or in the 111 Italian lecturer sections belonging to foreign schools where Italian is taught as a language of culture.\nAs of 2022, Australia had the highest number of students learning Italian in the world. This occurred because of support by the Italian community in Australia and the Italian Government and also because of successful educational reform efforts led by local governments in Australia.\nInfluence and derived languages.\nFrom the late 19th to the mid-20th century, millions of Italians settled in Argentina, Uruguay, southern Brazil, and Venezuela, and in Canada and the United States, where they formed a physical and cultural presence.\nIn some cases, colonies were established where variants of regional languages of Italy were used, and some continue to use this regional language. Examples are Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, where Talian is used, and the town of Chipilo near Puebla, Mexico; each continues to use a derived form of Venetian dating back to the 19th century. Other examples are Cocoliche, an Italian\u2013Spanish pidgin once spoken in Argentina and especially in Buenos Aires, and Lunfardo. The Rioplatense Spanish dialect of Argentina and Uruguay today has thus been heavily influenced by both standard Italian and Italian regional languages as a result.\nLingua franca.\nStarting in late medieval times in much of Europe and the Mediterranean, Latin was replaced as the primary commercial language by languages of Italy, especially Tuscan and Venetian. These varieties were consolidated during the Renaissance with the strength of Italy and the rise of humanism and the arts.\nItaly came to enjoy increasing artistic prestige within Europe. A mark of the educated gentlemen was to make the Grand Tour, visiting Italy to see its great historical monuments and works of art. It was expected that the visitor would learn at least some Italian, understood as language based on Florentine. In England, while the classical languages Latin and Greek were the first to be learned, Italian became the second most common modern language after French, a position it held until the late 18th century when it tended to be replaced by German. John Milton, for instance, wrote some of his early poetry in Italian.\nWithin the Catholic Church, Italian is known by a large part of the ecclesiastical hierarchy and is used in substitution for Latin in some official documents.\nItalian loanwords continue to be used in most languages in matters of art and music (especially classical music including opera), in the design and fashion industries, in some sports such as football and especially in culinary terms.\nLanguages and dialects.\nIn Italy, almost all the other languages spoken as the vernacular\u2014other than standard Italian and some languages spoken among immigrant communities\u2014are often called \"Italian dialects\", a label that can be very misleading if it is understood to mean \"dialects of Italian\". The Romance dialects of Italy are local evolutions of spoken Latin that pre-date the establishment of Italian, and as such are sister languages to the Tuscan that was the historical source of Italian. They can be quite different from Italian and from each other, with some belonging to different linguistic branches of Romance. The only exceptions to this are twelve groups considered \"historical language minorities\", which are officially recognised as distinct minority languages by the law. On the other hand, Corsican (a language spoken on the French island of Corsica) is closely related to medieval Tuscan, from which standard Italian derives and evolved.\nThe differences in the evolution of Latin in the different regions of Italy can be attributed to the natural changes that all languages in regular use are subject to, and to some extent to the presence of three other types of languages: substrata, superstrata, and adstrata. The most prevalent were substrata (the language of the original inhabitants), as the Italian dialects were most probably simply Latin as spoken by native cultural groups. Superstrata and adstrata were both less important. Foreign conquerors of Italy that dominated different regions at different times left behind little to no influence on the dialects. Foreign cultures with which Italy engaged in peaceful relations with, such as trade, had no significant influence either.19\u201320\nThroughout Italy, regional varieties of standard Italian, called Regional Italian, are spoken. Regional differences can be recognised by various factors: the openness of vowels, the length of the consonants, and influence of the local language (for example, in informal situations ', ' and ' replace the standard Italian ' in the area of Tuscany, Rome and Venice respectively for the infinitive 'to go').\nThere is no definitive date when the various Italian variants of Latin\u2014including varieties that contributed to modern standard Italian\u2014began to be distinct enough from Latin to be considered separate languages. One criterion for determining that two language variants are to be considered separate languages rather than variants of a single language is that they have evolved so that they are no longer mutually intelligible; this diagnostic is effective if mutual intelligibility is minimal or absent (e.g. in Romance, Romanian and Portuguese), but it fails in cases such as Spanish-Portuguese or Spanish-Italian, as educated native speakers of either pairing (particularly Spanish-Portuguese) can understand each other well if they choose to do so; however, the level of intelligibility is markedly lower between Italian-Spanish, and considerably higher between the Iberian sister languages of Portuguese-Spanish. Speakers of this latter pair can communicate with one another with remarkable ease, each speaking to the other in his own native language, without slang/jargon.\nNevertheless, on the basis of accumulated differences in morphology, syntax, phonology, and to some extent lexicon, it is not difficult to identify that for the Romance varieties of Italy, the first extant written evidence of languages that can no longer be considered Latin comes from the 9th and 10th centuries CE. These written sources demonstrate certain vernacular characteristics and sometimes explicitly mention the use of the vernacular in Italy.\nFull literary manifestations of the vernacular began to surface around the 13th century in the form of various religious texts and poetry.21Although these are the first written records of Italian varieties separate from Latin, the spoken language had probably diverged long before the first written records appeared since those who were literate generally wrote in Latin even if they spoke other Romance varieties in person.\nThroughout the 19th and 20th centuries, the use of standard Italian became increasingly widespread and was mirrored by a decline in the use of the dialects. An increase in literacy was one of the main driving factors (one can assume that only literates were capable of learning standard Italian, whereas those who were illiterate had access only to their native dialect). The percentage of literates rose from 25% in 1861 to 60% in 1911, and then on to 78.1% in 1951. Tullio De Mauro, an Italian linguist, has asserted that in 1861, only 2.5% of the population of Italy could speak standard Italian. He reports that in 1951, that percentage had risen to 87%. The ability to speak Italian did not necessarily mean that it was in everyday use, and most people (63.5%) still usually spoke their native dialects. In addition, other factors such as mass emigration, industrialization, and urbanization, and internal migrations after World War II, contributed to the proliferation of standard Italian. The Italians who emigrated during the Italian diaspora beginning in 1861 were often of the uneducated lower class, and thus the emigration had the effect of increasing the percentage of literates, who often knew and understood the importance of standard Italian back home in Italy. A large percentage of those who had emigrated also eventually returned to Italy, often more educated than when they had left.35\nAlthough use of the Italian dialects has declined in the modern era, as Italy unified under standard Italian and continues to do so aided by mass media from newspapers to radio to television, diglossia is still frequently encountered in Italy and triglossia is not uncommon in emigrant communities among older speakers. Both situations normally involve some degree of code-switching and code-mixing.\nPhonology.\nItalian has a seven-vowel system, consisting of , and 23 consonants. Compared with most other Romance languages, Italian phonology is conservative, preserving many words nearly unchanged from Vulgar Latin. Some examples:\nThe conservative nature of Italian phonology is partly explained by its origin. Italian stems from a literary language that is derived from the 13th-century speech of the city of Florence in the region of Tuscany, and has changed little in the last 700 years or so. Furthermore, the Tuscan dialect is the most conservative of all Italian dialects, radically different from the Gallo-Italian languages less than to the north (across the La Spezia\u2013Rimini Line).\nThe following are some of the conservative phonological features of Italian, as compared with the common Western Romance languages (French, Spanish, Portuguese, Galician, Catalan). Some of these features are also present in Romanian.\nCompared with most other Romance languages, Italian has many inconsistent outcomes, where the same underlying sound produces different results in different words, e.g. lax\u0101re &gt; \"lasciare\" and \"lassare\", capti\u0101re &gt; \"cacciare\" and \"cazzare\", (ex)d\u0113roteol\u0101re &gt; \"sdrucciolare\", \"druzzolare\" and \"ruzzolare\", r\u0113g\u012bna &gt; \"regina\" and \"reina\". Although in all these examples the second form has fallen out of usage, the dimorphism is thought to reflect the several-hundred-year period during which Italian developed as a literary language divorced from any native-speaking population, with an origin in 12th/13th-century Tuscan but with many words borrowed from languages farther to the north, with different sound outcomes. (The La Spezia\u2013Rimini Line, the most important isogloss in the entire Romance-language area, passes only about north of Florence.) Dual outcomes of Latin between vowels, such as l\u014fcvm &gt; \"luogo\" but f\u014fcvm &gt; \"fuoco\", was once thought to be due to borrowing of northern voiced forms, but is now generally viewed as the result of early phonetic variation within Tuscany.\nSome other features that distinguish Italian from the Western Romance languages:\nStandard Italian also differs in some respects from most nearby Italian languages:\nAssimilation.\nItalian phonotactics do not usually permit verbs and polysyllabic nouns to end with consonants, except in poetry and song, so foreign words may receive extra terminal vowel sounds.\nWriting system.\nItalian has a shallow orthography, meaning very regular spelling with an almost one-to-one correspondence between letters and sounds. In linguistic terms, the writing system is close to being a phonemic orthography. The most important of the few exceptions are the following (see below for more details):\nThe Italian alphabet is typically considered to consist of 21 letters. The letters j, k, w, x, y are traditionally excluded, although they appear in loanwords such as \"jeans\", \"whisky\", \"taxi\", and \"xilofono\". The letter \u27e8x\u27e9 has become common in standard Italian with the prefix \"extra-\", although \"(e)stra-\" is traditionally used; it is also common to use the Latin particle \"ex(-)\" to mean 'former(ly)' as in \"la mia ex\" ('my ex-girlfriend'), \"Ex-Jugoslavia\" ('Former Yugoslavia'). The letter \u27e8j\u27e9 appears in the first name \"Jacopo\" and in some Italian place-names, such as Bajardo, Bojano, Joppolo, Jerzu, Jesolo, Jesi, Ajaccio, among others, and in \"Mar Jonio\", an alternative spelling of \"Mar Ionio\" (the Ionian Sea). The letter \u27e8j\u27e9 may appear in dialectal words, but its use is discouraged in contemporary standard Italian. Letters used in foreign words can be replaced with phonetically equivalent native Italian letters and digraphs: \u27e8gi\u27e9, \u27e8ge\u27e9, or \u27e8i\u27e9 for \u27e8j\u27e9; \u27e8c\u27e9 or \u27e8ch\u27e9 for \u27e8k\u27e9 (including in the standard prefix \"kilo-\"); \u27e8o\u27e9, \u27e8u\u27e9 or \u27e8v\u27e9 for \u27e8w\u27e9; \u27e8s\u27e9, \u27e8ss\u27e9, \u27e8z\u27e9, \u27e8zz\u27e9 or \u27e8cs\u27e9 for \u27e8x\u27e9; and \u27e8e\u27e9 or \u27e8i\u27e9 for \u27e8y\u27e9.\nNote: \u27e8h\u27e9 is silent in the digraphs \"\u27e8ch\u27e9\", \"\u27e8gh\u27e9\"; and \u27e8i\u27e9 is silent in the digraphs \u27e8ci\u27e9 and \u27e8gi\u27e9 before \u27e8a, o, u\u27e9 unless the \u27e8i\u27e9 is stressed. For example, it is silent in \"ciao\" and cielo , but it is pronounced in \"farmacia\" and \"farmacie\" .\nItalian has geminate, or double, consonants, which are distinguished by length and intensity. Length is distinctive for all consonants except for , , , , , which are always geminate when between vowels, and , which is always single.\nGeminate plosives and affricates are realized as lengthened closures. Geminate fricatives, nasals, and are realized as lengthened continuants. There is only one vibrant phoneme but the actual pronunciation depends on the context and regional accent. Generally one can find a flap consonant in an unstressed position whereas is more common in stressed syllables, but there may be exceptions. Especially people from the northern part of Italy (Parma, Aosta Valley, South Tyrol) may pronounce as , , or .\nOf special interest to the linguistic study of Regional Italian is the \"gorgia toscana\", or \"Tuscan throat\", the weakening or lenition of intervocalic , , and in the Tuscan language.\nThe voiced postalveolar fricative is present as a phoneme only in loanwords: for example, \"garage\" . Phonetic is common in central and southern Italy as an intervocalic allophone of : \"gente\" 'people' but \"la gente\" 'the people', \"ragione\" 'reason'.\nGrammar.\nItalian grammar is typical of the grammar of Romance languages in general. Cases exist for personal pronouns (nominative, oblique, accusative, dative), but not for nouns.\nThere are two basic classes of nouns in Italian, referred to as genders, masculine and feminine. Gender may be natural (\"ragazzo\" 'boy', \"ragazza\" 'girl') or simply grammatical with no possible reference to biological gender (masculine \"costo\" 'cost', feminine \"costa\" 'coast'). Masculine nouns typically end in \"-o\" (\"ragazzo\" 'boy'), with plural marked by \"-i\" (\"ragazzi\" 'boys'), and feminine nouns typically end in \"-a\", with plural marked by \"-e\" (\"ragazza\" 'girl', \"ragazze\" 'girls'). For a group composed of boys and girls, \"ragazzi\" is the plural, suggesting that \"-i\" is a general neutral plural. A third category of nouns is unmarked for gender, ending in \"-e\" in the singular and \"-i\" in the plural: \"legge\" 'law, f. sg.', \"leggi\" 'laws, f. pl.'; \"fiume\" 'river, m. sg.', \"fiumi\" 'rivers, m. pl.', thus assignment of gender is arbitrary in terms of form, enough so that terms may be identical but of distinct genders: \"fine\" meaning 'aim', 'purpose' is masculine, while \"fine\" meaning 'end, ending' (e.g. of a movie) is feminine, and both are \"fini\" in the plural, a clear instance of \"-i\" as a non-gendered default plural marker. These nouns often, but not always, denote inanimates. There are a number of nouns that have a masculine singular and a feminine plural, most commonly of the pattern m. sg. \"-o\", f. pl. \"-a\" (\"miglio\" 'mile, m. sg.', \"miglia\" 'miles, f. pl.'; \"paio\" 'pair, m. sg.', \"paia\" 'pairs, f. pl.'), and thus are sometimes considered neuter (these are usually derived from neuter Latin nouns). An instance of neuter gender also exists in pronouns of the third person singular.\nExamples:\nNouns, adjectives, and articles inflect for gender and number (singular and plural).\nLike in English, common nouns are capitalized when occurring at the beginning of a sentence. Unlike English, nouns referring to languages (e.g. Italian) and adjectives pertaining to ethnicity are never capitalized, while speakers of languages, or inhabitants of an area (e.g. Italians) used to always be capitalized, but, starting from the 19th century, this convention has been subject to various changes.\nThere are three types of adjectives: descriptive, invariable and form-changing. Descriptive adjectives are the most common, and their endings change to match the number and gender of the noun they modify. Invariable adjectives are adjectives whose endings do not change. The form-changing adjectives \"buono\" 'good', \"bello\" 'beautiful', \"grande\" 'big', and \"santo\" 'saint/holy' change in form when placed before different types of nouns. Italian has three degrees for comparison of adjectives: positive, comparative, and superlative.\nThe order of words in the phrase is relatively free compared to most European languages. The position of the verb in the phrase is highly mobile. Word order often has a lesser grammatical function in Italian than in English. Adjectives are sometimes placed before their noun and sometimes after. Subject nouns generally come before the verb. Italian is a null-subject language, so nominative pronouns are usually absent, with subject indicated by verbal inflections (e.g. \"amo\" 'I love', \"ama\" '(s)he loves', \"amano\" 'they love'). Noun objects normally come after the verb, as do pronoun objects after imperative verbs, infinitives and gerunds, but otherwise, pronoun objects come before the verb.\nThere are both indefinite and definite articles in Italian. There are four indefinite articles, selected by the gender of the noun they modify and by the phonological structure of the word that immediately follows the article. \"Uno\" is masculine singular, used before \"z\" ( or ), \"s+consonant\", \"gn\" (), \"pn\" or \"ps\", while masculine singular \"un\" is used before a word beginning with any other sound. The noun \"zio\" 'uncle' selects masculine singular, thus \"uno zio\" 'an uncle' or \"uno zio anziano\" 'an old uncle,' but \"un mio zio\" 'an uncle of mine'. The feminine singular indefinite articles are \"una\", used before any consonant sound, and its abbreviated form, written \"un',\" used before vowels: \"una camicia\" 'a shirt', \"una camicia bianca\" 'a white shirt', \"un'altra camicia\" 'a different shirt'. There are seven forms for definite articles, both singular and plural. In the singular: \"lo\", which corresponds to the uses of \"uno\"; \"il\", which corresponds to the uses with the consonant of \"un\"; \"la,\" which corresponds to the uses of \"una\"; \"l',\" used for both masculine and feminine singular before vowels. In the plural: \"gli\" is the masculine plural of \"lo and l'\"; \"i\" is the plural of \"il\"; and \"le\" is the plural of feminine \"la\" and \"l\"'.\nThere are numerous contractions of prepositions with subsequent articles. There are numerous productive suffixes for diminutive, augmentative, pejorative, attenuating, etc., which are also used to create neologisms.\nThere are 27 pronouns, grouped in clitic and tonic pronouns. Personal pronouns are separated into three groups: subject, object (which takes the place of both direct and indirect objects), and reflexive. Second-person subject pronouns have both a polite and a familiar form. These two different types of addresses are very important in Italian social distinctions. All object pronouns have two forms: stressed and unstressed (clitics). Unstressed object pronouns are much more frequently used, and come before a verb conjugated for subject-verb (\"la vedi\": 'you see her'), after (in writing, attached to) non-conjugated verbs (\"vedendola\": 'seeing her'). Stressed object pronouns come after the verb, and are used when the emphasis is required, for contrast, or to avoid ambiguity (\"vedo lui, ma non lei\": 'I see him, but not her'). Aside from personal pronouns, Italian also has demonstrative, interrogative, possessive, and relative pronouns. There are two types of demonstrative pronouns: relatively near (this) and relatively far (that); there exists a third type of demonstrative denoting vicinity only to the listener, but it has fallen out of use. Demonstratives in Italian are repeated before each noun, unlike in English.\nThere are three regular sets of verbal conjugations, and various verbs are irregularly conjugated. Within each of these sets of conjugations, there are four simple (one-word) verbal conjugations by person/number in the indicative mood (present tense; past tense with imperfective aspect, past tense with perfective aspect, and future tense), two simple conjugations in the subjunctive mood (present tense and past tense), one simple conjugation in the conditional mood, and one simple conjugation in the imperative mood. Corresponding to each of the simple conjugations, there is a compound conjugation involving a simple conjugation of \"to be\" or \"to have\" followed by a past participle. \"To have\" is used to form compound conjugation when the verb is transitive (\"ha detto, ha fatto\": 'he/she has said, he/she has made/done'), while \"to be\" is used in the case of verbs of motion and some other intransitive verbs (\"\u00e8 andato, \u00e8 stato\": 'he has gone, he has been'). \"To be\" may be used with transitive verbs, but in such a case it makes the verb passive (\"\u00e8 detto, \u00e8 fatto\": 'it is said, it is made/done'). This rule is not absolute, and some exceptions do exist.\nWords.\nConversation.\nNote: the plural form of verbs could also be used as an extremely formal (for example to noble people in monarchies) singular form (see royal we).\nNumbers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExample text.\nArticle 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Italian:\n Tutti gli esseri umani nascono liberi ed eguali in dignit\u00e0 e diritti. Essi sono dotati di ragione e di coscienza e devono agire gli uni verso gli altri in spirito di fratellanza.\nArticle 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in English:\n \"All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\"\nInternational Phonetic Alphabet transcription:\n [\u02c8tut.ti\u203f\u028e.\u028e\u203f\u02c8\u025bs.seri\u032f\u203fu\u02c8ma\u02d0ni \u02c8naskono \u02c8li\u02d0beri e.d\u203fe\u02c8gwa\u02d0li\u032f\u203fin di\u0272.\u0272i\u02c8ta e\u203fdi\u02c8rit.ti \u2016 \u02c8\u025bs.si \u02c8so\u02d0no do\u02c8ta\u02d0ti di ra\u02c8d\u0361\u0292o\u02d0n\u203fe\u203fdi ko\u0283\u02c8\u0283\u025bnt\u0361sa e\u203f\u02c8d\u025b\u02d0vono a\u02c8d\u0361\u0292i\u02d0re\u203f\u028e.\u028e\u203f\u02c8u\u02d0ni \u02c8v\u025br.so\u203f\u028e.\u028e\u203f\u02c8altri\u032f\u203fin \u02c8spi\u02d0rito di fratel\u02c8lant\u0361sa \u2016]\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14709", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14709", "title": "Ice-T", "text": "American rapper and actor (born 1958)\nTracy Lauren Marrow (born February 16, 1958), known professionally as Ice-T (or Ice T), is an American rapper and actor. He is active in both hip hop and heavy metal. Ice-T began his career as an underground rapper in the 1980s and was signed to Sire Records in 1987, when he released his debut album \"Rhyme Pays\". The following year, he founded the record label Rhyme $yndicate Records (named after his collective of fellow hip-hop artists called the \"Rhyme $yndicate\") and released another album, \"Power\" (1988), which is Ice-T's only album to be certified platinum by the RIAA. His next three albums, \"The Iceberg/Freedom of Speech... Just Watch What You Say!\" (1989), \"O.G. Original Gangster\" (1991) and \"Home Invasion\" (1993), were also critically acclaimed and commercially successful, and were all certified gold in the US.\nIce-T co-founded the heavy metal band Body Count in 1990, which he introduced on \"O.G. Original Gangster\", on the track titled \"Body Count\". The band released its self-titled debut album in 1992. Ice-T encountered controversy over his track \"Cop Killer\", the lyrics of which discussed killing police officers. He asked to be released from his contract with Warner Bros. Records, and his follow-up solo album, \"Home Invasion\", was released through Priority Records. Ice-T released two more albums in the late 1990s and one in the 2000s before focusing on both his acting career and Body Count, who have released eight studio albums to date, the latest being 2024's \"Merciless\".\nAs an actor, Ice-T played small parts in the films \"Breakin (1984) and its sequels, ' and \"Rappin (1984 and 1985 respectively), before his major role debut, starring as police detective Scotty Appleton in \"New Jack City\" (1991). He received top billing for his role in \"Surviving the Game\" (1994) and continued to appear in small roles in TV series and other films throughout the 1990s. Since 2000, he has portrayed NYPD detective/sergeant Odafin Tutuola on the NBC police drama ', making him the longest-running male series actor in American TV history, according to \"Deadline\". A reality television show titled \"Ice Loves Coco\" ran for three seasons (2011\u20132013) on E!, featuring the home life of Ice-T and his wife Coco Austin. In 2018, he began hosting the true crime documentary \"In Ice Cold Blood\" on the Oxygen cable channel, which ran for three seasons.\nEarly life.\nTracy Lauren Marrow, the son of Solomon and Alice Marrow, was born in Newark, New Jersey on February 16, 1958. Solomon's family was originally from Virginia and Philadelphia, and Alice's family was originally from Louisiana. Both of his parents were African American. Ice-T states that his father was a \"dark-skinned brother\" while his mother was a \"fair-skinned\" black woman that looked like Dorothy Dandridge or Lena Horne. For decades, Solomon worked as a conveyor belt mechanic at the Rapistan Conveyor Company. When Marrow was a child, his family moved to upscale Summit, New Jersey. The first time race played a major part in Marrow's life was at the age of seven, when he became aware of the racism leveled by his white friends towards black children. Marrow surmised that he escaped similar treatment because they thought that he was white due to his lighter skin. Relaying this incident to his mother, she told him, \"Honey, people are stupid\"; her advice and this incident taught Marrow to control the way the negativity of others affected him.\nHis mother died of a heart attack when he was in third grade. Solomon raised Marrow as a single father for four years, with help from a housekeeper. Marrow's first experience with illicit activity occurred after a bicycle that his father bought him for Christmas was stolen. After Marrow told his father, Solomon shrugged, \"Well, then, you ain't got no bike\". Marrow stole parts from bicycles and assembled \"three or four weird-looking, brightly-painted bikes\" from the parts; his father either did not notice or never acknowledged this. When Marrow was 13 years old, Solomon also died of a heart attack.\nFollowing his father's death, the orphaned Marrow briefly lived with a nearby aunt, then was sent to live with his other aunt and her husband in View Park-Windsor Hills, an upper middle-class Black neighborhood in South Los Angeles. While his cousin Earl was preparing to leave for college, Marrow shared a bedroom with him. Earl was a fan of rock music and listened only to the local rock radio stations; sharing a room with him sparked Marrow's interest in heavy metal music.\nHigh school, early criminal activity, military service.\nMarrow moved to the Crenshaw District of Los Angeles when he was in the eighth grade. He attended Palms Junior High, which was predominantly made up of white students, and included black students who traveled by bus from South Central to attend. He then attended Crenshaw High School, which was almost entirely made up of black students.\nMarrow stood out from most of his friends because he did not drink alcohol, smoke tobacco, or use drugs. During Marrow's time in high school, gangs became more prevalent in the Los Angeles school system. Students who belonged to the Crips and Bloods gangs attended Crenshaw, and fought in the school's hallways. Marrow, while never an actual gang member, was affiliated with the former. Marrow began reading the novels of Iceberg Slim, which he memorized and recited to his friends, who enjoyed hearing the excerpts and told him, \"Yo, kick some more of that by Ice, T\", giving Marrow his nickname. Marrow and other Crips wrote and performed \"Crip Rhymes\".\nHis music career started with the band of the singing group The Precious Few of Crenshaw High School. Marrow and his group opened the show, dancing to a live band. The singers were Thomas Barnes, Ronald Robinson and Lapekas Mayfield.\nIn 1975, at the age of seventeen, Marrow began receiving Social Security benefits resulting from the death of his father and used the money to rent an apartment for $90 a month. He sold cannabis and stole car stereos to earn extra cash, but he was not making enough to support his pregnant girlfriend. After his daughter was born, Marrow enlisted in the United States Army in October 1977. Following basic training, Marrow was assigned to the 25th Infantry Division. During his time in the army Marrow was involved with a group of soldiers charged with the theft of a rug. While awaiting trial, he received a $2,500 bonus check and went absent without leave (AWOL), returning a month later, after the rug had been returned. Marrow received a non-judicial punishment as a consequence of his dereliction of duty.\nDuring his spell in the Army, Marrow became interested in hip hop music. He heard The Sugarhill Gang's newly released single \"Rapper's Delight\" (1979), which inspired him to perform his own raps over the instrumentals of this and other early hip-hop records. The music, however, did not fit his lyrics or form of delivery.\nWhen he was stationed in Hawaii (where prostitution was not a heavily prosecuted crime) as a squad leader at Schofield Barracks, Marrow met a pimp named Mac. Mac admired that Marrow could quote Iceberg Slim, and he taught Marrow how to be a pimp himself. Marrow was also able to purchase stereo equipment cheaply in Hawaii, including two Technics turntables, a mixer, and large speakers. Once equipped, he then began to learn turntablism and rapping.\nMarrow learned from his commanding officer that he could receive an early honorable discharge because he was a single father. Taking advantage of this, Marrow was discharged as a Private First Class (PFC - E3) in December 1979 after serving for two years and two months.\nDuring an episode of \"The Adam Carolla Podcast\" that aired on June 6, 2012, Marrow claimed that after being discharged from the Army, he began a career as a bank robber. Marrow claimed he and some associates began conducting take-over bank robberies \"like [in the film] \"Heat\"\". Marrow then elaborated, explaining, \"Only punks go for the drawer, we gotta go for the safe.\" Marrow also stated he was glad the United States justice system has statutes of limitations, which had likely expired when Marrow admitted to his involvement in multiple Class 1 Felonies in the early-to-mid 1980s. \nIn July 2010, Marrow was mistakenly arrested. A month later when Marrow attended court, the charges were dropped and the prosecution stated \"there had been a clerical error when the rapper was arrested\". Marrow gave some advice to young people who think going to jail is a mark of integrity, saying, \"Street credibility has nothing to do with going to jail, it has everything to do with staying out.\"\nCareer.\nMusic.\nEarly career (1980\u20131981).\nAfter leaving the Army, Marrow wanted to stay away from gang life and violence and instead make a name for himself as a DJ. As a tribute to Iceberg Slim, Marrow adopted the stage name Ice-T. While performing as a DJ at parties, he received more attention for his rapping, which led Ice-T to pursue a career as a rapper. However, he soon returned to a life of crime and robbed jewelry stores with his high school friends. Ice-T's raps later described how he and his friends pretended to be customers to gain access before smashing the display glass with small sledgehammers.\nIce-T's friends Al P. and Sean E. Sean went to prison. Al P. was caught in 1982 and sent to prison for robbing a high-end jewelry store in Laguna Niguel for $2.5 million in jewelry. Sean was arrested for possession of not only cannabis, which Sean sold, but also material stolen by Ice-T. Sean took the blame and served two years in prison. Ice-T stated that he owed a debt of gratitude to Sean because his prison time allowed him to pursue a career as a rapper. Concurrently, he wound up in a car accident and was hospitalized as a John Doe because he did not carry any form of identification due to his criminal activities. After being discharged from the hospital, he decided to abandon the criminal lifestyle and pursue a professional career rapping. Two weeks after being released from the hospital, he won an open mic competition judged by Kurtis Blow at the Carolina West nightclub. According to Michael Khalfani known as Disco Daddy, Ice-T won the first week of the competition under the name of DJ Tracy, but got beaten by Disco Daddy the second week, which led to the name change of Ice-T (Khalfani got signed to Rappers Rapp Records).\nProfessional career (1982\u2013present).\nIn 1982, Ice-T met producer Willie Strong from Saturn Records. In 1983, Strong recorded Ice-T's first single, \"Cold Wind Madness\", also known as \"The Coldest Rap\", an electro hip-hop record that became an underground success, becoming popular even though radio stations did not play it due to the song's explicit lyrics about taking a woman to the Snooty Fox motel in Los Angeles. That same year, Ice-T released \"Body Rock\", another electro hip-hop single that found popularity in clubs. In 1984, Ice-T was a featured rapper on \"Reckless\", a single by DJ Chris \"The Glove\" Taylor and (co-producer) David Storrs that gained widespread popularity as a featured track via the motion picture \"Breakin and its soundtrack album. This song was almost immediately followed up with a sequel entitled \"Reckless Rivalry (Combat)\", which was featured in the \"Breakin'\" sequel, ', however, it was never featured on the soundtrack album and was only released as a single on Taxidermi Records. In 1985, he appeared in the film \"Rappin\"' by performing two verses of his track \"Killers\", which was his first political rap. Ice later recorded the songs \"Ya Don't Quit\" and \"Dog'n the Wax (Ya Don't Quit-Part II)\" with Unknown DJ, who provided a Run\u2013D.M.C.-like sound for the songs.\nIce-T received further inspiration as an artist from Schoolly D's gangsta rap single \"P.S.K. What Does It Mean?\", which he heard in a club. Ice-T enjoyed the single's sound and delivery, as well as its vague references to gang life, although the real life gang, Park Side Killers, was not named in the song.\nIce-T decided to adopt Schoolly D's style, and wrote the lyrics to his first gangsta rap song, \"6 in the Mornin'\", in his Hollywood apartment, and created a minimal beat with a Roland TR-808. He compared the sound of the song, which was recorded as a B-side on the single \"Dog'n The Wax\", to that of the Beastie Boys. The A-side caused some controversy for the lyrics, which were unusually violent by the standards of hip hop at the time. The B-side was more successful and was later released as an extended rap on his first album. He intentionally did not represent any particular gang, and wore a mixture of red and blue clothing and shoes to avoid antagonizing gang-affiliated listeners, who debated his true affiliation.\nIce-T finally landed a deal with a major label Sire Records. When label founder and president Seymour Stein heard his demo, he said Ice-T sounded like Bob Dylan. Shortly after, he released his debut album \"Rhyme Pays\" in 1987 supported by DJ Evil E, DJ Aladdin and producer Afrika Islam, who helped create the mainly party-oriented sound. The record wound up being certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America. That same year, he recorded the title theme song for Dennis Hopper's \"Colors,\" a film about inner-city gang life in Los Angeles. His next album \"Power\" was released in 1988, under his own label Rhyme Syndicate, and it was a more assured and impressive record, earning him strong reviews and his second gold record. Released in 1989, \"The Iceberg/Freedom of Speech... Just Watch What You Say!\" established his popularity by matching excellent abrasive music with narrative and commentative lyrics. In the same year, he appeared on Hugh Harris' single \"Alice\".\nIn 1991, he released his album \"O.G. Original Gangster.\" On \"OG\", he introduced his heavy metal band Body Count in a track of the same name. Ice-T toured with Body Count on the first annual Lollapalooza concert tour in 1991, gaining him appeal among middle-class teenagers and fans of alternative music genres. The album \"Body Count\" was released in March 1992. For his appearance on the heavily collaborative track \"Back on the Block\", a composition by jazz musician Quincy Jones that \"attempt[ed] to bring together black musical styles from jazz to soul to funk to rap\", Ice-T won a Grammy Award for the Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group, an award shared by others who worked on the track including Jones and fellow jazz musician Ray Charles.\nControversy later surrounded Body Count over its song \"Cop Killer\". The rock song was intended to speak from the viewpoint of a criminal getting revenge on racist, brutal cops. Ice-T's rock song infuriated government officials, the National Rifle Association of America, and various police advocacy groups. Consequently, Time Warner Music refused to release Ice-T's upcoming album \"Home Invasion\" because of the controversy surrounding \"Cop Killer\". Ice-T suggested that the furor over the song was an overreaction, telling journalist Chuck Philips \"...they've done movies about nurse killers and teacher killers and student killers. Arnold Schwarzenegger blew away dozens of cops as the Terminator. But I don't hear anybody complaining about that\". In the same interview, Ice-T suggested to Philips that the misunderstanding of \"Cop Killer\", the misclassification of it as a rap song (not a rock song), and the attempts to censor it had racial overtones: \"The Supreme Court says it's OK for a white man to burn a cross in public. But nobody wants a black man to write a record about a cop killer\".\nIce-T split amicably with Sire/Warner Bros. Records after a dispute over the artwork of the album \"Home Invasion\". He then reactivated Rhyme Syndicate and formed a deal with Priority Records for distribution. Priority released \"Home Invasion\" in the spring of 1993. The album peaked at No. 9 on \"Billboard\" magazine's Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums and at No. 14 on the \"Billboard\" 200, spawning several singles including \"Gotta Lotta Love\", \"I Ain't New Ta This\" and \"99 Problems\" \u2013 which would later inspire Jay-Z to record a version with new lyrics in 2003. In 2003 he released the single \"Beat of Life\" with Sandra Nasi\u0107, Trigga tha Gambler and DJ Tomekk and placed in the German charts.\nIce-T had also collaborated with certain other heavy metal bands during this time period. For the film \"Judgment Night\", he did a duet with Slayer on the track \"Disorder\". In 1995, Ice-T made a guest performance on \"Forbidden\" by Black Sabbath. Another album of his, \"\", was released in 1996, followed by \"The Seventh Deadly Sin\" in 1999.\nHis first rap album since 1999, \"Gangsta Rap\", was released on October 31, 2006. The album's cover, which \"shows [Ice-T] lying on his back in bed with his ravishing wife's ample posterior in full view and one of her legs coyly draped over his private parts\", was considered to be too suggestive for most retailers, many of which were reluctant to stock the album. Some reviews of the album were unenthusiastic, as many had hoped for a return to the political raps of Ice-T's most successful albums.\nIce-T appears in the film \"Gift\". One of the last scenes includes Ice-T and Body Count playing with Jane's Addiction in a version of the Sly and the Family Stone song \"Don't Call Me Nigger, Whitey\".\nBesides fronting his own band and rap projects, Ice-T has also collaborated with other hard rock and metal bands, such as Icepick, Mot\u00f6rhead, Slayer, Megadeth, Pro-Pain, and Six Feet Under. He has also covered songs by hardcore punk bands such as the Exploited, Jello Biafra, and Black Flag. Ice-T made an appearance at Insane Clown Posse's Gathering of the Juggalos (2008 edition). Ice-T was also a judge for the 7th annual Independent Music Awards to support independent artists. His 2012 film \"\" features a who's who of underground and mainstream rappers.\nIn November 2011, Ice-T announced via Twitter that he was in the process of collecting beats for his next LP which was expected sometime during 2012, but as of October\u00a02014[ [update]], the album has not been released. A new Body Count album, \"Bloodlust\", was released in 2017. After the release of the album, responding to an interview question asking if he's \"done with rap\", he answered \"I don't know\" and noted that he's \"really leaning more toward EDM right now\". Body Count received their second Grammy nomination and later won the award at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards in 2021 for \"Best Metal Performance\" with their song \"Bum-Rush\" from the album \"Carnivore\".\nIn July 2019, Ice-T released his first solo hip hop track in 10 years, titled \"Feds in My Rearview\". The track is the first in a trilogy, with the second track, \"Too Old for the Dumb Shit\", described as a prequel to \"Feds in My Rearview\", and released in September 2019. Ice-T was also featured on the 2020 hip hop posse cut \"The Slayers Club\" alongside R.A. the Rugged Man, Brand Nubian and others.\nIce-T performed at New Year's Eve Toast &amp; Roast 2021, Fox broadcast.\nActing.\nTelevision and film.\nIce-T was prominently featured as both a rapper and a breakdancer in \"Breakin' 'n' Enterin\"' (1983), a documentary about the early West Coast hip hop scene.\nIce-T's first film appearances were in the motion pictures, \"Breakin (1984), and its sequel, ' (1984). These films were released before Ice-T released his first LP, although he appears on the soundtrack to \"Breakin'\". He has since stated he considers the films and his own performance in them to be \"wack\".\nIn 1991, he embarked on a serious acting career, portraying police detective Scotty Appleton in Mario Van Peebles' action thriller \"New Jack City\", gang leader Odessa (alongside Denzel Washington and John Lithgow) in \"Ricochet\" (1991), gang leader King James in \"Trespass\" (1992), followed by a notable lead role performance in \"Surviving the Game\" (1994), in addition to many supporting roles, such as J-Bone in \"Johnny Mnemonic\" (1995), and the marsupial mutant T-Saint in \"Tank Girl\" (1995). He was also interviewed in the Brent Owens documentary \"Pimps Up, Ho's Down\", in which he claims to have had an extensive pimping background before getting into rap. He is quoted as saying \"once you max something out, it ain't no fun no more. I couldn't really get no farther.\" He goes on to explain his pimping experience gave him the ability to get into new businesses. \"I can't act, I really can't act, I ain't no rapper, it's all game. I'm just working these niggas.\" Later he raps at the Players Ball.\nIn 1993, Ice-T, along with other rappers and the three \"Yo! MTV Raps\" hosts Ed Lover, Doctor Dr\u00e9, and Fab 5 Freddy starred in the comedy \"Who's the Man?\", directed by Ted Demme. In the film, he is a drug dealer who gets really frustrated when someone calls him by his real name, \"Chauncey\", rather than his street name, \"Nighttrain\".\nIn 1995, Ice-T had a recurring role as vengeful drug dealer Danny Cort on the television series \"New York Undercover\", co-created by Dick Wolf. His work on the series earned him the 1996 NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series. In 1997, he co-created the short-lived series \"Players\", produced by Wolf. This was followed by a role as pimp Seymour \"Kingston\" Stockton in \"\" (1998). These collaborations led Wolf to add Ice-T to the cast of \".\" Since 2000, he has portrayed Odafin \"Fin\" Tutuola, a former undercover narcotics officer transferred to the Special Victims Unit. In 2002, the NAACP awarded Ice-T with a second Image Award, again for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series, for his work on \"Law &amp; Order: SVU\".\nAround 1995, Ice-T co-presented a UK-produced magazine television series on black culture, \"Baadasss TV\".\nIn 1997, Ice-T had a pay-per-view special titled \"Ice-T's Extreme Babes\" which appeared on Action PPV, formerly owned by BET Networks.\nIn 1999, Ice-T starred in the HBO film \"Stealth Fighter\" as a United States Naval Aviator who fakes his own death, steals an F-117 stealth fighter, and threatens to destroy United States military bases. He also acted in the film \"Sonic Impact\", released the same year.\nIce-T made an appearance on the comedy television series \"Chappelle's Show\" as himself presenting the award for \"Player Hater of the Year\" at the \"Player-Haters Ball\", a parody of his own appearance at the Players Ball. He was dubbed the \"Original Player Hater\".\n\"Beyond Tough\", a 2002 documentary series, aired on Discovery Channel about the world's most dangerous and intense professions, such as alligator wrestlers and Indy 500 pit crews, was hosted by Ice-T.\nIn 2007, Ice-T appeared as a celebrity guest star on the MTV sketch comedy show \"\". Also in late 2007, he appeared in the short-music film \"Hands of Hatred\", which can be found online.\nIce-T was interviewed for the Cannibal Corpse retrospective documentary \"\", as well as appearing in Chris Rock's 2009 documentary \"Good Hair\", in which he reminisced about going to school in hair curlers.\nA 2016 advertisement for GEICO features Ice-T behind a lemonade stand run by children. When people ask if it is Ice-T, the actor yells back, \"No, it's lemonade!\"\nIn 2020, Ice-T competed on \"The Masked Singer\" spin-off \"The Masked Dancer\" where he portrayed \"Disco Ball\" and was the first to be eliminated.\nVoice acting.\nIce-T's voice acting roles include Madd Dogg in the video game ', as well as Agent Cain in '. He also appears as himself in ' and ' fighting video games. He also voiced the character Aaron Griffin in the video game \"Gears of War 3\". Marrow also made an appearance in the 2019 video game \"Borderlands 3\", in which he voices the character of BALEX. On August 22, 2023, it was revealed at Gamescom 2023 that he would be voicing the contractor, Mac in \"Payday 3\".\nOther ventures.\nPodcasting.\nOn December 27, 2013, Ice-T announced that he was entering podcasting in a deal with the Paragon Collective. Ice-T co-hosts the \"Ice-T: Final Level\" podcast with his longtime friend, Mick Benzo (known as Zulu Beatz on Sirius XM). They discuss relevant issues, films, video games, and do a behind the scenes of \"Law &amp; Order: SVU\" segment with featured guests from the entertainment world. The show will release new episodes bi-weekly. Guests have included Jim Norton. Ice-T released his first episode on January 7 to many accolades.\nReality television.\nOn October 20, 2006, \"Ice-T's Rap School\" aired and was a reality television show on VH1. It was a spin-off of the British reality show \"Gene Simmons' Rock School\", which also aired on VH1. In \"Rap School\", rapper/actor Ice-T teaches eight teens from York Preparatory School in New York called the \"York Prep Crew\" (\"Y.P. Crew\" for short). Each week, Ice-T gives them assignments and they compete for an imitation gold chain with a microphone on it. On the season finale on November 17, 2006, the group performed as an opening act for Public Enemy.\nOn June 12, 2011, E! reality show \"Ice Loves Coco\" debuted. The show is mostly about his relationship with his wife, Nicole \"Coco\" Austin.\nStyle and influence.\nIce-T cites writer Iceberg Slim and rapper Schoolly D as influences, with Iceberg Slim's novels guiding his skills as a lyricist. His favorite heavy rock acts are Edgar Winter, Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath. His hip hop albums helped shape gangsta rap, with music journalists tracing works of artists such as Tupac Shakur, Notorious B.I.G., Eminem and N.W.A to \"6 in the Mornin'\".\nA love of rock led Ice to use guitar in his albums, to provide his songs with edge and power, and to make his raps harder. He drew on the fusion of rock and hip hop by Rick Rubin-produced acts such as Beastie Boys, Run-DMC, and LL Cool J, who featured rock samples in their songs.\nBody Count \u2013 whose 1992 debut album Ice described as a \"rock album with a rap mentality\" \u2013 is described as paving the way for the success of rap rock fusions by acts like Kid Rock and Limp Bizkit. However, Ice-T states that the band's style does not fuse the two genres, and that Body Count is solely a rock band.\nIn \"Hip Hop Connection\", Ice listed his favorite rap albums:\nPersonal life.\nOn March 20, 1976, Marrow's high school girlfriend Adrienne gave birth to their daughter LeTesha Marrow, and they continued attending high school while raising her. While filming \"Breakin\"' in 1984, he met his second girlfriend Darlene Ortiz, who was at the club where the film was shot. They began a relationship and Ortiz was featured on the covers of \"Rhyme Pays\" and \"Power\". Ice-T and Ortiz had a son, Ice Tracy Marrow Jr., on November 23, 1991; Ice Marrow, aka \"Little Ice\", became a backing vocalist with Body Count in time for the recording of their album \"Carnivore.\"\nIce-T married swimsuit model Nicole \"Coco\" Austin in January 2002. In celebration of their impending ninth wedding anniversary, the couple renewed their wedding vows on June 4, 2011. As of 2006, they owned a penthouse apartment in North Bergen, New Jersey. In 2012, they were building a five-bedroom house in Edgewater, New Jersey, that was expected to be completed by the end of the year. In 2015, the couple had their first child together, a daughter.\nIce-T has stated on numerous occasions that he is a teetotaler, and lives a straight edge lifestyle. He is a long time practitioner of Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu and boxing, and is a big fan of the UFC.\nActivism.\nDuring the popularity of Public Enemy, Ice-T was closely associated with the band and his recordings of the time showed a similar political viewpoint. He was referred to as \"The Soldier of the Highest Degree\" in the booklet for \"Fear of a Black Planet\" and mentioned on the track \"Reggie Jax\". Ice-T's track \"This One's For Me\" included a defense of Professor Griff after the antisemitism controversy and attacked other rappers for not speaking out in his defense. At the Hollywood Walk of Fame ceremony for Ice-T, Chuck D appeared on stage alongside his longtime friend.\nIce-T also collaborated with fellow vocalist and anti-censorship campaigner Jello Biafra on his album \"The Iceberg/Freedom of Speech... Just Watch What You Say!\". He and Biafra appeared on \"The Oprah Winfrey Show\" in 1990 to debate Tipper Gore on censorship in music. After the controversy of the Body Count song \"Cop Killer\", Ice-T became an icon for free-speech campaigners, which led to a doubling in album sales. The song was condemned by both George H. W. Bush and Dan Quayle during the 1992 United States presidential election. When he decided to withdraw the song from his album, he replaced it with a metal version of his rap \"Freedom of Speech\". A 2004 \"Guardian\" article wrote, \"He's toured universities lecturing on first amendment rights and civil liberties and is vocal about the billions wasted on the Iraq war. He insists, however, he'd never get involved in politics.\"\nThe last track of \"OG Original Gangster\" condemned both the Gulf War and mass incarceration. In 2017, Ice-T signed a petition to Congress for criminal-justice reform.\nHis 1994 book, \"The Ice Opinion\", was largely focused on his view on politics. Writing in the aftermath of the 1992 Los Angeles riots, he was one of the only rappers who criticized the targeting of Koreans by some Black rioters.\nOn June 5, 2008, Ice-T joked that he would be voting for John McCain in the 2008 American elections, speculating that his past affiliation with Body Count could hurt Barack Obama's chances if he endorsed him, so he would choose instead to ruin McCain's campaign by saying he supported him. In 2015, Ice-T said that he admired Obama \"just for the simple fact he took the shot and went all the way to be president\" and included Obama in the list of people who he would like to have for a dream dinner party.\nOn September 22, 2022, Ice-T narrated an advertisement for the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression.\nPersonal disputes.\nLL Cool J.\nIce-T had a feud with LL Cool J in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Apparently, this was instigated by LL's claim to be \"the baddest rapper in the history of rap itself\". Ice-T recorded disses against LL on his 1988 album \"Power\". On the album was the track, \"I'm Your Pusher\", in which a rap music addict declines to buy an LL Cool J record. In the book \"Check the Technique: Liner Notes for Hip-Hop Junkies\", Ice-T said that the song \"Girls L.G.B.N.A.F.\" was also intended as a diss to LL Cool J, by making a crude song to contrast with the love songs that LL was making at the time.\nOn LL's response, \"To da Break of Dawn\" in 1990, he dissed Kool Moe Dee (whose feud with LL was far more publicized) as well as MC Hammer. He then devoted the third verse of the song to dissing Ice-T, mocking his rap ability (\"take your rhymes around the corner to rap rehab\"), his background (\"before you rapped, you was a downtown car thief\"), and his style (\"a brother with a perm deserves to get burned\"). He also suggested that the success of \"Power\" was due to the appearance of Ice-T's girlfriend Darlene on the album cover. Ice-T appeared to have ignored the insults and he had also defended LL Cool J after his arrest in the song \"Freedom of Speech\".\nIn August 2012, Ice-T said that the rivalry was \"never serious\" and that he needed a nemesis to create \"an exciting dispute\".\nSoulja Boy.\nIn June 2008, on DJ Cisco's \"Urban Legend\" mixtape, Ice-T criticized Soulja Boy (whose name is DeAndre Way) for \"killing hip hop\" and called his song \"Crank That\" \"garbage\" compared to the works of other hip-hop artists such as Rakim, Das EFX, Big Daddy Kane and Ice Cube. One of the comments exchanged was Ice-T telling Way to \"eat a dick\". The two then traded numerous videos back and forth over the Internet. These videos included a cartoon and video of Ice-T dancing on Way's behalf and an apology, but reiteration of his feelings that Way's music \"sucks\", on Ice-T's behalf. Musician Kanye West defended Way saying, \"He came from the 'hood, made his own beats, made up a new saying, new sound and a new dance with one song\".\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSource:\nBibliography.\n\"Kings of Vice\" novel series\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14711", "revid": "4968133", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14711", "title": "Iron Age", "text": "Archaeological period\nThe Iron Age (c.\u20091200\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009550\u00a0BC) is the final epoch of the three historical Metal Ages, after the Copper Age and Bronze Age. It has also been considered as the final age of the three-age division starting with prehistory (before recorded history) and progressing to protohistory (before written history). In this usage, it is preceded by the Stone Age (subdivided into the Paleolithic, Mesolithic and Neolithic) and Bronze Age. These concepts originated for describing Iron Age Europe and the ancient Near East. In the archaeology of the Americas, a five-period system is conventionally used instead; indigenous cultures there did not develop an iron economy in the pre-Columbian era, though some did work copper and silver. Indigenous metalworking arrived in Australia with European contact. Although meteoric iron has been used for millennia in many regions, the beginning of the Iron Age is defined locally around the world by archaeological convention when the production of smelted iron (especially steel tools and weapons) replaces their bronze equivalents in common use.\nIn Anatolia and the Caucasus, or Southeast Europe, the Iron Age began c.\u20091300\u00a0BC. In the ancient Near East, this transition occurred simultaneously with the Late Bronze Age collapse, during the 12th century\u00a0BC. The technology soon spread throughout the Mediterranean basin region and to South Asia between the 12th and 11th centuries\u00a0BC. Its further spread to Central Asia, Eastern Europe, and Central Europe was somewhat delayed, and Northern Europe was not reached until c.\u00a0the 5th century\u00a0BC.\nThe Iron Age in India is stated as beginning with the ironworking Painted Grey Ware culture, dating from c.\u00a01200 BC to the reign of Ashoka in the 3rd century\u00a0BC. The term \"Iron Age\" in the archaeology of South, East, and Southeast Asia is more recent and less common than for western Eurasia. Africa did not have a universal \"Bronze Age\", and many areas transitioned directly from stone to iron. Some archaeologists believe that iron metallurgy was developed in sub-Saharan Africa independently from Eurasia and neighbouring parts of Northeast Africa as early as 2000\u00a0BC.\nThe concept of the Iron Age ending with the beginning of the written historiographical record has not generalized well, as written language and steel use have developed at different times in different areas across the archaeological record. For instance, in China, written history started before iron smelting began, so the term is used infrequently for the archaeology of China. In Mesopotamia, written history predates iron smelting by hundreds of years. For the ancient Near East, the establishment of the Achaemenid Empire c.\u2009550\u00a0BC is used traditionally and still usually as an end date; later dates are considered historical according to the record by Herodotus despite considerable written records now being known from well back into the Bronze Age. In Central and Western Europe, the conquests by the Roman Empire during the 1st century\u00a0BC serve as marking the end of the Iron Age. The Germanic Iron Age of Scandinavia is considered to end c.\u2009AD\u00a0800, with the beginning of the Viking Age.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory of the concept.\nThe three-age system of Stone, Bronze, and Iron Ages was first used for the archaeology of Europe during the first half of the 19th century; by the latter half of the 19th century, it had been extended to the archaeology of the ancient Near East. Its name harks back to the mythological \"Ages of Man\" of Hesiod. As an archaeological era, it was first introduced to Scandinavia by Christian J\u00fcrgensen Thomsen during the 1830s. By the 1860s, it was embraced as a useful division of the \"earliest history of mankind\" in general and began to be applied in Assyriology. The development of the now-conventional periodization in the archaeology of the ancient Near East was developed during the 1920s and 1930s.\nDefinition of \"iron\".\nMeteoric iron, a natural iron\u2013nickel alloy, was used by various ancient peoples thousands of years before the Iron Age. The earliest-known meteoric iron artifacts are nine small beads dated to 3200\u00a0BC, which were found in burials at Gerzeh in Lower Egypt, having been shaped by careful hammering.\nThe characteristic of an Iron Age culture is the mass production of tools and weapons made not just of found iron, but from smelted steel alloys with an added carbon content. Only with the capability of the production of carbon steel does ferrous metallurgy result in tools or weapons that are harder and lighter than bronze.\nSmelted iron appears sporadically in the archeological record from the middle Bronze Age. Whilst terrestrial iron is abundant naturally, temperatures above are required to smelt it, impractical to achieve with the technology available commonly until the end of the second millennium\u00a0BC. In contrast, the components of bronze\u2014tin with a melting point of and copper with a relatively moderate melting point of \u2014were within the capabilities of Neolithic kilns, which date back to 6000\u00a0BC and were able to produce temperatures greater than .\nIn addition to specially designed furnaces, ancient iron production required the development of complex procedures for the removal of impurities, the regulation of the admixture of carbon, and the invention of hot-working to achieve a useful balance of hardness and strength in steel.\nChronological history.\nEarliest evidence.\nThe earliest tentative evidence for iron-making is a small number of iron fragments with the appropriate amounts of carbon admixture found in the Proto-Hittite layers at Kaman-Kaleh\u00f6y\u00fck in modern-day Turkey, dated to 2200\u20132000\u00a0BC. Akanuma (2008) concludes that \"The combination of carbon dating, archaeological context, and archaeometallurgical examination indicates that it is likely that the use of ironware made of steel had already begun in the third millennium\u00a0BC in Central Anatolia.\" Souckova-Siegolov\u00e1 (2001) shows that iron implements were made in Central Anatolia in very limited quantities about 1800\u00a0BC and were in general use by elites, though not by commoners, during the Neo-Hittite Empire (c.\u20091400\u20131200\u00a0BC).\nSimilarly, recent archaeological remains of iron-working in the Ganges Valley in India have been dated tentatively to 1800\u00a0BC. Tewari (2003) concludes that \"knowledge of iron smelting and manufacturing of iron artifacts was well known in the Eastern Vindhyas and iron had been in use in the Central Ganga Plain, at least from the early second millennium\u00a0BC\". (Recently reported claims of much earlier datings for iron smelting in Tamil Nadu's Sivagalai site are not yet published in peer-reviewed scientific journals and have been questioned by some scholars.) By the Middle Bronze Age increasing numbers of smelted iron objects (distinguishable from meteoric iron by the lack of nickel in the product) appeared in the Middle East, Southeast Asia and South Asia.\nAfrican sites are revealing dates as early as 2000\u20131200\u00a0BC. However, some recent studies date the inception of iron metallurgy in Africa between 3000 and 2500\u00a0BC, with evidence existing for early iron metallurgy in parts of Nigeria, Cameroon, and Central Africa, from as early as around 2000\u00a0BC.\u00a0The Nok culture of Nigeria may have practiced iron smelting from as early as 1000 BC, while the nearby Djenn\u00e9-Djenno culture of the Niger Valley in Mali shows evidence of iron production from c.\u00a0250 BC. Iron technology across much of sub-Saharan Africa has an African origin dating to before 2000 BC. These findings confirm the independent invention of iron smelting in sub-Saharan Africa.\nBeginning.\nAlthough meteoric iron has been used for millennia in many regions, the beginning of the Iron Age is defined locally around the world by archaeological convention when the production of smelted iron (especially steel tools and weapons) replaces their bronze equivalents in common use.\nModern archaeological evidence identifies the start of large-scale global iron production about 1200\u00a0BC, marking the end of the Bronze Age. The Iron Age in Europe is often considered as a part of the Bronze Age collapse in the ancient Near East.\nAnthony Snodgrass suggests that a shortage of tin and trade disruptions in the Mediterranean about 1300\u00a0BC forced metalworkers to seek an alternative to bronze. Many bronze implements were recycled into weapons during that time, and more widespread use of iron resulted in improved steel-making technology and lower costs. When tin became readily available again, iron was cheaper, stronger and lighter, and forged iron implements superseded cast bronze tools permanently.\nIn Central and Western Europe, the Iron Age lasted from c.\u2009800 BC to c.\u20091 BC, beginning in pre-Roman Iron Age Northern Europe in c.\u2009600 BC, and reaching Northern Scandinavian Europe about c.\u2009500 BC.\nThe Iron Age in the ancient Near East is considered to last from c.\u20091200 BC (the Bronze Age collapse) to c.\u2009550 BC (or 539 BC), roughly the beginning of historiography with Herodotus, marking the end of the proto-historical period.\nIn China, because writing was developed first, there is no recognizable prehistoric period characterized by ironworking, and the Bronze Age China transitions almost directly into the Qin dynasty of imperial China. \"Iron Age\" in the context of China is used sometimes for the transitional period of c.\u2009900 BC to 100 BC during which ferrous metallurgy was present even if not dominant.\nAncient Near East.\nThe Iron Age in the ancient Near East is believed to have begun after the discovery of iron smelting and smithing techniques in Anatolia, the Caucasus or Southeast Europe c.\u20091300\u00a0BC. The earliest bloomery smelting of iron is found at Tell Hammeh, Jordan c.\u2009930\u00a0BC (determined from 14C dating).\nThe Early Iron Age in the Caucasus area is divided conventionally into two periods: Early Iron I (c.\u20091100\u00a0BC), and Early Iron II (10th\u20139th centuries\u00a0BC). Many of the material culture traditions of the Late Bronze Age continued into the Early Iron Age. Thus, there is a sociocultural continuity during this transitional period.\nIn Iran, the earliest actual iron artifacts were unknown until the 9th century\u00a0BC. For Iran, the best studied archaeological site during this time period is Teppe Hasanlu.\nWest Asia.\nIn the Mesopotamian states of Sumer, Akkad and Assyria, the initial use of iron dates to perhaps 3000\u00a0BC. One of the earliest smelted iron artifacts known is a dagger with an iron blade found in a Hattic tomb in Anatolia, dating from 2500\u00a0BC. The widespread use of iron weapons which replaced bronze weapons rapidly disseminated throughout the Near East by the beginning of the 1st millennium\u00a0BC.\nThe development of iron smelting was once attributed to the Hittites of Anatolia during the Late Bronze Age. As part of the Late Bronze Age and Early Iron Age, the Bronze Age collapse saw the slow, comparatively continuous spread of iron-working technology in the region. It was long believed that the success of the Hittite Empire during the Late Bronze Age had been based on the advantages entailed by the \"monopoly\" on ironworking at the time. Accordingly, the invading Sea Peoples would have been responsible for spreading the knowledge through that region. The idea of such a \"Hittite monopoly\" has been examined more thoroughly and no longer represents a scholarly consensus. While there are some iron objects from Bronze Age Anatolia, the number is comparable to iron objects found in Egypt and other places of the same time period; and only a small number of these objects are weapons.\nDates are approximate\nEgypt.\nIn the Black Pyramid of Abusir, dating before 2000\u00a0BC, Gaston Maspero found some pieces of iron. In the funeral text of Pepi I, the metal is mentioned. Iron metal is singularly scarce in collections of Egyptian antiquities. Bronze remained the primary material there until the conquest by the Neo-Assyrian Empire in 671 BC. The explanation of this would seem to be that the relics are in most cases the paraphernalia of tombs, the funeral vessels and vases, and iron being considered an impure metal by the ancient Egyptians it was never used in their manufacture of these or for any religious purposes. It was attributed to Seth, the spirit of evil who according to Egyptian tradition governed the central deserts of Africa. A sword bearing the name of pharaoh Merneptah as well as a battle axe with an iron blade and gold-decorated bronze shaft were both found in the excavation of Ugarit. A dagger with an iron blade found in Tutankhamun's tomb, 13th century BC, was examined recently and found to be of meteoric origin.\nEurope.\nIn Europe, the Iron Age is the last stage of prehistoric Europe and the first of the protohistoric periods, which initially means descriptions of a particular area by Greek and Roman writers. For much of Europe, the period came to an abrupt local end after conquest by the Romans, though ironworking remained the dominant technology until recent times. Elsewhere it may last until the early centuries AD, and either Christianization or a new conquest during the Migration Period.\nIron working was introduced to Europe during the late 11th century BC, probably from the Caucasus, and slowly spread northwards and westwards over the succeeding 500 years. The Iron Age did not start when iron first appeared in Europe but it began to replace bronze in the preparation of tools and weapons. It did not happen at the same time throughout Europe; local cultural developments played a role in the transition to the Iron Age. For example, the Iron Age of Prehistoric Ireland begins about 500 BC (when the Greek Iron Age had already ended) and finishes about 400 AD. The widespread use of the technology of iron was implemented in Europe simultaneously with Asia. The prehistoric Iron Age in Central Europe is divided into two periods based on the Hallstatt culture (early Iron Age) and La T\u00e8ne (late Iron Age) cultures. Material cultures of Hallstatt and La T\u00e8ne consist of 4 phases (A, B, C, D).\nThe Iron Age in Europe is characterized by an elaboration of designs of weapons, implements, and utensils. These are no longer cast but hammered into shape, and decoration is elaborate and curvilinear rather than simple rectilinear; the forms and character of the ornamentation of the northern European weapons resemble in some respects Roman arms, while in other respects they are peculiar and evidently representative of northern art.\nCit\u00e2nia de Briteiros, located in Guimar\u00e3es, Portugal, is one of the examples of archaeological sites of the Iron Age. This settlement (fortified villages) covered an area of , and served as a Celtiberian stronghold against Roman invasions. \u0130t dates more than 2500 years back. The site was researched by Francisco Martins Sarmento starting from 1874. A number of amphoras (containers usually for wine or olive oil), coins, fragments of pottery, weapons, pieces of jewelry, as well as ruins of a bath and its (lit.\u2009'handsome stone') revealed here.\nAsia.\nCentral Asia.\nThe Iron Age began in Central Asia with the Saka, an Eastern Iranian people who lived in present-day Xinjiang, between the 10th and the 7th centuries\u00a0BC, attested at sites like the cemetery at Chawuhukou.\nThe Pazyryk culture is an Iron Age archaeological culture (c.\u20096th\u20133rd centuries\u00a0BC) identified by excavated artifacts and mummified humans found in the Siberian permafrost in the Altai Mountains.\nEast Asia.\nDates are approximate\nIn China, Chinese bronze inscriptions are found around 1200\u00a0BC, preceding the development of iron metallurgy, which was known by the 9th century\u00a0BC. Iron metallurgy reached the Yangtze valley in the late 6th century\u00a0BC. The few objects were found at Changsha and Nanjing. The mortuary evidence suggests that the initial use of iron in Lingnan belongs to the mid-to-late Warring States period (from c.\u2009350\u00a0BC). Important non-precious husi style metal finds include iron tools found at the tomb at Guwei-cun of the 4th century\u00a0BC.\nThe techniques used in Lingnan are a combination of bivalve moulds of distinct southern tradition and the incorporation of piece mould technology from the \"Zhongyuan\". The products of the combination of these two periods are bells, vessels, weapons and ornaments, and the sophisticated cast.\nAn Iron Age culture of the Tibetan Plateau has been associated tentatively with the Zhangzhung culture described by early Tibetan writings.\nIn Japan, iron items, such as tools, weapons, and decorative objects, are postulated to have entered Japan during the late Yayoi period (c.\u2009300\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009300\u00a0AD) or the succeeding Kofun period (c.\u2009250\u00a0\u2013 538\u00a0AD), most likely from the Korean Peninsula and China.\nDistinguishing characteristics of the Yayoi period include the appearance of new pottery styles and the start of intensive rice agriculture in paddy fields. Yayoi culture flourished in a geographic area from southern Ky\u016bsh\u016b to northern Honsh\u016b. The Kofun and the subsequent Asuka periods are sometimes referred to collectively as the Yamato period; The word is Japanese for the type of burial mounds dating from that era.\nIron objects were introduced to the Korean peninsula through trade with chiefdoms and state-level societies bordering the Yellow Sea during the 4th century\u00a0BC, at the end of the Warring States period, but before the beginning of the Western Han dynasty. Yoon proposes that iron was first introduced to chiefdoms located along North Korean river valleys that flow into the Yellow Sea such as the Cheongcheon and Taedong Rivers. Iron production quickly followed during the 2nd century\u00a0BC, and iron implements came to be used by farmers by the 1st century in southern Korea. The earliest known cast-iron axes in southern Korea are found in the Geum River river basin. The time that iron production begins is the same time that complex chiefdoms of Proto-historic Korea emerged. The complex chiefdoms were the precursors of early states such as Silla, Baekje, Goguryeo, and Gaya Iron ingots were an important mortuary item and indicated the wealth or prestige of the deceased during this period.\nSouth Asia.\nDates are approximate\nThe early evidence of iron smelting predates the emergence of the Iron Age proper by several centuries. Iron was being used in Mundigak to manufacture some The history of metallurgy in the Indian subcontinent began prior to the 3rd millennium BC. Archaeological sites in India, such as Malhar, Dadupur, Raja Nala Ka Tila, Lahuradewa, Kosambi and Jhusi, Allahabad in present-day Uttar Pradesh show iron implements in the period 1800\u20131200\u00a0BC. As the evidence from the sites Raja Nala ka tila, Malhar suggest the use of Iron c.\u00a01800\u20131700\u00a0BC. The extensive use of iron smelting is from Malhar and its surrounding area. This site is assumed as the center for smelted bloomer iron to this area due to its location in the Karamnasa River and Ganga River. This site shows agricultural technology as iron implements sickles, nails, clamps, spearheads, etc., by c.\u00a01500 BC. Archaeological excavations in Hyderabad show an Iron Age burial site.\nHowever, reviewing the claims of early uses of iron during c. 1800\u20131000 BC, archaeologist Suraj Bhan noted, \"the stratigraphical context and chronology of iron is not beyond doubt\" at these sites (namely Malhar, Dadupur, and Lahuradeva) \u2014 although \"there is no doubt\" that iron was being used in the Ganges Plains \"a few centuries before the rise of urbanization [...] around 600 BC\".\nThe beginning of the 1st millennium\u00a0BC saw extensive developments in iron metallurgy in India. Technological advancement and mastery of iron metallurgy were achieved during this period of peaceful settlements. One ironworking centre in East India has been dated to the 1st millennium\u00a0BC. In Southern India (present-day Mysore) iron appeared as early as 12th to 11th centuries BC; these developments were too early for any significant close contact with the northwest of the country. The Indian Upanishads mention metallurgy. and the Indian Mauryan period saw advances in metallurgy. As early as 300\u00a0BC, certainly by 200\u00a0AD, high-quality steel was produced in southern India, by what would later be called the crucible technique. In this system, high-purity wrought iron, charcoal, and glass were mixed in a crucible and heated until the iron melted and absorbed the carbon.\nThe protohistoric Early Iron Age in Sri Lanka lasted from 1000\u00a0BC to 600\u00a0BC. Radiocarbon evidence has been collected from Anuradhapura and Aligala shelter in Sigiriya. The Anuradhapura settlement is recorded to extend by 800\u00a0BC and grew to by 700\u2013600\u00a0BC to become a town. The skeletal remains of an Early Iron Age chief were excavated in Anaikoddai, Jaffna. The name \"Ko Veta\" is engraved in Brahmi script on a seal buried with the skeleton and is assigned by the excavators to the 3rd century BC. Ko, meaning \"King\" in Tamil, is comparable to such names as Ko Atan and Ko Putivira occurring in contemporary Brahmi inscriptions in south India. It is also speculated that Early Iron Age sites may exist in Kandarodai, Matota, Pilapitiya and Tissamaharama.\nThe earliest undisputed deciphered epigraphy found within the Indian subcontinent are the Edicts of Ashoka of the 3rd century\u00a0BC, in the Brahmi script. Several inscriptions were thought to be pre-Ashokan by earlier scholars; these include the Piprahwa relic casket inscription, the Badli pillar inscription, the Bhattiprolu relic casket inscription, the Sohgaura copper plate inscription, the Mahasthangarh Brahmi inscription, the Eran coin legend, the Taxila coin legends, and the inscription on the silver coins of Sophytes. However, more recent scholars have dated them to later periods.\nSoutheast Asia.\nDates are approximate\nArchaeology in Thailand at sites Ban Don Ta Phet and Khao Sam Kaeo yielding metallic, stone, and glass artifacts stylistically associated with the Indian subcontinent suggest Indianization of Southeast Asia beginning between the 4th and 2nd centuries\u00a0BC during the late Iron Age.\nIn Philippines and Vietnam, the Sa Huynh culture showed evidence of an extensive trade network. Sa Huynh beads were made from glass, carnelian, agate, olivine, zircon, gold and garnet; most of these materials were not local to the region and were most likely imported. Han-dynasty-style bronze mirrors were also found in Sa Huynh sites. Conversely, Sa Huynh produced ear ornaments have been found in archaeological sites in Central Thailand, as well as the Orchid Island.\nAfrica.\nEarly evidence for iron technology in Sub-Saharan Africa can be found at sites such as KM2 and KM3 in northwest Tanzania and parts of Nigeria and the Central African Republic. Nubia was one of the relatively few places in Africa to have a sustained Bronze Age along with Egypt and much of the rest of North Africa.\nArchaeometallurgy originated in numerous centers of Africa; the centers of origin were located in West Africa, Central Africa, and East Africa; consequently, as these origin centers are located within inner Africa, these archaeometallurgical developments are thus native African technologies. Iron metallurgical development occurred 2631\u20132458 BC at Lejja, in Nigeria, 2136\u20131921 BC at Obui, in Central Africa Republic, 1895\u20131370 BC at Tchire Ouma 147, in Niger, and 1297\u20131051 BC at Dekpassanware, in Togo.\nVery early copper and bronze working sites in Niger may date as early as 1500\u00a0BC. There is also evidence of iron metallurgy in Termit, Niger from around this period. Nubia was a major manufacturer and exporter of iron after the expulsion of the Nubian dynasty from Egypt by the Assyrians in the 7th century\u00a0BC.\nThough there is some uncertainty, some archaeologists believe that iron metallurgy was developed independently in sub-Saharan West Africa, separately from Eurasia and neighboring parts of North and Northeast Africa.\nArchaeological sites containing iron smelting furnaces and slag have also been excavated at sites in the Nsukka region of southeast Nigeria in what is now Igboland: dating to 2000\u00a0BC at the site of Lejja (Eze-Uzomaka 2009) and to 750\u00a0BC and at the site of Opi (Holl 2009). The site of Gbabiri (in the Central African Republic) has yielded evidence of iron metallurgy, from a reduction furnace and blacksmith workshop\u00a0\u2013 with earliest dates of 896\u2013773\u00a0BC and 907\u2013796\u00a0BC, respectively. Similarly, smelting in bloomery-type furnaces appear in the Nok culture of central Nigeria by about 550 BC and possibly a few centuries earlier.\nIron and copper working in Sub-Saharan Africa spread south and east from Central Africa in conjunction with the Bantu expansion, from the Cameroon region to the African Great Lakes in the 3rd century\u00a0BC, reaching the Cape around 400\u00a0AD.\nHowever, iron working may have been practiced in central Africa as early as the 3rd millennium\u00a0BC. Instances of carbon steel based on complex preheating principles were found to be in production around the 1st century\u00a0AD in northwest Tanzania.\nDates are approximate\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14712", "revid": "38427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14712", "title": "EFnet", "text": "IRC network\nEFnet or Eris-Free network is a major Internet Relay Chat (IRC) network, with more than 35,000 users. It is the modern-day descendant of the original IRC network.\nHistory.\nInitially, most IRC servers formed a single IRC network, to which new servers could join without restriction, but this was soon abused by people who set up servers to sabotage other users, channels, or servers. Restriction grew and, in August 1990, codice_1 was the last server indiscriminately allowing other servers to join it, Eris being the Greek goddess of strife and discord.\nA group of operators, with the support of Jarkko Oikarinen, introduced a new \"Q-line\" into their server configurations, to \"quarantine\" themselves away from eris by disconnecting from any subset of the IRC network as soon as they saw eris there.\nFor a few days, the entire IRC network suffered frequent netsplits, but eventually the majority of servers added the Q-line and effectively created a new separate IRC net called \"EFnet\" (Eris-Free Network); the remaining servers which stayed connected to eris (and thus were no longer able to connect to EFnet servers) were called \"A-net\" (Anarchy Network). A-net soon vanished, leaving EFnet as the only IRC network.\nContinuing problems with performance and abuse eventually led to the rise of another major IRC network, Undernet, which split off in October 1992.\nIn July 1996, disagreement on policy caused EFnet to break in two: the slightly larger European half (including Australia and Japan) formed IRCnet, while the American servers continued as EFnet. This was known as The Great Split.\nIn July 2001, after a string of DDoS attacks a service called \"CHANFIX\" (originally \"JUPES\") was created, which is designed to give back ops to channels which have lost ops or been taken over.\nIn 2007, various EFnet servers began implementing SSL.\nFebruary 2009 saw the introduction of a new \"CHANFIX\" module called \"OPME\", a mechanism for EFnet Admins to use to restore ops in an opless channel. It was proposed by Douglas Boldt to provide a much cleaner alternative to codice_2, which was unnecessarily invasive and disruptive to the network.\nLater in 2009, some major IRC servers were delinked: codice_3, codice_4, codice_5, EFnet's only UK server codice_6, and EFnet's only UK hub codice_7, which were sponsored by Demon Internet.\nIn September 2010, the two western regions of the network (United States and Canada) merged into the North American region. While the North American and European regions are technically independent of each other, today many issues within EFnet are handled at a global level.\nOn April 1, 2018, as an April Fools' joke, the 1990s IRC server eris.Berkeley.EDU server was resurrected. Some EFnet admins worked with the Open Computing Facility student group at UC Berkeley for months to resurrect the server for April Fools. Only a few EFnet staff were aware of the efforts and the server was linked in via a defunct H:line for the (normally) leaf (client-only) server codice_8, bypassing the normal linking procedure. As of 12:30 UTC on April 01 2018, eris.Berkeley.EDU was once again a valid IRC server on the \"Eris Free\" IRC network and accepted clients. At the same time, efnet.org begin redirecting to erisnet.org. eris.Berkeley.EDU delinked on April 02 2018 at 19:50 UTC.\nCharacteristics.\nEFnet has large variations in rules and policy between different servers as well as the two major regions (EU and NA). Both have their own policy structure, and each region votes on its own server applications. However, central policies are voted upon by the server admin community which is archived for referencing.\nDue to EFnet's nature, it has gained recognition over the years for warez, hackers, and DoS attacks.\nEFnet has always been known for its lack of IRC services that other IRC networks support (such as NickServ and ChanServ, although it had a NickServ until April 8, 1994). Instead, the \"CHANFIX\" service was introduced to fix \"opless\" channels.\nAll servers on EFnet run ircd-ratbox.\nEFnet's channel operators are generally free to run their channels however they see fit without the intervention of IRC operators. IRC ops are primarily there to handle network and server related issues, and rarely get involved with channel-level issues.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14713", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14713", "title": "Undernet", "text": "Internet Relay Chat network\nThe Undernet is the third largest publicly monitored Internet Relay Chat (IRC) network, c. 2022, with about 36 client servers serving 47,444 users in ~6000 channels at any given time.\nIRC clients can connect to Undernet via the global round robin irc.undernet.org, the region-specific round robins us.undernet.org and eu.undernet.org, IPv6 client servers irc6.undernet.org or a specific server from the server list.\nHistory.\nUndernet was established in October 1992 by Danny Mitchell, Donald Lambert, and Laurent Demally as an experimental network running a modified version of the EFnet irc2.7 IRCd software, created in an attempt to make it less bandwidth-consumptive and less chaotic, as netsplits and takeovers were starting to plague EFnet. The Undernet IRC daemon became known as \"ircu\". Undernet was formed at a time when many small IRC networks were being started and subsequently disappearing; however, it managed to grow into one of the largest and oldest IRC networks despite some initial in-fighting and setbacks. For a period in 1994, Undernet was wracked by an ongoing series of flame wars. Again in 2001, it was threatened by automated heavy spamming of its users for potential commercial gain. Undernet survived these periods relatively intact and its popularity continues to the present day.\nIt is notable as being the first network to utilize timestamping, originally made by Carlo Wood, in the IRC server protocol as a means to curb abuse.\nServices.\nUndernet uses GNUworld to provide X, its channel service bot. X operates on a username basis; a username is independent from a nickname, which cannot be registered on Undernet.\nAs Undernet limits channel registration to \"established channels\" or channels with an active userbase, Undernet introduced a version of \"ChanFix\" (under the nickname \"C\") designed to work like EFNet's CHANFIX. Its use is to protect unregistered channels. ChanFix tracks channel op usage by username basis and restores ops if channels become opless or are taken over.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14715", "revid": "138667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14715", "title": "DALnet", "text": "Major IRC network, established 1994\nDALnet is an Internet Relay Chat (IRC) network made up of 39 servers, with a stable population of approximately 10,000 users in about 4,000 channels.\nDALnet is accessible by connecting with an IRC client to an active DALnet server on ports 6660 through 6669, and 7000. SSL users can connect on port 6697.\nHistory.\nDALnet was founded in July 1994 by members of the EFnet #startrek channel. This new network was known as \"dal's net\", after the nickname used by the administrator of the first IRC server on the network, \"dalvenjah\", taken from the dragon \"Dalvenjah Foxfire\", in a fantasy novel by Thorarinn Gunnarsson. The network was soon renamed from dal's net to DALnet.\nFrom 25 users in July 1994, the number of users grew to 1,000 by November 1995, 5,000 by June 1996, 10,000 by December 1996, 50,000 by October 1999, 100,000 in November 2001, and peaked around 142,000 in April 2002.\nThe network was severely disrupted in late 2002 and early 2003 by distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks. Added to the DDoS issues was that the owner of twisted.dal.net (the world's largest single IRC server, hosting more than 50,000 clients most of the time) delinked his servers (for personal reasons).\nIt was around this time that DALnet closed many of its channels that were dedicated to serving content such as MP3 files and movies. File transfers were still allowed but not on a large scale. This raised suspicion as to whether DALnet was being targeted by the Recording Industry Association of America.\nIn 2003, DALnet put up its first anycast servers under the name \"The IX Concept\", and made irc.dal.net resolve to the anycast IP. Since then, most new client servers linked are anycast.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14716", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14716", "title": "BitchX", "text": "Free IRC client\nBitchX is a free IRC client that has been regarded as the most popular ircII-based IRC client. The initial implementation, written by \"Trench\" and \"HappyCrappy\", was a script for the IrcII chat client. It was converted to a program in its own right by panasync (Colten Edwards). BitchX 1.1 final was released in 2004. It is written in C and is a TUI application utilizing ncurses. GTK+ toolkit support has been dropped. It works on all Unix-like operating systems, and is distributed under a BSD license. It was originally based on ircII-EPIC, and eventually it was merged into the EPIC IRC client. It supports IPv6, multiple servers and SSL, and a subset of UTF-8 (characters contained in ISO-8859-1) with an unofficial patch.\nOn several occasions, BitchX has been noted to be a popular IRC client for Unix-like systems.\nThe latest official release is version 1.2.\nBitchX does not yet support Unicode.\nSecurity.\nIt was known that early versions of BitchX were vulnerable to a denial-of-service attack in that they could be caused to crash by passing specially-crafted strings as arguments to certain IRC commands. This was before format string attacks became a well-known class of vulnerability.\nThe previous version of BitchX, released in 2004, has security problems allowing remote IRC servers to execute arbitrary code on the client's machine (http://, http://).\nOn April 26, 2009, Slackware removed BitchX from its distribution, citing the numerous unresolved security issues.\nThe aforementioned vulnerabilities were fixed in the sources for the 1.2 release.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
