{"id": "12601", "revid": "6488475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12601", "title": "Governor-General of Australia", "text": "Federal representative of the Australian monarch\nThe governor-general of Australia is the federal representative of the monarch of Australia, currently Charles III. The governor-general has many constitutional and ceremonial roles in the Australian political system, in which they have independent agency. However, they are generally bound by convention to act on the advice of the prime minister and the Federal Executive Council. They also have a significant community role, through recognising meritorious individuals and groups, and representing the nation as a whole. The current governor-general is Sam Mostyn.\nSignificant functions of the governor-general include giving royal assent to bills passed by the houses of parliament, issuing writs for elections, exercising executive power on the advice of the Federal Executive Council, formally appointing government officials (including the prime minister, other ministers, judges and ambassadors), acting as commander-in-chief of the Australian Defence Force, and bestowing Australian honours. However, in almost all instances the governor-general only exercises \"de jure\" power in accordance with the principles of the Westminster system and responsible government. This requires them to remain politically neutral and to only act in accordance with Parliament (such as when selecting the prime minister and providing royal assent) or on the advice of ministers (when performing executive actions). However, in certain limited circumstances, the governor-general can exercise reserve powers (powers that may be exercised without or against formal advice), most notably during the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis. These situations are often controversial and the use of and continued existence of these powers remains highly debated.\nIn their ceremonial and community roles, the governor-general represents the nation as a whole. Domestically, this role entails attending services and commemorations, sponsoring community organisations and hosting events at one of the two official residences (Government House in Canberra and Admiralty House in Sydney). Internationally, the governor-general represents Australia by travelling to significant events and by performing and receiving state visits. The governor-general is supported by a staff (of 80 in 2018) headed by the official secretary.\nThe governor-general is selected by the prime minister, but formally appointed by the monarch of Australia on the prime minister's advice. Their term is not fixed, but they typically serve for five years. From Federation in 1901 until 1965, 11 out of the 15 governors-general were British aristocrats; however, all since then have been Australian citizens. The current governor-general, Samantha Mostyn, is the second woman to hold the post, after Dame Quentin Bryce (2008\u20132014).\nAppointment.\nThe governor-general is formally appointed by the monarch of Australia with a commission made under the authority of section 2 of the Constitution and regulated by letters patent issued by the monarch. When a new governor-general is to be appointed, the current prime minister recommends a name to the monarch, who by convention accepts that recommendation. Prior to the 1940s, the recommendation was made and decided by the Cabinet as a whole. The incoming governor-general is publicly announced usually several months before the end of the existing governor-general's term. After receiving their commission, the new governor-general takes an oath or affirmation of allegiance to the monarch and an oath or affirmation of office. These oaths are administered by the chief justice of Australia or another justice of the High Court. Traditionally, the ceremony takes place in the Senate chamber.\nTenure.\nThe Constitution does not set a term of office, so a governor-general may continue to hold office for any agreed length of time. In recent decades the typical term of office has been five years. Some early governors-general were appointed to terms of just one year (Lord Tennyson) or two years (Lord Forster; later extended). At the end of this initial term, a commission may be extended for a short time, usually to avoid conflict with an election or during political difficulties.\nThree governors-general have resigned their commission. The first governor-general, Lord Hopetoun, asked to be recalled to Britain in 1903 over a dispute about funding for the post. Sir John Kerr resigned in 1977, with his official reason being his decision to accept the position of Australian ambassador to UNESCO in Paris, a post which ultimately he did not take up, but the resignation also being motivated by the 1975 constitutional controversy. In 2003, ex-archbishop Peter Hollingworth voluntarily stood aside while controversial allegations against him were managed, and the letters patent of the office were amended to take account of this circumstance. He later stepped down over the church's handling of allegations of sexual abuse of boys, for which he apologised before the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse in 2016. In 1961, Lord Dunrossil became the first and, to date, only governor-general to die while holding office.\nA vacancy occurs on the resignation, death, or incapacity of the governor-general. A temporary vacancy occurs when the governor-general is overseas on official business representing Australia. A temporary vacancy also occurred in 2003 when Peter Hollingworth stood aside.\nSection 4 of the Constitution allows the monarch to appoint an administrator to carry out the role of governor-general when there is a vacancy. By convention, each of the state governors holds a dormant commission as administrator, allowing the longest-serving available governor to assume the office whenever a vacancy occurs. In 1975, Labor prime minister Gough Whitlam advised Queen Elizabeth II that Sir Colin Hannah, then governor of Queensland, should have his dormant commission revoked for having made public and partisan anti-Whitlam government political statements, in violation of the convention that vice-regal representatives remain neutral and above politics. In May 2023, previous governor-general Sir Peter Cosgrove was specially commissioned to act as administrator due to governor-general David Hurley and all of the state governors simultaneously being absent from Australia to attend the coronation of King Charles III and Queen Camilla.\nDismissal.\nA governor-general may be recalled or dismissed by the monarch before their term is complete. By convention, this may only be upon advice from the prime minister, who retains responsibility for selecting an immediate replacement or letting the vacancy provisions take effect. The constitutional crisis of 1975 raised the possibility of the prime minister and the governor-general attempting to dismiss each other at the same time. According to William McMahon, Harold Holt considered having Lord Casey dismissed from the governor-generalship, and went as far as to have the necessary documents drawn up. Casey had twice called McMahon into Yarralumla to give him a \"dressing down\" over his poor relationship with deputy prime minister John McEwen, which he believed was affecting the government. Holt believed that this was an improper use of his authority, but no further action was taken.\nConstitutional role.\nThe governor-general has a key role in performing constitutional duties in all branches of government.\nRole in the Australian Parliament.\nThe Constitution defines the Parliament of the Commonwealth as consisting of the monarch, the Senate and the House of Representatives. However, the monarch's role is no more than titular, with the governor-general responsible under the Constitution for most of the functions undertaken by the monarch in regard to the UK parliament. These include the power to summon, dissolve and prorogue the Parliament, to issue writs for lower house elections, to convene a joint sitting, as well as the power to give royal assent to bills in the monarch's name.\nThe governor-general also has a ceremonial role in swearing in and accepting the resignations of members of Parliament. All members must make an oath or affirmation of allegiance to the King in the presence of the governor-general or someone appointed by them before they take their seats. On the day parliament opens, the governor-general makes a speech in the Senate (similar to the King's Speech in the UK), entirely written by the government, explaining the government's proposed legislative program.\nOne of the most significant powers of the governor-general is the power to grant royal assent in the King's name. This assent gives bills that have been passed by the houses of parliament the force of law, with effect either 28 days after being signed, on a date to be fixed later by proclamation or otherwise as provided in the act. The government does not formally advise the governor-general to grant assent, but it is expected that they will act in accordance with the democratically elected houses of Parliament and assent has never been refused.\nApart from assenting to a bill, the governor-general can also reserve a bill for the King's pleasure, that is allow the monarch to give royal assent personally to a proposed bill. When the governor-general acted as a representative of the British government, this provision allowed for the governor-general to refer a bill back to the British government for review, which would then advise the monarch whether or not to grant assent. The British government could also advise the monarch to disallow a law passed within the last two years, which would annul the law on the governor-general's proclamation or message to the houses. However, since the assumption of full sovereignty and the emergence of an independent Crown of Australia, the British government no longer has these powers and the reservation power has only occasionally been used for bills that affect the monarch personally, such as the \"Royal Styles and Titles Act\" (1953 and 1973) and other bills of national significance such as the \"Flags Act 1953\" and the \"Australia Act 1986\".\nFinally, the governor-general can refer a bill back to the houses with suggested changes. This has only happened when once passed, the government has realised a bill requires further amendment and requests the governor-general return the bill to the house.\nRole in executive government.\nUnder the Constitution, the executive power of the Commonwealth is vested in the monarch, but is exercisable by the governor-general. However, such power is only exercised on the advice of ministers in accordance with the principles of responsible government. This occurs formally through the Federal Executive Council, a body of all current (and technically former) ministers that advises the governor-general. Such advice is generally the result of decisions already made in Cabinet, the \"de facto\" highest executive body in Australia. While some provisions in the Constitution refer the \"Governor-General\" and others to the \"Governor-General in Council\", this does not mean that there is in element of discretion in the former; this distinction merely indicates that the former powers were those that were historically classified as belonging to the prerogative of the monarch alone.\nMany executive powers are also bestowed on the governor-general by statute. This allow the government of the day (acting through the governor-general) to perform certain acts that would otherwise require legislation. Such provisions are often made for situations where legislating may be too slow; for example for the declaration of and response to emergencies. An example this was the declaration on the advice of the health minister of a human biosecurity emergency under the \"Biosecurity Act 2015\" in March 2020, due to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.\nFormally, the governor-general may exercise the traditional rights of the monarch as identified by Bagehot: the right to be consulted, to encourage and to warn. However, the practical ability to exercise this right is limited. Unlike in Canada or the UK, there is no tradition of regular weekly meetings between the governor-general and the prime minister, with meetings instead sporadically held at the request of either party. There is at least a theoretically greater capacity to exercise influence at the regular meetings of the Federal Executive Council at Government House. However, this opportunity is practically constrained too: by the large volume of often complex and legalistic materials considered; by the lack of a requirement for those executive councillors (ministers) present to be properly briefed; by the fact that executive councillors may not have sufficient seniority in the government such that warnings or encouragements would be considered; and by the expectation of some governments that the governor-general should act as a rubber stamp.\nReserve powers.\nThe reserve powers are those powers that the governor-general may exercise independently, that is in the absence of or against ministerial advice. While most of these powers are listed in the Constitution, the circumstances in which they can be used with discretion is not prescribed and is a matter of convention.\nThe reserve powers that are generally accepted are:\nThe reserve powers that are the subject of greater debate are:\nThe most prominent use of the reserve powers occurred in the course of the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis, in which governor-general Sir John Kerr dismissed the government of Gough Whitlam and appointed opposition leader Malcolm Fraser as prime minister while an election was held. Kerr acted following the blocking of supply by the opposition controlled Senate, arguing that this gave him both the right and duty to dismiss the government when they did not resign or advise an election. The event remains one of the most highly debated and controversial in Australian political history.\nDeputies of the governor-general.\nSection 126 of the Constitution provides for the sovereign to authorise the governor-general to appoint a deputy or deputies to assist in the execution of their duties. Given the vast size of the country, and the primitive transport arrangements when the constitution was drafted in the late 19th century, it was convenient for the governor-general be able to delegate some of their duties to deputies. The current authorisation is contained in Part IV of the 2008 letters patent relating to the Office of governor-general, issued by Elizabeth II.\nThe vice-president of the Executive Council is, as a matter of course, appointed a deputy to the governor-general for the purposes of summoning meetings of the Executive Council, presiding at meetings of the Executive Council in the absence of the governor-general, and appointing a minister as deputy to the governor-general for the purpose of presiding at a meeting of the Executive Council in the absence of both the governor-general and the vice-president.\nThe chief justice of the High Court of Australia, or another justice of the High Court, is appointed as deputy of the governor-general to open sessions of the Australian Parliament and administer oaths or affirmations of allegiance to new members of Parliament after opening parliament. Where there are also new senators, a second High Court justice will be appointed deputy to the governor-general to administer oaths or affirmations of allegiance in the upper house.\nGovernors-general regularly appoint state governors (most often the governors of New South Wales and Victoria, due to their proximity to Canberra) as deputies of the governor-general so that they may carry out some of the administrative functions of the office when the governor-general is unavailable but in the country. This is in addition to the dormant commissions the governors hold to administer the Government of the Commonwealth when there is no governor-general, or the governor-general is incapacitated or absent from the Commonwealth.\nUnder Section 42 of the Constitution, the governor-general may authorise a person to administer the oath or affirmation of allegiance to newly-elected senators and members of Parliament. In practice, these people are the president of the Senate and speaker of the House.\nCeremonial role.\nIn addition to the formal constitutional role, the governor-general has a representative and ceremonial role, though the extent and nature of that role has depended on the expectations of the time, the individual in office at the time, the wishes of the incumbent government, and the individual's reputation in the wider community. Governors-general generally become patrons of various charitable institutions, present honours and awards, host functions for various groups of people including ambassadors to and from other countries, and travel widely throughout Australia. Sir William Deane (governor-general 1996\u20132001) described one of his functions as being \"Chief Mourner\" at prominent funerals. In \"Commentaries on the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Australia\", Robert Garran wrote that, since the Australian executive is national in nature (being dependent on the nationally elected House of Representatives, rather than the Senate), \"the Governor-General, as the official head of the Executive, does not in the smallest degree represent any federal element; if he represents anything he is the image and embodiment of national unity and the outward and visible representation of the Imperial relationship of the Commonwealth\".\nThat role can become controversial, however, if the governor-general becomes unpopular with sections of the community. The public role adopted by Sir John Kerr was curtailed considerably after the constitutional crisis of 1975; Sir William Deane's focus on social justice issues provoked both praise and criticism; and Peter Hollingworth resigned after an independent inquiry determined that when he was the Anglican archbishop of Brisbane, he had knowingly allowed a paedophile priest to continue working.\nDiplomatic role.\nThe governor-general makes state visits overseas on behalf of Australia, during which an administrator of the government is appointed. The right of governors-general to make state visits was confirmed at the 1926 Imperial Conference, as it was deemed not feasible for the sovereign to pay state visits on behalf of countries other than the United Kingdom. However, an Australian governor-general did not exercise that right until 1971, when Paul Hasluck visited New Zealand. Hasluck's successor John Kerr made state visits to eight countries, but Kerr's successor Zelman Cowen made only a single state visit \u2013 to Papua New Guinea \u2013 as he wished to concentrate on travelling within Australia. All subsequent governors-general have travelled widely while in office and made multiple state visits. Occasionally governors-general have made extended tours visiting multiple countries, notably in 2009 when Quentin Bryce visited nine African countries in 19 days.\nThe governor-general accredits (i.e. formally validates) Australia's ambassadors through sending a formal letter of credence (and a letter of recall at the end of a tenure) to foreign heads of state and government. Similarly, the governor-general formally receives letters from foreign countries during credentials ceremonies for heads of missions upon their arrival in Canberra. Before 1987, Australia's ambassador and high commissioner appointments were formally made by the monarch instead.\nMilitary role.\nUnder section 68 of the Constitution, the command-in-chief of Australia's military forces is \"vested in the Governor\u2011General as the Queen's representative\". Views on the effect of this section vary, from merely making the governor-general \"in effect no more than a glorified Patron of the Defence Forces\" to alternatively making the governor-general the ultimate head of military chain of command who may influence or deny the use of the military if it is to be used for domestic political ends. Ex-governor-general Sir Ninian Stephen stated that his view of the section was that it vests command of the military in the governor-general personally, but only to the extent that the power to give orders or call out the military does not require formal advice from the Federal Executive Council but instead the direct advice of the relevant minister. Other powers exist in the \"Defence Force Act 1903\", such as the power to appoint the chief of the Defence Force, to call out the Defence Force, and declare a time of war, exercised as ordinary executive powers on advice. Additionally, all officers are appointed by the governor-general on behalf of the monarch with a personally signed commission.\nHistorically, the power to declare war and make peace rested with the monarch (as advised by the British government) in their role as head of the British Empire. This was the position of Robert Menzies in 1939, who assumed that the declaration of war by the United Kingdom in World War II automatically applied to Australia. However, in 1941 opinion had shifted and the Curtin government advised the governor-general to declare war on several Axis powers. However, it was still unclear whether the governor-general had the constitutional power to declare war, so in addition to requesting the assignment of powers by the monarch to the governor-general, the government also requested King George VI make similar proclamations of war on Australia's behalf. No formal declarations of war have been made since World War II, although other declarations on the start and end of time of \"active service\" have been made in other conflicts.\nThe powers of command-in-chief are vested in the governor-general rather than the \"Governor-General in Council\", but this does not denote an element of personal discretion in their exercise. However, in 1970 governor-general Paul Hasluck refused prime minister John Gorton's request to authorise a Pacific Islands Regiment peacekeeping mission in the Territory of Papua and New Guinea, on the ground that cabinet had not been consulted. Gorton agreed to put the matter to his ministers, and a cabinet meeting agreed that troops should be called out only if requested by the territory's administrator; this did not occur. Defence minister Malcolm Fraser, who opposed the call out, was responsible for informing Hasluck of the prime minister's lack of consultation. The incident contributed to Fraser's resignation from cabinet in 1971 and Gorton's subsequent loss of the prime ministership.\nCommunity role.\nThe governor-general is generally invited to become patron of various charitable and service organisations. Historically the governor-general has also served as Chief Scout of Australia. The chief scout is nominated by the Scouting Association's National Executive Committee and is invited by the president of the Scout Association to accept the appointment. Bill Hayden declined the office on the grounds of his atheism, which was incompatible with the Scout Promise. He did however serve as the association's patron during his term of office.\nRelationship with the monarch.\nWhile the governor-general is the monarch's representative, as provided by section 2 of the Constitution, the powers they exercise are solely granted by the Constitution. This was not always seen to be the case however, with section 2 also providing that the governor-general may exercise other powers, subject to the Constitution, that the monarch may assign them. Additionally, the initial letters patent of Queen Victoria purported to create and empower the office of governor-general, despite their assignment already in the Constitution. This was raised as early as 1901, by John Quick and Garran in their authoritative commentary of the Constitution, noting that the governor-general of Australia was distinguished from other imperial governors-general by the fact that \"[t]he principal and most important of his powers and functions, legislative as well as executive, are expressly conferred on him by the terms of the Constitution itself ... not by Royal authority, but by statutory authority\". This view was also held by Andrew Inglis Clark, senior judge of the Supreme Court of Tasmania, who with W. Harrison Moore (a contributor to the first draft of the constitution put before the 1897 Adelaide Convention and professor of law at the University of Melbourne), postulating that the letters patent and the royal instructions issued by Queen Victoria were unnecessary \"or even of doubtful legality\".\nAdditionally, it was also previously believed that the monarch retained certain powers, such as the power to declare war, appoint diplomatic officers and to grant charters of incorporation and as such these powers were assigned separately to the governor-general under section 2. However, the current interpretation of the Constitution is that all royal prerogatives are exercisable by the governor-general under section 61 and in recognition of this, the vesting of additional powers ended in 1987. While separate letters-patent still exist for the governor-general, these merely provide for the appointment of administrator in the case of the governor-general's absence or incapacity and requires the governor-general to make an oath or affirmation of allegiance and one of office.\nCommonwealth Solicitor-General Maurice Byers stated in 1974: \"The constitutional prescription is that executive power is exercisable by the governor-general although vested in the Queen. What is exercisable is original executive power: that is, the very thing vested in the Queen by section 61. And it is exercisable by the Queen's representative, not her delegate or agent.\"\nThe 1988 Constitutional Commission report explained: \"the governor-general is in no sense a delegate of the Queen. The independence of the office is highlighted by changes which have been made in recent years to the Royal Instruments relating to it\". The changes occurred in 1984 when Queen Victoria's letters patent and instructions were revoked and replaced with new letters patent, on prime minister Bob Hawke's advice, who stated that this would clarify the governor-general's position under the constitution.\nThis remains the case even when the sovereign is in the country: solicitor-general Kenneth Bailey, prior to the first tour of Australia by its reigning monarch in 1954, explained the position by saying: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the Constitution expressly vests in the Governor-General the power or duty to perform a number of the Crown's functions in the Legislature and the Executive Government of the Commonwealth... The executive power of the Commonwealth, by section 61 of the Constitution, is declared to be vested in the Queen. It is also, in the same section, declared to be \"exercisable\" by the Governor-General as the Queen's representative. In the face of this provision, I feel it is difficult to contend that the Queen, even though present in Australia, may exercise in person functions of executive government which are specifically assigned by the constitution to the Governor-General.The monarch did not overturn the actions of governor-general Sir John Kerr in his dismissal of the prime ministership and government of Gough Whitlam during the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis, with the Queen's private secretary arguing that the power to commission the prime minister was \"clearly placed within the jurisdiction of the governor-general, and The Queen has no part in the decisions which the Governor-General must take in accordance with the Constitution\". In an address to the Sydney Institute, January 2007, in connection with that event, Sir David Smith, a retired official secretary to the governor-general of Australia who had been Kerr's official secretary in 1975, described the constitution as conferring the powers and functions of Australia's head of state on the governor-general in \"his own right\". He stated that the governor-general was more than a representative of the sovereign, explaining: \"under section 2 of the Constitution the Governor-General is the Queen's representative and exercises certain royal prerogative powers and functions; under section 61 of the Constitution the Governor-General is the holder of a quite separate and independent office created, not by the Crown, but by the Constitution, and empowered to exercise, in his own right as Governor-General... all the powers and functions of Australia's head of state\".\nPrivileges.\nGovernors-general are entitled to various privileges by virtue of holding the office. These include the right to live in Government House (also known as Yarralumla), or Admiralty House, Sydney the two official residences of the office-holder. For transportation, the governor-general has access to a Rolls-Royce Phantom VI limousine for ceremonial occasions or an armoured BMW 7 Series for ordinary official business. These cars fly the flag of the governor-general of Australia and display the Tudor Crown instead of number plates. Originally, two Phantoms were available after being purchased in the 1970s to be used for royal tours. One of these cars was sold in 1995 to a Sydney doctor, having previously carried the Queen during a royal tour and later being pelted with eggs when it carried Sir John Kerr following the Dismissal in 1975. The car was then entered into the almost 15,000\u00a0km long Peking to Paris rally, where it became known as \"Lizzie's Taxi\" and secured fourth place. The car is now owned by Lindsay Fox and is often on display as a part of the Fox Classic Car Collection at Queens Warehouse, Melbourne.\nSalary.\nThe salary of the governor-general was initially set by the Constitution at \u00a310,000. This could be changed by subsequent legislation, although the salary of the current governor-general cannot be changed during their term of office. Their pay (currently A$709,107) is now set by the \"Governor-General Act 1974\", which is amended to set the salary for each new governor-general to an amount slightly higher than the estimated average salary of the chief justice of the High Court over the next five years. Since 1995, this has been reduced by the amount of any pension the incoming governor-general may be receiving from an earlier Commonwealth office. The governor-general also receives a pension amounting to 60% of the salary of the chief justice when they leave office. Until 2001, governors-general did not pay income tax on their salary; this was changed after Elizabeth II agreed to pay tax.\nOfficial dress.\nGovernors-general before the 1970s wore traditional court uniforms, consisting of a dark navy wool double-breasted coatee with silver oak leaf and fern embroidery on the collar and cuffs trimmed with silver buttons embossed with the Royal Arms and with bullion edged epaulettes on the shoulders, dark navy trousers with a wide band of silver oak-leaf braid down the outside seam, silver sword belt with ceremonial sword, bicorne cocked hat with plume of ostrich feathers, black patent leather Wellington boots with spurs, etc., that is worn on ceremonial occasions. There is also a tropical version made of white tropical wool cut in a typical military fashion worn with a plumed helmet. However, that custom fell into disuse during the tenure of Sir Paul Hasluck with governors-general now observing informal wear day-to-day.\nTitles and honours.\nGovernors-general have during their tenure the style \"His or Her Excellency the Honourable\" and their spouses have the style \"His or Her Excellency\". Since May 2013, the style used by a former governor-general is \"the Honourable\"; it was at the same time retrospectively granted for life to all previous holders of the office.\nFrom the creation of the Order of Australia in 1975, the governor-general was, \"ex officio\", Chancellor and Principal Companion of the order, and therefore became entitled to the post-nominal AC. In 1976, the letters patent for the order were amended to introduce the rank of Knight and Dame to the order, and from that time the governor-general became, ex officio, the Chancellor and Principal Knight of the order. In 1986 the letters patent were amended again, and governors-general appointed from that time were again, ex officio, entitled to the post-nominal AC (although if they already held a knighthood in the order that superior rank was retained).\nUntil 1989, all governors-general were members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom and thus held the additional style \"The Right Honourable\" for life. The same individuals were also usually either peers, knights, or both (the only Australian peer to be appointed as governor-general was Lord Casey; and Sir William McKell was knighted only in 1951, some years into his term, but he was entitled to the style \"The Honourable\" during his tenure as premier of New South Wales, an office he held until almost immediately before his appointment). In 1989, Bill Hayden, a republican, declined appointment to the British Privy Council and any imperial honours. From that time until 2014, governors-general did not receive automatic titles or honours, other than the post-nominal AC by virtue of being Chancellor and Principal Companion of the Order of Australia. Quentin Bryce was the first governor-general to have had no prior title or pre-nominal style. She was in office when, on 19 March 2014, then prime minister Tony Abbott advised the Queen to amend the letters patent of the Order of Australia to reinstate knighthoods into the Order, with the governor-general becoming the Principal Knight or Dame of the order. However, in 2015 knighthoods were once again abolished by new prime minister Malcolm Turnbull, with all subsequent governors-general appointed as Companions.\nSpouses of governors-general have no official duties but carry out the role of a vice-regal consort. They are entitled to the courtesy style \"Her Excellency\" or \"His Excellency\" during the office-holder's term of office. Most spouses of governors-general have been content to be quietly supportive. Some, however, have been notable in their own right, such as Dame Alexandra Hasluck, Lady Casey and Michael Bryce.\nHistory.\nOther offices named \"governor-general\" were previously used in Australia in the mid-19th century. Sir Charles FitzRoy (governor of New South Wales from 1846 to 1855) and Sir William Denison (governor of New South Wales from 1855 to 1861) also carried the additional title of governor-general because their jurisdiction extended to other colonies in Australia.\nThe office of governor-general of Australia was conceived during the debates and conventions leading up to federation. The first governor-general, John Hope, 7th Earl of Hopetoun, was a previous governor of Victoria. He was selected on 14 July 1900 and legally appointed on 29 October 1900, returning to Australia shortly before the inauguration of the Commonwealth of Australia on 1 January 1901. After the initial confusion of the Hopetoun Blunder, he appointed the first prime minister of Australia, Edmund Barton, to a caretaker government, with the inaugural 1901 federal election not occurring until March.\nEarly governors-general were British and were appointed by the king on the recommendation of the Colonial Office. The Australian government was merely asked, as a matter of courtesy, whether they approved of the choice or not. Governors-general were expected to exercise a supervisory role over the Australian government in the manner of a colonial governor. In a very real sense, they represented the British government. They had the right to reserve legislation passed by the Parliament of Australia: in effect, to ask the Colonial Office in London for an opinion before giving the royal assent. They exercised this power several times. The monarch, acting upon advice of the British government, could also disallow any Australian legislation up to a year after the governor-general had given it the assent; although this power has never been used. These powers remain in section 59 of the Constitution of Australia, but today are regarded as dead letters.\nThe early governors-general frequently sought advice on the exercise of their powers from judges of the High Court of Australia, Sir Samuel Griffith and Sir Edmund Barton.\nIn 1919, prime minister Billy Hughes sent a memorandum to the Colonial Office in which he requested \"a real and effective voice in the selection of the King's representative\". He further proposed that the Dominions be able to nominate their own candidates and that \"the field of selection should not exclude citizens of the Dominion itself\". The memorandum met with strong opposition within the Colonial Office and was dismissed by Lord Milner, the Colonial Secretary; no response was given. The following year, as Ronald Munro Ferguson's term was about to expire, Hughes cabled the Colonial Office and asked that the appointment be made in accordance with the memorandum. To mollify Hughes, Milner offered him a choice between three candidates. After consulting his cabinet he chose Henry Forster, 1st Baron Forster. In 1925, under prime minister Stanley Bruce, the same practice was followed for the appointment of Forster's successor John Baird, 1st Viscount Stonehaven, with the Australian government publicly stating that his name \"had been submitted, with others, to the Commonwealth ministry, who had selected him\".\nDuring the 1920s, the importance of the position declined. As a result of decisions made at the 1926 Imperial Conference, the governor-general ceased to represent the British government diplomatically, and the British right of supervision over Australian affairs was abolished. As a result of the Balfour Declaration of 1926, which declared that the UK and the Dominions to be \"autonomous Communities within the British Empire, equal in status, in no way subordinate one to another\", the declaration further stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the Governor-General of a Dominion is the representative of the Crown, holding in all essential respects the same position in relation to the administration of public affairs in the Dominion as is held by His Majesty the King in Great Britain, and that he is not the representative or agent of His Majesty's Government in Great Britain or of any Department of that Government.\nHowever, it remained unclear just whose prerogative it now became to decide who new governors-general would be. In 1930, King George V and the Australian prime minister James Scullin discussed the appointment of a new governor-general to replace Lord Stonehaven, whose term was coming to an end. The King maintained that it was now his sole prerogative to choose a governor-general, and he wanted Field-Marshal Sir William Birdwood for the Australian post. Scullin recommended the Australian jurist Sir Isaac Isaacs, and he insisted that George V act on the advice of his Australian prime minister in this matter. Scullin was partially influenced by the precedent set by the government of the Irish Free State, which always insisted upon having an Irishman as the governor-general of the Irish Free State.\nScullin's proposed appointment of Sir Isaac Isaacs was fiercely opposed by the British government. This was not because of any lack of regard for Isaacs personally, but because the British government considered that the choice of governors-general was, since the 1926 Imperial Conference, a matter for the monarch's decision alone. (However, it became very clear in a conversation between Scullin and King George V's private secretary, Lord Stamfordham, on 11 November 1930, that this was merely the official reason for the objection, with the real reason being that an Australian, no matter how highly regarded personally, was not considered appropriate to be a governor-general.) Scullin was equally insistent that the monarch must act on the relevant prime minister's direct advice (the practice until 1926 was that Dominion prime ministers advised the monarch indirectly, through the British government, which effectively had a veto over any proposal it did not agree with). Scullin cited the precedents of the prime minister of South Africa, J. B. M. Hertzog, who had recently insisted on his choice of George Villiers, 6th Earl of Clarendon as governor-general of that country, and the selection of an Irishman as governor-general of the Irish Free State. Both of these appointments had been agreed to despite British government objections.\nDespite these precedents, George V remained reluctant to accept Scullin's recommendation of Isaacs and asked him to consider Birdwood. However, Scullin stood firm, saying he would be prepared to fight a general election on the issue of whether an Australian should be prevented from becoming governor-general because he was Australian. On 29 November, the King agreed to Isaacs's appointment, but made it clear that he did so only because he felt he had no option. Lord Stamfordham had complained that Scullin had \"put a gun to the King's head\".\nThe usual wording of official announcements of this nature read \"The King has been pleased to appoint ...\", but on this occasion the announcement said merely \"The King has appointed ...\", and Lord Stamfordham asked the Australian solicitor-general, Sir Robert Garran, to make sure that Scullin was aware of the exact wording. The opposition Nationalist Party of Australia denounced the appointment as \"practically republican\", but Scullin had set a precedent. The convention gradually became established throughout the British Commonwealth that the governor-general is a citizen of the country concerned, and is appointed on the advice of the government of that country.\nAt the same time as the appointment of Isaacs as the first Australian-born governor-general, a separate role of British Representative in Australia (as the representative of the British government) was established, with Ernest Crutchley the first appointee. 1935 saw the appointment of the first British High Commissioner to Australia, Geoffrey Whiskard (in office 1936\u20131941).\nThis right not only to advise the monarch directly, but also to expect that advice to be accepted, was soon taken up by all the other Dominion prime ministers. This, among other things, led to the \"Statute of Westminster 1931\" and to the formal separation of the Crowns of the Dominions.\nAfter Scullin's defeat in 1931, non-Labor governments continued to recommend British people for appointment as governor-general, but such appointments remained solely a matter between the Australian government and the monarch. In 1947, Labor appointed a second Australian governor-general, William McKell, who was in office as the Labor premier of New South Wales. The then leader of the Opposition, Robert Menzies, called McKell's appointment \"shocking and humiliating\".\nIn 1965 the Menzies conservative government appointed an Australian, Lord Casey, and thereafter only Australians have held the position. However, when the Palace papers were released in 2020, it was revealed that the Fraser government in 1976 considered it \"highly desirable\" that Prince Charles become governor-general; however the Queen strongly indicated her disapproval of her son taking up the role until \"such time as he has a settled married life\". Additionally, in 2007 media outlets reported that Prince William might become governor-general of Australia. However, both the prime minister, John Howard, and Clarence House repudiated the suggestion.\nBackgrounds of governors-general.\nAll the governors-general until 1965 were British-born, except for Australian-born Sir Isaac Isaacs (1931\u20131936) and Sir William McKell (1947\u20131953). They included six barons, two viscounts, two earls, and one prince. There have been only Australian occupants since then, although Sir Ninian Stephen (1982\u20131989) had been born in Britain. Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester, was a senior member of the royal family. Dame Quentin Bryce (2008\u20132014) was the first woman to be appointed to the office. Sir Isaac Isaacs and Sir Zelman Cowen were Jewish; Bill Hayden was an avowed atheist during his term and he made an affirmation rather than swear an oath at the beginning of his commission; the remaining governors-general have been Christian.\nVarious governors-general had previously served as governors of an Australian state or colony: John Hope, 7th Earl of Hopetoun (Victoria 1889\u20131895); Hallam Tennyson, 2nd Baron Tennyson (South Australia 1899\u20131902); Alexander Hore-Ruthven, 1st Earl of Gowrie (South Australia 1928\u201334; and New South Wales 1935\u20131936); Major General Michael Jeffery (Western Australia 1993\u20132000); Dame Quentin Bryce (Queensland 2003\u20132008); General David Hurley (New South Wales 2014\u20132019). Sir Ronald Munro Ferguson had been offered the governorship of South Australia in 1895 and of Victoria in 1910, but refused both appointments. Henry Northcote, 1st Baron Northcote was governor of Bombay. Lord Casey was governor of Bengal in between his periods of service to the Commonwealth Parliament.\nFormer leading politicians and members of the judiciary have figured prominently. William Ward, 2nd Earl of Dudley was Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (1902\u20131905). John Baird, 1st Viscount Stonehaven (as John Baird) was minister for Transport in the cabinets of Bonar Law and Stanley Baldwin; and after his return to Britain he became chairman of the UK Conservative Party. Sir Isaac Isaacs was successively Commonwealth attorney-general, a High Court judge, and chief justice. Sir William McKell was premier of New South Wales. William Morrison, 1st Viscount Dunrossil (as William Morrison) was Speaker of the UK House of Commons. William Sidney, 1st Viscount De L'Isle was secretary of State for Air in Winston Churchill's cabinet from 1951 to 1955. More recent governors-general in this category include Lord Casey, Sir Paul Hasluck, Sir John Kerr, Sir Ninian Stephen, Bill Hayden and Sir William Deane.\nOf the eleven Australians appointed governor-general since 1965, Lord Casey, Sir Paul Hasluck and Bill Hayden were former federal parliamentarians; Sir John Kerr was the chief justice of the Supreme Court of New South Wales; Sir Ninian Stephen and Sir William Deane were appointed from the bench of the High Court; Sir Zelman Cowen was a vice-chancellor of the University of Queensland and constitutional lawyer; Peter Hollingworth was the Anglican Archbishop of Brisbane; and Major General Michael Jeffery was a retired military officer and former governor of Western Australia. Quentin Bryce's appointment was announced during her term as governor of Queensland; she had previously been the Federal Sex Discrimination Commissioner. General David Hurley was a retired chief of Defence Force and former governor of New South Wales.\nSignificant post-retirement activities of earlier governors-general have included: Lord Tennyson was appointed deputy governor of the Isle of Wight; Sir Ronald Munro Ferguson (by now Lord Novar) became secretary of State for Scotland; and Lord Gowrie became chairman of the Marylebone Cricket Club (Henry Forster, 1st Baron Forster had also held this post, before his appointment as governor-general).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12607", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12607", "title": "Glasnost", "text": "1980s policy of the Soviet Union promoting openness and freedom of information\nGlasnost ( ; , ) is a concept relating to openness and transparency. It has several general and specific meanings, including a policy of maximum openness in the activities of state institutions and freedom of information and the inadmissibility of hushing up problems. In Russian, the word \"glasnost\" has long been used to mean 'openness' and 'transparency'. In the mid-1980s, it was popularised by Mikhail Gorbachev as a political slogan for increased government transparency in the Soviet Union within the framework of \"perestroika\", and the word came to be used in English in the latter meaning.\nHistorical usage.\nIn the Russian Empire of the late-19th century, the term was used in its direct meanings of \"openness\" and \"publicity\" and applied to politics and the judicial system. Some reforms were introduced permitting attendance of the press and the public at trials. After some liberalization under Alexander II of Russia, the openness of trials started to be restricted again. Human rights activist Lyudmila Alexeyeva writes that the word \"glasnost\" has been in the Russian language for several hundred years as a common term: \"It was in the dictionaries and lawbooks as long as there had been dictionaries and lawbooks. It was an ordinary, hardworking, non-descript word that was used to refer to a process, any process of justice or governance, being conducted in the open.\" In the mid-1960s it acquired a revived topical importance in discourse about the necessity of changing the Cold War era internal policy of the Soviet Union.\nIn the USSR.\nThe dissidents.\nOn 5 December 1965 the Glasnost rally took place in Moscow, considered to be a key event in the emergence of the Soviet civil rights movement. Protesters at Pushkin Square led by Alexander Yesenin-Volpin demanded access to the closed trial of Yuly Daniel and Andrei Sinyavsky. The protestors made specific requests for \"glasnost\", herein referring to the specific admission of the public, independent observers and foreign journalists, to the trial that had been legislated in the then newly issued RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure. Article 111 of the Code stated that, with a few specified exceptions, judicial hearings in the USSR should be held in public.\nSuch protests against closed trials continued throughout the post-Stalin era. Andrei Sakharov, for example, did not travel to Oslo to receive his Nobel Peace Prize due to his public protest outside a Vilnius court building demanding access to the 1976 trial of Sergei Kovalev, an editor of the \"Chronicle of Current Events\" and prominent rights activist.\nGorbachev.\nOn December 10, 1984, while poised to become the next Soviet General Secretary, Mikhail Gorbachev made a speech detailing the need for \"glasnost\", alongside other reforms such as \"perestroika\", and next year, becoming General Secretary, he launched the \"glasnost\" campaign. Alexander Yakovlev, Head of the Propaganda Department of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, is considered to be the intellectual force behind Gorbachev's reform program.\nGlasnost was taken to mean increased openness and transparency in government institutions and activities in the Soviet Union (USSR). \"Glasnost\" reflected a commitment of the Gorbachev administration to allowing Soviet citizens to discuss publicly the problems of their system and potential solutions. Gorbachev encouraged popular scrutiny and criticism of leaders, as well as a certain level of exposure by the mass media.\nSome critics, especially among legal reformers and dissidents, regarded the Soviet authorities' new slogans as vague and limited alternatives to more basic liberties. Alexei Simonov, president of the Glasnost Defence Foundation, makes a critical definition of the term in suggesting it was \"a tortoise crawling towards Freedom of Speech\".\nBetween 1985 and 1991, during an era of reforms in the USSR, glasnost was frequently linked with other generalised concepts such as perestroika (literally: restructuring or regrouping) and demokratizatsiya (democratisation). Gorbachev often appealed to glasnost when promoting policies aimed at reducing corruption at the top of the Communist Party and the Soviet government, and moderating the abuse of administrative power in the Central Committee. The ambiguity of \"glasnost\" defines the distinctive six-year period (1985\u20131991) at the end of the USSR's existence. There was decreasing pre-publication and pre-broadcast censorship and greater freedom of information.\nThe \"Era of Glasnost\" saw greater contact between Soviet citizens and the Western world, particularly the United States: restrictions on travel were loosened for many Soviet citizens which further eased pressures on international exchange between the Soviet Union and the West.\nWhile associated with freedom of speech, the main goal of this policy was to make the country's management transparent, and circumvent the holding of near-complete control of the economy and bureaucracy of the Soviet Union by a concentrated body of officials and bureaucratic personnel.\nDuring Glasnost, Soviet history under Stalin was re-examined; censored literature in the libraries was made more widely available; and there was a greater freedom of speech for citizens and openness in the media. It was in the late 1980s when most people in the Soviet Union began to learn about the atrocities of Stalin, and learned about previously suppressed events.\nOutside the Soviet Union.\nGorbachev's policy of glasnost received mixed reception in communist states, especially outside the Eastern Bloc.\nSupport.\nGlasnost had a trickle-down effect on Eastern Europe and led to democratic reforms, namely in Poland and Czech Republic. Glasnost and similar reforms were applied in the following communist states:\nFurthermore, in the socialist state of Yugoslavia, similar reforms also existed, with the first major reforms beginning in Slovenia.\nOpposition.\nGlasnost or similar reforms were not applied in the following communist states:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12608", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12608", "title": "Geodesy", "text": "Science of measuring the shape, orientation, and gravity of Earth\nGeodesy or geodetics is the science of measuring and representing the geometry, gravity, and spatial orientation of the Earth in temporally varying 3D. It is called planetary geodesy when studying other astronomical bodies, such as planets or circumplanetary systems.\nGeodynamical phenomena, including crustal motion, tides, and polar motion, can be studied by designing global and national control networks, applying space geodesy and terrestrial geodetic techniques, and relying on datums and coordinate systems.\nGeodetic job titles include geodesist and geodetic surveyor.\nHistory.\nGeodesy began in pre-scientific antiquity, so the very word geodesy comes from the Ancient Greek word or \"geodaisia\" (literally, \"division of Earth\").\nEarly ideas about the figure of the Earth held the Earth to be flat and the heavens a physical dome spanning over it. Two early arguments for a spherical Earth were that lunar eclipses appear to an observer as circular shadows and that Polaris appears lower and lower in the sky to a traveler headed South.\nDefinition.\nGeodesy refers to the science of measuring and representing geospatial information, while geomatics encompasses practical applications of geodesy on local and regional scales, including surveying.\nGeodesy originated as the science of measuring and understanding Earth's geometric shape, orientation in space, and gravitational field; it is now also applied to other astronomical bodies in the Solar System.\nTo a large extent, Earth's shape is the result of rotation, which causes its equatorial bulge, and the competition of geological processes such as the collision of plates, as well as of volcanism, resisted by Earth's gravitational field. This applies to the solid surface, the liquid surface (dynamic sea surface topography), and Earth's atmosphere. For this reason, the study of Earth's gravitational field is called physical geodesy.\nGeoid and reference ellipsoid.\nThe geoid essentially is the figure of Earth abstracted from its topographical features. It is an idealized equilibrium surface of seawater, the mean sea level surface in the absence of currents and air pressure variations, and continued under the continental masses. Unlike a reference ellipsoid, the geoid is irregular and too complicated to serve as the computational surface for solving geometrical problems like point positioning. The geometrical separation between the geoid and a reference ellipsoid is called \"geoidal undulation\", and it varies globally between \u00b1110 m based on the GRS 80 ellipsoid.\nA reference ellipsoid, customarily chosen to be the same size (volume) as the geoid, is described by its semi-major axis (equatorial radius) \"a\" and flattening \"f\". The quantity \"f\" = , where \"b\" is the semi-minor axis (polar radius), is purely geometrical. The mechanical ellipticity of Earth (dynamical flattening, symbol \"J\"2) can be determined to high precision by observation of satellite orbit perturbations. Its relationship with geometrical flattening is indirect and depends on the internal density distribution or, in simplest terms, the degree of central concentration of mass.\nThe 1980 Geodetic Reference System (GRS 80), adopted at the XVII General Assembly of the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG), posited a 6,378,137 m semi-major axis and a 1:298.257 flattening. GRS 80 essentially constitutes the basis for geodetic positioning by the Global Positioning System (GPS) and is thus also in widespread use outside the geodetic community. Numerous systems used for mapping and charting are becoming obsolete as countries increasingly move to global, geocentric reference systems utilizing the GRS 80 reference ellipsoid.\nThe geoid is a \"realizable\" surface, meaning it can be consistently located on Earth by suitable simple measurements from physical objects like a tide gauge. The geoid can, therefore, be considered a physical (\"real\") surface. The reference ellipsoid, however, has many possible instantiations and is not readily realizable, so it is an abstract surface. The third primary surface of geodetic interest \u2014 the topographic surface of Earth \u2014 is also realizable.\nCoordinate systems in space.\nThe locations of points in 3D space most conveniently are described by three cartesian or rectangular coordinates, \"X\", \"Y\", and \"Z\". Since the advent of satellite positioning, such coordinate systems are typically geocentric, with the Z-axis aligned to Earth's (conventional or instantaneous) rotation axis.\nBefore the era of satellite geodesy, the coordinate systems associated with a geodetic datum attempted to be geocentric, but with the origin differing from the geocenter by hundreds of meters due to regional deviations in the direction of the plumbline (vertical). These regional geodetic datums, such as ED 50 (European Datum 1950) or NAD 27 (North American Datum 1927), have ellipsoids associated with them that are regional \"best fits\" to the geoids within their areas of validity, minimizing the deflections of the vertical over these areas.\nIt is only because GPS satellites orbit about the geocenter that this point becomes naturally the origin of a coordinate system defined by satellite geodetic means, as the satellite positions in space themselves get computed within such a system.\nGeocentric coordinate systems used in geodesy can be divided naturally into two classes:\nThe coordinate transformation between these two systems to good approximation is described by (apparent) sidereal time, which accounts for variations in Earth's axial rotation (length-of-day variations). A more accurate description also accounts for polar motion as a phenomenon closely monitored by geodesists.\nCoordinate systems in the plane.\nIn geodetic applications like surveying and mapping, two general types of coordinate systems in the plane are in use:\nOne can intuitively use rectangular coordinates in the plane for one's current location, in which case the \"x\"-axis will point to the local north. More formally, such coordinates can be obtained from 3D coordinates using the artifice of a map projection. It is impossible to map the curved surface of Earth onto a flat map surface without deformation. The compromise most often chosen \u2014 called a conformal projection \u2014 preserves angles and length ratios so that small circles get mapped as small circles and small squares as squares.\nAn example of such a projection is UTM (Universal Transverse Mercator). Within the map plane, we have rectangular coordinates \"x\" and \"y\". In this case, the north direction used for reference is the \"map\" north, not the \"local\" north. The difference between the two is called meridian convergence.\nIt is easy enough to \"translate\" between polar and rectangular coordinates in the plane: let, as above, direction and distance be \"\u03b1\" and \"s\" respectively; then we have:\nformula_1\nThe reverse transformation is given by:\nformula_2\nHeights.\nIn geodesy, point or terrain \"heights\" are \"above sea level\" as an irregular, physically defined surface.\nHeight systems in use are:\nEach system has its advantages and disadvantages. Both orthometric and normal heights are expressed in metres above sea level, whereas geopotential numbers are measures of potential energy (unit: m2 s\u22122) and not metric. The reference surface is the geoid, an equigeopotential surface approximating the mean sea level as described above. For normal heights, the reference surface is the so-called \"quasi-geoid\", which has a few-metre separation from the geoid due to the density assumption in its continuation under the continental masses.\nOne can relate these heights through the geoid undulation concept to \"ellipsoidal heights\" (also known as \"geodetic heights\"), representing the height of a point above the reference ellipsoid. Satellite positioning receivers typically provide ellipsoidal heights unless fitted with special conversion software based on a model of the geoid.\nGeodetic datums.\nBecause coordinates and heights of geodetic points always get obtained within a system that itself was constructed based on real-world observations, geodesists introduced the concept of a \"geodetic datum\" (plural \"datums\"): a physical (real-world) realization of a coordinate system used for describing point locations. This realization follows from \"choosing\" (therefore conventional) coordinate values for one or more datum points. In the case of height data, it suffices to choose \"one\" datum point \u2014 the reference benchmark, typically a tide gauge at the shore. Thus we have vertical datums, such as the NAVD 88 (North American Vertical Datum 1988), NAP (Normaal Amsterdams Peil), the Kronstadt datum, the Trieste datum, and numerous others.\nIn both mathematics and geodesy, a coordinate system is a \"coordinate system\" per ISO terminology, whereas the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS) uses the term \"reference system\" for the same. When coordinates are realized by choosing datum points and fixing a geodetic datum, ISO speaks of a \"coordinate reference system\", whereas IERS uses a \"reference frame\" for the same. The ISO term for a datum transformation again is a \"coordinate transformation\".\nPositioning.\nGeneral geopositioning, or simply positioning, is the determination of the location of points on Earth, by myriad techniques. Geodetic positioning employs geodetic methods to determine a set of precise geodetic coordinates of a point on land, at sea, or in space. It may be done within a coordinate system (point positioning or absolute positioning) or relative to another point (relative positioning). One computes the position of a point in space from measurements linking terrestrial or extraterrestrial points of known location (\"known points\") with terrestrial ones of unknown location (\"unknown points\"). The computation may involve transformations between or among astronomical and terrestrial coordinate systems. Known points used in point positioning can be GNSS continuously operating reference stations or triangulation points of a higher-order network.\nTraditionally, geodesists built a hierarchy of networks to allow point positioning within a country. The highest in this hierarchy were triangulation networks, densified into the networks of traverses (polygons) into which local mapping and surveying measurements, usually collected using a measuring tape, a corner prism, and the red-and-white poles, are tied.\nCommonly used nowadays is GPS, except for specialized measurements (e.g., in underground or high-precision engineering). The higher-order networks are measured with static GPS, using differential measurement to determine vectors between terrestrial points. These vectors then get adjusted in a traditional network fashion. A global polyhedron of permanently operating GPS stations under the auspices of the IERS is the basis for defining a single global, geocentric reference frame that serves as the \"zero-order\" (global) reference to which national measurements are attached.\nReal-time kinematic positioning (RTK GPS) is employed frequently in survey mapping. In that measurement technique, unknown points can get quickly tied into nearby terrestrial known points.\nOne purpose of point positioning is the provision of known points for mapping measurements, also known as (horizontal and vertical) control. There can be thousands of those geodetically determined points in a country, usually documented by national mapping agencies. Surveyors involved in real estate and insurance will use these to tie their local measurements.\nGeodetic problems.\nIn geometrical geodesy, there are two main problems:\nThe solutions to both problems in plane geometry reduce to simple trigonometry and are valid for small areas on Earth's surface; on a sphere, solutions become significantly more complex as, for example, in the inverse problem, the azimuths differ going between the two end points along the arc of the connecting great circle.\nThe general solution is called the geodesic for the surface considered, and the differential equations for the geodesic are solvable numerically. On the ellipsoid of revolution, geodesics are expressible in terms of elliptic integrals, which are usually evaluated in terms of a series expansion \u2014 see, for example, Vincenty's formulae.\nObservational concepts.\nAs defined in geodesy (and also astronomy), some basic observational concepts like angles and coordinates include (most commonly from the viewpoint of a local observer):\nMeasurements.\nThe reference surface (level) used to determine height differences and height reference systems is known as mean sea level. The traditional spirit level directly produces such (for practical purposes most useful) heights above sea level; the more economical use of GPS instruments for height determination requires precise knowledge of the figure of the geoid, as GPS only gives heights above the GRS80 reference ellipsoid. As geoid determination improves, one may expect that the use of GPS in height determination shall increase, too.\nThe theodolite is an instrument used to measure horizontal and vertical (relative to the local vertical) angles to target points. In addition, the tachymeter determines, electronically or electro-optically, the distance to a target and is highly automated or even robotic in operations. Widely used for the same purpose is the method of free station position.\nCommonly for local detail surveys, tachymeters are employed, although the old-fashioned rectangular technique using an angle prism and steel tape is still an inexpensive alternative. As mentioned, also there are quick and relatively accurate real-time kinematic (RTK) GPS techniques. Data collected are tagged and recorded digitally for entry into Geographic Information System (GIS) databases.\nGeodetic GNSS (most commonly GPS) receivers directly produce 3D coordinates in a geocentric coordinate frame. One such frame is WGS84, as well as frames by the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS). GNSS receivers have almost completely replaced terrestrial instruments for large-scale base network surveys.\nTo monitor the Earth's rotation irregularities and plate tectonic motions and for planet-wide geodetic surveys, methods of very-long-baseline interferometry (VLBI) measuring distances to quasars, lunar laser ranging (LLR) measuring distances to prisms on the Moon, and satellite laser ranging (SLR) measuring distances to prisms on artificial satellites, are employed.\nGravity is measured using gravimeters, of which there are two kinds. First are \"absolute gravimeter\"s, based on measuring the acceleration of free fall (e.g., of a reflecting prism in a vacuum tube). They are used to establish vertical geospatial control or in the field. Second, \"relative gravimeter\"s are spring-based and more common. They are used in gravity surveys over large areas \u2014 to establish the figure of the geoid over these areas. The most accurate relative gravimeters are called \"superconducting gravimeter\"s, which are sensitive to one-thousandth of one-billionth of Earth-surface gravity. Twenty-some superconducting gravimeters are used worldwide in studying Earth's tides, rotation, interior, oceanic and atmospheric loading, as well as in verifying the Newtonian constant of gravitation.\nIn the future, gravity and altitude might become measurable using the special-relativistic concept of time dilation as gauged by optical clocks.\nUnits and measures on the ellipsoid.\nGeographical latitude and longitude are stated in the units degree, minute of arc, and second of arc. They are \"angles\", not metric\nmeasures, and describe the \"direction\" of the local normal to the reference ellipsoid of revolution. This direction is \"approximately\" the same as the direction of the plumbline, i.e., local gravity, which is also the normal to the geoid surface. For this reason, astronomical position determination \u2013 measuring the direction of the plumbline by astronomical means \u2013 works reasonably well when one also uses an ellipsoidal model of the figure of the Earth.\nOne geographical mile, defined as one minute of arc on the equator, equals 1,855.32571922 m. One nautical mile is one minute of astronomical latitude. The radius of curvature of the ellipsoid varies with latitude, being the longest at the pole and the shortest at the equator same as with the nautical mile.\nA metre was originally defined as the 10-millionth part of the length from the equator to the North Pole along the meridian through Paris (the target was not quite reached in actual implementation, as it is off by 200 ppm in the current definitions). This situation means that one kilometre roughly equals (1/40,000) * 360 * 60 meridional minutes of arc, or 0.54 nautical miles. (This is not exactly so as the two units had been defined on different bases, so the international nautical mile is 1,852 m exactly, which corresponds to rounding the quotient from 1,000/0.54 m to four digits).\nTemporal changes.\nVarious techniques are used in geodesy to study temporally changing surfaces, bodies of mass, physical fields, and dynamical systems. Points on Earth's surface change their location due to a variety of mechanisms:\nGeodynamics is the discipline that studies deformations and motions of Earth's crust and its solidity as a whole. Often the study of Earth's irregular rotation is included in the above definition. Geodynamical studies require terrestrial reference frames realized by the stations belonging to the Global Geodetic Observing System (GGOS).\nTechniques for studying geodynamic phenomena on global scales include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFundamentals\nGovernmental agencies\nInternational organizations\nOther\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12609", "revid": "44414075", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12609", "title": "Eurogame", "text": "Type of board game\nA Eurogame, also called a German-style board game, German game, or Euro-style game (generally just referred to as board games in Europe), is a class of tabletop games that generally feature indirect player interaction, lack of player elimination, and provide multiple ways to score points. Eurogames are sometimes contrasted with American-style board games, which generally involve more luck, conflict, and drama. They are usually less abstract than chess or Go, but more focused on economic competition than wargames. Likewise, they generally require more thought and planning than party games such as \"Pictionary\" or \"Trivial Pursuit\".\nHistory.\nDue in part to postwar aversion to products which glorified conflict, the 3M series of strategy and economic games, including \"Acquire\", became popular in Germany. They offered a style of gameplay without direct conflict or warfare and led the way for designs that focused on resource management and competitive strategy through more peaceful means. \nGerman family board games.\nThe genre developed as a more concentrated design movement in the late 1970s and early 1980s in Germany. The genre spread to other European countries such as France, the Netherlands, and Sweden. During this time, board games in Europe often featured shorter play times than their American counterparts, along with rules that encouraged all players to remain engaged until the end, thereby reducing the risk of early elimination.\n\"Settlers of Catan\".\nAlthough German-style designs were already popular within Germany, \"The Settlers of Catan\", first published in 1995, paved the way for the genre outside Europe. While it was not the first Eurogame and not the first to achieve popularity outside Germany, it became more successful than any of its predecessors. Millions of copies were sold in Germany alone. The game's success brought new interest, investment, and attention to this genre of board games emphasizing mechanics other than direct conflict. Game designers like Reiner Knizia became popular globally. Knizia's notable designs include \"Amun-Re\", \"Blue Moon City\", \"Ingenious\", \"Keltis\", \"Lord of the Rings\", \"Medici\", \"Modern Art\", \"Ra\", \"Taj Mahal\", \"Tigris and Euphrates\", and \"Through the Desert\". Many of his designs incorporate mathematical principles, such as his repeated use of auction mechanics.\nGrowth in the 21st century.\nAs the market expanded, some designers began creating deeper, more complex games often referred to as \u201cgamer\u2019s games\u201d or \u201cexpert games.\u201d Titles such as \"Agricola\" (2007) by Uwe Rosenberg and \"Terra Mystica\" (2012) by Helge Ostertag and Jens Dr\u00f6gem\u00fcller introduced more detailed resource management, longer playing times, and heightened decision depth. These games often came with multiple paths to victory, ensuring replay value and a variety of strategies for enthusiasts. Residents of Germany purchased more board games per capita than any other country as of 2009[ [update]]. While many Eurogames are published and played in Anglophone markets such as the United States and the United Kingdom, they occupy a niche status there. Other games in the genre to achieve widespread popularity include \"Carcassonne\", \"Puerto Rico\", \"TransAmerica\", \"Ticket to Ride\", \"Alhambra\", \"Brass,\" \"Terraforming Mars\", Concordia and \"Ark Nova\". Today, Eurogames remain an important segment of the board gaming industry, appreciated for their emphasis on strategy, thoughtful interaction, and lack of player elimination that allows all participants to remain engaged. While Germany still leads in per capita board game purchases, the popularity of Eurogames has spread worldwide, and many titles now receive international distribution and acclaim. Conventions in Germany gather thousands of fans annually, and 204,000 attended \"Essen Spiel\" in 2024.\nCharacteristics.\nEurogames tend to be focused on presenting a complex challenge to players. They feature individual economic competition and resource management rather than direct conflict, and have a limited amount of luck. They also differ from abstract strategy games like chess by using themes tied to specific locales. Eurogames also emphasize the mechanical challenges of their systems over having the systems match the theme of the game. They are generally simpler than the wargames that flourished in the 1970s and 1980s from publishers such as SPI and Avalon Hill, but still often have a considerable depth of play.\nOne consequence of the increasing popularity of this genre has been an upwards in complexity. Games such as \"Puerto Rico\" that were considered quite complex when Eurogames proliferated in the U.S. after the turn of the millennium are now the norm, with newer high-end titles like \"Terra Mystica\" and \"Tzolkin\" being significantly more complex.\nIncentive for social play.\nEurogames tend to be well-suited to social play. In contrast to games such as \"Risk\" or \"Monopoly\", in which a close game can extend indefinitely, Eurogames usually have mechanics to limit the playing time. Common mechanisms include a predetermined winning score, a set number of game turns, or depletion of limited game resources. Playing time varies from a half-hour to a few hours, with one to two hours being typical. Generally, Eurogames do not have a fixed number of players like chess or bridge. Although there is a sizeable body of Eurogames that are designed for exactly two players, most games can accommodate between two to six players (with varying degrees of suitability). Six-player games are somewhat rare; examples include \"Power Grid\" and \"Caverna\" (the latter supporting seven-player games). Some require expansions, such as \"The Settlers of Catan\" or \"Carcassonne\". Players usually play for themselves, rather than in a partnership or team.\nA growing number of Eurogames support solo play with modified rulesets. To win, the player either has to achieve specific single-player campaign goals or beat the score of a simulated opponent that takes actions according to special rules outlined in the scenario. Recent Eurogames suitable for solo play include \"Wingspan\", \"Terraforming Mars\", and \"Spirit Island\".\nNo player elimination.\nAnother prominent characteristic of these games is the lack of player elimination. Eliminating players before the end of the game is seen as contrary to the social aspect of such games. Most of these games are designed to keep all players in the game as long as possible, so it is rare to be certain of victory or defeat until relatively late in the game. Related to no-player-elimination, Eurogame scoring systems are often designed so that hidden scoring or end-of-game bonuses can catapult a player who appears to be in a lagging position at end of play into the lead. A second-order consequence is that Eurogames tend to have multiple paths to victory (dependent on aiming at different end-of-game bonuses) and it is often not obvious to other players which strategic path a player is pursuing. Balancing mechanisms are often integrated into the rules, giving slight advantages to lagging players and slight hindrances to the leaders. This helps to keep the game competitive to the very end, an example of which is Power Grid, where the turn order is determined by number of cities (and biggest power plant as the tie-breaker), such that players further ahead are handicapped in their option of plays.\nGame mechanics.\nA wide variety of often innovative mechanics are used, and familiar mechanics such as rolling dice and moving, capture, or trick-taking are avoided. If a game has a board, the board is usually irregular rather than uniform or symmetric (such as \"Risk\" rather than chess or \"Scrabble\"). The board is often random (as in \"The Settlers of Catan\") or has random elements (such as \"Tikal\"). Some boards are merely mnemonic or organizational and contribute only to ease of play, such as a cribbage board; examples of this include \"Puerto Rico\" and \"Princes of Florence\". Random elements are often present but do not usually dominate the game. While rules are light to moderate, they allow depth of play, usually requiring thought, planning, and a shift of tactics through the game.\nStewart Woods' \"Eurogames\" cites six examples of mechanics common to eurogames:\nLow randomness.\nEurogame designs tend to de-emphasize luck and random elements. Often, the only random element of the game will be resource or terrain distribution in the initial setup, or (less frequently) the random order of a set of event or objective cards. The role played by deliberately random mechanics in other styles of game is instead fulfilled by the unpredictability of the behavior of other players.\nThemes.\nExamples of themes are:\nGame designer as author.\nAlthough not relevant to actual play, the name of the game's designer is often prominently mentioned on the box, or at least in the rule book. Top designers enjoy considerable following among enthusiasts of Eurogames. For this reason, the name \"designer games\" is often offered as a description of the genre. Recently, there has also been a wave of games designed as spin-offs of popular novels, such as the games taking their style from the German bestsellers \"Der Schwarm\" and \"Tintenherz\".\nIndustry.\nDesigners.\nDesigners of Eurogames include:\nEvents.\nThe Internationale Spieltage, also known as Essen Spiel, or the Essen Games Fair, is the largest non-digital game convention in the world, and the place where the largest number of Eurogames are released each year. Founded in 1983 and held annually in Essen, Germany, the fair was founded with the objective of providing a venue for people to meet and play board games, and show gaming as an integral part of German culture.\nA \"World Boardgaming Championships\" is held annually in July in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania. The event is nine days long and includes tournament tracks of over a hundred games; while traditional wargames are played there, the most popular tournaments are Eurogames and it is generally perceived as a Eurogame-centered event. Attendance is international, though players from the U.S. and Canada predominate.\nAwards.\nThe most prestigious German board game award is the Spiel des Jahres (\"Game of the Year\"). The award is very family-oriented, with shorter, more approachable games such as \"Ticket to Ride\" and \"Elfenland\" usually preferred by the award committee.\nIn 2011, the jury responsible for the Spiel des Jahres created the Kennerspiel des Jahres, or connoisseur's game of the year, for more complex games.\nThe Deutscher Spielepreis (\"German game prize\") is also awarded to games that are more complex and strategic, such as \"Puerto Rico\". A few games have had broad enough appeal to win both awards: \"The Settlers of Catan\" (published 1995), \"Carcassonne\" (published 2000), and \"Dominion\" (published 2008).\nInfluence.\nXbox Live Arcade has included popular games from the genre, with \"Catan\" being released to strong sales on May 13, 2007, \"Carcassonne\" being released on June 27, 2007. \"Lost Cities\" and \"Ticket to Ride\" soon followed. \"Alhambra\" was due to follow later in 2007 until being cancelled.\nThe iPhone received versions of The Settlers of Catan and \"Zooloretto\" in 2009. Carcassonne was added to the iPhone App Store in June 2010. Later, Ticket to Ride was developed for both the iPhone and the iPad, significantly boosting sales of the board game.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12610", "revid": "1314889472", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12610", "title": "Grand Unified Theory", "text": "Comprehensive physical model\nA Grand Unified Theory (GUT) is any model in particle physics that merges the electromagnetic, weak, and strong forces (the three gauge interactions of the Standard Model) into a single force at high energies. Although this unified force has not been directly observed, many GUT models theorize its existence. If the unification of these three interactions is possible, it raises the possibility that there was a grand unification epoch in the very early universe in which these three fundamental interactions were not yet distinct.\nExperiments have confirmed that at high energy, the electromagnetic interaction and weak interaction unify into a single combined electroweak interaction. GUT models predict that at even higher energy, the strong and electroweak interactions will unify into one electronuclear interaction. This interaction is characterized by one larger gauge symmetry and thus several force carriers, but one unified coupling constant. Unifying gravity with the electronuclear interaction would provide a more comprehensive theory of everything (TOE) rather than a Grand Unified Theory. Thus, GUTs are often seen as an intermediate step towards a TOE.\nThe novel particles predicted by GUT models are expected to have extremely high masses\u2014around the GUT scale of (only three orders of magnitude below the Planck scale of )\u2014and so are well beyond the reach of any foreseen particle hadron collider experiments. Therefore, the particles predicted by GUT models will be unable to be observed directly, and instead the effects of grand unification might be detected through indirect observations of the following:\nSome GUTs, such as the Pati\u2013Salam model, predict the existence of magnetic monopoles.\nWhile GUTs might be expected to offer simplicity over the complications present in the Standard Model, realistic models remain complicated because they need to introduce additional fields and interactions, or even additional dimensions of space, in order to reproduce observed fermion masses and mixing angles. This difficulty, in turn, may be related to the existence of family symmetries beyond the conventional GUT models. Due to this and the lack of any observed effect of grand unification so far, there is no generally accepted GUT model.\nModels that do not unify the three interactions using one simple group as the gauge symmetry but do so using semisimple groups can exhibit similar properties and are sometimes referred to as Grand Unified Theories as well.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in physics\nAre the three forces of the Standard Model unified at high energies? By which symmetry is this unification governed? Can the Grand Unification Theory explain the number of fermion generations and their masses?\nMore unsolved problems in physics\nHistory.\nHistorically, the first true GUT, which was based on the simple Lie group SU(5), was proposed by Howard Georgi and Sheldon Glashow in 1974. The Georgi\u2013Glashow model was preceded by the semisimple Lie algebra Pati\u2013Salam model by Abdus Salam and Jogesh Pati also in 1974, who pioneered the idea to unify gauge interactions.\nThe acronym GUT was first coined in 1978 by CERN researchers John Ellis, Andrzej Buras, Mary K. Gaillard, and Dimitri Nanopoulos, however in the final version of their paper they opted for the less anatomical GUM (Grand Unification Mass). Nanopoulos later that year was the first to use the acronym in a paper.\nMotivation.\nThe fact that the electric charges of electrons and protons seem to cancel each other exactly to extreme precision is essential for the existence of the macroscopic world as we know it, but this important property of elementary particles is not explained in the Standard Model of particle physics. While the description of strong and weak interactions within the Standard Model is based on gauge symmetries governed by the simple symmetry groups SU(3) and SU(2) which allow only discrete charges, the remaining component, the weak hypercharge interaction is described by an abelian symmetry U(1) which in principle allows for arbitrary charge assignments. The observed charge quantization, namely the postulation that all known elementary particles carry electric charges which are exact multiples of one-third of the \"elementary\" charge, has led to the idea that hypercharge interactions and possibly the strong and weak interactions might be embedded in one Grand Unified interaction described by a single, larger simple symmetry group containing the Standard Model. This would automatically predict the quantized nature and values of all elementary particle charges. Since this also results in a prediction for the relative strengths of the fundamental interactions which we observe, in particular, the weak mixing angle, grand unification ideally reduces the number of independent input parameters but is also constrained by observations.\nGrand unification is reminiscent of the unification of electric and magnetic forces by Maxwell's field theory of electromagnetism in the 19th century, but its physical implications and mathematical structure are qualitatively different.\nUnification of matter particles.\nSU(5).\nSU(5) is the simplest GUT. The smallest simple Lie group which contains the Standard Model, and upon which the first Grand Unified Theory was based, is\n formula_1\nSuch group symmetries allow the reinterpretation of several known particles, including the photon, W and Z bosons, and gluon, as different states of a single particle field. However, it is not obvious that the simplest possible choices for the extended \"Grand Unified\" symmetry should yield the correct inventory of elementary particles. The fact that all currently known matter particles fit perfectly into three copies of the smallest group representations of SU(5) and immediately carry the correct observed charges, is one of the first and most important reasons why people believe that a Grand Unified Theory might actually be realized in nature.\nThe two smallest irreducible representations of SU(5) are 5 (the defining representation) and 10. (These bold numbers indicate the dimension of the representation.) In the standard assignment, the 5 contains the charge conjugates of the right-handed down-type quark color triplet and a left-handed lepton isospin doublet, while the 10 contains the six up-type quark components, the left-handed down-type quark color triplet, and the right-handed electron. This scheme has to be replicated for each of the three known generations of matter. It is notable that the theory is anomaly free with this matter content.\nThe hypothetical right-handed neutrinos are a singlet of SU(5), which means its mass is not forbidden by any symmetry; it doesn't need a spontaneous electroweak symmetry breaking which explains why its mass would be heavy (see seesaw mechanism).\nSO(10).\nThe next simple Lie group which contains the Standard Model is\n formula_2\nHere, the unification of matter is even more complete, since the irreducible spinor representation 16 contains both the and 10 of SU(5) and a right-handed neutrino, and thus the complete particle content of one generation of the extended Standard Model with neutrino masses. This is already the largest simple group that achieves the unification of matter in a scheme involving only the already known matter particles (apart from the Higgs sector).\nSince different Standard Model fermions are grouped together in larger representations, GUTs specifically predict relations among the fermion masses, such as between the electron and the down quark, the muon and the strange quark, and the tau lepton and the bottom quark for SU(5) and SO(10). Some of these mass relations hold approximately, but most don't (see Georgi-Jarlskog mass relation).\nThe boson matrix for SO(10) is found by taking the 15 \u00d7 15 matrix from the 10 + 5 representation of SU(5) and adding an extra row and column for the right-handed neutrino. The bosons are found by adding a partner to each of the 20 charged bosons (2 right-handed W bosons, 6 massive charged gluons and 12 X/Y type bosons) and adding an extra heavy neutral Z-boson to make 5 neutral bosons in total. The boson matrix will have a boson or its new partner in each row and column. These pairs combine to create the familiar 16D Dirac spinor matrices of SO(10).\nE6.\nIn some forms of string theory, including E8\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0E8 heterotic string theory, the resultant four-dimensional theory after spontaneous compactification on a six-dimensional Calabi\u2013Yau manifold resembles a GUT based on the group E6. Notably E6 is the only exceptional simple Lie group to have any complex representations, a requirement for a theory to contain chiral fermions (namely all weakly-interacting fermions). Hence the other four (G2, F4, E7, and E8) can't be the gauge group of a GUT.\nExtended Grand Unified Theories.\nNon-chiral extensions of the Standard Model with vectorlike split-multiplet particle spectra which naturally appear in the higher SU(N) GUTs considerably modify the desert physics and lead to the realistic (string-scale) grand unification for conventional three quark-lepton families even without using supersymmetry (see below). On the other hand, due to a new missing VEV mechanism emerging in the supersymmetric SU(8) GUT the simultaneous solution to the gauge hierarchy (doublet-triplet splitting) problem and problem of unification of flavor can be argued.\nGUTs with four families / generations, SU(8): Assuming 4 generations of fermions instead of 3 makes a total of 64 types of particles. These can be put into 64 \n 8 + 56 representations of SU(8). This can be divided into SU(5) \u00d7 SU(3)F \u00d7 U(1) which is the SU(5) theory together with some heavy bosons which act on the generation number.\nGUTs with four families / generations, O(16): Again assuming 4 generations of fermions, the 128 particles and anti-particles can be put into a single spinor representation of O(16).\nSymplectic groups and quaternion representations.\nSymplectic gauge groups could also be considered. For example, Sp(8) (which is called Sp(4) in the article symplectic group) has a representation in terms of 4 \u00d7 4 quaternion unitary matrices which has a 16 dimensional real representation and so might be considered as a candidate for a gauge group. Sp(8) has 32 charged bosons and 4 neutral bosons. Its subgroups include SU(4) so can at least contain the gluons and photon of SU(3) \u00d7 U(1). Although it's probably not possible to have weak bosons acting on chiral fermions in this representation. A quaternion representation of the fermions might be:\n formula_3\nA further complication with quaternion representations of fermions is that there are two types of multiplication: left multiplication and right multiplication which must be taken into account. It turns out that including left and right-handed 4 \u00d7 4 quaternion matrices is equivalent to including a single right-multiplication by a unit quaternion which adds an extra SU(2) and so has an extra neutral boson and two more charged bosons. Thus the group of left- and right-handed 4 \u00d7 4 quaternion matrices is Sp(8) \u00d7 SU(2) which does include the Standard Model bosons:\n formula_4\nIf formula_5 is a quaternion valued spinor, formula_6 is quaternion hermitian 4 \u00d7 4 matrix coming from Sp(8) and formula_7 is a pure vector quaternion (both of which are 4-vector bosons) then the interaction term is:\n formula_8\nOctonion representations.\nIt can be noted that a generation of 16\u00a0fermions can be put into the form of an octonion with each element of the octonion being an 8-vector. If the 3\u00a0generations are then put in a 3x3 hermitian matrix with certain additions for the diagonal elements then these matrices form an exceptional (Grassmann) Jordan algebra, which has the symmetry group of one of the exceptional Lie groups (F4, E6, E7, or E8) depending on the details.\n formula_9\n formula_10\nBecause they are fermions the anti-commutators of the Jordan algebra become commutators. It is known that E6 has subgroup O(10) and so is big enough to include the Standard Model. An E8 gauge group, for example, would have 8\u00a0neutral bosons, 120\u00a0charged bosons and 120\u00a0charged anti-bosons. To account for the 248\u00a0fermions in the lowest multiplet of E8, these would either have to include anti-particles (and so have baryogenesis), have new undiscovered particles, or have gravity-like (spin connection) bosons affecting elements of the particles spin direction. Each of these possesses theoretical problems.\nBeyond Lie groups.\nOther structures have been suggested including Lie 3-algebras and Lie superalgebras. Neither of these fit with Yang\u2013Mills theory. In particular Lie superalgebras would introduce bosons with incorrect statistics. Supersymmetry, however, does fit with Yang\u2013Mills.\nUnification of forces and the role of supersymmetry.\nThe unification of forces is possible due to the energy scale dependence of force coupling parameters in quantum field theory called renormalization group \"running\", which allows parameters with vastly different values at usual energies to converge to a single value at a much higher energy scale.\nThe renormalization group running of the three gauge couplings in the Standard Model has been found to nearly, but not quite, meet at the same point if the hypercharge is normalized so that it is consistent with SU(5) or SO(10) GUTs, which are precisely the GUT groups which lead to a simple fermion unification. This is a significant result, as other Lie groups lead to different normalizations. However, if the supersymmetric extension MSSM is used instead of the Standard Model, the match becomes much more accurate. In this case, the coupling constants of the strong and electroweak interactions meet at the grand unification energy, also known as the GUT scale:\n formula_11\nIt is commonly believed that this matching is unlikely to be a coincidence, and is often quoted as one of the main motivations to further investigate supersymmetric theories despite the fact that no supersymmetric partner particles have been experimentally observed. Also, most model builders simply assume supersymmetry because it solves the hierarchy problem\u2014i.e., it stabilizes the electroweak Higgs mass against radiative corrections.\nNeutrino masses.\nSince Majorana masses of the right-handed neutrino are forbidden by SO(10) symmetry, SO(10) GUTs predict the Majorana masses of right-handed neutrinos to be close to the GUT scale where the symmetry is spontaneously broken in those models. In supersymmetric GUTs, this scale tends to be larger than would be desirable to obtain realistic masses of the light, mostly left-handed neutrinos (see neutrino oscillation) via the seesaw mechanism. These predictions are independent of the Georgi\u2013Jarlskog mass relations, wherein some GUTs predict other fermion mass ratios.\nProposed theories.\nSeveral theories have been proposed, but none is currently universally accepted. An even more ambitious theory that includes \"all\" fundamental forces, including gravitation, is termed a theory of everything. Some common mainstream GUT models are:\n\"Note\": These models refer to Lie algebras not to Lie groups. The Lie group could be formula_12 just to take a random example.\nThe most promising candidate is SO(10).\n(Minimal) SO(10) does not contain any exotic fermions (i.e. additional fermions besides the Standard Model fermions and the right-handed neutrino), and it unifies each generation into a single irreducible representation. A number of other GUT models are based upon subgroups of SO(10). They are the minimal left-right model, SU(5), flipped SU(5) and the Pati\u2013Salam model. The GUT group E6 contains SO(10), but models based upon it are significantly more complicated. The primary reason for studying E6 models comes from E8 \u00d7 E8 heterotic string theory.\nGUT models generically predict the existence of topological defects such as monopoles, cosmic strings, domain walls, and others. But none have been observed. Their absence is known as the monopole problem in cosmology. Many GUT models also predict proton decay, although not the Pati\u2013Salam model. As of now, proton decay has never been experimentally observed. The minimal experimental limit on the proton's lifetime pretty much rules out minimal SU(5) and heavily constrains the other models. The lack of detected supersymmetry to date also constrains many models.\n\\ &lt;/math&gt; in SU(5) GUT\n | class1=\n | alt1=\n | Dimension 6\u00a0proton decay mediated by the X\u00a0boson formula_13 in flipped SU(5) GUT\n | class2=\n | alt2=\n | Dimension 6\u00a0proton decay mediated by the triplet Higgs formula_14 and the anti-triplet Higgs formula_15 in SU(5) GUT\n | class3=\n | alt3=\nSome GUT theories like SU(5) and SO(10) suffer from what is called the doublet-triplet problem. These theories predict that for each electroweak Higgs doublet, there is a corresponding colored Higgs triplet field with a very small mass (many orders of magnitude smaller than the GUT scale here). In theory, unifying quarks with leptons, the Higgs doublet would also be unified with a Higgs triplet. Such triplets have not been observed. They would also cause extremely rapid proton decay (far below current experimental limits) and prevent the gauge coupling strengths from running together in the renormalization group.\nMost GUT models require a threefold replication of the matter fields. As such, they do not explain why there are three generations of fermions. Most GUT models also fail to explain the little hierarchy between the fermion masses for different generations.\nIngredients.\nA GUT model consists of a gauge group which is a compact Lie group, a connection form for that Lie group, a Yang\u2013Mills action for that connection given by an invariant symmetric bilinear form over its Lie algebra (which is specified by a coupling constant for each factor), a Higgs sector consisting of a number of scalar fields taking on values within real/complex representations of the Lie group and chiral Weyl fermions taking on values within a complex rep of the Lie group. The Lie group contains the Standard Model group and the Higgs fields acquire VEVs leading to a spontaneous symmetry breaking to the Standard Model. The Weyl fermions represent matter.\nCurrent evidence.\nThe discovery of neutrino oscillations indicates that the Standard Model is incomplete, but there is currently no clear evidence that nature is described by any Grand Unified Theory. Neutrino oscillations have led to renewed interest toward certain GUT such as SO(10).\nOne of the few possible experimental tests of certain GUT is proton decay and also fermion masses. There are a few more special tests for supersymmetric GUT. However, minimum proton lifetimes from research (at or exceeding the 1034~1035\u00a0year range) have ruled out simpler GUTs and most non-SUSY models.\nThe maximum upper limit on proton lifetime (if unstable), is calculated at \u00a0years for SUSY models and \u00a0years for minimal non-SUSY GUTs.\nThe gauge coupling strengths of QCD, the weak interaction and hypercharge seem to meet at a common length scale called the GUT scale and equal approximately to 1016\u00a0GeV (slightly less than the Planck energy of 1019\u00a0GeV), which is somewhat suggestive. This interesting numerical observation is called the \"gauge coupling unification\", and it works particularly well if one assumes the existence of superpartners of the Standard Model particles. Still, it is possible to achieve the same by postulating, for instance, that ordinary (non supersymmetric) SO(10) models break with an intermediate gauge scale, such as the one of Pati\u2013Salam group.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12611", "revid": "50596144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12611", "title": "GTE", "text": "Defunct American telephone company\nGTE Corporation, formerly General Telephone &amp; Electronics Corporation (1955\u20131982), was the largest independent telephone company in the United States during the days of the Bell System. The company operated from 1926, with roots tracing further back than that, until 2000, when it was acquired by Bell Atlantic, which changed its name to Verizon.\nThe Wisconsin-based Associated Telephone Utilities Company was founded in 1926; it went bankrupt in 1933 during the Great Depression, and was reorganized as General Telephone in 1934. In 1991, it acquired the third-largest independent phone company at that time, Continental Telephone (ConTel). It owned Automatic Electric, a telephone equipment supplier similar in many ways to Western Electric, and Sylvania Electric Products, the only non-communications-oriented company under GTE ownership. GTE provided local telephone service to many areas of the U.S. through operating companies, much as American Telephone &amp; Telegraph provided local telephone service through its 22 Bell Operating Companies.\nThe company acquired BBN Planet, one of the earliest Internet service providers, in 1997. That division became known as GTE Internetworking, and was later spun off into the independent company Genuity (a name recycled from another Internet company GTE acquired in 1997) to satisfy Federal Communications Commission (FCC) requirements regarding the GTE\u2013Bell Atlantic merger that created Verizon.\nGTE operated in Canada via large interests in subsidiary companies such as BC Tel and Quebec-T\u00e9l\u00e9phone. When foreign ownership restrictions on telecommunications companies were introduced, GTE's ownership was grandfathered. When BC Tel merged with Telus (the name given to the privatized Alberta Government Telephones (AGT)) to create BCT.Telus, GTE's Canadian subsidiaries were merged into the new parent, making it the second-largest telecommunications carrier in Canada. As such, GTE's successor, Verizon Communications, was the only foreign telecommunications company with a greater than 20% interest in a Canadian carrier, until Verizon completely divested itself of its shares in 2004.\nIn the Caribbean, CONTEL purchased several major stakes in the newly independent countries of the British West Indies (namely in Barbados, Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago).\nPrior to GTE's merger with Bell Atlantic, GTE also maintained an interactive television service joint-venture called GTE mainStreet (sometimes also called mainStreet USA) as well as an interactive entertainment and video game publishing operation, GTE Interactive Media.\nHistory.\nGeneral Telephone.\nIn 1934, General Telephone Corporation was established with John Winn as president. The following year, the company created General Telephone Directory Company as a division. During World War II, General Telephone helped install phone service for military facilities. From 1946 to 1950, General Telephone obtained over 100,000 telephone lines and bought out Leich Electric Company.\nGeneral Telephone's holdings included 15 telephone companies across 20 states by 1951, when Donald C. Power was named president of the company under chairman and long-time GT executive Morris F. LaCroix, replacing the retiring Harold Bozell (president 1940 \u2013 1951). Power proceeded to expand the company through the 1950s principally through two acquisitions.\nIn 1955, Theodore Gary &amp; Company became a part of General Telephone and allowed the company to hold over 2 million telephone lines after the companies merged. It also had a subsidiary, named the General Telephone and Electric Corporation, formed in 1930 with the Transamerica Corporation and British investors to compete against ITT.\nIn 1959, Sylvania Electric Products merged into General Telephone and was renamed to General Telephone &amp; Electronics Corporation (GT&amp;E). Power also obtained the purchases of multiple companies. such as Lenkurt Electric Company, Inc and Peninsular Telephone Company. In 1960, GT&amp;E International Incorporated was created as a branch company. Power was named C.E.O. and chairman in 1961, making way for Leslie H. Warner, formerly of Theodore Gary, to become president. Simultaneously, GT&amp;E went on to buy Community Antenna Television providers.\nIn 1964, Western Utilities Corporation became part of GT&amp;E. Additional purchases during the 1960s included Hawaiian Telephone Company and Northern Ohio Telephone Company. At the end of the decade, ten million GT&amp;E phones were active.\nIn the late 1960s, GT&amp;E joined in the search for a railroad car Automatic Car Identification system. It designed the KarTrak optical system, which won over other manufacturer's systems in field trials, but ultimately proved to need too much maintenance. In the late 1970s the system was abandoned.\nAfter a 1970 bomb attack to the company's headquarters in New York City, the company relocated to Stamford, Connecticut for their new headquarters. In 1971 GT&amp;E undertook an identity change and became simply GTE, while Sylvania Electric Products became GTE Sylvania. The same year, Donald C. Power retired and Leslie H. Warner became chairman of the board. Theodore F. Brophy was brought in as president.\nIn 1974, GTE worked with American Telephone &amp; Telegraph in a project to create satellite stations. A few years later, the company's international branch was replaced by a GTE products company in 1976. Their products company remained until 1979.\nIn 1979, GTE purchased Telenet to establish a presence in the growing packet switching data communications business. GTE Telenet was later included in the US Telecom joint venture.\n1980s.\nOn August 16, 1982 the company changed its name to GTE Corp.\nIn December 1983 Vanderslice stepped down as the company's president and chief operating officer.\nIn April 1988, after the retirement of Theodore F. Brophy, James L. \"Rocky\" Johnson was promoted from his position as president and chief operating officer to CEO of GTE; he was appointed chairman in 1991.\nUnder Johnson's leadership, GTE divested its 50% ownership of US Sprint, the nation's third largest long-distance company. He also orchestrated the sale of Sylvania and the merger with Contel, creating the 2nd largest telephone company in the United States. \nIn 1989, GTE reorganized into six operating groups, focusing on its core businesses of telephone operations, information services, and publishing of telephone directories. With previous job cuts and announced future job cuts, Johnson was able to return GTE to profitability. \nOther new services provided under his leadership were GTE Mobilenet cellular telephone operations, Airfone air-to-ground telephone services, and the first voice, video, and data services community in Cerritos, California to test home banking, at-home shopping, home security, and pay-per-view television in 16,000 homes and 2,000 businesses.\n1990s.\nIn April 1992, James L. \"Rocky\" Johnson retired after 43 years at GTE, remaining on the GTE board of directors as chairman emeritus. Charles \"Chuck\" Lee was named to succeed Johnson. In 1994, Lee sold the company's satellite provider, Spacenet, to General Electric and Contel of Maine to Oxford Networks, which placed the company into a newly created subsidiary, Oxford West Telephone.\nMerger with Bell Atlantic.\nBell Atlantic merged with GTE on June 30, 2000, and named the new entity Verizon Communications. The GTE operating companies retained by Verizon became collectively known as Verizon West division of Verizon (including east coast service territories). The remaining smaller operating companies were sold off or transferred into the remaining ones. Additional properties were sold off within a few years after the merger to CenturyTel, Alltel, and Hawaiian Telcom.\nOn July 1, 2010, Verizon sold many former GTE properties to Frontier Communications. Additional ex-GTE territories in California, Florida, and Texas were sold to Frontier in 2015 and transferred in 2016, ending Verizon's landline operations outside of the historic Bell Atlantic footprint.\nVerizon still operates phone service in non-Bell System areas in Pennsylvania under Verizon North, and in non-Bell System areas in Virginia and Knotts Island, North Carolina under Verizon South.\nIn September 2024, Verizon announced a deal to acquire Frontier, which will return much of the former GTE network to Verizon ownership.\nOperating companies.\nPrior to the merger with Bell Atlantic, GTE owned the following operating companies in the US:\nFollowing the merger of GTE and Bell Atlantic, some of these companies and/or access lines have been sold off to other companies, such as Alltel, ATEAC, The Carlyle Group, CenturyTel, Citizens/Frontier Communications, and Valor Telecom.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12612", "revid": "1306091936", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12612", "title": "General aviation", "text": "Civil use of aircraft excluding commercial transportation\nGeneral aviation (GA) is defined by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) as all civil aviation aircraft operations except for commercial air transport or aerial work, which is defined as specialized aviation services for other purposes. However, for statistical purposes, ICAO uses a definition of general aviation which includes aerial work.\nGeneral aviation includes \"private transport\" and recreational components of aviation, most of which is accomplished with light aircraft.\nDefinition.\nThe International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) defines civil aviation aircraft operations in three categories: General Aviation (GA), Aerial Work (AW) and Commercial Air Transport (CAT). Aerial work operations are separated from general aviation by ICAO by this definition. Aerial work is when an aircraft is used for specialized services such as agriculture, construction, photography, surveying, observation and patrol, search and rescue, and aerial advertisement. However, for statistical purposes ICAO includes aerial work within general aviation, and has proposed officially extending the definition of general aviation to include aerial work, to reflect common usage. The proposed ICAO classification includes instructional flying as part of general aviation (non-aerial-work).\nThe International Council of Aircraft Owner and Pilot Associations (IAOPA) refers to the category as general aviation/aerial work (GA/AW) to avoid ambiguity. Their definition of general aviation includes:\nGeneral aviation thus includes both commercial and non-commercial activities.\nIAOPA's definition of aerial work includes, but is not limited to: \nCommercial air transport includes:\nHowever, in some countries, air taxi is regarded as being part of GA/AW.\nPrivate flights are made in a wide variety of aircraft: light and ultra-light aircraft, sport aircraft, homebuilt aircraft, business aircraft (like private jets), gliders and helicopters. Flights can be carried out under both visual flight and instrument flight rules, and can use controlled airspace with permission.\nThe majority of the world's air traffic falls into the category of general aviation, and most of the world's airports serve GA exclusively. Flying clubs are considered a part of general aviation.\nGeography.\nEurope.\nIn 2003, the European Aviation Safety Agency was established as the central EU regulator, taking over responsibility for legislating airworthiness and environmental regulation from the national authorities.\nUnited Kingdom.\nOf the 21,000 civil aircraft registered in the United Kingdom, 96 percent are engaged in GA operations, and annually the GA fleet accounts for between 1.25 and 1.35 million hours flown. There are 28,000 private pilot licence holders, and 10,000 certified glider pilots. Some of the 19,000 pilots who hold professional licences are also engaged in GA activities. GA operates from more than 1,800 airports and landing sites or aerodromes, ranging in size from large regional airports to farm strips.\nGA is regulated by the Civil Aviation Authority. The main focus is on standards of airworthiness and pilot licensing, and the objective is to promote high standards of safety.\nNorth America.\nGeneral aviation is particularly popular in North America, with over 6,300 airports available for public use by pilots of general aviation aircraft (around 5,200 airports in the U.S. and over 1,000 in Canada). In comparison, scheduled flights operate from around 560 airports in the U.S. According to the U.S. Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association, general aviation provides more than one percent of the United States' GDP, accounting for 1.3 million jobs in professional services and manufacturing.\nRegulation.\nMost countries have a civil aviation authority that oversees all civil aviation, including general aviation, adhering to the standardized codes of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).\nSafety.\nAviation accident rate statistics are necessarily estimates. According to the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board, general aviation in the United States (excluding charter) suffered 1.31 fatal accidents for every 100,000 hours of flying in 2005, compared to 0.016 for scheduled airline flights. In Canada, recreational flying accounted for 0.7 fatal accidents for every 1000 aircraft, while air taxi accounted for 1.1 fatal accidents for every 100,000 hours. More experienced GA pilots appear generally safer, although the relationship between flight hours, accident frequency, and accident rates are complex and often difficult to assess.\nA small number of commercial aviation accidents in the United States have involved collisions with general aviation flights, notably TWA Flight 553, Piedmont Airlines Flight 22, Allegheny Airlines Flight 853, PSA Flight 182 and Aerom\u00e9xico Flight 498.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12613", "revid": "651047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12613", "title": "Grue", "text": "Grue may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12615", "revid": "11042835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12615", "title": "Gracchi brothers", "text": "Ancient Roman brothers known for their social reforms\nThe Gracchi brothers were two brothers who lived during the beginning of the late Roman Republic: Tiberius Gracchus and Gaius Gracchus. They served in the plebeian tribunates of 133\u00a0BC and 122\u2013121\u00a0BC, respectively. They have been received as well-born and eloquent advocates for social reform who were both killed by a reactionary political system; their terms in the tribunate precipitated a series of domestic crises which are viewed as unsettling the Roman Republic and contributing to its collapse.\nTiberius Gracchus passed legislation which established a commission to survey Roman public land, reassert state claims to it, and redistribute it to poor rural farmers. These reforms were a reaction to a perceived decline in Italy's rural population. A decade later, Gaius Gracchus' reforms, among other things, attempted to buttress Tiberius' land commission and start Roman colonisation outside of Italy. They also were far more broad, touching on many topics such as assignment of provincial commands, composition of juries for the permanent courts, and letting of state tax farming contracts. Both brothers were killed during or shortly after the conclusion of their respective tribunician terms.\nMore recent scholarship on the Roman economy has viewed the Gracchi agrarian reforms as less impactful than claimed in the ancient sources. It is also clear that the vast majority of their reformist legislation was left intact rather than repealed. Some modern scholars also connect the agrarian reforms to degrading Rome's relations with its Italian allies and the Social War, as the reforms were a reassertion of Roman claims on public land that had been for decades largely occupied without title by Rome's Italian allies. Gracchan claims of Italian rural depopulation also are contradicted by archaeological evidence. The impact of the violent reaction to the two brothers, however, is of substantial import: it set a dangerous precedent that violence was an acceptable tool against political enemies.\nThe Gracchi exerted a substantial influence on later politics. They were viewed alternately as popular martyrs or dangerous demagogues through the late republic. They were also portrayed as social revolutionaries and proto-socialists during the French Revolution and afterwards; in that vein, they motivated social revolutionaries such as Fran\u00e7ois-No\u00ebl \"Gracchus\" Babeuf and opposition to enclosure in Britain. Scholars today view these socialist comparisons as unapt.\nBackground.\nTransmitted from the ancient sources, the traditional view on the state of rural Italy in the second century was one of substantial decline. Modern survey archaeology, however, from the 1980s onwards has shown that it \"has been much overstated\" and that the narrative connecting military service to the decline of the yeomanry, moreover, \"has to be rejected\". Indeed, \"impressive methodological advances that have been achieved in survey archaeology have ... done much to undermine the credibility of earlier claims concerning the spread of slave-staffed estates and the survival or otherwise of subsistence-oriented smallholders\".\nRural conditions, 159\u201333\u00a0BC.\nDifficulty in and resistance against conscripting men is reported through the second century\u00a0BC, starting in the Third Macedonian War and continuing through Roman campaigns in Spain from 151\u00a0BC. Roman censuses \u2013 which were conducted largely to tally men for conscription \u2013 starting in 159\u00a0BC also began to note a reduction in the free population of Italy, falling from 328,316 in 159\u201358\u00a0BC down to a low of 317,933 in the census of 136\u201335\u00a0BC. Politicians reacted to these constraints by securing volunteers for service; Gracchan agricultural policy was meant to reverse this population decline and minimise the impacts of conscription.\nWhile the census reported a falls in the number of citizens, leading to difficulties in drafting men for service, this did not necessarily imply an actual fall in the population of rural Italy. Because the easiest way to dodge the draft was not to self-report to the censors, no \"actual\" decline in population is necessary to explain those census results. Moreover, the censuses of 125\u201324\u00a0BC and 115\u201314\u00a0BC, indicate large and rapid increases which are incompatible with any actual decline in Italian rural populations.\nArchaeological evidence of small farms attested all over Italy in the second century and the general need for free labour during harvest time has also led scholars to conclude that \"there are no good grounds for inferring a general decline of the small independent farmer in the second century\". The Gracchan narrative of rural population decline through 133\u00a0BC \u2013 \"long since... shown to be false\" \u2013 likely emerged not from a general and actual decline in rural free-holding, but rather, generalisation from a local decline in coastal Etruria where commercial slave plantations were dominant. And while Gracchan observations of rural poverty were likely true; this, however, was not a result of slave-dominated plantations crowding out poor farmers, but overpopulation under Malthusian conditions.\nIn rural areas closer to Rome, the rising population alongside the effect of partible inheritance dividing farms into smaller and smaller plots made many family farms unviable. The high demand for agricultural land near Rome, due to its closeness to produce markets, motivated those farmers to sell their small plots to rich men, either moving or engaging instead in wage labour, which large farms especially needed during the harvest. The economic situation in the years prior to 133\u00a0BC was also abnormally negative: a pause in the construction of public buildings meant there was little construction work to be found at the city and prices for food were also inflated due to an ongoing slave revolt in Sicily, a major grain exporter.\nPublic land.\nThe Roman conquest of Italy from the fourth century\u00a0BC onwards meant that the republic held legal rights to large swaths of land taken from the subjugated Italians. This \"ager publicus\" however was not heavily utilised by the Roman state or its lessors. Rather, the state simply let the defeated Italians continue to work the land, regarding this arraignment as \"a sort of to the allies\". In essence, while Rome acquired nominal title to these lands, the Italians were permitted \"de facto\" to use them while also profitting from the influx of booty and wealth from Roman conquest.\nThe traditional narratives in the ancient sources which described the emergence of commercial (enormous slave-staffed plantations owned by the elite) on the public land itself is also largely unattested to by the archaeological evidence in this period. Moreover, evidence indicates that the was largely located outside of the traditional farmlands close to Rome and instead located in non-Roman Italy closer to the Italian allies. Public land redistribution was therefore necessarily at the expense of the allies, who would be evicted from ancestral lands still occupied.\nEarly life of the Gracchi.\nTiberius Sempronius Gracchus was born c. 163\u00a0BC. His younger brother Gaius was born c. 154\u00a0BC. They were the sons of the Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus who had been consul 177 and 163\u00a0BC as well as censor in 169\u00a0BC. He had triumphed twice in 178 and 175\u00a0BC. Their mother was Cornelia, the daughter of the renowned general Scipio Africanus, the hero of the Second Punic War. Their sister Sempronia also was the wife of Scipio Aemilianus, another important general and politician.\nTiberius' military career started in 147\u00a0BC, serving as a legate or military tribune under his brother-in-law, Scipio Aemilianus during the campaign to take Carthage during the Third Punic War. Tiberius, along with Gaius Fannius, was among the first to scale Carthage's walls, serving through to the next year. A decade later, in 137\u00a0BC, he was quaestor under the consul Gaius Hostilius Mancinus in Hispania Citerior. The campaign was part of the Numantine War and was unsuccessful; Mancinus and his army lost several skirmishes outside the city before a confused night-time retreat led them to be surrounded on the site of a camp from a prior campaign in 153\u00a0BC. Tiberius negotiated a treaty of surrender, aided in part by his father's positive reputation built during a praetorship in 179\u201378\u00a0BC; Tiberius' treaty, however, was later humiliatingly rejected by the senate after his return to Rome.\nReforms.\nReform and obstruction were not unheard of prior to 133, the year of Tiberius' tribunate. Tiberius' land reform proposal was also not entirely novel. In 140\u00a0BC the consul Gaius Laelius Sapiens had proposed similar legislation. However, amid opposition from the senate and after a military crisis diverted his attention elsewhere, the proposal was withdrawn.\nIn 139 and 137\u00a0BC, laws had been passed to create and extend the secret ballot in legislative and judicial votes before the assemblies. These bills were likely justified as means to preserve voters' independence and prevent corruption: both social pressure and financial compulsion would be more difficult if voters' ballots could not be so easily tracked. They were also likely a necessary conditions for the Gracchan programme since they insulated the assemblies from elite control. For this reason, the historian Harriet Flower in the 2010 book \"Roman Republics\", demarcates a new phase of the republic at 139\u00a0BC.\nOpposition was also not unheard of but had been resolved amicably. A tribune vetoed the in 137, with the support of one of the consuls, but under pressure from the highly influential Scipio Aemilianus gave way.\nThe ancient historians, especially Plutarch, viewed the Gracchan reforms and brothers as a single unit. Modern scholars have started to view them separately and in their own political contexts.\nTiberius.\nViews on Gracchus' motives differ. Favourable ancient sources attribute his reforms to spirited advocacy for the poor. Less favourable ancient sources, such as Cicero, instead attribute his actions to an attempt to win back and standing after the embarrassing treaty he was forced to negotiate after defeat in Spain. It cannot be doubted that, even if he was a true believer in the need for reform, Tiberius hoped to further his fame and political standing among the elite.\nAgrarian reforms.\nThe main goal of Tiberius' agrarian proposal was three-fold:\nThe purpose of the reform was to stimulate population growth and expand the number of people who would meet the property qualifications for service in the Roman army. The inclusion of the limit of 500 was for the purpose of painting the law as a return to and the Sextian-Licinian rogations so to avoid any charges of novelty. Whether the Sextian-Licinian rogations in fact had such a clause is unclear; what mattered to Tiberius and his allies was that they believed it did.\nLand distributed was likely done so with a prohibition on alienation and a (rent). Alienation was prohibited to prevent recipients from simply reselling the land. The served to allow the land to revert to the state if a citizen walked away from the allotment; reversion would then allow the state to settle someone else on the land. The (old possessors) also would receive security of tenure over their lands, up to the 500 or 1,000 limit.\nTiberius was supported in his endeavour by like-minded aristocrats who also viewed the perceived problem of rural depopulation seriously \u2013 among those in support of the proposal were the consul of 133\u00a0BC, Publius Mucius Scaevola, and Scaevola's brother, Publius Licinius Crassus Dives Mucianus, \u2013 he may have been put up to pass the proposals by his allies. He was also successful in rallying large numbers of rural plebs to Rome to vote in favour of the plan. The proposals were likely not appealing to the urban plebs, who would not have had the agricultural skills necessary to benefit from the allotments.\nHe was opposed in the assembly by one of the other tribunes, Marcus Octavius. There were largely three grounds for opposition: first, the dispossession would harm the ruling classes of both Rome and the Italian allies; second, the law unfairly dispossessed people who had put money into the improvement of possessed lands; third, that dispossession also would unsettle dowries pledged against possessed land and transactions made under the assumption that tenure was secure. When the vote arrived and Octavius interposed his tribunician veto, the matter was brought before the senate, but no settlement was reached. Unwilling to back down, Tiberius \u2013 unprecedentedly \u2013 had the assembly depose Octavius from office and vote the legislation through.\nDeath.\nViolent opposition to Tiberius' agrarian policy did not come to a head until he moved legislation to use the inheritance of Attalus III of Pergamon for the land commission. The ancient sources differ on the question of what Attalus' bequest was to be dedicated: Plutarch claims it was to be used to help land recipients purchase farm equipment; Livy, via epitome, claims that it was to be used to purchase more land for distribution after there turned out to be little land available.\nThis second proposal infringed on senatorial prerogatives over foreign policy and public finances. Senators also feared that Tiberius was arrogating the republic's money to win himself personal support with handouts. Tiberius then announced his intention to stand for re-election; according to Livy, this was illegal, due to a law which forbade holding the same magistracy within ten years. The sources allege that Tiberius also announced plans for a significantly more broad set of reforms, but these may be retrojections of his brother Gaius' later-consummated proposals. On the day of the election, Tiberius seized the Capitoline Hill, possibly to intimidate voters or exclude his enemies from casting their votes; Tiberius' opponents accused him of having kingly aspirations and attempted to induce the consul in the senate to use force to stop his re-election. The consul refused to act extralegally, but one of the other senators, Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica Serapio, found this reply unacceptable and led an impromptu military levy of senators, which included one of Tiberius' colleagues in the plebeian tribunate; with Nasica, who was \"pontifex maximus\", reenacting an archaic sacrificial ritual, they then stormed the Capitoline and bludgeoned Tiberius and a number of his supporters to death.\nIt was largely constitutional issues which impelled the violent reaction, not the agrarian laws. The reaction was motivated in part by Greek constitutional thought which created a narrative of popular mobilisation leading inexorably to popular tyranny. Such beliefs were compounded by the recent example of tyranny in Sparta, led by Nabis, which had come to power with a reform programme of cancelling debts and redistributing lands.\nEffects.\nTiberius' and the land commission survived his death. Opposition was to Tiberius' methods rather than his policies; it is likely that most senators agreed with the reform programme in principle. Archaeologists have recovered the commission's boundary stones (), which documenting the three commissioners' activities from 133 to 130\u00a0BC. The boundary locations and descriptions imply that over just a few years they distributed some 3,268 square kilometres of land to Roman citizens, concentrated in southern Italy and benefitting some 15,000 households.\nThe largely name Tiberius' younger brother Gaius, Appius Claudius Pulcher, and Publius Licinius Crassus. While Tiberius appointed himself to the commission after his death Crassus was elected in his place. After the natural deaths of Appius Claudius and Crassus by 130\u00a0BC, the vacancies were filled by Marcus Fulvius Flaccus and Gaius Papirius Carbo.\nBecause one of the commission's goals was in reasserting Roman claims to land which by that time had long been occupied by the Italian allies, the allies started to complain of unfairness and inaccurate rushed surveying. In 129, those complaints were heard by the senate, who also took the opportunity to limit the agrarian commission's powers. Scipio Aemilianus proposed and received from the senate a decree which assigned the power to determine contested ownership to the consuls. By 129\u00a0BC, the commission had over some three years distributed much of the available uncontested land. Archaeological finds of Gracchan largely stop after 129\u00a0BC.\nGaius.\nDiscontent among the Italian allies had grown between Tiberius' land commission and the later 120s\u00a0BC. One of the land commissioners elected in the early 120s\u00a0BC, Marcus Fulvius Flaccus had served as consul in 125\u00a0BC and \u2013 according to Appian \u2013 proposed a compromise giving the allies Roman citizenship in exchange for acquiescence to Roman reassertion of claims to the . This proposal, however, fell through when Flaccus was dispatched to war in Transalpine Gaul; relations with the allies were also not helped by the revolt and destruction of the Latin colony of Fregellae when Flaccus' proposals were withdrawn.\nGaius positioned himself politically as the inheritor of Tiberius' popularity and political programme. After a quaestorship, he was elected fourth in the tribunician elections of 124\u00a0BC; after his election, he cast his brother's death as \"a failure by the plebeians to maintain their tradition of defending their tribunes\". Unlike his brother, Gaius' proposals largely did not relate to land. Over two years, he proposed broad legislation touching all parts of Roman government, from tax collection to senatorial provincial assignments.\nReforms.\nDuring his first tribunate, he proposed a number of laws. First, he proposed legislation to bar anyone who the people had deposed from office from further office. This was, however, dropped at the instigation of his mother Cornelia. The proposal was likely meant to intimidate the other tribunes so they would not exercise their vetoes. He then passed legislation reaffirming \"provocatio\" rights and retroactively extending them to the sentences of exile which the consular commission in 132\u00a0BC had passed against Tiberius' supporters. Publius Popillius Laenas, the consul who had led the commission and was thereby opened to prosecution for violating those rights, immediately left the city for exile in Campania.\nGaius also moved legislation which would benefit the rich equestrians, especially those who served as Rome's public contractors (the \"publicani\"):\nGaius also recognised the weakness of Tiberius' coalition, which relied only on the rural plebs, and therefore sought to expand it. To do so, he courted the urban plebs with legislation establishing Roman colonies both in Italy and abroad at Carthage. He also carried legislation to stop deduction of soldier pay for equipment and to establish a minimum age for conscription at 17. In this package, Gaius also introduced the grain subsidy which allowed all citizens to purchase grain at a subsidised price of six and two-thirds sesterces per .\nFurther legislation also regulated the magistrates and the senate. Even though the ancient sources generally cast these reforms as part of \"an elaborate plot against the authority of the senate... he showed no sign of wanting to replace the senate in its normal functions\". Nor were his reforms meant to undermine the senate indirectly or establish a democracy. Rather, Gaius was seeking to have the senators act more in the public interest rather than in their own private interests. To that end, with an ally in the tribunate, Manlius Acilius Glabrio, he also moved legislation reforming the provincial corruption laws. Also importantly, he passed the , which required the senate to assign consular provinces prior to the elections of the consuls and insulated this decision from tribunician veto.\nSome ancient sources claim that Gaius wanted to change voting procedures in the timocratic to make it more democratic. However, this claim is dubious and largely rejected.\nGaius made an extremely controversial proposal to improve the state of the Latins and the other Italian allies: the Latins would receive full Roman citizenship with the Italians upgraded to Latin rights. Doing so further extended to Italians, via Latin rights, the right to vote if present in Rome during elections. This proposal died: the specifics are not entirely clear, it may have been vetoed or otherwise simply withdrawn; recent scholarship now trends towards a veto from Livius Drusus. Gaius, after taking some leave to set up a colony near Carthage, attempted to stand for a third tribunate, but was unsuccessful. It is said that he had sufficient popular support to have been elected, but was not returned because the ten tribunician offices had already been filled.\nDeath.\nEarly in the year 121\u00a0BC, attempts were made to repeal portions of Gaius' legislation. The main point of repeal, however, was not agrarian legislation or his subsidised grain bill, but the comparatively minor question of the proposed colony at Carthage. After an attendant was killed in the streets by Gaius' supporters, Gaius and his ally Flaccus were summoned to defend themselves before the senate; they refused and barricaded themselves with armed followers on the Aventine hill. Their refusal was tantamount to rebellion. A \"senatus consultum ultimum\" was then moved, instructing the consul Lucius Opimius to ensure the state came to no harm and urging him to suppress Gaius and Flaccus on the Aventine. With a force of militia and Cretan archers, Opimius stormed the Aventine, killing Flaccus and his sons; Gaius was either killed or forced to commit suicide. Opimius then presided over drumhead courts investigating and executing many of Gaius and Flaccus' supporters.\nIn the end, most of Gaius' reforms were preserved; archaeology has discovered evidence of Gracchan land colonial activities in Africa c.\u2009119\u00a0BC and the land commission remained in operation until 111\u00a0BC. By that point, almost all land available to distribute had already been distributed. In the whole, \"the aristocracy's reaction resembled that of a general dealing with a mutiny, who accedes to most of the demands but executes the ringleaders to preserve discipline\".\nAftermath.\nGracchan.\nTiberius' reforms were focused on the rural peasantry. They were not, however, \"so much oppressed as eager (quite justifiably) to share in the increased economic prosperity brought by Roman imperialism\". In general, more recent scholarship has stressed that the ancient sources have exaggerated the extent to which the Roman yeoman farmers were in fact in decline. Tiberius' reform law was not revolutionary, but his tactics in pursuit of it were, especially when they mobilised the assemblies which gave some genuine expression of the popular will. Those tactics threatened \"to break the oligarchic stranglehold on Rome's political system, thus leading to his demise\". This was exacerbated by Tiberius' use of social justice rhetoric, which further set him aside from his aristocratic brethren.\nWhile substantial acreage was distributed as a whole, more than 3,268 square kilometres in the first few years of operation, there is some debate to the extent to which the Gracchan land allotments were actually economically viable for the families placed atop them. However, there are some indications that the lands distributed were used for pasture rather than intensive agriculture, even if they were suitable for farming.\nGaius' role in land reform is more obscure; the sources are largely unclear on it except in mentioning offhandedly that he brought legislation on the matter. By the time of his tribunate, the census results of 125\u201324\u00a0BC had been published and belief in a depopulation crisis had disappeared. His agrarian reforms likely did little more than grant the agrarian commission \u2013 of which he was still a member \u2013 the necessary jurisdiction stripped in 129\u00a0BC. He was, however, sufficiently visionary to see that further land exactions from Rome's allies would seriously damage their interests (and be politically infeasible). This led him, \"one of the first to realise that the amount of land in Italy was insufficient to provide for all inhabitants of the peninsula\", to pursue extra-Italian colonisation. This change in scope proved long-lasting and by the time of Caesar, it would be standard policy to establish citizen colonies outside the Italian peninsula, which \"would in time prove the only adequate method of finding enough land\" for Italy's growing populations.\nThe Gracchan continued in operation through their deaths until 111\u00a0BC, which again overhauled Roman policy with public lands. Much of this law survives to the present. Building upon those laws, it abolished the rents that Tiberius' law passed, making the lands fully private and alienable. By 111\u00a0BC, most of the lands that could be distributed already had been; what was left over was \"mostly pasture or land which had been assigned to specific people\" through long-term leases or set aside for the purpose of providing money for road maintenance. The continuing increase of the Italian population, however, would trigger later proposals for land redistribution; especially notable is Caesar's during his consulship in 59\u00a0BC, which gave away the to some 20,000 settlers, albeit on less generous terms. After this, it became increasingly clear that there was simply insufficient land in Italy to accommodate demand.\nReassessments of the causes of the Social War have also trended toward viewing the as a major contributing factor. Land holdings in Roman-dominated Italy gave the Roman state a latent title to large swaths of land which had never been formally surveyed. While the Gracchan land commission quickly parcelled and redistributed lands in southern Italy that had been confiscated from the allies that had defected to Hannibal during the Second Punic War, the older lands had been occupied for centuries. Attempts, through to the start of the Social War, to press Roman claims on those lands \u2013 which \"the allies assumed that they would be able to keep... as long as they did not rebel\" \u2013 may have greatly undermined allied support for Roman hegemony.\nGaius' urban and administrative reforms.\nGaius' reforms were broad and covered large portions of the republic's administration. Their main purpose was to advance the quality of Roman government, reducing extortion and corruption among the senatorial governors while acting within the bounds of what his contemporaries would have considered due process.\nOne of the elements best attested to is Gaius' , which reformed the on provincial corruption with an equestrian jury to check senatorial governors. The law is preserved on a bronze tablet once owned by Cardinal Pietro Bembo. While, in the long run, the equestrian jury would prove a political issue for the next half century, these reforms were not meant to set the senate and equites into conflict. Nor were they some kind of programme at true popular oversight, as moving the jury from the senators to the equites \"merely reallocated influence from one section of the elite to another\". Ernst Badian, writing in the \"Oxford Classical Dictionary\", gave the assessment:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A proud aristocrat, [Gaius] wanted to leave the senate in charge of directing policy and the magistrates in charge of its execution, subject to constitutional checks and removed from financial temptation, with the people sharing in the profits of empire without excessive exploitation of the subjects. The ultimate result of his legislation was to set up the as a new exploiting class, not restrained by a tradition of service or by accountability at law. But this did not become clear for a generation, and he cannot be blamed for not foreseeing it.\nHis , which created a subsidised grain supply at around what he considered to be a \"normal\" price, set up an influential model for welfare in Rome. It was a reaction to corn disruptions in recent times that likely developed from army service, but his idea to have the Roman state smooth much of the variability of agriculture put the population less at the mercy of speculators and less dependent on magisterial largesse. The lowered incentives for magistrates giving food away for popularity at home had the added effect of reducing their proclivity to extort corn from provincials. These provisions continued in force after the death of Gaius, suggesting an emerging consensus at Rome that there was a \"right of the people to enjoy the rewards of the empire [and that] [were useful] to divert the interest and support of the urban plebs from the prospect of agrarian reform\". After a period of abrogation by Sulla, the dole in the future would expand, however, both in cost and generosity, as later generations of politicians acted with or without senatorial support to do so.\nGaius' was a similar policy to reduce senatorial corruption and was \"far from being revolutionary\": his purpose with the law \"was to prevent sitting consuls from using their position to influence provincial assignments improperly (and perhaps to Rome's detriment)\" by requiring provinces to be assigned before the consuls took office. To further insulate such decisions from political meddling, he even made senatorial decisions on consular provinces immune from tribunician veto.\nPolitical violence.\nThe impact of Tiberius' murder started a cycle of increased political violence: \"the oligarchy had introduced violence into the political system with the murder of Tiberius Gracchus and over the years the use of violence became increasingly acceptable as various political disputes in Rome led to more and more bloody discord\". The use of force to suppress reform also suggested that the republic itself was temperamentally unsuited for producing the types of economic reforms wanted or needed, as in the Gracchi's framing, by the people.\nIn terms of periodisation, the death of Tiberius Gracchus in 133\u00a0BC is widely viewed as the start of the \"late republic\" and the beginning of the republic's eventual collapse. For example, in \"The Cambridge Companion to the Roman Republic\", J\u00fcrgen von Ungern-Sternberg writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was Tiberius' assassination that made the year 133\u00a0BC a turning point in Roman history and the beginning of the crisis of the Roman Republic. \nEven in ancient times, Cicero remarked as much in saying \"the death of Tiberius Gracchus, and even before that the whole rationale behind his tribunate, divided a united people into two distinct groups\". However, scholars such as Mary Beard also warn that Cicero is exaggerating for rhetorical effect and that \"the idea there had been a calm consensus at Rome between rich and poor until [133\u00a0BC] is at best a nostalgic fiction\".\nThe death of Gaius as well inaugurated a new tool for the senate in upholding the current order by force: the so-called . Opimius was prosecuted in 120\u00a0BC for violating Gaius' law against extralegal punishment. The ex-consul, however, was able to successfully defend himself by appealing to the senate's decree and by arguing that Gaius and Flaccus deserved to be treated as seditious enemies rather than citizens. Opimius' acquittal set the precedent that the \u2013 which was merely advice from the senate: \"the senate could pass any decree it liked, it was the magistrate who was responsible for any illegal actions\" \u2013 was an acceptable ground to vitiate citizen rights extralegally.\nReception and historiography.\nViews of the Gracchi have changed over time. In the ancient world, the two brothers were largely viewed as an organised force acting in concert. During the early modern period, the Gracchan land programme was widely misconstrued as a socialistic restructuring of Roman society where public and private land ownership would be capped. Modern historians, however, largely view the two brothers' political activities as separate and dismiss their identification as social revolutionaries.\nAncient reception.\nThere was a positive and a negative tradition related to the Gracchi brothers. Many of the ancient sources are late \u2013 there is a lack of contemporary sources \u2013 and are coloured by the positive tradition: many scholars believe that Plutarch's biographies of the two men, along with Appian's \"Civil wars\", are largely based on Gaius Gracchus and his supporters' narratives; in this, most of what is known of Tiberius is filtered through his brother's self-presentation. Plutarch's narrative, guided by his literary agenda, \"drastically simplifies the [complex] history of this period\". On the whole, Appian's narrative is more reliable, but is still marred with significant anachronisms, clear inaccuracies, and schematic features \u2013 that the agrarian reform eventually fails and that Tiberius and Gaius pursued the same objectives \u2013 which emerge from Appian's historiographical agenda.\nSome modern scholars speculate that these Gracchan narratives were transmitted through the centuries to the imperial authors by plays which dramatised the tragedy of their deaths. Two major themes stand out. First, the specifics of Gaius' death are \"a dog's breakfast\" of varying details and involve a Lucius Vitellius, which was a common name during the republic for traitors (according to legend, the Vitellii were the first to betray the republic to the Tarquins shortly after the expulsion of the kings). Second, the stress on friendship and betrayal in these last hours is seen as replacing a more anodyne political drama for heightened pathos. Other scholars, however, disagree, arguing that the hypothesis of lost tragedies is too speculative and instead credit Plutarch or his sources with the dramatisation of the narrative. Regardless, in later generations, the death of the Gracchi became a common rhetorical \"topos\" in Roman oratorical schools.\nThe negative tradition, however, is transmitted through other sources, such as Cicero and Valerius Maximus. In these narratives, the Gracchi are painted as seditious tribunes who inaugurated the use of force and intimidation which then required the Roman state to use violence to re-establish order. The confluence of these traditions was common in late republican politics. For example, Cicero modulated his opinions on the Gracchi brothers to meet his audience. Before the senate, he spoke of them negatively and focused on their alleged attempts to take over the republic; before the people, he instead praised their good faith, moral virtues, and quality as orators (especially in comparison to the tribunes of his day).\nModern reception.\nBy the 17th and 18th centuries, many books on ancient history repeated a false notion that Rome had limited all men to only 500 of land. The incorrect understanding emerged in 1734 with the publication of Montesquieu's \"Considerations on the causes of the greatness of the Romans and their decline\", which furthered this mistaken notion of large scale land reform rather than redistribution of state-owned lots. This led to the characterisation of the Gracchi as \"socialists\". Through the later 18th century, the waters became further muddied, until the matter was largely re-cleared by Barthold Georg Niebuhr in his \"History of Rome\".\nDuring the French Revolution, the revolutionary Fran\u00e7ois-No\u00ebl Babeuf named himself \"Gracchus\" after the Gracchi brothers, in an attempt to connect his desire for large scale land redistribution with the Gracchan programme for agrarian reform. Babeuf's plans, however, differed substantially from the Gracchan programme in ways that exemplify how the reception of the Gracchi had deviated from their actual historical policies. First, Babeuf envisioned the nationalisation and communal ownership of lands, which was incompatible with the Gracchan programme of privatising already state-owned lands. Second, Babeuf's choice of name was made under the prevailing assumption at the time that the Gracchi acted to place a limit on \"private\" land holdings. Finally, Babeuf's name demonstrated his belief that a comparison was apt, consistent with contemporary beliefs that the Gracchi were revolutionaries. However, \"the truth of the matter was otherwise[:] the Gracchi sought to strengthen and uphold the Roman republic; Babeuf wished to overthrow and radicalise the French republic\".\nDuring the 19th century, the use of the Gracchi in then-current politics continued. The process of enclosure in England, for example, led to the formation of a large body of poor urban workers; many of their leaders were likened to the Gracchi and proposed reforms were compared with reference to the Roman land crisis as described in the ancient sources.\nSome 19th and early 20th century scholarship argued that the Gracchi were to some extent influenced by Greek political philosophy, especially in the extent to which Greek democratic principles could be applied at Rome. These influences are largely attributed to Tiberius' interactions with Stoic egalitarian philosophy through Blossius of Cumae. This is no longer believed, however, as there is little evidence for Tiberius being a Stoic or for Stoicism justfying democratic policies.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArticles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12616", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12616", "title": "Gossip", "text": "Idle talk or rumour, especially about personal or private affairs of others\n \nGossip is idle talk or rumor, especially unconfirmed information about the personal or private affairs of others; the act is also known as dishing or tattling.\nEtymology.\nThe word is from Old English \"godsibb\", from \"god\" and \"sibb\", the term for the godparents of one's child or the parents of one's godchild, generally very close friends. In the 16th century, the word assumed the meaning of a person, mostly a woman, one who delights in idle talk, a newsmonger, a tattler. In the early 19th century, the term was extended from the talker to the conversation of such persons. The verb \"to gossip\", meaning \"to be a gossip\", first appears in Shakespeare.\nThe term originates from the bedroom at the time of childbirth. Giving birth used to be a social event exclusively attended by women. The pregnant woman's female relatives and neighbors would congregate and idly converse. In the Middle Ages, \"a gossip\" referred to a community of tight-knit friendships between women. Over time, gossip came to mean talk of others.\nFunctions.\nGossip can:\nWorkplace gossip.\nMary Gormandy White, a human resource expert, gives the following \"signs\" for identifying workplace gossip: \nWhite suggests \"five tips ... [to] handle the situation with aplomb:\nPeter Vajda identifies gossip as a form of workplace violence, noting that it is \"essentially a form of attack.\" Gossip is thought by many to \"empower one person while disempowering another\" (Hafen).Accordingly, many companies have formal policies in their employee handbooks against gossip. Sometimes there is room for disagreement on exactly what constitutes unacceptable gossip, since workplace gossip may take the form of offhand remarks about someone's tendencies such as \"He always takes a long lunch,\" or \"Don't worry, that's just how she is.\"\nTLK Healthcare cites as examples of gossip, \"tattletaling to the boss without intention of furthering a solution or speaking to co-workers about something someone else has done to upset us.\" Corporate email can be a particularly dangerous method of gossip delivery, as the medium is semi-permanent and messages are easily forwarded to unintended recipients; accordingly, a Mass High Tech article advised employers to instruct employees against using company email networks for gossip. Low self-esteem and a desire to \"fit in\" are frequently cited as motivations for workplace gossip.\nThere are five essential functions that gossip has in the workplace (according to DiFonzo &amp; Bordia):\nAccording to Kurkland and Pelled, workplace gossip can be very serious depending upon the amount of power that the gossiper has over the recipient, which will in turn affect how the gossip is interpreted. There are four types of power that are influenced by gossip:\nNegative consequences of the gossip.\nSome serious negative consequences of gossip may include:\nTurner and Weed theorize that among the three main types of responders to workplace conflict are attackers who cannot keep their feelings to themselves and express their feelings by attacking whatever they can. Attackers are further divided into up-front attackers and behind-the-back attackers. Turner and Weed note that the latter \"are difficult to handle because the target person is not sure of the source of any criticism, nor even always sure that there is criticism.\"\nIt is possible however, that there may be illegal, unethical, or disobedient behavior happening at the workplace and this may be a case where reporting the behavior may be viewed as gossip. It is then left up to the authority in charge to fully investigate the matter and not simply look past the report and assume it to be workplace gossip.\nInformal networks through which communication occurs in an organization are sometimes called the \"grapevine\". In a study done by Harcourt, Richerson, and Wattier, it was found that middle managers in several different organizations believed that gathering information from the grapevine was a much better way of learning information than through formal communication with their subordinates (Harcourt, Richerson &amp; Wattier).\nVarious views.\nSome see gossip as trivial, hurtful and socially, spiritually\nand/or intellectually unproductive. Some people view gossip as a lighthearted way of spreading information. Authorities or would-be authorities may have a negative view of gossip as something undesirable or dangerous.\nPhilosophical analysis by Emrys Westacott points to the role of gossip in (for example) cementing friendships and combatting abuses of power.\nA feminist definition of gossip presents it as \"a way of talking between women, intimate in style, personal and domestic in scope and setting, a female cultural event which springs from and perpetuates the restrictions of the female role, but also gives the comfort of validation.\" (Jones, 1990:243)\nIn early modern England.\nIn early modern England, the word \"gossip\" referred to companions in childbirth, not limited to the midwife. It also became a term for women-friends generally, with no necessary derogatory connotations. (OED n. definition 2. a. \"A familiar acquaintance, friend, chum\", supported by references from 1361 to 1873). It commonly referred to an informal local sorority or social group, who could enforce socially acceptable behavior through private censure or through public rituals, such as \"rough music\", the cucking stool and the skimmington ride. \nSilvia Federici notes that, in the sixteenth century, satirical literature and mystery plays that mocked women and expressed misogynous sentiments gave way to what could be described as a \"war on women\".\nIn Thomas Harman's 1566 \"Caveat for Common Cursitors,\" a 'walking mort' relates how she was forced to agree to meet a man in his barn but informed his wife. The wife arrived with her \"five furious, sturdy, muffled gossips,\" who caught the errant husband with \"his hosen [trousers] about his legs\" and gave him a sound beating. The story functions as a morality tale in which the gossips uphold the social order.\nSir Herbert Maxwell Bart, in \"The Chevalier of the Splendid Crest\" [1900] at the end of chapter three portrays the king as referring to his loyal knight \"Sir Thomas de Roos\" in kindly terms as \"my old gossip\". Whilst a historical novel of that time the reference implies a continued use of the term \"Gossip\" as a childhood friend as late as 1900.\nIn Judaism.\nJudaism considers gossip spoken without a constructive purpose (known in Hebrew as \"evil tongue\", \"lashon hara\") to be a sin. Speaking negatively about people, even if retelling true facts, counts as sinful, as it demeans the dignity of man \u2014 both the speaker and the subject of the gossip.\nAccording to \"Proverbs\" 18:8: \"The words of a gossip are like choice morsels: they go down to a man's innermost parts.\"\nIn Christianity.\nThe Christian perspective on gossip typically aligns with modern cultural assumptions of the phenomenon, especially with the assumption that generally speaking, gossip is negative speech. However, due to the complexity of the phenomenon, biblical scholars have more precisely identified the form and function of https:// , even identifying a socially positive role for the social process as it is described in the New Testament. Of course, this does not mean that there are \"not\" numerous texts in the New Testament that see gossip as dangerous negative speech.\nThus, for example, the Epistle to the Romans associates gossips (\"backbiters\") with a list of sins including sexual immorality and with murder:\n28: And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient;\n29: Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers,\n30: Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,\n31: Without understanding, covenant breakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful:\n32: Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them. (Romans 1:28-32)\nAccording to Matthew 18, Jesus also taught that conflict-resolution among church members ought to begin with the aggrieved party attempting to resolve their dispute with the offending party alone. Only if this did not work would the process escalate to the next step, in which another church member would become involved. After that, if the person at fault still would not \"hear\", the matter was to be fully investigated by the church elders, and if not resolved, it was to be then exposed publicly.\nBased on texts like these that portray gossip negatively, many Christian authors generalize on the phenomenon. So, in order to gossip, writes Phil Fox Rose, we \"must harden our heart towards the 'out' person. We draw a line between ourselves and them; define them as being outside the rules of Christian charity... We create a gap between ourselves and God's Love.\" As we harden our heart towards more people and groups, he continues, \"this negativity and feeling of separateness will grow and permeate our world, and we'll find it more difficult to access God's love in any aspect of our lives.\"\nThe New Testament is also in favor of group accountability (Ephesians 5:11; 1st Tim 5:20; James 5:16; Gal 6:1-2; 1 Cor 12:26), which may be associated with gossip.\nGossip as a breach of secrecy has parallels with confession: the medieval Christian church sought to control both from its position as a powerful regulator.\nIn Islam.\nIslam calls tattling as namimah (\u0646\u0645\u064a\u0645\u0629), \nit is also related to ghibah (backbiting), which is the equivalent of eating the flesh of one's dead brother. According to Muslims, backbiting harms its victims without offering them any chance of defense, just as dead people cannot defend against their flesh being eaten. Muslims are expected to treat others like brothers (regardless of their beliefs, skin-color, gender, or ethnic origin), deriving from Islam's concept of brotherhood amongst its believers.\nIn the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith labels backbiting as the \"worst human quality and the most great sin...\" In their faith, murder would be considered less negative than backbiting. Bah\u00e1\u2019u\u2019ll\u00e1h, the Prophet-Founder of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith stated: \"Backbiting quencheth the light of the heart, and extinguished the life of the soul.\"\nIn psychology.\nEvolutionary view.\nFrom Robin Dunbar's evolutionary theories, gossip originated to help bond the groups that were constantly growing in size. To survive, individuals need alliances; but as these alliances grew larger, it was difficult if not impossible to physically connect with everyone. Conversation and language were able to bridge this gap. Gossip became a social interaction that helped the group gain information about other individuals without personally speaking to them. \u00a0\nIt enabled people to keep up with what was going on in their social network. It also creates a bond between the teller and the hearer, as they share information of mutual interest and spend time together. It also helps the hearer learn about another individual's behavior and helps them have a more effective approach to their relationship. Dunbar (2004) found that 65% of conversations consist of social topics.\nDunbar (1994) argues that gossip is the equivalent of social grooming often observed in other primate species. Anthropological investigations indicate that gossip is a cross-cultural phenomenon, providing evidence for evolutionary accounts of https://.\nThere is very little evidence to suggest meaningful sex differences in the proportion of conversational time spent gossiping, and when there is a difference, women are only very slightly more likely to gossip compared with men. Further support for the evolutionary significance of gossip comes from a recent study published in the peer-reviewed journal, Science Anderson and colleagues (2011) found that faces paired with negative social information dominate visual consciousness to a greater extent than positive and neutral social information during a binocular rivalry task.\nBinocular rivalry occurs when two different stimuli are presented to each eye simultaneously and the two percepts compete for dominance in visual consciousness. While this occurs, an individual will consciously perceive one of the percepts while the other is suppressed. After a time, the other percept will become dominant and an individual will become aware of the second percept. Finally, the two percepts will alternate back and forth in terms of visual awareness.\nThe study by Anderson and colleagues (2011) indicates that higher order cognitive processes, like evaluative information processing, can influence early visual processing. That only negative social information differentially affected the dominance of the faces during the task alludes to the unique importance of knowing information about an individual that should be avoided. Since the positive social information did not produce greater perceptual dominance of the matched face indicates that negative information about an individual may be more salient to our behavior than positive.\nGossip also gives information about social norms and guidelines for behavior, usually commenting on how appropriate a behavior was, and the mere act of repeating it signifies its importance. In this sense, gossip is effective regardless of whether it is positive or negative Some theorists have proposed that gossip is actually a pro-social behavior intended to allow an individual to correct their socially prohibitive behavior without direct confrontation of the individual. By gossiping about an individual's acts, other individuals can subtly indicate that said acts are inappropriate and allow the individual to correct their behavior (Schoeman 1994).\nPerception of those who gossip.\nIndividuals who are perceived to engage in gossiping regularly are seen as having less social power and being less liked than those who gossip less frequently. The type of gossip being exchanged also affects likeability, whereby those who engage in negative gossip are less liked than those who engage in positive gossip. In a study done by Turner and colleagues (2003), having a prior relationship with a gossiper was not found to protect the gossiper from less favorable personality-ratings after gossip was exchanged. In the study, pairs of individuals were brought into a research lab to participate. Either the two individuals were friends prior to the study or they were strangers scheduled to participate at the same time. One of the individuals was a confederate of the study, and they engaged in gossiping about the research assistant after she left the room. The gossip exchanged was either positive or negative. Regardless of gossip type (positive versus negative) or relationship type (friend versus stranger) the gossipers were rated as less trustworthy after sharing the gossip.\nWalter Block has suggested that while gossip and blackmail both involve the disclosure of unflattering information, the blackmailer is arguably ethically superior to the gossip. Block writes: \"In a sense, the gossip is much \"worse\" than the blackmailer, for the blackmailer has given the blackmailed a chance to silence him. The gossip exposes the secret without warning.\" The victim of a blackmailer is thus offered choices denied to the subject of gossip, such as deciding if the exposure of his or her secret is worth the cost the blackmailer demands. Moreover, in refusing a blackmailer's offer one is in no worse a position than with the https://. Adds Block, \"It is indeed difficult, then, to account for the vilification suffered by the blackmailer, at least compared to the gossip, who is usually dismissed with slight contempt and smugness.\"\nContemporary critiques of gossip may concentrate on or become subsumed in the discussion of social media such as Facebook.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12617", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12617", "title": "Graphical User Interface", "text": ""}
{"id": "12618", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12618", "title": "G4", "text": "G4 or G.IV may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles associated with the same title formed as a letter\u2013number combination."}
{"id": "12619", "revid": "196153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12619", "title": "Garbage collection (disambiguation)", "text": "Garbage collection, or waste collection, is part of municipal waste management.\nGarbage collection may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12620", "revid": "42867806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12620", "title": "Guitarist", "text": "Musician who plays the guitar\nA guitarist (or a guitar player) is a person who plays the guitar. Guitarists may play a variety of guitar family instruments such as classical guitars, acoustic guitars, electric guitars, and bass guitars. Some guitarists accompany themselves on the guitar by singing or playing the harmonica, or both.\nTechniques.\nThe guitarist may employ any of several methods for sounding the guitar, including finger-picking, depending on the type of strings used (either nylon or steel), and including strumming with the fingers, or a guitar pick made of bone, horn, plastic, metal, felt, leather, or paper, and melodic flatpicking and finger-picking.\nThe guitarist may also employ various methods for selecting notes and chords, including fingering, thumbing, the barre (a finger lying across many or all strings at a particular fret), and guitar slides, usually made of glass or metal. These left- and right-hand techniques may be intermixed in performance.\nNotable guitarists.\nRock, metal, jazz, country and blues.\nSeveral magazines and websites have compiled what they intend as lists of the greatest guitarists\u2014for example \"The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time\" by \"Rolling Stone\" magazine, or \"100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time\" by \"Guitar World\" magazine.\nRolling Stone.\nThe first in the list from 2007 is the American guitarist Jimi Hendrix, introduced by Pete Townshend, guitarist for the Who, who was, in his turn, ranked at #50 in the list.\nIn describing the list to readers, Paul MacInnes from British newspaper \"The Guardian\" wrote, \"Surprisingly enough for an American magazine, the top 10 is fair jam-packed with Yanks\", though he also noted three exceptions in the top 10. The online magazine \"Blogcritics\" criticized the list for introducing some allegedly undeserving guitarists while forgetting some artists the writer considered perhaps more worthy, such as Johnny Marr, Al Di Meola, Phil Keaggy or John Petrucci.\nIn 2011, \"Rolling Stone\" updated the list, which this time was chosen by a panel of guitarists and other experts. Jimi Hendrix was again named as the greatest. Artists who had not been included in the previous list were added. Rory Gallagher, for example, was ranked in 57th place.\n\"The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time\" is mentioned in many biographies about artists who appear in the list.\n\"Guitar World\".\n\"Guitar World\", a monthly music magazine devoted to the guitar, also published their list of 100 greatest guitarists in the book \"Guitar World Presents the 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time from the Pages of Guitar World Magazine\". Different from the \"Rolling Stone\" list, which listed guitarists in descending order, \"Guitar World\" divided guitarists by music genre\u2014such as \"Lords of Hard Rock\" for hard rock artists or \"Jazzmen\" for jazz players. Despite the appearance in other magazines like \"Billboard\", this publication by \"Guitar World\" was criticized for including no female musicians within its selection. However, \"Guitar World\" recently published a list of \"Eight Amazing Female Acoustic Players\", including Kaki King, Muriel Anderson and Sharon Isbin.\n\"Time\" and others.\nFollowing the death of Les Paul, \"Time\" website presented their list of 10 greatest artists in electric guitar. As in \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list, Jimi Hendrix was chosen as the greatest guitarist followed by Slash from Guns N' Roses, B.B. King, Keith Richards, Jimmy Page, and Eric Clapton. \"Gigwise.com\", an online music magazine, also ranks Jimi Hendrix as the greatest guitarist ever, followed by Jimmy Page, B.B. King, Keith Richards and Kirk Hammett.\nOther genres.\nThe classical guitar is traditionally strung with gut or nylon strings for the treble notes, and wound strings for the bass. Often adorned with mother-of-pearl inlays, the instrument was once primarily played using the fingertips alone. Over time, however, guitarists began to use a combination of fingernail and flesh to achieve a clearer, more expressive sound, and allowing for many different changes in sound quality (or timbre). This guitar tradition dates back at least to the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, when a four course instrument was popular among aristocrats. In the early nineteenth century there the guitar enjoyed a surge of popularity when composer/performers such as Fernando Sor, Napol\u00e9on Coste, Mauro Giuliani, and many others published thousands of pieces for the concert hall and home gatherings. The classical guitar enjoyed another period of popularity in the twentieth century when recordings amplified the relatively quiet instrument. There are many classical guitarists listed as \"notable\" in their respective epochs.\nOne of the most renowned flamenco guitarists in recent decades was Paco de Luc\u00eda. Flamenco music is a popular traditional music associated with the Andalucia region of southern Spain. It is characterized by intricate syncopated rhythms intimately informed by a gypsy dance style. Flamenco guitarists also often accompany flamenco singers performing \"cante jondo\" (deep song). De Luc\u00eda was also one of the first to have successfully crossed over into other genres of music such as classical and jazz.\nThe cuatro guitar is a family of Latin American string instruments played in Puerto Rico, Venezuela and other Latin American countries. It is derived from the Spanish guitar. Although some have viola-like shapes, most cuatros resemble a small to mid-sized classical guitar. In Puerto Rico and Venezuela, the cuatro is an ensemble instrument for secular and religious music, and is played at parties and traditional gatherings. Christian Nieves is a Puerto Rican cuatro player and is recognized by the Institute of Puerto Rican culture as the most talented young of their national instrument, the Puerto Rican cuatro.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12622", "revid": "51047711", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12622", "title": "Gothic fiction", "text": "Romance, horror and death literary genre\nGothic fiction, sometimes referred to as Gothic horror (primarily in the 20th century), is a literary aesthetic of fear and haunting. The name of the genre is derived from the Renaissance-era use of the word \"gothic\", as a pejorative term meaning medieval and barbaric, which itself originated from Gothic architecture and in turn the Goths.\nThe first work to be labelled as Gothic was Horace Walpole's 1764 novel \"The Castle of Otranto\", later subtitled \"A Gothic Story\". Subsequent 18th-century contributors included Clara Reeve, Ann Radcliffe, William Thomas Beckford, and Matthew Lewis. The Gothic influence continued into the early 19th century, with Romantic works by poets such as Samuel Taylor Coleridge and Lord Byron. Novelists such as Mary Shelley, Charles Maturin, Walter Scott, and E. T. A. Hoffmann frequently drew upon Gothic motifs in their works as well.\nGothic aesthetics continued to be used in Victorian literature in novels by Charles Dickens and the Bront\u00eb sisters, as well as in works by the American writers Edgar Allan Poe and Nathaniel Hawthorne. Later, Gothic fiction evolved through well-known works like \"Dracula\" by Bram Stoker, \"The Beetle\" by Richard Marsh, \"Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde\" by Robert Louis Stevenson, and \"The Picture of Dorian Gray\" by Oscar Wilde. In the 20th-century, Gothic fiction remained influential with contributors including Daphne du Maurier, Stephen King, V. C. Andrews, Shirley Jackson, Anne Rice, and Toni Morrison.\nCharacteristics.\nGothic fiction is characterised by an environment of fear, the threat of supernatural events, and the intrusion of the past upon the present. The setting typically includes physical reminders of the past, especially through ruined buildings that stand as proof of the transience of humans and their works, and the changeable and fickle nature of history. Characteristic gothic settings in the 18th and 19th centuries include castles, and religious buildings such as monasteries, convents, and crypts. The atmosphere is typically claustrophobic, and common plot elements include vengeful persecution, imprisonment, and murder. The depiction of horrifying events in Gothic fiction often serves as a metaphorical expression of psychological or social conflicts. The form of a Gothic story is usually discontinuous and convoluted, often incorporating tales within tales, changing narrators, and framing devices such as discovered manuscripts or interpolated histories. Other characteristics, regardless of relevance to the main plot, can include sleeplike and deathlike states, live burials, doubles, unnatural echoes or silences, the discovery of obscured family ties, unintelligible writings, nocturnal landscapes, remote locations, and dreams. In the late 19th century, Gothic fiction often involved demons, demonic possession, ghosts, and other kinds of evil spirits.\nRole of architecture.\nGothic fiction is strongly associated with the Gothic Revival architecture of that same era. English Gothic writers often associated medieval buildings with what they saw as a dark and terrifying period, marked by harsh laws enforced by torture and with mysterious, fantastic, and superstitious rituals. The literary Gothic embodies an appreciation of the joys of extreme emotion, the thrills of fearfulness and awe inherent in the sublime, and a quest for atmosphere, similar to the Gothic Revivalists' rejection of the clarity and rationalism of the Neoclassical style of the Enlightened Establishment. Gothic ruins invoke multiple linked emotions by representing the collapse of human creations and inevitable decay\u2013 hence the urge to add fake ruins as eyecatchers in English landscape parks.\nIncluding a Gothic building in a story serves several purposes. It implies that the story is set in the past, coveys a sense of isolation or dissociation from the rest of the world, indicates religious associations, and evokes feelings of awe. The architecture often served as a mirror for the characters and events of the story. The buildings in \"The Castle of Otranto\", for example, are riddled with tunnels that characters use to move back and forth in secret. This movement mirrors the secrets surrounding Manfred's possession of the castle and how it came into his family.\nHistory.\nPrecursors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\n'Tis now the very witching time of night,\nWhen churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out\nContagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood,\nAnd do such bitter business as the day\nWould quake to look on.\u00a0\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\u2014 Lines from Shakespeare's \"Hamlet\"\nThe components that would eventually combine into Gothic literature had a rich history by the time Walpole presented a fictitious medieval manuscript in \"The Castle of Otranto\" in 1764.\nThe plays of William Shakespeare were also a crucial reference point for early Gothic writers, in an effort to bring credibility to their works, and to legitimize the emerging genre as serious literature to the public. His tragedies such as \"Hamlet\", \"Macbeth\", \"King Lear\", \"Romeo and Juliet,\" and \"Richard III\" incorporated plots revolving around the supernatural, revenge, murder, ghosts, witchcraft, and omens. These works, often set in medieval castles and written in dramatic pathos, were a huge influence upon early Gothic authors. Many early Gothic writers frequently quote, and make allusions to Shakespeare's works.\nAnother major influence among Gothic writers was John Milton's \"Paradise Lost\" (1667), particularly his depiction of the tragic anti-hero character Satan. This character became a model for many charismatic Gothic villains and Byronic heroes. Milton's \"version of the myth of the fall and redemption, creation and decreation, is, as \"Frankenstein\" again reveals, an important model for Gothic plots.\"\nAlexander Pope also had a significant role in shaping Gothic fiction. Pope was the first significant poet of the 18th century to write a poem in an authentic Gothic manner. His poem, \"Eloisa to Abelard\" (1717), is a tale of star-crossed lovers, one doomed to a life of seclusion in a convent, and the other in a monastery, abounds in gloomy imagery, religious terror, and suppressed passion. The influence of Pope's poem is found throughout 18th-century Gothic literature, including the novels of Walpole, Radcliffe, and Lewis.\nDevelopment of Gothic aesthetics.\nGothic literature is often described with words such as \"wonder\" and \"terror.\" This sense of wonder and terror that provides the suspension of disbelief so important to Gothic fiction\u2014which, except for when it is parodied, even for all its occasional melodrama, is typically played straight, in a self-serious manner\u2014requires the imagination of the reader to be willing to accept the idea that there might be something \"beyond that which is immediately in front of us.\" The mysterious imagination necessary for Gothic literature to have gained any traction had been growing for some time even before the advent of the Gothic. The need for an outlet for this imagination came as the known world was becoming more explored, reducing the geographical mysteries of the world. The edges of the map were filling in, and no dragons were to be found. The human mind required a replacement. Clive Bloom theorizes that this void in the collective imagination was critical in developing the cultural possibility for the rise of the Gothic tradition.\nThe setting of most early Gothic works was medieval, but this was a common theme long before Walpole. In Britain especially, there was a desire to reclaim a shared past. This obsession frequently led to extravagant architectural displays like Fonthill Abbey, and even mock tournaments were held. It was not merely in literature that a medieval revival made itself felt, the broader cultural fascination with the medieval era contributed to a society ready to accept a perceived medieval work in 1764.\nThe Gothic often uses scenery of decay, death, and morbidity to achieve its effects (especially in the Italian Horror school of Gothic). However, Gothic literature was not the origin of this tradition; it was far older. Images like corpses, skeletons, and churchyards, now commonly associated with early Gothic fiction, were first popularized by the Graveyard poets. They were also present in novels such as Daniel Defoe's \"A Journal of the Plague Year\", which contains comical scenes of plague carts and piles of corpses. Even earlier, poets like Edmund Spenser evoked a dreary and sorrowful mood in such poems as Epithalamion. These pre-Gothic works laid the emotional groundwork that Gothic fiction later expanded upon.\nAll aspects of pre-Gothic literature occur to some degree in the Gothic, but even taken together, they still fall short of true Gothic. What was needed to be added was an aesthetic to tie the elements together. Bloom notes that this aesthetic must take the form of a theoretical or philosophical core, which is necessary to \"sav[e] the best tales from becoming mere anecdote or incoherent sensationalism.\" In this case, the aesthetic needed to be emotional, and was finally provided by Edmund Burke's 1757 work, \"A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful\", which \"finally codif[ied] the gothic emotional experience.\" Burke's thoughts on the Sublime, Terror, and Obscurity helped shape Gothic fiction's emotional and psychological tone. These sections can be summarized thus: the Sublime is that which is or produces the \"strongest emotion which the mind is capable of feeling\"; Terror most often evoked the Sublime; and to cause Terror, we need some amount of Obscurity \u2013 we can't know everything about that which is inducing Terror \u2013 or else \"a great deal of the apprehension vanishes\"; Obscurity is necessary to experience the Terror of the unknown. Bloom asserts that Burke's descriptive vocabulary was essential to the Romantic works that eventually informed the Gothic.\nThe birth of Gothic literature was also thought to have been influenced by political upheaval. Researchers linked its birth with the English Civil War, culminating in the Jacobite rising of 1745 which was more recent to the first Gothic novel (1764). The collective political memory and any deep cultural fears associated with it likely contributed to early Gothic villains as literary representatives of defeated Tory barons or Royalists \"rising\" from their political graves in the pages of early Gothic novels to terrorize the bourgeois reader of late eighteenth-century England.\nThe Female Gothic.\nFrom the castles, dungeons, forests, and hidden passages of the Gothic fiction genre emerged the subgenre, female Gothic. Guided by the works of authors such as Ann Radcliffe, Mary Shelley, and Charlotte Bront\u00eb, the female Gothic allowed women's societal and sexual desires to be introduced. In many respects, the novel's intended reader of the time was the woman who, even as she enjoyed such novels, felt she had to \"lay\" down her book with affected indifference, or momentary shame,\" according to author, Jane Austen. Gothic fiction shaped its form for woman readers to \"turn to Gothic romances to find support for their own mixed feelings.\"\nFemale Gothic narratives focus on such topics as a persecuted heroine fleeing from a villainous father and searching for an absent mother. At the same time, male writers tend towards the masculine transgression of social taboos. The emergence of the ghost story gave women writers something to write about besides the common marriage plot, allowing them to present a more radical critique of male power, violence, and predatory sexuality. Authors such as Mary Robinson and Charlotte Dacre however, present a counter to the naive and persecuted heroines usually featured in female Gothic of the time, and instead feature more sexually assertive heroines in their works. Dacre's \"Zofloya; or, The Moor\" is a noted example of an early female Gothic novel which transgresses gender conventions of the female Gothic of the time, with a sexually aggressive female protagonist, Victoria, who pursues partners at her desire.\nWhen the female Gothic coincides with the explained supernatural, the natural cause of terror is not the supernatural, but female disability and societal horrors: rape, incest, and the threatening control of a male antagonist. Female Gothic novels also address women's discontent with patriarchal society, their difficult and unsatisfying maternal position, and their role within that society. Women's fears of entrapment in the domestic, their bodies, marriage, childbirth, or domestic abuse commonly appear in the genre.\nAfter the characteristic Gothic \"Bildungsroman\"-like plot sequence, female Gothic allowed readers to grow from \"adolescence to maturity\" in the face of the realized impossibilities of the supernatural. As protagonists such as Adeline in \"The Romance of the Forest\" learn that their superstitious fantasies and terrors are replaced by natural cause and reasonable doubt, the reader may grasp the heroine's true position: \"The heroine possesses the romantic temperament that perceives strangeness where others see none. Her sensibility, therefore, prevents her from knowing that her true plight is her condition, the disability of being female.\"\nEighteenth-century Gothic novels.\nThe first work to be labeled as \"Gothic\" was Horace Walpole's \"The Castle of Otranto\" (1764). The widely popular first edition presented the story as a translation of a sixteenth-century manuscript. In the second edition, Walpole revealed himself as the author, adding the subtitle \"A Gothic Story\". The revelation prompted a backlash from readers, who considered it inappropriate for a modern author to write a supernatural story in a rational age. By initiating a literary genre, Walpole's Gothic tale inspired many contemporary imitators, including Clara Reeve's \"The Old English Baron\" (1778). Reeve writes in the preface: \"This Story is the literary offspring of \"The Castle of Otranto\"\". Like Reeve, other writers attempted his combination of supernatural plots with emotionally realistic characters in the 1780s. Examples include Sophia Lee's \"The Recess\" (1783\u20135) and William Beckford's \"Vathek\" (1786).\nAt the height of the Gothic novel's popularity in the 1790s, the genre was almost synonymous with Ann Radcliffe, whose highly anticipated and widely imitated works helped shape the period. \"The Romance of the Forest\" (1791) and \"The Mysteries of Udolpho\" (1794) were particularly popular. In an essay on Radcliffe, Walter Scott wrote about the popularity of \"Udolpho\" at the time stating, \"The very name was fascinating, and the public, who rushed upon it with all the eagerness of curiosity, rose from it with unsated appetite. When a family was numerous, the volumes flew, and were sometimes torn from hand to hand.\" Her novels were often seen as the feminine and rational opposite of a more violently horrifying male Gothic associated with Matthew Lewis. Radcliffe's final novel, \"The Italian\" (1797) was written in response to Lewis's \"The Monk\" (1796). Radcliffe and Lewis have been called \"the two most significant Gothic novelists of the 1790s.\"\nThe popularity and influence of \"The Mysteries of Udolpho\" and \"The Monk\" led to the rise in shorter, cheaper versions of Gothic literature. These included Gothic bluebooks and chapbooks, many of which were plagiarized or abridged versions of well-known Gothic novels. \"The Monk,\" in particular, with its immoral and sensational content, saw many plagiarized copies, and was notably drawn from in the cheaper pamphlets.\nOther notable Gothic novels of the 1790s include William Godwin's \"Caleb Williams\" (1794), Regina Maria Roche's \"Clermont\" (1798), and Charles Brockden Brown's \"Wieland\" (1798), as well as large numbers of anonymous works published by the Minerva Press established by William Lane at Leadenhall Street, London in 1790. In continental Europe, Romantic literary movements led to related Gothic genres such as the German \"Schauerroman\" and the French R\"oman noir\". Eighteenth-century Gothic novels were typically set in a distant past and (for English novels) a distant European country, but without specific dates or historical figures that characterized the later development of historical fiction.\nThe saturation of Gothic-inspired literature in the 1790s led to criticism, as noted by Samuel Taylor Coleridge in a letter dated 16 March 1797. Reflecting on his review work, he wrote, \"indeed I am almost weary of the Terrible, having been a hireling in the Critical Review for the last six or eight months \u2013 I have been reviewing \"the Monk\", \"the Italian\", \"Hubert de Sevrac\" &amp;c &amp;c &amp;c \u2013 in all of which dungeons, and old castles, &amp; solitary Houses by the Sea Side &amp; Caverns &amp; Woods &amp; extraordinary characters &amp; all the tribe of Horror &amp; Mystery, have crowded on me \u2013 even to surfeiting.\"\nThe excesses, stereotypes, and frequent absurdities of the Gothic genre made it rich territory for satire. Historian Rictor Norton notes that satire of Gothic literature was common from 1796 until the 1820s, including early satirical works such as \"The New Monk\" (1798), \"More Ghosts!\" (1798) and \"Rosella, or Modern Occurrences\" (1799). Gothic novels themselves, according to Norton, also possess elements of self-satire, \"By having profane comic characters as well as sacred serious characters, the Gothic novelist could puncture the balloon of the supernatural while at the same time affirming the power of the imagination.\" After 1800 there was a period in which Gothic parodies outnumbered forthcoming Gothic novels. In \"The Heroine\" by Eaton Stannard Barrett (1813), Gothic tropes are exaggerated for comic effect. In Jane Austen's novel \"Northanger Abbey\" (1818), the naive protagonist, a female named Catherine, conceives herself as a heroine of a Radcliffean romance and imagines murder and villainy on every side. However, the truth turns out to be much more prosaic. This novel is also noted for including a list of early Gothic works known as the Northanger Horrid Novels.\nSecond generation or \"J\u00fcngere Romantik\".\nThe poetry, romantic adventures, and character of Lord Byron\u2014characterized by his spurned lover Lady Caroline Lamb as \"mad, bad and dangerous to know\"\u2014were another inspiration for the Gothic novel, providing the archetype of the Byronic hero. For example, Byron is the title character in Lady Caroline's Gothic novel \"Glenarvon\" (1816).\nByron was also the host of the celebrated ghost-story competition involving himself, Percy Bysshe Shelley, Mary Shelley, and John William Polidori at the Villa Diodati on the banks of Lake Geneva in the summer of 1816. This occasion was productive of both Mary Shelley's \"Frankenstein, or, The Modern Prometheus\" (1818), and Polidori's short story \"The Vampyre\" (1819), featuring the Byronic Lord Ruthven. \"The Vampyre\" has been accounted by cultural critic Christopher Frayling as one of the most influential works of fiction ever written and spawned a craze for vampire fiction and theatre (and, latterly, film) that has not ceased to this day. Although clearly influenced by the Gothic tradition, Mary Shelley's novel is often considered the first science fiction novel, despite the novel's lack of any scientific explanation for the animation of Frankenstein's monster and the focus instead on the moral dilemmas and consequences of such a creation. \"Frankenstein\" is also credited for enhancing the traditional setting in Gothic fiction, in which the ruined castle and haunted room is replaced by a scientist's laboratory. \nJohn Keats' \"La Belle Dame sans Merci\" (1819) and \"Isabella, or the Pot of Basil\" (1820) feature mysteriously fey ladies. In the latter poem, the names of the characters, the dream visions, and the macabre physical details are influenced by the novels of premiere Gothicist Ann Radcliffe.\nAlthough ushering in the historical novel, and turning popularity away from Gothic fiction, Walter Scott frequently employed Gothic elements in his novels and poetry. Scott drew upon oral folklore, fireside tales, and ancient superstitions, often juxtaposing rationality and the supernatural. Novels such as \"The Bride of Lammermoor\" (1819), in which the characters' fates are decided by superstition and prophecy, or the poem \"Marmion\" (1808), in which a nun is walled alive inside a convent, illustrate Scott's influence and use of Gothic themes.\nA late example of a traditional Gothic novel is \"Melmoth the Wanderer\" (1820) by Charles Maturin, which combines themes of anti-Catholicism with an outcast Byronic hero. Jane C. Loudon's \"The Mummy!\" (1827) features standard Gothic motifs, characters, and plot, but with one significant twist; it is set in the twenty-second century and speculates on fantastic scientific developments that might have occurred three hundred years in the future, making it and \"Frankenstein\" among the earliest examples of the science fiction genre developing from Gothic traditions.\nDuring two decades, the most famous author of Gothic literature in Germany was the polymath E. T. A. Hoffmann. Lewis's \"The Monk\" influenced and even mentioned it in his novel \"The Devil's Elixirs\" (1815). The novel explores the motive of Doppelg\u00e4nger, a term coined by another German author and supporter of Hoffmann, Jean-Paul, in his humorous novel \"Siebenk\u00e4s\" (1796\u20131797). He also wrote an opera based on Friedrich de la Motte Fouqu\u00e9's Gothic story \"Undine\" (1816), for which de la Motte Fouqu\u00e9 wrote the libretto. Aside from Hoffmann and de la Motte Fouqu\u00e9, three other important authors from the era were Joseph Freiherr von Eichendorff (\"The Marble Statue\", 1818), Ludwig Achim von Arnim (\"Die Majoratsherren\", 1819), and Adelbert von Chamisso (\"Peter Schlemihls wundersame Geschichte\", 1814). After them, Wilhelm Meinhold wrote \"The Amber Witch\" (1838) and \"Sidonia von Bork\" (1847).\nIn Spain, the priest Pascual P\u00e9rez Rodr\u00edguez was the most diligent novelist in the Gothic way, closely aligned to the supernatural explained by Ann Radcliffe. At the same time, the poet Jos\u00e9 de Espronceda published \"The Student of Salamanca\" (1837\u20131840), a narrative poem that presents a horrid variation on the Don Juan legend.\nIn Russia, authors of the Romantic era include Antony Pogorelsky (penname of Alexey Alexeyevich Perovsky), Orest Somov, Oleksa Storozhenko, Alexandr Pushkin, Nikolai Alekseevich Polevoy, Mikhail Lermontov (for his work \"Stuss\"), and Alexander Bestuzhev-Marlinsky. Pushkin is particularly important, as his 1833 short story \"The Queen of Spades\" was so popular that it was adapted into operas and later films by Russian and foreign artists. Some parts of Mikhail Yuryevich Lermontov's \"A Hero of Our Time\" (1840) are also considered to belong to the Gothic genre, but they lack the supernatural elements of other Russian Gothic stories.\nThe following poems are also now considered to belong to the Gothic genre: Meshchevskiy's \"Lila\", Katenin's \"Olga\", Pushkin's \"The Bridegroom\", Pletnev's \"The Gravedigger\" and Lermontov's \"Demon\" (1829\u20131839).\nThe key author of the transition from Romanticism to Realism, Nikolai Vasilievich Gogol, who was also one of the most important authors of Romanticism, produced a number of works that qualify as Gothic fiction. Each of his three short story collections features a number of stories that fall within the Gothic genre or contain Gothic elements. They include \"Saint John's Eve\" and \"A Terrible Vengeance\" from \"Evenings on a Farm Near Dikanka\" (1831\u20131832), \"The Portrait\" from \"Arabesques\" (1835), and \"Viy\" from \"Mirgorod\" (1835). While all are well known, the latter is probably the most famous, having inspired at least eight film adaptations (two now considered lost), one animated film, two documentaries, and a video game. Gogol's work differs from Western European Gothic fiction, as his cultural influences drew on Ukrainian folklore, the Cossack lifestyle, and, as a religious man, Orthodox Christianity.\nOther relevant authors of this era include Vladimir Fyodorovich Odoevsky (\"The Living Corpse\", written 1838, published 1844, \"The Ghost\", \"The Sylphide\", as well as short stories), Count Aleksey Konstantinovich Tolstoy (\"The Family of the Vourdalak\", 1839, and \"The Vampire\", 1841), Mikhail Zagoskin (\"Unexpected Guests\"), J\u00f3zef S\u0119kowski/Osip Senkovsky (\"Antar\"), and Yevgeny Baratynsky (\"The Ring\").\nNineteenth-century Gothic fiction.\nBy the Victorian era, Gothic had ceased to be the dominant genre for novels in England, partly replaced by more sedate historical fiction. However, Gothic short stories continued to be popular, published in magazines or as small chapbooks called penny dreadfuls. The most influential Gothic writer from this period was the American Edgar Allan Poe, who wrote numerous short stories and poems reinterpreting Gothic tropes. His story \"The Fall of the House of Usher\" (1839) revisits classic Gothic tropes of aristocratic decay, death, and insanity. Poe is now considered the master of the American Gothic.\nIn England, one of the most influential penny dreadfuls is the anonymously authored \"Varney the Vampire\" (1847), which introduced the trope of vampires having sharpened teeth. Another notable English author of penny dreadfuls is George W. M. Reynolds, known for \"The Mysteries of London\" (1844), \"Faust\" (1846), \"Wagner the Wehr-wolf\" (1847), and \"The Necromancer\" (1857). Elizabeth Gaskell's tales \"The Doom of the Griffiths\" (1858), \"Lois the Witch\", and \"The Grey Woman\" all employ one of the most common themes of Gothic fiction: the power of ancestral sins to curse future generations, or the fear that they will. M. R. James, an English medievalist whose stories are still popular today, is known as the originator of the \"antiquarian ghost story.\" In Spain, Gustavo Adolfo B\u00e9cquer stood out with his romantic poems and short tales, some depicting supernatural events. Today some consider him the most-read Spanish writer after Miguel de Cervantes.\nIn addition to these short Gothic fictions, some novels drew on the Gothic. Emily Bront\u00eb's \"Wuthering Heights\" (1847) transports the Gothic to the forbidding Yorkshire Moors and features ghostly apparitions and a Byronic hero in the person of the demonic Heathcliff. The Bront\u00ebs' fictions were cited by feminist critic Ellen Moers as prime examples of Female Gothic, exploring woman's entrapment within domestic space and subjection to patriarchal authority and the transgressive and dangerous attempts to subvert and escape such restriction. Emily Bront\u00eb's \"Cathy\" and Charlotte Bront\u00eb's \"Jane Eyre\" are examples of female protagonists in such roles. Louisa May Alcott's Gothic potboiler, \"A Long Fatal Love Chase\" (written in 1866 but published in 1995), is also an interesting specimen of this subgenre. Charlotte Bront\u00eb's \"Villette\" also shows the Gothic influence, with its supernatural subplot featuring a ghostly nun, and its view of Roman Catholicism as exotic and heathenistic. Nathaniel Hawthorne's novel \"The House of the Seven Gables\", about a family's ancestral home, is colored with suggestions of the supernatural and witchcraft; and in true Gothic fashion, it features the house itself as one of the main characters.\nThe genre also heavily influenced writers such as Charles Dickens, who read Gothic novels as a teenager and incorporated their gloomy atmosphere and melodrama into his works, shifting them to a more modern period and an urban setting; for example, in \"Oliver Twist\" (1837\u20131838), \"Bleak House\" (1852\u20131853) and \"Great Expectations\" (1860\u20131861). These works juxtapose wealthy, ordered, and affluent civilization with the disorder and barbarity of the poor in the same metropolis. \"Bleak House,\" in particular, is credited with introducing urban fog to the novel, which would become a frequent characteristic of urban Gothic literature and film. Miss Havisham from \"Great Expectations\" is one of Dickens' most Gothic characters. The bitter recluse shuts herself away in her gloomy mansion ever since being jilted at the altar on her wedding day. His most explicitly Gothic work is his last novel, \"The Mystery of Edwin Drood,\" which he did not live to complete and was published unfinished upon his death in 1870. The mood and themes of the Gothic novel held a particular fascination for the Victorians, with their obsession with mourning rituals, mementos, and mortality in general.\nIrish Catholics also wrote Gothic fiction in the 19th century. Although some Anglo-Irish dominated and defined the subgenre decades later, they did not own it. Irish Catholic Gothic writers included Gerald Griffin, James Clarence Mangan, and John and Michael Banim. William Carleton was a notable Gothic writer, and converted from Catholicism to Anglicanism.\nIn Switzerland, Jeremias Gotthelf wrote \"The Black Spider\" (1842), an allegorical work that uses Gothic themes. The last work from the German writer Theodor Storm, \"The Rider on the White Horse\" (1888), also uses Gothic motives and themes.\nAfter Gogol, Russian literature saw the rise of Realism, but many authors continued to write stories within Gothic fiction territory. Ivan Sergeyevich Turgenev, one of the most celebrated Realists, wrote \"Faust\" (1856), \"Phantoms\" (1864), \"Song of the Triumphant Love\" (1881), and \"Clara Milich\" (1883). Another classic Russian Realist, Fyodor Mikhailovich Dostoyevsky, incorporated Gothic elements into many of his works, although none can be seen as purely Gothic. Grigory Petrovich Danilevsky, who wrote historical and early science fiction novels and stories, wrote \"Mertvec-ubiytsa\" (\"Dead Murderer\") in 1879. Also, Grigori Alexandrovich Machtet wrote \"Zaklyatiy kazak\", which may now also be considered Gothic.\nThe 1880s saw the revival of the Gothic as a powerful literary form allied to fin de siecle, which fictionalized contemporary fears like ethical degeneration and questioned the social structures of the time. Classic works of this Urban Gothic include Robert Louis Stevenson's \"Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde\" (1886), Oscar Wilde's \"The Picture of Dorian Gray\" (1891), George du Maurier's \"Trilby\" (1894), Richard Marsh's \"The Beetle\" (1897), Henry James' \"The Turn of the Screw\" (1898), and the stories of Arthur Machen.\nIn Ireland, Gothic fiction tended to be purveyed by the Anglo-Irish Protestant Ascendancy. According to literary critic Terry Eagleton, Charles Maturin, Sheridan Le Fanu, and Bram Stoker form the core of the Irish Gothic subgenre with stories featuring castles set in a barren landscape and a cast of remote aristocrats dominating an atavistic peasantry, which represent an allegorical form the political plight of Catholic Ireland subjected to the Protestant Ascendancy. Le Fanu's use of the gloomy villain, forbidding mansion, and persecuted heroine in \"Uncle Silas\" (1864) shows direct influence from Walpole's \"Otranto\" and Radcliffe's \"Udolpho\". Le Fanu's short story collection \"In a Glass Darkly\" (1872) includes the superlative vampire tale \"Carmilla\", which provided fresh blood for that particular strand of the Gothic and influenced Bram Stoker's vampire novel \"Dracula\" (1897). Stoker's book created the most famous Gothic villain ever, Count Dracula, and established Transylvania and Eastern Europe as the \"locus classicus\" of the Gothic. Published in the same year as \"Dracula\", Florence Marryat's \"The Blood of the Vampire\" is another piece of vampire fiction. \"The Blood of the Vampire\", which, like \"Carmilla,\" features a female vampire, is notable for its treatment of vampirism as both racial and medicalized. The vampire, Harriet Brandt, is also a psychic vampire, killing unintentionally.\nIn the United States, notable late 19th-century writers in the Gothic tradition were Ambrose Bierce, Robert W. Chambers, and Edith Wharton. Bierce's short stories were in the horrific and pessimistic tradition of Poe. Chambers indulged in the decadent style of Wilde and Machen, even including a character named Wilde in his \"The King in Yellow\" (1895). Wharton published some notable Gothic ghost stories. Some works of the Canadian writer Gilbert Parker also fall into the genre, including the stories in \"The Lane that had No Turning\" (1900).\nGothic fiction became significant in Italy in the later decades of the 19th century, being cultivated particularly by Scapigliati such as Iginio Ugo Tarchetti (most notably in his novel \"Fosca\"), Giovanni Faldella, and the brothers Camillo and Arrigo Boito. It continued in some of the work of Giovanni Verga and Luigi Capuana, who are best known as veristi, and also in parts of the production of Emilio De Marchi, Remigio Zena, and, above all, Antonio Fogazzaro (most notably in his debut novel \"Malombra\").\nThe serialized novel \"The Phantom of the Opera\" (1909\u20131910) by the French writer Gaston Leroux is another well-known example of Gothic fiction from the early 20th century, when many German authors were writing works influenced by \"Schauerroman\", including Hanns Heinz Ewers.\nRussian Gothic.\nUntil the 1990s, Russian Gothic critics did not view Russian Gothic as a genre or label. If used, the word \"gothic\" was used to describe (mostly early) works of Fyodor Dostoyevsky from the 1880s. Most critics used tags such as \"Romanticism\" and \"fantastique\", such as in the 1984 story collection translated into English as \"Russian 19th-Century Gothic Tales\" but originally titled \"\u0424\u0430\u043d\u0442\u0430\u0441\u0442\u0438\u0447\u0435\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u043c\u0438\u0440 \u0440\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u043e\u0439 \u0440\u043e\u043c\u0430\u043d\u0442\u0438\u0447\u0435\u0441\u043a\u043e\u0439 \u043f\u043e\u0432\u0435\u0441\u0442\u0438\", literally, \"The Fantastic World of Russian Romanticism Short Story/Novella.\" However, since the mid-1980s, Russian gothic fiction as a genre began to be discussed in books such as \"The Gothic-Fantastic in Nineteenth-Century Russian Literature\", \"European Gothic: A Spirited Exchange 1760\u20131960\", \"The Russian Gothic Novel and its British Antecedents\" and \"Goticheskiy roman v Rossii (The Gothic Novel in Russia)\".\nThe first Russian author whose work has been described as gothic fiction is considered to be Nikolay Mikhailovich Karamzin. While many of his works feature gothic elements, the first to belong purely under the gothic fiction label is \"Ostrov Borngolm\" (\"Island of Bornholm\") from 1793. Nearly ten years later, Nikolay Ivanovich Gnedich followed suit with his 1803 novel \"Don Corrado de Gerrera\", set in Spain during the reign of Philip II. The term \"Gothic\" is sometimes also used to describe the ballads of Russian authors such as Vasily Andreyevich Zhukovsky, particularly \"Ludmila\" (1808) and \"Svetlana\" (1813), both translations based on Gottfreid August Burger's Gothic German ballad, \"Lenore\".\nDuring the last years of Imperial Russia in the early 20th century, many authors continued to write in the Gothic fiction genre. They include the historian and historical fiction writer Alexander Valentinovich Amfiteatrov and Leonid Nikolaievich Andreyev, who developed psychological characterization; the symbolist Valery Yakovlevich Bryusov, Alexander Grin, Anton Pavlovich Chekhov; and Aleksandr Ivanovich Kuprin. Nobel Prize winner Ivan Alekseyevich Bunin wrote \"Dry Valley\" (1912), which is seen as influenced by Gothic literature. In a monograph on the subject, Muireann Maguire writes, \"The centrality of the Gothic-fantastic to Russian fiction is almost impossible to exaggerate, and certainly exceptional in the context of world literature.\"\nTwentienth-century Gothic fiction.\nGothic fiction and Modernism influenced each other. This is often evident in detective fiction, horror fiction, and science fiction, but the influence of the Gothic can also be seen in the high literary Modernism of the 20th century. Oscar Wilde's \"The Picture of Dorian Gray\" (1890) initiated a re-working of older literary forms and myths that became common in the work of W. B. Yeats, T. S. Eliot, James Joyce, Virginia Woolf, Shirley Jackson, and Angela Carter, among others. In Joyce's \"Ulysses\" (1922), the living are transformed into ghosts, which points to an Ireland in stasis at the time and a history of cyclical trauma from the Great Famine in the 1840s through to the current moment in the text. The way \"Ulysses\" uses Gothic tropes such as ghosts and hauntings while removing the supernatural elements of 19th-century Gothic fiction indicates a general form of modernist Gothic writing in the first half of the 20th century.\nIn America, pulp magazines such as \"Weird Tales\" reprinted classic Gothic horror tales from the previous century by authors like Poe, Arthur Conan Doyle, and Edward Bulwer-Lytton, and printed new stories by modern authors featuring both traditional and new horrors. The most significant of these was H. P. Lovecraft, who also wrote a conspectus of the Gothic and supernatural horror tradition in his \"Supernatural Horror in Literature\" (1936), and developed a Mythos that would influence Gothic and contemporary horror well into the 21st century. Lovecraft's prot\u00e9g\u00e9, Robert Bloch, contributed to \"Weird Tales\" and penned \"Psycho\" (1959), which drew on the classic interests of the genre. From these, the Gothic genre \"per se\" gave way to modern horror fiction, regarded by some literary critics as a branch of the Gothic, although others use the term to cover the entire genre.\nThe Romantic strand of Gothic was taken up in Daphne du Maurier's \"Rebecca\" (1938), which is seen by some to have been influenced by Charlotte Bront\u00eb's \"Jane Eyre\". Other books by du Maurier, such as \"Jamaica Inn\" (1936), also display Gothic tendencies. Du Maurier's work inspired a substantial body of \"female Gothics,\" concerning heroines alternately swooning over or terrified by scowling Byronic men in possession of acres of prime real estate and the appertaining \"droit du seigneur\".\nSouthern Gothic.\nThe genre also influenced American writing, creating a Southern Gothic genre that combines some Gothic sensibilities, such as the grotesque, with the setting and style of the Southern United States. Examples include Erskine Caldwell, William Faulkner, Carson McCullers, John Kennedy Toole, Manly Wade Wellman, Eudora Welty, V. C. Andrews, Tennessee Williams, Truman Capote, Flannery O'Connor, Davis Grubb, Anne Rice, Harper Lee, and Cormac McCarthy.\nGothic romances.\nIt is a subgenre of gothic fiction that began to develop with Ann Radcliffe's \"A Sicilian Romance\" in 1790, building upon the tropes established by Horace Walpole's \"The Castle of Otranto\" (1764), such as isolated settings and semi-supernatural occurrences. However, Radcliffe's novels introduced female protagonists who were \"battling through terrifying ordeals while struggling to be with their true loves.\" This aspect is what ultimately distinguishes gothic romance from its counterpart, gothic horror. The subgenre came to be defined and ultimately dominated by female protagonists, especially following the publication of Charlotte Bront\u00eb\u2019s \"Jane Eyre\" (1847), which follows the story of a young woman striving to preserve her independence while falling for a dark, brooding man. This became a hallmark of gothic romance in the decades that followed.\nMass-produced Gothic romances became popular in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s with authors such as Phyllis A. Whitney, Joan Aiken, Dorothy Eden, Victoria Holt, Barbara Michaels, Mary Stewart and Alicen White. Many featured covers show a terror-stricken woman in diaphanous attire in front of a gloomy castle, often with a single lit window. Many were published under the Paperback Library Gothic imprint and marketed to female readers. While the authors were mostly women, some men wrote Gothic romances under female pseudonyms: the prolific Clarissa Ross and Marilyn Ross were pseudonyms of the male Dan Ross; Frank Belknap Long published Gothics under his wife's name, Lyda Belknap Long; the British writer Peter O'Donnell wrote under the pseudonym Madeleine Brent. After the gothic romance boom faded away in the early 1990s, very few publishers embraced the term for mass market romance paperbacks apart from imprints like Love Spell, which was discontinued in 2010. However, in recent years the term \"Gothic Romance\" is being used to describe both old and new works of Gothic fiction.\nContemporary Gothic.\nGothic fiction continues to be extensively practised by contemporary authors. Many modern writers of horror or other types of fiction exhibit considerable Gothic sensibilities \u2013 examples include Anne Rice, Susan Hill, Ray Russell, Billy Martin, Silvia Moreno-Garcia, Carmen Maria Machado, Neil Gaiman, and Stephen King. Thomas M. Disch's novel \"The Priest\" (1994) was subtitled \"A Gothic Romance\" and partly modeled on Matthew Lewis' \"The Monk\". Many writers such as Billy Martin, Stephen King, Brett Easton Ellis, and Clive Barker have focused on the body's surface and blood's visuality. England's Rhiannon Ward is among the recent writers of Gothic fiction. Catriona Ward won a British Fantasy Award for Best Horror Novel for her gothic novel \"Rawblood\" in 2016.\nContemporary American writers in the tradition include Joyce Carol Oates with such novels as \"Bellefleur\" and \"A Bloodsmoor Romance\", Toni Morrison with her radical novel \"Beloved\", about a slave-woman whose murdered baby haunts her, Raymond Kennedy with his novel \"Lulu Incognito\", Donna Tartt with her postmodern gothic horror novel \"The Secret History\", Ursula Vernon with her Edgar Allan Poe-inspired novel \"What Moves the Dead\", Danielle Trussoni with her \"gothic extravaganza\" \"The Ancestor\", and filmmaker Anna Biller with \"Bluebeard's Castle\", a throwback to 18th-century Gothic novels and 1960s dime-store romances. British writers who have continued in the Gothic tradition include Sarah Waters with her haunted house novel \"The Little Stranger\", Diane Setterfield with her quintessentially Gothic novels \"The Thirteenth Tale\" and \"Once Upon a River\", Helen Oyeyemi with her experimental novel \"White is for Witching\", Sarah Perry with her novels \"Melmoth\" and \"The Essex Serpent\", and Laura Purcell with her historical novels \"The Silent Companions\" and \"The Shape of Darkness.\"\nSeveral Gothic traditions have also developed in New Zealand (with the subgenre referred to as New Zealand Gothic or M\u0101ori Gothic) and Australia (known as Australian Gothic). These explore everything from the multicultural natures of the two countries to their natural geography. Novels in the Australian Gothic tradition include Kate Grenville's \"The Secret River\" and the works of Kim Scott. An even smaller genre is Tasmanian Gothic, set exclusively on the island, with prominent examples including \"Gould's Book of Fish\" by Richard Flanagan and \"The Roving Party\" by Rohan Wilson. Another Australian author, Kate Morton, has penned several homages to classic gothic fiction, among them \"The Distant Hours\" and \"The House at Riverton\".\nSouthern Ontario Gothic applies a similar sensibility to a Canadian cultural context. Robertson Davies, Alice Munro, Barbara Gowdy, Timothy Findley, and Margaret Atwood have all produced notable exemplars of this form. Another writer in the tradition was Henry Farrell, best known for his 1960 Hollywood horror novel \"What Ever Happened To Baby Jane?\" Farrell's novels spawned a subgenre of \"Grande Dame Guignol\" in the cinema, represented by such films as the 1962 film based on Farrell's novel, which starred Bette Davis versus Joan Crawford; this subgenre of films was dubbed the \"psycho-biddy\" genre.\nOutside the English-speaking world, Latin American Gothic literature has been gaining momentum since the first decades of the 21st century. Some of the main authors whose style has been described as Gothic are Mar\u00eda Fernanda Ampuero, Mariana Enr\u00edquez, Fernanda Melchor, M\u00f3nica Ojeda, Giovanna Rivero, and Samanta Schweblin.\nThe many Gothic subgenres include a new \"environmental Gothic\" or \"ecoGothic\". It is an ecologically aware Gothic engaged in \"dark nature\" and \"ecophobia.\" Writers and critics of the ecoGothic suggest that the Gothic genre is uniquely positioned to speak to anxieties about climate change and the planet's ecological future.\nAmong the bestselling books of the 21st century, the YA novel \"Twilight\" by Stephenie Meyer is now increasingly identified as a Gothic novel, as is Carlos Ruiz Zaf\u00f3n's 2001 novel \"The Shadow of the Wind\".\nOther media.\nLiterary Gothic themes have been translated into other media. There was a notable revival in 20th-century Gothic horror cinema, such as the classic Universal Monsters films of the 1930s, Hammer Horror films, and Roger Corman's Poe cycle. In Hindi cinema, the Gothic tradition was combined with aspects of Indian culture, particularly reincarnation, for an \"Indian Gothic\" genre, beginning with \"Mahal\" (1949) and \"Madhumati\" (1958). The 1960s Gothic television series \"Dark Shadows\" borrowed liberally from Gothic traditions, with elements like haunted mansions, vampires, witches, doomed romances, werewolves, obsession, and madness. The early 1970s saw a Gothic Romance comic book mini-trend with such titles as DC Comics' \"The Dark Mansion of Forbidden Love\" and \"The Sinister House of Secret Love\", Charlton Comics' \"Haunted Love\", Curtis Magazines' \"Gothic Tales of Love\", and Atlas/Seaboard Comics' one-shot magazine \"Gothic Romances\".\nTwentieth-century rock music also had its Gothic side. Black Sabbath's 1970 debut album created a dark sound different from other bands at the time and has been called the first-ever \"goth-rock\" record. However, the first recorded use of \"gothic\" to describe a style of music was for The Doors. Critic John Stickney used the term \"gothic rock\" to describe the music of The Doors in October 1967 in a review published in \"The Williams Record\". Other forerunners who initially shaped the aesthetics and musical conventions of gothic rock include Marc Bolan, the Velvet Underground, David Bowie, Brian Eno, and Iggy Pop. Critic Simon Reynolds retrospectively described Kate Bush's 1978 song \"Wuthering Heights\"\u2014with its lyrics inspired by Emily Bront\u00eb's 1847 novel \"Wuthering Heights\" featuring Cathy as a ghost and the tortured anti-hero Heathcliff\u2014as \"Gothic romance distilled into four-and-a-half minutes of gaseous rhapsody\". Gothic rock as a music genre emerged in late 1970s England, with Bauhaus's debut single, \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\", released in late 1979, retrospectively considered to be the beginning of the genre. This was followed by the album \"Unknown Pleasures\" by Joy Division a year later, and in the early 1980s, post-punk bands such as the Cure and Siouxsie and the Banshees included more gothic characteristics in their music. Tracing the genre from its 18th-century literary roots through its flourishing as a music subculture from the late 1970s onward, the Cure's Lol Tolhurst wrote, \"Goth is about being in love with the melancholy beauty of existence\". Themes from Gothic writers such as H. P. Lovecraft were used among Gothic rock and heavy metal bands, especially in black metal, thrash metal (Metallica's \"The Call of Ktulu\"), death metal, and gothic metal. For example, in his compositions, heavy metal musician King Diamond delights in telling stories full of horror, theatricality, Satanism, and anti-Catholicism.\nIn role-playing games (RPG), the pioneering 1983 \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" adventure \"Ravenloft\" instructs the players to defeat the vampire Strahd von Zarovich, who pines for his dead lover. It has been acclaimed as one of the best role-playing adventures ever and even inspired an entire fictional world of the same name. The \"World of Darkness\" is a gothic-punk RPG line set in the real world, with the added element of supernatural creatures such as werewolves and vampires. In addition to its flagship title ', the game line features a number of spin-off RPGs such as ', ', , ', and \"\", allowing for a wide range of characters in the gothic-punk setting. \"My Life with Master\" uses Gothic horror conventions as a metaphor for abusive relationships, placing the players in the shoes of minions of a tyrannical, larger-than-life Master.\nVarious video games feature Gothic horror themes and plots. The \"Castlevania\" series typically involves a hero of the Belmont lineage exploring a dark, old castle, fighting vampires, werewolves, Frankenstein's Creature, and other Gothic monster staples, culminating in a battle against Dracula himself. Others, such as \"Ghosts 'n Goblins\", feature a camper parody of Gothic fiction. 2017's ', a Southern Gothic reboot to the survival horror video game involves an everyman and his wife trapped in a derelict plantation and mansion owned by a family with sinister and hideous secrets and must face terrifying visions of a ghostly mutant in the shape of a little girl. This was followed by 2021's \"Resident Evil Village\", a Gothic horror sequel focusing on an action hero searching for his kidnapped daughter in a mysterious Eastern European village under the control of a bizarre religious cult inhabited by werewolves, vampires, ghosts, shapeshifters, and other monsters. The \"Devil May Cry\" series stands as an equally parodic and self-serious franchise, following the escapades, stunts and mishaps of series protagonist Dante as he explores dingy demonic castles, ancient occult monuments and ruined urban landscapes on his quest to avenge his mother and brother. Gothic literary themes appear all throughout the story, such as how the past physically creeps into the ambiguously modern setting, recurrent imagery of doubles (notably regarding Dante and his twin brother), and the persisting melodramas associated with Dante's father's fame, absence, and demonic heritage. Beginning with ', Female Gothic elements enter the series as deuteragonist Lady works through her own revenge plot against her murderous father, with the oppressive and consistent emotional and physical abuse instigated by a patriarchal figure serving as a heavy, understated counterweight to the extravagance of the rest of the story. Finally, \"Bloodborne\" takes place in the decaying Gothic city of Yharnam, where the player must face werewolves, shambling mutants, vampires, witches, and numerous other Gothic staple creatures. However, the game takes a marked turn midway shifting from gothic to Lovecraftian horror. ' expansion pack ' features several gothic elements such as a death, ghosts, ghostly possession, an evil curse, an abandoned haunted mansion, a graveyard, beasts, and demonic entities.\nPopular tabletop card game \"\", known for its consisting of \"planes,\" features the plane known as Innistrad. Its general aesthetic is based on northeast European Gothic horror. Innistard's common residents include cultists, ghosts, vampires, werewolves, and zombies.\nFilm director Tim Burton, whose influences include Universal Monsters movies such as \"Frankenstein\", Hammer Horror films starring Christopher Lee and the horror films of Vincent Price, is known for creating a gothic aesthetic in his films. Modern Gothic horror films include \"Sleepy Hollow\", \"Interview with the Vampire\", \"Underworld\", \"The Wolfman\", \"From Hell\", \"Dorian Gray\", \"Let the Right One In\", \"The Woman in Black\", \"Crimson Peak\", \"The Little Stranger\", \"The Love Witch\", \"Nosferatu\", and \"Frankenstein\". \nThe TV series \"Penny Dreadful\" (2014\u20132016) brings many classic Gothic characters together in a psychological thriller set in the dark corners of Victorian London. The Oscar-winning Korean film \"Parasite\" has also been called Gothic \u2013 specifically, Revolutionary Gothic. Recently, the Netflix original \"The Haunting of Hill House\" and its successor \"The Haunting of Bly Manor\" have integrated classic Gothic conventions into modern psychological horror.\nScholarship.\nEducators in literary, cultural, and architectural studies appreciate the Gothic as an area that facilitates investigation of the beginnings of scientific certainty. As Carol Senf has stated, \"the Gothic was... a counterbalance produced by writers and thinkers who felt limited by such a confident worldview and recognized that the power of the past, the irrational, and the violent continue to sway in the world.\" As such, the Gothic helps students better understand their doubts about the self-assurance of today's scientists. Scotland is the location of what was probably the world's first postgraduate program to consider the genre exclusively: the MLitt in the Gothic Imagination at the University of Stirling, first recruited in 1996.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12626", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12626", "title": "General Aviation", "text": ""}
{"id": "12627", "revid": "49434219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12627", "title": "Gospel", "text": "Books on the life and teachings of Jesus\nGospel originally meant the Christian message (\"the gospel\"), but in the second century AD the term (, from which the English word originated as a calque) came to be used also for the books in which the message was reported. In this sense a gospel can be defined as a loose-knit, episodic narrative of the words and deeds of Jesus, culminating in his trial and death, and concluding with various reports of his post-resurrection appearances.\nThe Gospels are commonly seen as literature that is based on oral traditions, Christian preaching, and Old Testament exegesis with the consensus being that they are a variation of Greco-Roman biography; similar to other ancient works such as Xenophon's \"Memoirs of Socrates\". They are meant to convince people that Jesus was a charismatic miracle-working holy man, providing examples for readers to emulate. As such, they present the Christian message of the second half of the first century AD, Modern biblical scholars are therefore cautious of relying on the gospels uncritically as historical documents, and although they afford a good idea of Jesus' public career, critical study has largely failed to distinguish his original ideas from those of the later Christian authors, and the focus of research has therefore shifted to Jesus as remembered by his followers, and understanding the Gospels themselves.\nThe canonical gospels are the four which appear in the New Testament of the Bible. They were probably written between AD 66 and 110, which puts their composition likely within the lifetimes of various eyewitnesses, including Jesus's own family. Most scholars hold that all four were anonymous (with the modern names of the \"Four Evangelists\" added in the 2nd century). They are generally not viewed as eyewitness accounts, though this may partly be the result of dubious form-critical assumptions .The gospels are products of literarily creative authors (which did involve claiming consulting eyewitnesses). According to the majority of scholars, Mark was the first to be written, using a variety of sources, followed by Matthew and Luke, which both independently used Mark for their narrative of Jesus's career, supplementing it with a collection of sayings called \"the Q source\", and additional material unique to each, though alternative hypotheses that posit the direct use of Matthew by Luke or vice versa without Q are increasing in popularity. There have been different views on the transmission of material that led to the synoptic gospels, with various scholars arguing memory and orality reliably preserved traditions that ultimately go back to the historical Jesus. Other scholars have been more skeptical and see more changes in the traditions prior to the written Gospels. John may have been aware of the Synoptics, and there is currently considerable debate over the gospel's social, religious and historical context. In modern scholarship, the synoptic gospels are the primary sources for reconstructing Christ's ministry while John is used less since it differs from the synoptics. According to the manuscript evidence and citation frequency by the early Church Fathers, Matthew and John were the most popular gospels while Luke and Mark were less popular in the early centuries of the church.\nMany non-canonical gospels were also written, all later than the four canonical gospels, and like them advocating the particular theological views of their various authors. Important examples include the gospels of Thomas, Peter, Judas, and Mary; infancy gospels such as that of James (the first to introduce the perpetual virginity of Mary); and gospel harmonies such as the Diatessaron.\nEtymology.\n\"Gospel\" is the Old English translation of the Hellenistic Greek term , meaning \"good news\"; this may be seen from analysis of ( \"good\" + \"messenger\" + diminutive suffix). The Greek term was Latinized as in the Vulgate, and translated into Latin as . In Old English, it was translated as ( \"good\" + \"news\"). The Old English term was retained as in Middle English Bible translations and hence remains in use also in Modern English.\nEncyclopaedia Britannica defines gospel as stemming from g\u014ddspel \"good story/news,\" a calque translating Latin evangelium from Greek \u03b5\u1f50\u03b1\u03b3\u03b3\u03ad\u03bb\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd \"good news.\"\nCanonical gospels: Matthew, Mark, Luke and John.\nContents.\nThe four canonical gospels share the same basic outline of the life of Jesus: he begins his public ministry in conjunction with that of John the Baptist, calls disciples, teaches and heals and confronts the Pharisees, dies on the cross and is raised from the dead. Each has its own distinctive understanding of him and his divine role and scholars recognize that the differences of detail among the gospels are irreconcilable, and any attempt to harmonize them would only disrupt their distinct theological messages. The patterns of parallels and differences found in the gospels are typical of ancient biographies about actual people and history, and are thus unproblematic if not read anachronistically.\nMatthew, Mark, and Luke are termed the synoptic gospels because they present very similar accounts of the life of Jesus. Mark begins with the baptism of the adult Jesus and the heavenly declaration that he is the son of God; he gathers followers and begins his ministry, and tells his disciples that he must die in Jerusalem but that he will rise; in Jerusalem, he is at first acclaimed but then rejected, betrayed, and crucified, and when the women who have followed him come to his tomb, they find it empty. Mark never calls Jesus \"God\" or claims that he existed prior to his earthly life, apparently believes that he had a normal human parentage and birth, and makes no attempt to trace his ancestry back to King David or Adam; it originally ended at Mark 16:8 and had no post-resurrection appearances, although Mark 16:7, in which the young man discovered in the tomb instructs the women to tell \"the disciples and Peter\" that Jesus will see them again in Galilee, hints that the author knew of the tradition.\nThe authors of Matthew and Luke added infancy and resurrection narratives to the story they found in Mark, although the two differ markedly. Each also makes subtle theological changes to Mark, though James Barker argues this is exaggerated, with ancient rhetorical practices explaining many differences in the gospels instead. The Markan miracle stories, for example, confirm Jesus' status as an emissary of God (which was Mark's understanding of the Messiah), but in Matthew they demonstrate his divinity, and the \"young man\" who appears at Jesus' tomb in Mark becomes a radiant angel in Matthew. Luke, while following Mark's plot more faithfully than Matthew, has expanded on the source, corrected Mark's grammar and syntax, and eliminated some passages entirely, notably most of chapters 6 and 7.\nJohn, the most overtly theological, is the first to make Christological judgements outside the context of the narrative of Jesus's life. He presents a significantly different picture of Jesus's career, omitting any mention of his ancestry, birth and childhood, his baptism, temptation and transfiguration; his chronology and arrangement of incidents is also distinctly different, clearly describing the passage of three years in Jesus's ministry in contrast to the single year of the synoptics, placing the cleansing of the Temple at the beginning rather than at the end, and the Last Supper on the day before Passover instead of being a Passover meal. However, there are also verses such as Mark 14:49 and Matthew 23:37 often viewed as hints of a longer ministry in the Synoptics. Ancient writing practices involved such chronological displacement and changes, with even reliable biographers including Plutarch displaying them. According to Delbert Burkett, the Gospel of John is the only gospel to call Jesus God, though other scholars including Larry Hurtado and Michael Barber view a possible divine Christology in the synoptics. In contrast to Mark, where Jesus hides his identity as messiah, in John he openly proclaims it.\nComposition.\nLike the rest of the New Testament, the four gospels were written in Greek. The Gospel of Mark probably dates from around AD 70, Matthew and Luke around AD 80\u201390, and John AD 90\u2013100, which puts their composition likely within the lifetimes of various eyewitnesses, including Jesus's own family. Despite the traditional ascriptions, all four are anonymous, and scholars have largely agreed they do not represent eyewitness accounts, though this may partly be the result of dubious form-critical assumptions . Most scholars view the author of Luke-Acts as an eyewitness to Paul. However, Paul never met Jesus. Before the gospels were written, he claimed to have had a vision of Jesus after his death and later met his brother James. The form-critics largely viewed the gospels as compilers of transmitted traditions, but the gospels are now seen as biographers engaging in literarily creative and imaginative form of art (which did involve claiming consulting eyewitnesses). Though the texts are anonymous, many scholars have defended the attributions to Luke and John, though many others have abandoned this view.\nIn the immediate aftermath of Jesus' death, his followers expected his return within their own lifetimes, and in consequence there was little motivation to write anything down for future generations, but as eyewitnesses began to die, and as the missionary needs of the church grew, there was an increasing need for written versions of the founder's life and teachings. According to Allison and Hays, the gospels present the timing of the Parousia as imminent but not fixed, being dependent on the repentance of Israel. Burkett argues the emergence of the gospels can be summarized by oral traditions passed on as unordered units, written collections of miracle stories and sayings, and proto-gospels preceding and serving as sources for the gospels, which combined proto-gospels, written collections, and oral tradition. The dedicatory preface of Luke testifies to the existence of previous accounts of the life of Jesus. According to Chris Keith, there is no incontrovertible evidence the gospel traditions circulated as written narratives, testimonia, or notes prior to Mark.\nMark is generally agreed to be the first gospel. According to Boring, Mark uses a variety of sources, including conflict stories (Mark 2:1\u20133:6), apocalyptic discourse (4:1\u201335), and collections of sayings, although not the sayings gospel known as the Gospel of Thomas, and probably not the hypothesized Q\u00a0source used by Matthew and Luke. However, Helen Bond writes that source criticism largely fallen out of favor in gospels scholarship, though some elements remain. Most scholars believe the authors of Matthew and Luke, acting independently, used Mark for their narrative of Jesus' career, supplementing it with the hypothesized collection of sayings called the Q\u00a0source and additional material unique to each called the M\u00a0source (Matthew) and the L\u00a0source (Luke), though alternative hypotheses that posit the direct use of Matthew by Luke or vice versa without Q are increasing in popularity within scholarship. The Gospels represent a Jesus tradition and were enveloped by oral storytelling and performances during the early years of Christianity, rather than being redactions or literary responses to each other. Mark, Matthew, and Luke are called the synoptic gospels because of their close similarities of content, arrangement, and language. Alan Kirk praises Matthew in particular for his \"scribal memory competence\" and \"his high esteem for and careful handling of both Mark and Q\", which makes claims the latter two works are significantly theologically or historically different dubious. The author of John may have known the synoptics, but did not use them in the way that Matthew and Luke used Mark. The increase in support for John\u2019s knowledge of the Synoptics is correlated with the decline of the signs source hypothesis, and there is currently considerable debate over the gospel's social, religious and historical context.\nAll four also use the Jewish scriptures, by quoting or referencing passages, interpreting texts, or alluding to or echoing biblical themes. Such use can be extensive: Mark's description of the Parousia (second coming) is made up almost entirely of quotations from scripture. Matthew is full of quotations and allusions, and although John uses scripture in a far less explicit manner, its influence is still pervasive. According to Wesley Allen, their source was the Greek version of the scriptures, called the Septuagint and they do not seem familiar with the original Hebrew, though other scholars point out that Matthew in particular has quotations closer to the Masoretic and could understand Hebrew.\nGenre and historical reliability.\nThe consensus among modern scholars is that the gospels are a subset of the ancient genre of \"bios\", or ancient biography. Ancient biographies were concerned with providing examples for readers to emulate while preserving and promoting the subject's reputation and memory; the gospels were never simply biographical, they were propaganda and \"kerygma\" (preaching), meant to convince people that Jesus was a charismatic miracle-working holy man. As such, they present the Christian message of the second half of the first century AD, and modern biblical scholars are cautious of relying on the gospels uncritically as historical documents, though they provide a good idea of the public career of Jesus. Bond states that many chreia found in the gospels are literary creations composed by the evangelists rather than reservoirs of oral tradition; while many are rooted in actual history, they have been reshaped to emphasize various aspects of Jesus.\nMost scholars since the 19th century have viewed the gospel of John as less reliable than the Synoptic gospels. Since the third quest, however, John's gospel is seen as having more reliability than previously thought or sometimes even more reliable than the synoptics. The John, Jesus, and History Seminar has contributed to the overthrow of the previous consensus that John was of no historical value, and many scholars now see it as a source for the Historical Jesus. In addition, the gospels read today have been edited and corrupted over time, leading Origen to complain in the 3rd century that \"the differences among manuscripts have become great [...] [because copyists] either neglect to check over what they have transcribed, or, in the process of checking, they make additions or deletions as they please.\" Most of these are insignificant, but some are significant, an example being Matthew 1:18, altered to imply the pre-existence of Jesus. For these reasons, modern scholars are cautious of relying on the gospels uncritically, and critical study can attempt to distinguish the original ideas of Jesus from those of later authors.\nScholars usually agree that John is not without historical value: certain of its sayings are as old or older than their synoptic counterparts, and its representation of the topography around Jerusalem is often superior to that of the synoptics. Its testimony that Jesus was executed before, rather than on, Passover, might well be more accurate, and its presentation of Jesus in the garden and the prior meeting held by the Jewish authorities are possibly more historically plausible than their synoptic parallels. Commentators disagree on whether the beloved disciple is presented as the author or an authority behind the gospel. The Synoptic Gospels are the primary sources for Christ's ministry.\nAssessments of the reliability of the Gospels involve not just the texts but studying the long oral and written transmission behind them using methods like memory studies and form criticism, with different scholars coming to different conclusions. There have been different views on the transmission of material that lead to the synoptic gospels, with various scholars arguing memory and orality reliably preserved traditions that ultimately go back to the historical Jesus. Other scholars have been more skeptical and see more changes in the traditions prior to the written Gospels. Jeffrey Tripp observes a scholarly trend advocating for the reliability of memory and the oral gospel traditions.\nJames D.G. Dunn believed that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the earliest tradents within the Christian churches [were] preservers more than innovators [...] seeking to transmit, retell, explain, interpret, elaborate, but not create \"de novo\" [...] Through the main body of the Synoptic tradition [...] we have in most cases direct access to the teaching and ministry of Jesus as it was remembered from the beginning of the transmission process [...] and so fairly direct access to the ministry and teaching of Jesus through the eyes and ears of those who went about with him.\nAnthony Le Donne, a leading memory researcher in Jesus studies, elaborated on Dunn's thesis, basing \"his historiography squarely on Dunn\u2019s thesis that the historical Jesus is the memory of Jesus recalled by the earliest disciples.\" According to Le Donne as explained by his reviewer, Benjamin Simpson, memories are fractured, and not exact recalls of the past. Le Donne further argues that the remembrance of events is facilitated by relating it to a common story, or \"type.\" This means the Jesus-tradition is not a theological invention of the early Church, but rather a tradition shaped and refracted through such memory \"type.\" Le Donne too supports a conservative view on typology compared to some other scholars, transmissions involving eyewitnesses, and ultimately a stable tradition resulting in little invention in the Gospels. Le Donne expressed himself thusly vis-a-vis more skeptical scholars, \"He (Dale Allison) does not read the gospels as fiction, but even if these early stories derive from memory, memory can be frail and often misleading. While I do not share Allison's point of departure (i.e. I am more optimistic), I am compelled by the method that came from it.\"\nDale Allison emphasizes the weakness of human memory, referring to its 'many sins' and how it frequently misguides people. He expresses skepticism at other scholars' endeavors to identify authentic sayings of Jesus. Instead of isolating and authenticating individual pericopae, Allison advocates for a methodology focused on identifying patterns and finding what he calls 'recurrent attestation'. Allison argues that the general impressions left by the Gospels should be trusted, though he is more skeptical on the details; if they are broadly unreliable, then our sources almost certainly cannot have preserved any of the particulars. Opposing preceding approaches where the Gospels are historically questionable and must be rigorously sifted through by competent scholars for nuggets of information, Allison argues that the Gospels are generally accurate and often 'got Jesus right'. Dale Allison finds apocalypticism to be recurrently attested, among various other themes. Reviewing his work, Rafael Rodriguez largely agrees with Allison's methodology and conclusions while arguing that Allison's discussion on memory is too one-sided, noting that memory \"is nevertheless sufficiently stable to authentically bring the past to bear on the present\" and that people are beholden to memory's successes in everyday life.\nCraig Keener, drawing on the works of previous studies by Dunn, Alan Kirk, Kenneth Bailey, and Robert McIver, among many others, utilizes memory theory and oral tradition to argue that the Gospels are in many ways historically accurate. His work has been endorsed by Markus Bockmuehl, James Charlesworth, and David Aune, among others. \nAccording to Bruce Chilton and Craig Evans, \"...the Judaism of the period treated such traditions very carefully, and the New Testament writers in numerous passages applied to apostolic traditions the same technical terminology found elsewhere in Judaism [...] In this way they both identified their traditions as 'holy word' and showed their concern for a careful and ordered transmission of it.\" NT Wright also argued for a stable oral tradition, stating \"Communities that live in an oral culture tend to be story-telling communities [...] Such stories [...] acquire a fairly fixed form, down to precise phraseology [...] they retain that form, and phraseology, as long as they are told [...] The storyteller in such a culture has no license to invent or adapt at will. The less important the story, the more the entire community, in a process that is informal but very effective, will keep a close watch on the precise form and wording with which the story is told.\nOther scholars are less sanguine about oral tradition, and Valantasis, Bleyle, and Hough argue that the early traditions were fluid and subject to alteration, sometimes transmitted by those who had known Jesus personally, but more often by wandering prophets and teachers like the Apostle Paul, who did not know him personally. Ehrman explains how the tradition developed as it was transmitted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You are probably familiar with the old birthday party game \"telephone.\" A group of kids sits in a circle, the first tells a brief story to the one sitting next to her, who tells it to the next, and to the next, and so on, until it comes back full circle to the one who started it. Invariably, the story has changed so much in the process of retelling that everyone gets a good laugh. Imagine this same activity taking place, not in a solitary living room with ten kids on one afternoon, but over the expanse of the Roman Empire (some 2,500 miles across), with thousands of participants\u2014from different backgrounds, with different concerns, and in different contexts\u2014some of whom have to translate the stories into different languages.\nWhile multiple quests have been undertaken to reconstruct the historical Jesus, since the late 1990s concerns have been growing about the possibility to reconstruct a historical Jesus from the Gospel-texts. According to Dunn, \"What we actually have in the earliest retellings of what is now the Synoptic tradition...are the memories of the first disciples-not Jesus himself, but the remembered Jesus. The idea that we can get back to an objective historical reality, which we can wholly separate and disentangle from the disciples' memories...is simply unrealistic.\" These memories can contradict and are not always historically correct, as the Gospels display. Chris Keith argues that the Historical Jesus was the one who could create these memories, both true or not. For instance, Mark and Luke disagree on how Jesus came back to the synagogue, with the likely more accurate Mark arguing he was rejected for being an artisan, while Luke portrays Jesus as literate and his refusal to heal in Nazareth as cause of his dismissal. Keith does not view Luke's account as a fabrication since different eyewitnesses would have perceived and remembered differently. According to Chris Keith, a historical Jesus is \"ultimately unattainable, but can be hypothesized on the basis of the interpretations of the early Christians, and as part of a larger process of accounting for how and why early Christians came to view Jesus in the ways that they did.\" According to Keith, \"these two models are methodologically and epistemologically incompatible,\" calling into question the methods and aim of the first model. Keith argues that criticism of the criteria of authenticity does not mean scholars cannot research the Historical Jesus, but rather that scholarship should seek to understand the Gospels rather than trying to sift through them for nuggets of history. Regardless of the methodological challenges historical Jesus studies have flowered in recent years; Dale Allison laments, \"The publication of academic books about the historical Jesus continues apace, so much so that no one can any longer keep up; we are all overwhelmed.\"\nTextual history and canonisation.\nThe oldest gospel text known is \ud835\udd1352, a fragment of John dating from the first half of the 2nd century. The creation of a Christian canon was probably a response to the career of the heretic Marcion (c.\u200985\u2013160), who established a canon of his own with just one gospel, the Gospel of Marcion, similar to the Gospel of Luke. The Muratorian canon, the earliest surviving list of books considered (by its own author at least) to form Christian scripture, included Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Irenaeus of Lyons went further, stating that there must be four gospels and only four because there were four corners of the Earth and thus the Church should have four pillars. He referred to the four collectively as the \"fourfold gospel\" (\"euangelion tetramorphon\").\nNon-canonical (apocryphal) gospels.\nThe many apocryphal gospels arose from the 1st century onward, frequently under assumed names to enhance their credibility and authority, and often from within branches of Christianity that were eventually branded heretical. They can be broadly organised into the following categories:\nThe apocryphal gospels can also be seen in terms of the communities which produced them:\nIn Islam.\nIn Islam, the Injil (Arabic: ) is considered one of the four major divine scriptures revealed by God, alongside the Tawrat (Torah), Zabur (Psalms), and the Quran. The term \"Inj\u012bl\" is derived from the Syriac (\"awongelion\"), ultimately from the Greek (\"euangelion\"; \"lit.\" \"good news\" or \"glad tidings\").\nAccording to the Quran, the Injil was a divine revelation given to \u02bf\u012as\u0101 (Jesus), whom Islam regards as a prophet and messenger, not the Son of God. It is described as containing guidance and light for the Children of Israel and as confirming the scriptures that came before it.\nMainstream Islamic belief holds that the original Injil has been lost or altered (\"ta\u1e25r\u012bf\") over time, and that the four canonical Gospels\u2014Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John\u2014do not represent this original text, although they may contain elements of Jesus\u2019s authentic teachings. Some classical and contemporary scholars argue that the Injil was primarily an oral revelation given to Jesus, similar to the Qur\u2019an revealed to Muhammad, rather than a written text authored by him.\nWhile the Injil holds a position of respect in Islam, it is considered superseded by the Qur\u2019an, which Muslims believe to be the final, complete, and preserved word of God. Islamic theology emphasizes that Muslims are instructed to believe in all previous scriptures in their original form, but the Qur\u2019an is seen as the ultimate criterion (\"al-Furq\u0101n\") over them.\nCriticism.\nSome modern Christian scholars and apologists have criticized the Islamic view of the Injil as historically and textually problematic, arguing that there is no manuscript evidence for a distinct, lost Gospel that matches the Qur\u2019anic description. Others contend that the charge of \"ta\u1e25r\u012bf\" (corruption) is a later theological development rather than a contemporaneous claim from the time of Jesus. \nMuslim scholars generally respond that the Qur\u2019an does not require the original Injil to survive in full form, only that its essential message was revealed to Jesus and has since been superseded by the Qur\u2019an.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12628", "revid": "123229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12628", "title": "GIMP", "text": "Open source raster graphics editor\n \nThe GNU Image Manipulation Program, commonly known by its acronym GIMP ( ), is a free and open-source raster graphics editor. \nIt is commonly used for photo retouching, image editing, free-hand drawing, and converting between different image file formats. \nGIMP is freely available on Windows, Linux and macOS. It is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL 3.0 or later). The project is supported by a community of volunteers. Users are encouraged to contribute. \nGIMP supports plugins and scripting, allowing users to extend its features and automate tasks. While it is not primarily designed for drawing, some artists and creators still use it for that purpose.\nHistory.\nIn 1995, Spencer Kimball and Peter Mattis began developing GIMP as a semester project at University of California, Berkeley for the eXperimental Computing Facility\".\" The software was originally named the General Image Manipulation Program. Kimball and Mattis formed the acronym GIMP by adding the letter G to \"-IMP,\" inspired by a reference to \"the gimp\" in the 1994 film \"Pulp Fiction\".\nGIMP's first public release, version 0.54, came out in 1996. It attracted many users, and a community of contributors grew around it. These contributors produced tutorials, shared artwork, and introduced improved workflows and techniques.\nDuring a visit to UC Berkeley in 1997, Richard Stallman of the GNU Project met with Kimball and Mattis where they asked him if they could change \"General\" in the program's name to \"GNU\". Stallman approved, and GIMP became part of the GNU software collection.\nThe initial release worked only on Unix-based systems such as Linux, SGI IRIX and HP-UX. Since then, GIMP has been ported to other operating systems, including Microsoft Windows (1997, GIMP 1.1) and macOS.\nA GUI toolkit called GTK (at the time known as the GIMP ToolKit) was developed to facilitate the development of GIMP. The development of the GIMP ToolKit has been attributed to Peter Mattis becoming disenchanted with the Motif toolkit GIMP originally used. Motif was used up to GIMP 0.60.\nMascot.\nWilber, the official mascot of GIMP, was created using GIMP by Tuomas Kuosmanen, known as \"tigert\", on 25 September 1997.\nOver time, other GIMP developers contributed additional accessories for Wilber, which are included in the \"Wilber Construction Kit\". The kit is available in GIMP's source code at codice_1.\nDevelopment.\nGIMP is primarily developed by volunteers as a free and open source software project associated with both the GNU and GNOME projects. Development takes place in a public git source code repository, on public mailing lists and in public chat channels on the GIMPNET IRC network.\nNew features are held in public separate source code branches and merged into the main (or development) branch when the GIMP team is sure they won't damage existing functions. Sometimes this means that features that appear complete do not get merged or take months or years before they become available in GIMP.\nGIMP itself is released as source code. After a source code release, installers and packages are made for different operating systems by parties who might not be in contact with the maintainers of GIMP.\nThe version number used in GIMP is expressed in a \"major-minor-micro\" format, with each number carrying a specific meaning: the first (major) number is incremented only for major developments (and is currently 3). The second (minor) number is incremented with each release of new features, with odd numbers reserved for in-progress development versions and even numbers assigned to stable releases; the third (micro) number is incremented before and after each release (resulting in even numbers for releases, and odd numbers for development snapshots) with any bug fixes subsequently applied and released for a stable version.\nPreviously, GIMP applied for several positions in the Google Summer of Code (GSoC). From 2006 to 2009 there have been nine GSoC projects that have been listed as successful, although not all successful projects have been merged into GIMP immediately. The healing brush and perspective clone tools and Ruby bindings were created as part of the 2006 GSoC and can be used in version 2.8.0 of GIMP, although there were three other projects that were completed and are later available in a stable version of GIMP; those projects being Vector Layers (end 2008 in 2.8 and master), and a JPEG 2000 plug-in (mid 2009 in 2.8 and master). Several of the GSoC projects were completed in 2008, but have been merged into a stable GIMP release later in 2009 to 2014 for Version 2.8.xx and 2.10.x. Some of them needed some more code work for the master tree.\nSecond public Development 2.9-Version was 2.9.4 with many deep improvements after initial Public Version 2.9.2. Third Public 2.9-Development version is Version 2.9.6. One of the new features is removing the 4\u00a0GB size limit of XCF file. Increase of possible threads to 64 is also an important point for modern parallel execution in actual AMD Ryzen and Intel Xeon processors. Version 2.9.8 included many bug fixes and improvements in gradients and clips. Improvements in performance and optimization beyond bug hunting were the development targets for 2.10.0. MacOS Beta is available with Version 2.10.4.\nThe first release candidate for version 3.0, RC1, was released on 6 November 2024. After several more months of development, version 3.0 was completed and released on 16 March 2025. This represented the completion of seven years of development to complete a major overhaul of many of GIMP's features and dependencies.\nGIMP developers meet during the annual Libre Graphics Meeting. Interaction designers from OpenUsability have also contributed to GIMP.\nDistribution.\nThe current version of GIMP works with numerous operating systems, including Linux, macOS and Windows. Many Linux distributions, such as Fedora Linux and Debian, include GIMP as a part of their desktop operating systems.\nGIMP began to host its own downloads after discontinuing use of SourceForge in 2013. The website later repossessed GIMP's dormant account and hosted advertising-laden versions of GIMP for Windows.\nIn 2022, GIMP was published on the Microsoft Store for Windows.\nFeatures.\nTools used to perform image editing can be accessed via the toolbox, through menus and dialogue windows. They include filters and brushes, as well as transformation, selection, layer and masking tools. GIMP's developers have asserted that it has, or at least aspire to it having, similar functionality to Photoshop, but has a different user interface.\nColor.\nThere are several ways of selecting colors, including palettes, color choosers and using an eyedropper tool to select a color on the canvas. The built-in color choosers include RGB/HSV/LAB/LCH selector or scales, water-color selector, CMYK selector and a color-wheel selector. Colors can also be selected using hexadecimal color codes, as used in HTML color selection. GIMP has native support for indexed color and RGB color spaces; other color spaces are supported using decomposition, where each channel of the new color space becomes a black-and-white image. CMYK, LAB and HSV (hue, saturation, value) are supported this way. Color blending can be achieved using the Blend tool, by applying a gradient to the surface of an image and using GIMP's color modes. Gradients are also integrated into tools such as the brush tool, when the user paints this way the output color slowly changes. There are a number of default gradients included with GIMP; a user can also create custom gradients with tools provided. Gradient plug-ins are also available.\nSelections and paths.\nGIMP selection tools include a rectangular and circular selection tool, free select tool, and fuzzy select tool (also known as magic wand). More advanced selection tools include the select by color tool for selecting contiguous regions of color\u2014and the scissors select tool, which creates selections semi-automatically between areas of highly contrasting colors. GIMP also supports a quick mask mode where a user can use a brush to paint the area of a selection. Visibly this looks like a red colored overlay being added or removed. The foreground select tool is an implementation of Simple interactive object extraction (SIOX), a method used to perform the extraction of foreground elements, such as a person or a tree in focus. The Paths Tool allows a user to create vectors (also known as B\u00e9zier curves). Users can use paths to create complex selections, including around natural curves. They can paint (or \"stroke\") the paths with brushes, patterns, or various line styles. Users can name and save paths for reuse.\nImage editing.\nThere are many tools that can be used for editing images in GIMP. The more common tools include a paint brush, pencil, airbrush, eraser and ink tools used to create new or blended pixels. The Bucket Fill tool can be used to fill a selection with a color or pattern. The Blend tool can be used to fill a selection with a color gradient. These color transitions can be applied to large regions or smaller custom path selections.\nGIMP also provides \"smart\" tools that use a more complex algorithm to do things that otherwise would be time-consuming or impossible. These include:\nLayers, layer masks and channels.\nAn image being edited in GIMP can consist of many layers in a stack. The user manual suggests that \"A good way to visualize a GIMP image is as a stack of transparencies,\" where in GIMP terminology, each level (analogous to a transparency) is called a layer. Each layer in an image is made up of several channels. In an RGB image, there are normally 3 or 4 channels, each consisting of a red, green and blue channel. Color sublayers look like slightly different gray images, but when put together they make a complete image. The fourth channel that may be part of a layer is the alpha channel (or layer mask). This channel measures opacity where a whole or part of an image can be completely visible, partially visible or invisible. Each layer has a layer mode that can be set to change the colors in the image.\nText layers can be created using the text tool, allowing a user to write on an image. Text layers can be transformed in several ways, such as converting them to a path or selection.\nAutomation, scripts and plug-ins.\nGIMP has approximately 150 standard effects and filters, including Drop Shadow, Blur, Motion Blur and Noise.\nGIMP operations can be automated with scripting languages. The Script-Fu is a Scheme-based language implemented using a TinyScheme interpreter built into GIMP. GIMP can also be scripted in Perl, Python (Python-Fu), or Tcl, using interpreters external to GIMP. New features can be added to GIMP not only by changing program code (GIMP core), but also by creating plug-ins. These are external programs that are executed and controlled by the main GIMP program. MathMap is an example of a plug-in written in C.\nThere is support for several methods of sharpening and blurring images, including the blur and sharpen tool. The unsharp mask tool is used to sharpen an image selectively\u00a0\u2013 it sharpens only those areas of an image that are sufficiently detailed. The Unsharp Mask tool is considered to give more targeted results for photographs than a normal sharpening filter. The Selective Gaussian Blur tool works in a similar way, except it blurs areas of an image with little detail.\nGIMP-ML is an extension for machine learning with 15 filters.\nGEGL.\nThe \"Generic Graphics Library\" (\"GEGL\") was first introduced in GIMP 2.6 to improve how the software processes images. Initially GIMP used GEGL for high bit-depth colour operations, helping reduce data loss when adjusting colours.\nGIMP 2.8 was limited to 8-bit color, which is much lower than the 12-bit or higher depth that most digital cameras produce. GIMP 2.10 introduced full support for high bit-depth color, and hardware acceleration was enabled through OpenCL for some tasks.\nGIMP 3.0 introduces non-destructive filters, allowing users to apply effects without permanently changing the original image. This means they can be edited, toggled on or off, or removed after being applied. Third-party filters are also supported, though they will not be retained if the necessary plugins are missing.\nCTX.\nCTX is a rasterizer for vector graphics introduced in GIMP 3.0. It allows certain simple shapes, such as lines and circles, to be converted into vector objects.\nFile formats.\nGIMP supports importing and exporting with a large number of different file formats. GIMP's native format XCF is designed to store all information GIMP can contain about an image; XCF is named after the e\"X\"perimental \"C\"omputing \"F\"acility where GIMP was authored. Import and export capability can be extended to additional file formats by means of plug-ins. XCF file size is extended to more than 4\u00a0GB since 2.9.6 and new stable tree 2.10.x.\nProfessional reviews.\nLifewire reviewed GIMP favorably in March 2019, writing that \"for those who have never experienced Photoshop, GIMP is simply a very powerful image manipulation program,\" and \"if you're willing to invest some time learning it, it can be a very good graphics tool.\"\nGIMP's fitness for use in professional environments is regularly reviewed; it is often compared to and suggested as a possible replacement for Adobe Photoshop.\nThe single-window mode introduced in GIMP 2.8 was reviewed in 2012 by Ryan Paul of \"Ars Technica\", who noted that it made the user experience feel \"more streamlined and less cluttered\". Michael Burns, writing for \"Macworld\" in 2014, described the single-window interface of GIMP 2.8.10 as a \"big improvement\".\nThe user interface has been criticized for being \"hard to use\".\nVersions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nForks and derivatives.\nBecause of the free and open-source nature of GIMP, several forks, variants and derivatives of the computer program have been created to fit the needs of their creators. While GIMP is cross-platform, variants of GIMP may not be. These variants are neither hosted nor linked on the GIMP site. The GIMP site does not host GIMP builds for Windows or Unix-like operating systems either, although it does include a link to a Windows build.\nExtensions.\nGIMP's functionality can be extended with plugins. Notable ones include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12629", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12629", "title": "Global illumination", "text": "Group of rendering algorithms used in 3D computer graphics\nGlobal illumination (GI), or indirect illumination, refers to the group of algorithms used in 3D computer graphics meant to add more realistic lighting to 3D scenes. Such algorithms take into account not only the light that comes directly from a light source (\"direct illumination\"), but also subsequent cases in which light rays from the same source are reflected by other surfaces in the scene, whether reflective or not (\"indirect illumination\").\nThe term \"global illumination\" was first used by Turner Whitted in his paper \"An improved illumination model for shaded display\", to differentiate between illumination calculations at a local scale (using geometric information directly, such as in Phong shading), a microscopic scale (extending local geometry with microfacet detail), and a global scale, including not only the geometry itself but also the visibility of every other object in the scene. Theoretically, reflections, refractions, and shadows are all examples of global illumination, because when simulating them, one object affects the rendering of another (as opposed to an object being affected only by a direct source of light). In practice, however, only the simulation of diffuse inter-reflection or caustics is called global illumination, especially when referring to real-time applications.\nAlgorithms.\nGlobal illumination is a key aspect to the realism of a 3D scene. Naive 3D lighting will only take into account direct light, meaning any light which radiates off a light source and bounces directly into the virtual camera. Shadows will appear completely dark, due to light not interacting with any other surface before it reaches the camera. As this is not what occurs in real life, we perceive the resulting image as incomplete. Applying full global illumination allows for the missing effects that makes an image feel more natural. However, global illumination is computationally more expensive and consequently much slower to generate.Most algorithms, especially those focusing on real-time solutions, model diffuse inter-reflection exclusively, which is a very important part of global illumination; however, some also model indirect specular reflections, refraction, and indirect shadowing, which allows for a closer approximation of the reality and produces more appealing images. The algorithms used to calculate the distribution of light energy between surfaces of a scene are closely related to heat transfer simulations performed using finite-element methods in engineering design.\nRadiosity, ray tracing, beam tracing, cone tracing, path tracing, Metropolis light transport and photon mapping are all examples of algorithms used for global illumination in offline settings, some of which may be used together to yield results that trade between accuracy and speed, depending on the implementation. \nReal-time applications.\nAchieving accurate computation of global illumination in real-time remains difficult. In real-time 3D graphics, the diffuse inter-reflection component of global illumination is sometimes approximated by an \"ambient\" term in the lighting equation, which is also called \"ambient lighting\" or \"ambient color\" in 3D software. Though this method of approximation is easy to perform computationally, when used alone it does not provide an adequately realistic effect. Ambient lighting is known to \"flatten\" shadows in 3D scenes, making the overall visual effect more bland. Beyond ambient lighting, techniques which trace the path of light accurately, such as those mentioned in the paragraph above, have historically been either too slow for consumer hardware or limited to static and precomputed environments. This proves problematic, as most applications allow for input from an user that can affect their environment, and the precalculation steps may introduce constraints upon the artists. Consequently, research has been dedicated to finding a balance between adequate performance, accurate visual results, and interactivity. \nRecently, consumer graphics hardware (starting with Nvidia's RTX 20 series and AMD's Radeon RX 6000 series) has been extended to allow for ray tracing computations to be performed in real time through hardware acceleration. This has allowed for further improvements, as applications can now harness the power of this acceleration to provide not only precise lighting results, but the ability to affect said lighting dynamically. Some content that has taken advantage of this capability includes Cyberpunk 2077, Indiana Jones and the Great Circle, and Alan Wake 2, among others.\nFor an overview of the current state of real-time global illumination, see or .\nProcedure.\nAlgorithms which attempt to simulate global illumination are numerical approximations of the rendering equation. Well-known algorithms for computing global illumination include path tracing, photon mapping and radiosity. The following approaches can be distinguished here:\nA full overview can be found in .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12630", "revid": "35839912", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12630", "title": "Geometric series", "text": "Sum of an (infinite) geometric progression\nIn mathematics, a geometric series is a series summing the terms of an infinite geometric sequence, in which the ratio of consecutive terms is constant. For example, the series formula_1 is a geometric series with common ratio &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which converges to the sum of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Each term in a geometric series is the geometric mean of the term before it and the term after it, in the same way that each term of an arithmetic series is the arithmetic mean of its neighbors.\nWhile Greek philosopher Zeno's paradoxes about time and motion (5th century BCE) have been interpreted as involving geometric series, such series were formally studied and applied a century or two later by Greek mathematicians, for example used by Archimedes to calculate the area inside a parabola (3rd century BCE). Today, geometric series are used in mathematical finance, calculating areas of fractals, and various computer science topics.\nThough geometric series most commonly involve real or complex numbers, there are also important results and applications for matrix-valued geometric series, function-valued geometric series, formula_2-adic number geometric series, and most generally geometric series of elements of abstract algebraic fields, rings, and semirings.\nDefinition and examples.\nThe geometric series is an infinite series derived from a special type of sequence called a geometric progression. This means that it is the sum of infinitely many terms of geometric progression: starting from the initial term formula_3, and the next one being the initial term multiplied by a constant number known as the common ratio formula_4. By multiplying each term with a common ratio continuously, the geometric series can be defined mathematically as\nformula_5\nThe sum of a finite initial segment of an infinite geometric series is called a finite geometric series, expressed as\nformula_6\nWhen formula_7 it is often called a growth rate or rate of expansion. When formula_8 it is often called a decay rate or shrink rate, where the idea that it is a \"rate\" comes from interpreting formula_9 as a sort of discrete time variable. When an application area has specialized vocabulary for specific types of growth, expansion, shrinkage, and decay, that vocabulary will also often be used to name formula_10 parameters of geometric series. In economics, for instance, rates of increase and decrease of price levels are called inflation rates and deflation rates, while rates of increase in values of investments include rates of return and interest rates.\nWhen summing infinitely many terms, the geometric series can either be convergent or divergent. Convergence means there is a value after summing infinitely many terms, whereas divergence means no value after summing. The convergence of a geometric series can be described depending on the value of a common ratio, see . Grandi's series is an example of a divergent series that can be expressed as formula_11, where the initial term is formula_12 and the common ratio is formula_13; this is because it has three different values.\nDecimal numbers that have repeated patterns that continue forever can be interpreted as geometric series and thereby converted to expressions of the ratio of two integers. For example, the repeated decimal fraction formula_14 can be written as the geometric series formula_15 where the initial term is formula_16 and the common ratio is formula_17.\nConvergence of the series and its proof.\nThe convergence of the infinite sequence of partial sums of the infinite geometric series depends on the magnitude of the common ratio formula_10 alone:\nThe rate of convergence shows how the sequence quickly approaches its limit. In the case of the geometric series\u2014the relevant sequence is formula_36 and its limit is formula_37\u2014the rate and order are found via\nformula_38\nwhere formula_39 represents the order of convergence. Using formula_40 and choosing the order of convergence formula_41 gives:\nformula_42\nWhen the series converges, the rate of convergence gets slower as formula_43 approaches formula_44. The pattern of convergence also depends on the sign or complex argument of the common ratio. If formula_45 and formula_46 then terms all share the same sign and the partial sums of the terms approach their eventual limit monotonically. If formula_47 and formula_46, adjacent terms in the geometric series alternate between positive and negative, and the partial sums formula_36 of the terms oscillate above and below their eventual limit formula_50. For complex formula_10 and formula_52 the formula_20 converge in a spiraling pattern.\nThe convergence is proved as follows. The partial sum of the first formula_54 terms of a geometric series, up to and including the formula_55 term,\nformula_56\nis given by the closed form\nformula_57\nwhere formula_4 is the common ratio. The case formula_59 is merely a simple addition, a case of an arithmetic series. The formula for the partial sums formula_20 with formula_61 can be derived as follows:\nformula_62\nfor formula_63. As formula_10 approaches 1, polynomial division or L'H\u00f4pital's rule recovers the case formula_65. \nAs formula_66 approaches infinity, the absolute value of \"r\" must be less than one for this sequence of partial sums to converge to a limit. When it does, the series converges absolutely. The infinite series then becomes\nformula_67\nfor formula_68.\nThis convergence result is widely applied to prove the convergence of other series as well, whenever those series's terms can be bounded from above by a suitable geometric series; that proof strategy is the basis for the ratio test and root test for the convergence of infinite series.\nConnection to the power series.\nLike the geometric series, a\u00a0power series\u00a0has one parameter for a common variable raised to successive powers corresponding to the geometric series's\u00a0formula_4, but it has additional parameters\u00a0formula_70 one\u00a0for each term in the series, for the distinct coefficients of each\u00a0formula_71, rather than just a single additional parameter\u00a0formula_27\u00a0for all terms, the common coefficient of\u00a0formula_73\u00a0in each term of a geometric series. The geometric series can therefore be considered a class of power series in which the sequence of coefficients satisfies\u00a0formula_74\u00a0for all\u00a0formula_9\u00a0and\u00a0formula_76.\nThis special class of power series plays an important role in mathematics, for instance for the study of\u00a0ordinary generating functions\u00a0in combinatorics and the\u00a0summation\u00a0of\u00a0divergent series in analysis. Many other power series can be written as transformations and combinations of geometric series, making the geometric series formula a convenient tool for calculating formulas for those power series as well.\nAs a power series, the geometric series has a radius of convergence of 1. This could be seen as a consequence of the Cauchy\u2013Hadamard theorem and the fact that formula_77 for any formula_27 or as a consequence of the ratio test for the convergence of infinite series, with formula_79 implying convergence only for formula_80 However, both the ratio test and the Cauchy\u2013Hadamard theorem are proven using the geometric series formula as a logically prior result, so such reasoning would be subtly circular.\nBackground.\n2,500 years ago, Greek mathematicians believed that an infinitely long list of positive numbers must sum to infinity. Therefore, Zeno of Elea created a paradox, demonstrating as follows: in order to walk from one place to another, one must first walk half the distance there, and then half of the remaining distance, and half of that remaining distance, and so on, covering infinitely many intervals before arriving. In doing so, he partitioned a fixed distance into an infinitely long list of halved remaining distances, each with a length greater than zero. Zeno's paradox revealed to the Greeks that their assumption about an infinitely long list of positive numbers needing to add up to infinity was incorrect.\nEuclid's \"Elements\" has the distinction of being the world's oldest continuously used mathematical textbook, and it includes a demonstration of the sum of finite geometric series in Book IX, Proposition 35, illustrated in an adjacent figure.\nArchimedes in his \"The Quadrature of the Parabola\" used the sum of a geometric series to compute the area enclosed by a parabola and a straight line. Archimedes' theorem states that the total area under the parabola is of the area of the blue triangle. His method was to dissect the area into infinite triangles as shown in the adjacent figure. He determined that each green triangle has the area of the blue triangle, each yellow triangle has the area of a green triangle, and so forth. Assuming that the blue triangle has area 1, then, the total area is the sum of the infinite series\nformula_81\nHere the first term represents the area of the blue triangle, the second term is the area of the two green triangles, the third term is the area of the four yellow triangles, and so on. Simplifying the fractions gives\nformula_82\na geometric series with common ratio formula_83 and its sum is:\nformula_84\nIn addition to his elegantly simple proof of the divergence of the harmonic series, Nicole Oresme proved that the arithmetico-geometric series known as Gabriel's Staircase,\nformula_85\nIn the diagram for his geometric proof, similar to the adjacent diagram, shows a two-dimensional geometric series. The first dimension is horizontal, in the bottom row, representing the geometric series with initial value formula_86 and common ratio formula_87\nformula_88\nThe second dimension is vertical, where the bottom row is a new initial term formula_89 and each subsequent row above it shrinks according to the same common ratio formula_87, making another geometric series with sum formula_91,\nformula_92\nThis approach generalizes usefully to higher dimensions, and that generalization is described below in .\nApplications.\nAs mentioned above, the geometric series can be applied in the field of economics. This leads to the common ratio of a geometric series that may refer to the rates of increase and decrease of price levels are called inflation rates and deflation rates; in contrast, the rates of increase in values of investments include rates of return and interest rates. More specifically in mathematical finance, geometric series can also be applied in time value of money; that is to represent the present values of perpetual annuities, sums of money to be paid each year indefinitely into the future. This sort of calculation is used to compute the annual percentage rate of a loan, such as a mortgage loan. It can also be used to estimate the present value of expected stock dividends, or the terminal value of a financial asset assuming a stable growth rate. However, the assumption that interest rates are constant is generally incorrect and payments are unlikely to continue forever since the issuer of the perpetual annuity may lose its ability or end its commitment to make continued payments, so estimates like these are only heuristic guidelines for decision making rather than scientific predictions of actual current values.\nIn addition to finding the area enclosed by a parabola and a line in Archimedes' \"The Quadrature of the Parabola\", the geometric series may also be applied in finding the Koch snowflake's area described as the union of infinitely many equilateral triangles (see figure). Each side of the green triangle is exactly the size of a side of the large blue triangle and therefore has exactly the area. Similarly, each yellow triangle has the area of a green triangle, and so forth. All of these triangles can be represented in terms of geometric series: the blue triangle's area is the first term, the three green triangles' area is the second term, the twelve yellow triangles' area is the third term, and so forth. Excluding the initial 1, this series has a common ratio formula_93, and by taking the blue triangle as a unit of area, the total area of the snowflake is:\nformula_94\nVarious topics in computer science may include the application of geometric series in the following:\nBeyond real and complex numbers.\nWhile geometric series with real and complex number parameters formula_27 and formula_10 are most common, geometric series of more general terms such as functions, matrices, and formula_2-adic numbers also find application. The mathematical operations used to express a geometric series given its parameters are simply addition and repeated multiplication, and so it is natural, in the context of modern algebra, to define geometric series with parameters from any ring or field. Further generalization to geometric series with parameters from semirings is more unusual, but also has applications; for instance, in the study of fixed-point iteration of transformation functions, as in transformations of automata via rational series.\nIn order to analyze the convergence of these general geometric series, then on top of addition and multiplication, one must also have some metric of distance between partial sums of the series. This can introduce new subtleties into the questions of convergence, such as the distinctions between uniform convergence and pointwise convergence in series of functions, and can lead to strong contrasts with intuitions from the real numbers, such as in the convergence of the series formula_98 with formula_99 and formula_100 to formula_101 in the 2-adic numbers using the 2-adic absolute value as a convergence metric. In that case, the 2-adic absolute value of the common coefficient is formula_102, and while this is counterintuitive from the perspective of real number absolute value (where formula_103 naturally), it is nonetheless well-justified in the context of p-adic analysis.\nWhen the multiplication of the parameters is not commutative, as it often is not for matrices or general physical operators, particularly in quantum mechanics, then the standard way of writing the geometric series,\nformula_104\nmultiplying from the right, may need to be distinguished from the alternative\nformula_105\nmultiplying from the left, and also the symmetric\nformula_106\nmultiplying half on each side. These choices may correspond to important alternatives with different strengths and weaknesses in applications, as in the case of ordering the mutual interferences of drift and diffusion differently at infinitesimal temporal scales in Ito integration and Stratonovitch integration in stochastic calculus.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12631", "revid": "25530780", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12631", "title": "Gypsies", "text": ""}
{"id": "12634", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12634", "title": "List of islands of Greece", "text": " \nGreece has many islands, with estimates ranging from somewhere around 1,200 to 6,000, depending on the minimum size to take into account. The number of inhabited islands is variously cited as between 166 and 227.\nThe largest Greek island by both area and population is Crete, located at the southern edge of the Aegean Sea. The second largest island in area is Euboea or Evvia, which is separated from the mainland by the 60 m wide Euripus Strait, and is administered as part of the Central Greece region. After the third and fourth largest Greek islands, Lesbos and Rhodes, the rest of the islands are two-thirds of the area of Rhodes, or smaller.\nThe Greek islands are traditionally grouped into the following clusters: the Argo-Saronic Islands (pink) in the Saronic Gulf near Athens; the Cyclades (purple), a large but dense collection occupying the central part of the Aegean Sea; the North Aegean islands (yellow, and emerald), a loose grouping off the west coast of Turkey; the Dodecanese (blue), another loose collection in the southeast between Crete and Turkey; the Sporades (olive), a small tight group off the coast of Euboea; and the Ionian Islands (red), chiefly located to the west of the mainland in the Ionian Sea. Crete with its surrounding islets and Euboea are traditionally excluded from this grouping.\nSome Greek islands are often located off the coasts of modern countries whose shores were already inhabited by Greeks before antiquity, such as the coasts of Asia Minor and northern Epirus. It was only in the 20th century that the displacement of Greek populations led to a change in the ethnic landscape: today, Greek-populated islands are situated near regions now inhabited by other ethnic groups, such as in Turkey (Asia Minor) and southern Albania (Northern Epirus).\nThis article excludes the Peloponnese, which has technically been an island since the construction of the Corinth Canal in 1893, but is rarely considered to be an island due to its artificial origins.\nIslands of Greece by size.\nThe following are the 50 largest Greek islands listed by surface area. \nIslands of the Aegean Sea.\nArgo-Saronic Islands.\nThis list includes Argo-Saronic islands \n, which are located in the Saronic Gulf. The largest Argo-Saronic island is Salamis. The main islands are in bold. Uninhabited islands are indicated, including those that may have been inhabited in the past:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt; \nCretan island.\nThe two lists below show the islands, islets, and rocks that surround the island of Crete that are in the Aegean Sea or Libyan Sea.\nCretan islands of the Aegean Sea.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCretan islands of the Libyan Sea.\nIslands on the south coast of Crete are considered in the Libyan Sea.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCyclades islands.\nThe Cyclades islands comprise around 220 islands and islets. The main islands are indicated in bold below.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDodecanese islands.\nThere are 164 total Dodecanese Islands of which 26 are inhabited. There are 12 main islands, listed in bold below:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEuboea and surrounding islands.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNorth Aegean islands.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt; \nThere are also two North Aegean islands in the Thracian Sea:\nSporades islands.\nThe 30 islands in the Sporades are listed below, with the four major islands in bold. The largest Sporades island is Skyros.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt; \nIonian Sea islands.\nIslands in the Ionian Sea are listed below. The seven largest and most popular islands are listed in bold.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt; \nIslets close to mainland.\nThe following islands are close to the mainland and not part of a sea:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIslands not in the sea.\nLake and river islands.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLagoon islands.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12635", "revid": "2308770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12635", "title": "Gian Lorenzo Bernini", "text": "Italian sculptor and architect (1598\u20131680)\nGian Lorenzo (or Gianlorenzo) Bernini (, ; ; Italian Giovanni Lorenzo; 7 December 1598 \u2013 28 November 1680) was an Italian sculptor, architect, painter and city planner. Bernini's creative abilities and mastery in a range of artistic arenas define him as a \"uomo universale\" or Renaissance man. While a major figure in the world of architecture, he was more prominently the leading sculptor of his age, credited with creating the Baroque style of sculpture.\nAs one scholar has commented, \"What Shakespeare is to drama, Bernini may be to sculpture: the first pan-European sculptor whose name is instantaneously identifiable with a particular manner and vision, and whose influence was inordinately powerful\u00a0...\" In addition, he was a painter (mostly small canvases in oil) and a man of the theatre: he wrote, directed and acted in plays (mostly Carnival satires), for which he designed stage sets and theatrical machinery. He produced designs as well for a wide variety of decorative art objects including lamps, tables, mirrors, and even coaches.\nAs an architect and city planner, he designed secular buildings, churches, chapels, and public squares, as well as massive works combining both architecture and sculpture, especially elaborate public fountains and funerary monuments and a whole series of temporary structures (in stucco and wood) for funerals and festivals. His broad technical versatility, boundless compositional inventiveness and sheer skill in manipulating marble ensured that he would be considered a worthy successor of Michelangelo, far outshining other sculptors of his generation. His talent extended beyond the confines of sculpture to a consideration of the setting in which it would be situated; his ability to synthesize sculpture, painting, and architecture into a coherent conceptual and visual whole has been termed by the late art historian Irving Lavin the \"unity of the visual arts\".\nBiography.\nYouth.\nBernini was born on 7 December 1598 in Naples to Angelica Galante, a Neapolitan, and Mannerist sculptor Pietro Bernini, originally from Florence. He was the sixth of their thirteen children. Gian Lorenzo Bernini was \"recognized as a prodigy when he was only eight years old, [and] he was consistently encouraged by his father, Pietro. His precocity earned him the admiration and favour of powerful patrons who hailed him as 'the Michelangelo of his century'\u201d. More specifically, it was Pope Paul V, who after first attesting to the boy Bernini's talent, famously remarked, 'This child will be the Michelangelo of his age,' later repeating that prophecy to Cardinal Maffeo Barberini (the future Pope Urban VIII), as Domenico Bernini reports in his biography of his father. In 1606 his father received a papal commission (to contribute a marble relief to the Cappella Paolina of Santa Maria Maggiore) and so moved from Naples to Rome, taking his entire family with him and continuing in earnest the training of his son Gian Lorenzo.\nSeveral extant works, dating c.\u20091615\u20131620, are by general scholarly consensus, collaborative efforts by both father and son: they include the \"Faun Teased by Putti\" (c.\u20091615, Metropolitan Museum, NYC), \"Boy with a Dragon\" (c.\u20091616\u201317, Getty Museum, Los Angeles), the Aldobrandini \"Four Seasons\" (c.\u20091620, private collection), and the recently discovered \"Bust of the Savior\" (1615\u201316, New York, private collection). Sometime after the arrival of the Bernini family in Rome, word about the great talent of the boy Gian Lorenzo spread throughout the city and he soon caught the attention of Cardinal Scipione Borghese, nephew to the reigning pope, Paul V, who spoke of the boy genius to his uncle. Bernini was therefore presented before Pope Paul V, curious to see if the stories about Gian Lorenzo's talent were true. The boy improvised a sketch of Saint Paul for the marvelling pope, and this was the beginning of the pope's attention on this young talent.\nOnce he was brought to Rome, he rarely left its walls, except (much against his will) for a five-month stay in Paris in the service of King Louis XIV and brief trips to nearby towns (including Civitavecchia, Tivoli and Castelgandolfo), mostly for work-related reasons. Rome was Bernini's city: \"You are made for Rome,\" said Pope Urban VIII to him, \"and Rome for you.\" It was in this world of 17th-century Rome and the international religious-political power which resided there that Bernini created his greatest works. Bernini's works are therefore often characterized as perfect expressions of the spirit of the assertive, triumphal but self-defensive Counter Reformation Catholic Church. Certainly, Bernini was a man of his times and deeply religious (at least later in life), but he and his artistic production should not be reduced simply to instruments of the papacy and its political-doctrinal programs, an impression that is at times communicated by the works of the three most eminent Bernini scholars of the previous generation, Rudolf Wittkower, Howard Hibbard, and Irving Lavin. As Tomaso Montanari's recent revisionist monograph, \"La libert\u00e0 di Bernini\" (Turin: Einaudi, 2016) argues and Franco Mormando's anti-hagiographic biography, \"Bernini: His Life and His Rome\" (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011), illustrates, Bernini and his artistic vision maintained a certain degree of freedom from the mindset and mores of Counter-Reformation Roman Catholicism.\nPartnership with Scipione Borghese.\nUnder the patronage of the extravagantly wealthy and most powerful Cardinal Scipione Borghese, the young Bernini rapidly rose to prominence as a sculptor. Among his early works for the cardinal, as an assistant in his father's workshop, would have been small contributions to decorative pieces for the garden of the Villa Borghese, such as perhaps \"The Allegory of Autumn\" (formerly in the Hester Diamond collection in New York). Another small garden ornament work (in the Galleria Borghese since Bernini's lifetime), \"The Goat Amalthea with the Infant Jupiter and a Faun\", was from 1926 until 2022 generally considered by scholars to be the earliest work executed entirely by the young Bernini himself, despite the fact that it is never mentioned in any of the contemporary sources, except for a late reference (1675) as a Bernini work by Joachim von Sandrart, a German visitor to Rome, an attribution that was given no credence until the twentieth century. Indeed, the official 2022 \"Catalogo generale\" (vol. 1, \"Sculture moderne\", cat. 41) of the Galleria Borghese, edited by Anna Coliva (former director of the gallery) formally removes the attribution to Bernini completely, on the basis of both stylistic, technical, and historical (documentary) grounds.\nInstead, among Bernini's earliest and securely documented work is his collaboration on his father's commission of February 1618 from Cardinal Maffeo Barberini to create four marble \"putti\" for the Barberini family chapel in the church of , the contract stipulating that his son Gian Lorenzo would assist in the execution of the statues. Also dating to 1618 is a letter by Maffeo Barberini in Rome to his brother Carlo in Florence, which mentions that he (Maffeo) was thinking of asking the young Gian Lorenzo to finish one of the statues left incomplete by Michelangelo, then in possession of Michelangelo's grandnephew which Maffeo was hoping to purchase, a remarkable attestation of the great skill that the young Bernini was already believed to possess.\nAlthough the Michelangelo statue-completion commission came to nought, the young Bernini was shortly thereafter (in 1619) commissioned to repair and complete a famous work of antiquity, the \"Sleeping Hermaphroditus\" owned by Cardinal Scipione Borghese (, Rome) and later (c.\u20091622) restored the so-called \"Ludovisi Ares\" (, Rome).\nAlso dating to this early period are the so-called \"Damned Soul\" and \"Blessed Soul\" of c.\u20091619, two small marble busts which may have been influenced by a set of prints by Pieter de Jode I or Karel van Mallery, but which were in fact unambiguously catalogued in the inventory of their first documented owner, Fernando de Botinete y Acevedo, as depicting a nymph and a satyr, a commonly paired duo in ancient sculpture (they were not commissioned by nor ever belonged to either Scipione Borghese or, as most scholarship erroneously claims, the Spanish cleric, Pedro Foix Montoya). By the time he was twenty-two, Bernini was considered talented enough to have been given a commission for a papal portrait, the \"Bust of Pope Paul V\", now in the J. Paul Getty Museum.\nBernini's reputation, however, was definitively established by four masterpieces, executed between 1619 and 1625, all now displayed in the Galleria Borghese in Rome. To the art historian Rudolf Wittkower these four works\u2014\"Aeneas, Anchises, and Ascanius\" (1619), \"The Rape of Proserpina\" (1621\u201322), \"Apollo and Daphne\" (1622\u20131625), and \"David\" (1623\u201324)\u2014\"inaugurated a new era in the history of European sculpture.\" It is a view repeated by other scholars, such as Howard Hibbard who proclaimed that, in all of the seventeenth century, \"there were no sculptors or architects comparable to Bernini.\" Adapting the classical grandeur of Renaissance sculpture and the dynamic energy of the Mannerist period, Bernini forged a new, distinctly Baroque conception for religious and historical sculpture, powerfully imbued with dramatic realism, stirring emotion and dynamic, theatrical compositions. Bernini's early sculpture groups and portraits manifest \"a command of the human form in motion and a technical sophistication rivalled only by the greatest sculptors of classical antiquity.\" Moreover, Bernini possessed the ability to depict highly dramatic narratives with characters showing intense psychological states, but also to organize large-scale sculptural works that convey a magnificent grandeur.\nUnlike sculptures done by his predecessors, these focus on specific points of narrative tension in the stories they are trying to tell: Aeneas and his family fleeing the burning Troy; the instant that Pluto finally grasps the hunted Persephone; the precise moment that Apollo sees his beloved Daphne begin her transformation into a tree. They are transitory but dramatic powerful moments in each story. Bernini's \"David\" is another stirring example of this. Michelangelo's motionless, idealized \"David\" shows the subject holding a rock in one hand and a sling in the other, contemplating the battle; similarly immobile versions by other Renaissance artists, including Donatello's, show the subject in his triumph after the battle with Goliath. Bernini illustrates David during his active combat with the giant, as he twists his body to catapult toward Goliath. To emphasize these moments and to ensure that they were appreciated by the viewer, Bernini designed the sculptures with a specific viewpoint in mind, though he sculpted them fully in the round. Their original placements within the Villa Borghese were against walls so that the viewers' first view was the dramatic moment of the narrative.\nThe result of such an approach is to invest the sculptures with greater psychological energy. The viewer finds it easier to gauge the state of mind of the characters and therefore understands the larger story at work: Daphne's wide open mouth in fear and astonishment, David biting his lip in determined concentration, or Proserpina desperately struggling to free herself. This is shown by how Bernini portrays her braids coming undone which reveals her emotional distress. In addition to portraying psychological realism, they show a greater concern for representing physical details. The tousled hair of Pluto, the pliant flesh of Proserpina, or the forest of leaves beginning to envelop Daphne all demonstrate Bernini's exactitude and delight for representing complex real world textures in marble form.\nPapal artist: the pontificate of Urban VIII.\nIn 1621 Pope Paul V Borghese was succeeded on the throne of St. Peter by another admiring friend of Bernini's, Cardinal Alessandro Ludovisi, who became Pope Gregory XV: although his reign was very short (he died in 1623), Pope Gregory commissioned portraits of himself (both in marble and bronze) by Bernini. The pontiff also bestowed upon Bernini the honorific rank of 'Cavaliere,' the title with which for the rest of his life the artist was habitually referred. In 1623 came the ascent to the papal throne of his aforementioned friend and former tutor, Cardinal Maffeo Barberini, as Pope Urban VIII, and henceforth (until Urban's death in 1644) Bernini enjoyed near monopolistic patronage from the Barberini pope and family. The new Pope Urban is reported to have remarked, \"It is a great fortune for you, O Cavaliere, to see Cardinal Maffeo Barberini made pope, but our fortune is even greater to have Cavalier Bernini alive in our pontificate.\" Although he did not fare as well during the reign (1644\u201355) of Innocent X, under Innocent's successor, Alexander VII (reigned 1655\u201367), Bernini once again gained pre-eminent artistic domination and continued in the successive pontificate to be held in high regard by Clement IX during his short reign (1667\u201369).\nUnder Urban VIII's patronage, Bernini's horizons rapidly and widely broadened: he was not just producing sculpture for private residences, but playing the most significant artistic (and engineering) role on the city stage, as sculptor, architect, and urban planner. His official appointments also testify to this\u2014\"curator of the papal art collection, director of the papal foundry at Castel Sant'Angelo, commissioner of the fountains of Piazza Navona\". Such positions gave Bernini the opportunity to demonstrate his versatile skills throughout the city. To great protest from older, experienced master architects, he, with virtually no architectural training to his name, was appointed \"Architect of St Peter's\" in 1629, upon the death of Carlo Maderno. From then on, Bernini's work and artistic vision would be placed at the symbolic heart of Rome.\nBernini's artistic pre-eminence under Urban VIII (and later under Alexander VII) meant he was able to secure the most important commissions in the Rome of his day, namely, the various massive embellishment projects of the newly finished St. Peter's Basilica, completed under Pope Paul V with the addition of Maderno's nave and facade and finally re-consecrated by Pope Urban VIII on 18 November 1626, after 100 years of planning and building. Within the basilica he was responsible for the Baldacchino, the decoration of the four piers under the cupola, the Cathedra Petri or Chair of St. Peter in the apse, the Tomb of Countess Matilda of Tuscany, the chapel of the Blessed Sacrament in the right nave, and the decoration (floor, walls and arches) of the new nave. The Baldacchino immediately became the visual centrepiece of the basilica. Designed as a massive spiraling gilded bronze canopy over the tomb of St Peter, Bernini's four-columned creation reached nearly from the ground and cost around 200,000 Roman scudi (about 8 million US dollars in the currency of the early 21st century). \"Quite simply\", writes one art historian, \"nothing like it had ever been seen before\". Soon after the completion of the Baldacchino, Bernini undertook the whole-scale embellishment of the four massive piers at the crossing of the basilica (i.e., the structures supporting the cupola) including, most notably, four colossal, theatrically dramatic statues. Among the latter is the majestic \"St. Longinus\" executed by Bernini himself (the other three are by other contemporary sculptors Fran\u00e7ois Duquesnoy, Francesco Mochi, and Bernini's disciple, Andrea Bolgi).\nIn the basilica Bernini also began work on the tomb for Urban VIII, completed only after Urban's death in 1644, one in a long, distinguished series of tombs and funerary monuments for which Bernini is famous and a traditional genre upon which his influence left an enduring mark, often copied by subsequent artists. Indeed, Bernini's final and most original tomb monument, the Tomb of Pope Alexander VII, in St. Peter's Basilica, represents, according to Erwin Panofsky, the very pinnacle of European funerary art, whose creative inventiveness subsequent artists could not hope to surpass.\nDespite this busy engagement with large works of public architecture, Bernini was still able to devote himself to his sculpture, especially portraits in marble, but also large statues such as the life-size \"Saint Bibiana\" (1624, Church of Santa Bibiana, Rome). Bernini's portraits show his ever-increasing ability to capture the utterly distinctive personal characteristics of his sitters, as well as his ability to achieve in cold white marble almost painterly-like effects that render with convincing realism the various surfaces involved: human flesh, hair, fabric of varying type, metal, etc. These portraits included a number of busts of Urban VIII himself, the family bust of Francesco Barberini and most notably, the Two Busts of Scipione Borghese\u2014the second of which had been rapidly created by Bernini once a flaw had been found in the marble of the first. The transitory nature of the expression on Scipione's face is often noted by art historians, as iconic of the Baroque concern for representing fleeting movement in static artworks. To Rudolf Wittkower the \"beholder feels that in the twinkle of an eye not only might the expression and attitude change but also the folds of the casually arranged mantle\".\nOther marble portraits in this period include that of Costanza Bonarelli unusual in its more personal, intimate nature. (At the time of the sculpting of the portrait, Bernini was having an affair with Costanza, wife of one of his assistants, sculptor, Matteo.) Indeed, it would appear to be the first marble portrait of a non-aristocratic woman by a major artist in European history.\nBeginning in the late 1630s, now known in Europe as one of the most accomplished portraitists in marble, Bernini also began to receive royal commissions from outside Rome, for subjects such as Cardinal Richelieu of France, Francesco I d'Este the powerful Duke of Modena, Charles I of England and his wife, Queen Henrietta Maria. The bust of Charles I was produced in Rome from a triple portrait (oil on canvas) executed by Van Dyck, that survives today in the British Royal Collection. The bust of Charles was lost in the Whitehall Palace fire of 1698 (though its design is known through contemporary copies and drawings) and that of Henrietta Maria was not undertaken due to the outbreak of the English Civil War.\nTemporary eclipse and resurgence under Innocent X.\nIn 1644, with the death of Pope Urban with whom Bernini had been so intimately connected and the ascent to power of the fierce Barberini-enemy Pope Innocent X Pamphilj, Bernini's career suffered a major, unprecedented eclipse, which was to last four years. This had not only to do with Innocent's anti-Barberini politics but also with Bernini's role in the disastrous project of the new bell towers for St. Peter's basilica, designed and supervised entirely by Bernini.\nThe infamous bell tower affair was to be the biggest failure of his career, both professionally and financially. In 1636, eager to finally finish the exterior of St. Peter's, Pope Urban had ordered Bernini to design and build the two, long-intended bell towers for its facade: the foundations of the two towers had already been designed and constructed (namely, the last bays at either extremity of the facade) by Carlo Maderno (architect of the nave and the fa\u00e7ade) decades earlier. Once the first tower was finished in 1641, cracks began to appear in the fa\u00e7ade but, curiously enough, work nonetheless continued on the second tower and the first storey was completed. Despite the presence of the cracks, work only stopped in July 1642 once the papal treasury had been exhausted by the disastrous Wars of Castro. Knowing that Bernini could no longer depend on the protection of a favourable pope, his enemies (especially Francesco Borromini) raised a great alarm over the cracks, predicting a disaster for the whole basilica and placing the blame entirely on Bernini. The subsequent investigations, in fact, revealed the cause of the cracks as Maderno's defective foundations and not Bernini's elaborate design, an exoneration later confirmed by the meticulous investigation conducted in 1680 under Pope Innocent XI.\nNonetheless, Bernini's opponents in Rome succeeded in seriously damaging the reputation of Urban's artist and in persuading Pope Innocent to order (in February 1646) the complete demolition of both towers, to Bernini's great humiliation and indeed financial detriment (in the form of a substantial fine for the failure of the work). After this, one of the rare failures of his career, Bernini retreated into himself: according to his son, Domenico. his subsequent unfinished statue of 1647, \"Truth Unveiled by Time\", was intended to be his self-consoling commentary on this affair, expressing his faith that eventually Time would reveal the actual Truth behind the story and exonerate him fully, as indeed did occur.\nAlthough he received no personal commissions from Innocent or the Pamphilj family in the early years of the new papacy, Bernini did not lose his former positions granted to him by previous popes. Innocent X maintained Bernini in all of the official roles given to him by Urban, including his most prestigious one as \"Architect of St. Peter's.\" Under Bernini's design and direction, work continued on decorating the massive, recently completed but still entirely unadorned nave of St. Peter's, with the addition of elaborate multi-coloured marble flooring, marble facing on the walls and pilasters, and scores of stuccoed statues and reliefs. It is not without reason that Pope Alexander VII once quipped, 'If one were to remove from Saint Peter's everything that had been made by the Cavalier Bernini, that temple would be stripped bare.' Indeed, given all of his many and various works within the basilica over several decades, it is to Bernini that is due the lion's share of responsibility for the final and enduring aesthetic appearance and emotional impact of St. Peter's. He was also allowed to continue to work on Urban VIII's tomb, despite Innocent's antipathy for the Barberini. A few months after completing Urban's tomb, in 1648 Bernini won (through furtive manoeuvring with the complicity of the pope's sister-in-law Donna Olimpia) the Pamphilj commission for the prestigious Four Rivers Fountain on Piazza Navona, marking the end of his disgrace and the beginning a yet another glorious chapter in his life. \nIf there had been doubts over Bernini's position as Rome's preeminent artist, they were definitively removed by the unqualified success of the marvellously delightful and technically ingenious Four Rivers Fountain, featuring a heavy ancient obelisk placed over a void created by a cavelike rock formation placed in the centre of an ocean of exotic sea creatures. Bernini continued to receive commissions from Pope Innocent X and other senior members of Rome's clergy and aristocracy, as well as from exalted patrons outside of Rome, such as Francesco d'Este. Recovering quickly from the humiliation of the bell towers, Bernini's boundless creativity continued as before. New types of funerary monument were designed, such as, in the Church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva, the seemingly floating medallion, hovering in the air as it were, for the deceased nun Maria Raggi, while chapels he designed, such as the Raimondi Chapel in the church of San Pietro in Montorio, illustrated how Bernini could use hidden lighting to help suggest divine intervention within the narratives he was depicting and to add a dramatically theatrical \"spotlight\" to enhance the main focus of the space.\nOne of the most accomplished and celebrated works to come from Bernini's hand in this period was the Cornaro Family Chapel in the small Carmelite church of Santa Maria della Vittoria, Rome. The Cornaro Chapel (inaugurated in 1651) showcased Bernini's ability to integrate sculpture, architecture, fresco, stucco, and lighting into \"a marvellous whole\" (\"bel composto\", to use early biographer Filippo Baldinucci's term to describe his approach to architecture) and thus create what scholar Irving Lavin has called the \"unified work of art\". The central focus of the Cornaro Chapel is the Ecstasy of Saint Teresa, depicting the so-called \"transverberation\" of the Spanish nun and saint-mystic, Teresa of Avila. Bernini presents the spectator with a theatrically vivid portrait, in gleaming white marble, of the swooning Teresa and the quietly smiling angel, who delicately grips the arrow piercing the saint's heart. On either side of the chapel the artist places (in what can only strike the viewer as theatre boxes), portraits in relief of various members of the Cornaro family\u2014the Venetian family memorialized in the chapel, including Cardinal Federico Cornaro who commissioned the chapel from Bernini\u2014who are in animated conversation among themselves, presumably about the event taking place before them. The result is a complex but subtly orchestrated architectural environment providing the spiritual context (a heavenly setting with a hidden source of light) that suggests to viewers the ultimate nature of this miraculous event.\nNonetheless, during Bernini's lifetime and in the centuries following till this very day, Bernini's \"Saint Teresa\" has been accused of crossing a line of decency by sexualizing the visual depiction of the saint's experience, to a degree that no artist, before or after Bernini, dared to do: in depicting her at an impossibly young chronological age, as an idealized delicate beauty, in a semi-prostrate position with her mouth open and her legs splayed-apart, her wimple coming undone, with prominently displayed bare feet (Discalced Carmelites, for modesty, always wore sandals with heavy stockings) and with the seraph \"undressing\" her by (unnecessarily) parting her mantle to penetrate her heart with his arrow.\nMatters of decorum aside, Bernini's \"Teresa\" was still an artistic tour de force that incorporates all of the multiple forms of visual art and technique that Bernini had at his disposal, including hidden lighting, thin gilded beams, recessive architectural space, secret lens, and over twenty diverse types of colored marble: these all combine to create the final artwork\u2014\"a perfected, highly dramatic and deeply satisfying seamless ensemble\".\nEmbellishment of Rome under Alexander VII.\nUpon his accession to the Chair of St Peter, Pope Alexander VII Chigi (reigned 1655\u20131667) began to implement his extremely ambitious plan to transform Rome into a magnificent world capital by means of systematic, bold (and costly) urban planning. In so doing, he brought to fruition the long, slow recreation of the urban glory of Rome\u2014the deliberate campaign for the \"renovatio Romae\"\u2014that had begun in the fifteenth century under the Renaissance popes. Over the course of his pontificate, Alexander commissioned many large-scale architectural changes in the city\u2014indeed, some of the most significant ones in the city's recent history and for years to come\u2014choosing Bernini as his principal collaborator (though other architects, especially Pietro da Cortona, were also involved). Thus did commence another extraordinarily prolific and successful chapter in Bernini's career.\nBernini's major commissions during this period include St. Peter's Square. In a previously broad, irregular, and completely unstructured space, he created two massive semi-circular colonnades, each row of which was formed of four simple white Doric columns. This resulted in an oval shape that formed an inclusive arena within which any gathering of citizens, pilgrims and visitors could witness the appearance of the pope\u2014either as he appeared on the loggia on the fa\u00e7ade of St Peter's or at the traditional window of the neighbouring Palazzo Vaticano, to the right of the square. In addition to being logistically efficient for carriages and crowds, Bernini's design was completely in harmony with the pre-existing buildings and added to the majesty of the basilica. Often likened to two arms reaching out from the church to embrace the waiting crowd, Bernini's creation extended the symbolic greatness of the Vatican area, creating an emotionally thrilling and \"exhilarating expanse\" that was, architecturally, an \"unequivocal success\".\nElsewhere within the Vatican, Bernini created systematic rearrangements and majestic embellishment of either empty or aesthetically undistinguished spaces that exist as he designed them to the present day and have become indelible icons of the splendour of the papal precincts. Within the hitherto unadorned apse of the basilica, the Cathedra Petri, the symbolic throne of St Peter, was rearranged as a monumental gilded bronze extravagance that matched the Baldacchino created earlier in the century. Bernini's complete reconstruction of the Scala Regia, the stately papal stairway between St. Peters's and the Vatican Palace, was slightly less ostentatious in appearance but still taxed Bernini's creative powers (employing, for example, clever tricks of optical illusion) to create a seemingly uniform, totally functional, but nonetheless regally impressive stairway to connect two irregular buildings within an even more irregular space.\nNot all works during this era were on such a large scale. Indeed, the commission Bernini received to build the church of Sant'Andrea al Quirinale for the Jesuits was relatively modest in physical size (though great in its interior chromatic splendour), which Bernini executed completely free of charge. Sant'Andrea shared with Piazza San Pietro\u2014unlike the complex geometries of his rival Francesco Borromini\u2014a focus on basic geometric shapes, circles, and ovals to create spiritually intense spaces. He also designed the church of Santa Maria Assunta (1662\u201365) in the town of Ariccia with its circular outline, rounded dome and three-arched portico, reminiscent of the Pantheon. In Santa Maria Assunta, as in his church of St. Thomas of Villanova in Castelgandolfo (1658\u201361), Bernini completely eschewed the rich polychrome marble decoration dramatically seen in Sant'Andrea and the Cornaro Chapel in Santa Maria della Vittoria, in favour of an essentially white, somewhat stark interior, albeit still much adorned with stucco work and painted altarpieces.\nVisit to France and service to King Louis XIV.\nAt the end of April 1665, and still considered the most important artist in Rome, if indeed not in all of Europe, Bernini was forced by political pressure (from both the French court and Pope Alexander VII) to travel to Paris to work for King Louis XIV, who required an architect to complete work on the royal palace of the Louvre. Bernini would remain in Paris until mid-October. Louis XIV assigned a member of his court to serve as Bernini's translator, tourist guide, and overall companion, Paul Fr\u00e9art de Chantelou, who kept a \"Journal\" of Bernini's visit that records much of Bernini's behaviour and utterances in Paris. The writer Charles Perrault, who was serving at this time as an assistant to the French Controller-General of Finances Jean-Baptiste Colbert, also provided a first-hand account of Bernini's visit.\nBernini was popular among the crowds who gathered wherever he stopped, which led him to compare his itinerary to the travelling exhibition of an elephant. On his walks in Paris the streets were lined with admiring crowds too. But things soon turned sour. Bernini presented finished designs for the east front (i.e., the all-important principal facade of the entire palace) of the Louvre, which were ultimately rejected, albeit not formally until 1667, well after his departure from Paris (indeed, the already constructed foundations for Bernini's Louvre addition were inaugurated in October 1665 in an elaborate ceremony, with both Bernini and King Louis in attendance). It is often stated in the scholarship on Bernini that his Louvre designs were turned down because Louis and his finance minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert considered them too Italianate or too Baroque in style. In fact, as Franco Mormando points out, \"aesthetics are \"never\" mentioned in any of [the]\u00a0... surviving memos\" by Colbert or any of the artistic advisors at the French court. The explicit reasons for the rejections were utilitarian, namely, on the level of physical security and comfort (e.g., location of the latrines). It is also indisputable that there was an interpersonal conflict between Bernini and the young French king, each one feeling insufficiently respected by the other. Though his design for the Louvre went unbuilt, it circulated widely throughout Europe by means of engravings and its direct influence can be seen in subsequent stately residences such as Chatsworth House, Derbyshire, England, seat of the Dukes of Devonshire.\nOther projects in Paris suffered a similar fate, such as Bernini's plans for the Bourbon funerary chapel in the cathedral of Saint Denis and the main altar of the Church of Val de Gr\u00e2ce (done at the request of its patron the Queen Mother), as well as his idea for a fountain for Saint-Cloud, the estate of King Louis's brother, Philippe. With the exception of Chantelou, Bernini failed to forge significant friendships at the French court. His frequent negative comments on various aspects of French culture, especially its art and architecture, did not go down well, particularly in juxtaposition to his praise for the art and architecture of Italy (especially Rome); he said that a painting by Guido Reni, the \"Annunciation\" altarpiece (then in the Carmelite convent, now the Louvre Museum), was \"alone worth half of Paris.\" The sole work remaining from his time in Paris is the \"Bust of Louis XIV\" although he also contributed a great deal to the execution of the Christ Child Playing with a Nail marble relief (now in the Louvre) by his son Paolo as a gift to Queen Maria Theresa. Back in Rome, Bernini created a monumental equestrian statue of Louis XIV; when it finally reached Paris (in 1685, five years after the artist's death), the French king found it extremely repugnant and wanted it destroyed; it was instead re-carved into a representation of the ancient Roman hero Marcus Curtius.\nLater years and death.\nBernini remained physically and mentally vigorous and active in his profession until just two weeks before his death which came as a result of a stroke. The pontificate of his old friend, Clement IX, was too short (barely two years) to accomplish more than the dramatic refurbishment by Bernini of the Ponte Sant'Angelo, while the artist's elaborate plan, under Clement, for a new apse for the basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore came to an unpleasant end in the midst of public uproar over its cost and the destruction of ancient mosaics that it entailed. The last two popes of Bernini's life, Clement X and Innocent XI, were both not especially close or sympathetic to Bernini and not particularly interested in financing works of art and architecture, especially given the disastrous conditions of the papal treasury. The most important commission by Bernini, executed entirely by him in just six months in 1674, under Clement X was the statue of the \"Blessed Ludovica Albertoni\", another nun-mystic. The work, reminiscent of Bernini's \"Ecstasy of Saint Teresa,\" is located in the chapel dedicated to Ludovica remodelled under Bernini's supervision in the Trastevere church of San Francesco a Ripa, whose fa\u00e7ade was designed by Bernini's disciple, Mattia de' Rossi.\nIn his last two years, Bernini also carved (supposedly for Queen Christina) the bust of the Savior (Basilica of San Sebastiano fuori le Mura, Rome) and supervised the restoration of the historic Palazzo della Cancelleria, a direct commission from Pope Innocent XI. The latter commission is an outstanding confirmation of both Bernini's continuing professional reputation and good health of mind and body even in advanced old age, inasmuch as the pope had chosen him over any number of talented younger architects plentiful in Rome, for this prestigious and most difficult assignment since, as his son Domenico points out, \"deterioration of the palace had advanced to such an extent that the threat of its imminent collapse was quite apparent.\"\nShortly after the completion of the latter project, Bernini died in his home on 28 November 1680 and was buried, with little public fanfare, in the simple, unadorned Bernini family vault, along with his parents, in the Basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore. Though an elaborate funerary monument had once been planned (documented by a single extant sketch of c.\u20091670 by disciple Ludovico Gimignani), it was never built and Bernini remained with no permanent public acknowledgement of his life and career in Rome until 1898 when, on the anniversary of his birth, a simple plaque and small bust was affixed to the face of his home on the Via della Mercede, proclaiming \"Here lived and died Gianlorenzo Bernini, a sovereign of art, before whom reverently bowed popes, princes, and a multitude of peoples.\"\nPersonal life.\nIn the late 1630s, Bernini had an affair with a married woman named Costanza (wife of his workshop assistant, Matteo Bonucelli, also called Bonarelli) and sculpted a bust of her (now in the Bargello, Florence) during the height of their romance. However, at some point, Costanza began at the same time an affair also with Bernini's younger brother, Luigi, who was Bernini's right-hand man in his studio. When Bernini found out about Costanza and his brother, in a fit of mad fury, he chased Luigi through the streets of Rome and into the basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore, almost ending his life. To punish his unfaithful mistress, Bernini had a servant go to the house of Costanza, where the servant slashed her face several times with a razor. The servant was later jailed, while Costanza herself was jailed for adultery. Bernini himself was exonerated by the pope, even though he had committed a crime in ordering the face-slashing.\nSoon after, in May 1639, at age forty-one, Bernini wed a twenty-two-year-old Roman woman, Caterina Tezio, in an arranged marriage, under orders from Pope Urban. She had eleven children, including youngest son Domenico Bernini, who would later be his father's first biographer. After his never-repeated episode of stalking and disfigurement by proxy, in his subsequent marriage Bernini turned more sincerely to the practice of his faith, according to his early official biographers. Luigi, however, once again brought scandal to his family in 1670 by raping a young Bernini workshop assistant at the construction site of the 'Constantine' memorial in St. Peter's Basilica.\nPersonal residences.\nDuring his lifetime Bernini lived in various residences throughout the city: principal among them, a palazzo right across from Santa Maria Maggiore and still extant at Via Liberiana 24, while his father was still alive; after his father died in 1629, Bernini moved the clan to the long-ago-demolished Santa Marta neighbourhood behind the apse of St. Peter's Basilica, which afforded him more convenient access to the Vatican Foundry and to his working studio also on the Vatican site. In 1639, Bernini bought property on the corner of the Via della Mercede and the Via del Collegio di Propaganda Fide in Rome. This gave him the distinction of being only one of two artists (the other is Pietro da Cortona) to be the proprietor of his own large palatial (though not sumptuous) residence, furnished as well with its own water supply. Bernini refurbished and expanded the existing palazzo on the Via della Mercede site, at what are now Nos. 11 and 12. (The building is sometimes referred to as \"Palazzo Bernini\", but that title more properly pertains to the Bernini family's later and larger home on Via del Corso, to which they moved in the early nineteenth century, now known as the Palazzo Manfroni-Bernini.) Bernini lived at No. 11 (extensively remodelled in the 19th century), where his working studio was located, as well as a large collection of works of art, his own and those of other artists.\nIt is imagined that it must have been galling for Bernini to witness through the windows of his dwelling the construction of the tower and dome of Sant'Andrea delle Fratte by his rival, Borromini and also the demolition of the chapel that he, Bernini, had designed at the Collegio di Propaganda Fide, which was later replaced by Borromini's chapel in 1660 (because the Collegio required a much larger chapel), but there is no documentation of this belief. The construction of Sant'Andrea, however, was completed by Bernini's close disciple, Mattia de Rossi and it contains (to this day) the marble originals of two of Bernini's own angels executed by the master for the Ponte Sant'Angelo.\nWorks of art, architecture, and mixed genre.\nSculpture.\nAlthough he proved during his long lifetime to be a \"uomo universale\", truly accomplished in so many areas of artistic production like Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci before him, Bernini was first and foremost a sculptor. He was trained from his earliest youth in that profession by his sculptor father, Pietro. The most recent and most comprehensive catalogue raisonn\u00e9 of his works of sculpture compiled by Maria Grazia Bernardini (\"Bernini: Catalogo delle sculture\"; Turin: Allemandi, 2022, 2 vols.) comprises 143 entries (not including those of debated attribution): they span Bernini's entire productive life, the first securely attributed work dating to 1610-1612 (the marble portrait bust of Bishop Giovanni Battista Santoni, for his tomb monument in Rome's Santa Prassede) and the last to 1679 (the marble \"Salvator Mundi\" bust, Basilica of San Sebastian fuori le Mura, Rome).\nThese many works range in size from small garden pieces of his earliest years (e.g., the \"Boy with a Dragon\", 1617, Getty Museum, Los Angeles) to colossal works such as the \"Saint Longinus\" (1629\u201338, St. Peter's Basilica, Rome). The majority are in marble, with other works being in bronze (most notably his various papal portrait busts and the monumental statues adorning his \"Baldacchino\" (1624\u201333) and \"Cathedra Petri\" (1656\u201366) in St. Peter's Basilica. In virtually all cases, Bernini first produced numerous clay models as preparation for the final product; these models are now treasured as works of art in themselves, though, regrettably, only a minuscule percentage have survived from what must have been a great multitude.\nThe single largest sub-group of his sculptural production is represented by his portrait busts (either free-standing or incorporated into larger funerary monuments), mostly of his papal patrons or other ecclesiastical personages, as well as those few secular potentates who could afford the extraordinary expense of commissioning a portrait from Bernini (e.g., \"King Louis XIV\", 1665, Palace of Versailles). Other large groups are represented by his religious works \u2013 statues of Biblical figures, angels, saints of the church, the crucified Christ, etc. \u2013 and his mythological figures either free-standing (such as his earliest masterpieces in the Galleria Borghese, Rome) or serving as ornaments in his complex fountain designs (such as the Fountain of the Four Rivers, 1647\u201351, Piazza Navona, Rome).\nBernini's vast sculptural output can also be categorized according to the degree to which Bernini himself contributed to both the design and execution of the final product: to wit, some works are entirely of his own design and execution; others, of his design and partial but still substantial execution; while others of his design but with little or no actual execution by Bernini (such as the \"Madonna and Child,\" Carmelite Church of Saint Joseph, Paris). A further category contains those works commissioned from Bernini and fully credited to his workshop, but represent neither his direct design nor execution, only his signature stylistic inspiration (such as several of the angels on the Ponte Sant\u2019 Angelo refurbished by Bernini, and all of the saints atop the two arms of the portico of Saint Peter's Square). In general, the more prestigious the commission, and the earlier the commission in his career, the greater is Bernini's role in both design and execution, though notable exceptions exist to both of these general rules.\nArchitecture.\nAlthough his formal professional training was as sculptor and his entrance into the field of architecture not of his own volition but that of Pope Urban VIII, Bernini had by the end of his life reached what has proven to be his enduring status as one of the most influential architects of seventeenth-century Europe. He was certainly one of the most prolific over the many decades of his long, active life. Despite the fact that he rarely left the city of Rome and that all of his works of architecture were confined to the limits of the papal capital or to nearby towns, Bernini's influence was indeed European-wide: this is thanks both to the many engravings that disseminated his ideas across the continent and to the many non-Italian students of architecture who made long pilgrimages to Rome from all corners of Europe to study and be inspired by the ancient and modern masters, Bernini among them.\nBernini's architectural works include sacred and secular buildings and sometimes their urban settings and interiors. He made adjustments to existing buildings and designed new constructions. Among his most well-known works are St. Peter's Square (1656\u201367), the piazza and colonnades in front of St. Peter's Basilica and the interior decoration of the basilica. Among his secular works are a number of Roman palaces: following the death of Carlo Maderno, he took over the supervision of the building works at the Palazzo Barberini from 1630 on which he worked with Francesco Borromini; the Palazzo Ludovisi (now Palazzo Montecitorio, started 1650); and the Palazzo Chigi (now Palazzo Chigi-Odescalchi, started 1664).\nHis first architectural projects were the creation of the new fa\u00e7ade and refurbishment of the interior of the church of Santa Bibiana (1624\u201326) and the \"St. Peter's Baldachin\" (1624\u201333), the bronze columned canopy over the high altar of St. Peter's basilica. In 1629, and before the baldachin was complete, Urban VIII put him in charge of all the ongoing architectural works in the basilica, bestowing upon him the official rank of \"Architect of St. Peter's.\" However, Bernini fell out of favour during the papacy of Innocent X Pamphili because of that pope's already-mentioned animosity towards the Barberini (and hence towards their clients including Bernini) and the above-described failure of the bell towers designed and built by Bernini for St. Peter's Basilica. Never wholly without patronage during the Pamphili years and never losing his status as \"Architect of St. Peter's,\" after Innocent's death in 1655 Bernini regained a major role in the decoration of the basilica with the Pope Alexander VII Chigi, leading to his design of the piazza and colonnade in front of St. Peter's. Further significant works by Bernini at the Vatican include the \"Scala Regia\" (1663\u201366), the monumental grand stairway entrance to the Vatican Palace, and the \"Cathedra Petri\", the Chair of Saint Peter, in the apse of St. Peter's, in addition to the Chapel of the Blessed Sacrament in the nave.\nBernini did not build many churches \"ex novo\", from the ground up; rather, his efforts were concentrated on pre-existing structures, such as the restored church of Santa Bibiana and in particular St. Peter's. He fulfilled three commissions for new churches in Rome and nearby small towns. Best known is the small but richly ornamented oval church of Sant'Andrea al Quirinale, done (beginning in 1658) for the Jesuit novitiate, representing one of the rare works of his hand with which Bernini's son, Domenico, reports that his father was truly and very pleased. Bernini also designed churches in Castelgandolfo (San Tommaso da Villanova, 1658\u20131661) and Ariccia (Santa Maria Assunta, 1662\u20131664), and was responsible for the re-modelling of the Sanctuary of Santa Maria di Galloro, Ariccia, endowing it with a majestic new fa\u00e7ade.\nWhen Bernini was invited to Paris in 1665 to prepare works for Louis XIV, he presented designs for the east fa\u00e7ade of the Louvre Palace, but his projects were ultimately turned down in favour of the more sober and classic proposals of a committee consisting of three Frenchmen: Louis Le Vau, Charles Le Brun, and the doctor and amateur architect Claude Perrault, signalling the waning influence of Italian artistic hegemony in France. Bernini's projects were essentially rooted in the Italian Baroque urbanist tradition of relating public buildings to their settings, often leading to innovative architectural expression in urban spaces like \"piazze\" or squares. However, by this time, the French absolutist monarchy now preferred the classicizing monumental severity of the Louvre's facade, no doubt with the added political bonus that it had been designed by Frenchmen. The final version did, however, include Bernini's feature of a flat roof behind a Palladian balustrade.\nFountains.\nTrue to the decorative dynamism of Baroque which loved the aesthetic pleasure and emotional delight afforded by the sight and sound of water in motion, among Bernini's most gifted and applauded creations were his Roman fountains, which were both utilitarian public works and personal monuments to their patrons, papal or otherwise. His first fountain, the 'Barcaccia' (commissioned in 1627, finished 1629) at the foot of the Spanish Steps, cleverly surmounted a challenge that Bernini was to face in several other fountain commissions, the low water pressure in many parts of Rome (Roman fountains were all driven by gravity alone), creating a low-lying flat boat that was able to take greatest advantage of the small amount of water available. Another example is the long-ago dismantled \"Woman Drying Her Hair\" fountain that Bernini created for the no-longer-extant Villa Barberini ai Bastioni on the edge of the Janiculum Hill overlooking St. Peter's Basilica.\nHis other fountains include the \"Fountain of the Triton\", or \"Fontana del Tritone\" in Piazza Barberini (celebrated in Ottorino Respighi's \"Fountains of Rome\"), and the nearby Barberini Fountain of the Bees, the \"Fontana delle Api\". The Fountain of the Four Rivers, or \"Fontana dei Quattro Fiumi\", in the Piazza Navona is an exhilarating masterpiece of spectacle and political allegory in which Bernini again brilliantly overcame the problem of the piazza's low water pressure creating the illusion of an abundance of water that in reality did not exist. An oft-repeated, but false, anecdote tells that one of the Bernini's river gods defers his gaze in disapproval of the fa\u00e7ade of Sant'Agnese in Agone (designed by the talented, but less politically successful, rival Francesco Borromini), impossible because the fountain was built several years before the fa\u00e7ade of the church was completed. Bernini also provided the design for the statue of the Moor in \"La Fontana del Moro\" in Piazza Navona (1653).\nTomb monuments and other works.\nAnother major category of Bernini's activity was that of the tomb monument, a genre on which his distinctive new style exercised a decisive and long-enduring influence; included in this category are his tombs for Popes Urban VIII and Alexander VII (both in St. Peter's Basilica), Cardinal Domenico Pimentel (Santa Maria sopra Minerva, Rome, design only), and Matilda of Canossa (St. Peter's Basilica). Related to the tomb monument is the funerary memorial, of which Bernini executed several (including that, most notably, of Maria Raggi (Santa Maria sopra Minerva, Rome) also of greatly innovative style and long enduring influence.\nAmong his smaller commissions, although not mentioned by either of his earliest biographers, Baldinucci or Domenico Bernini, the Elephant and Obelisk is a sculpture located near the Pantheon, in the Piazza della Minerva, in front of the Dominican church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva. Pope Alexander VII decided that he wanted a small ancient Egyptian obelisk (that was discovered beneath the piazza) to be erected on the same site, and in 1665 he commissioned Bernini to create a sculpture to support the obelisk. The sculpture of an elephant bearing the obelisk on its back was executed by one of Bernini's students, Ercole Ferrata, upon a design by his master, and finished in 1667. An inscription on the base relates the Egyptian goddess Isis and the Roman goddess Minerva to the Virgin Mary, who supposedly supplanted those pagan goddesses and to whom the church is dedicated. Bernini's elephants are highly realistic as Bernini had twice the opportunity to see a live elephant: Don Diego in 1630 and Hansken in 1655. A popular anecdote concerns the elephant's smile. To find out why it is smiling, legend has it, the viewer must examine the rear end of the animal and notice that its muscles are tensed and its tail is shifted to the left as if it were defecating. The animal's rear is pointed directly at one of the headquarters of the Dominican Order, housing the offices of its Inquisitors as well as the office of Father Giuseppe Paglia, a Dominican friar who was one of the main antagonists of Bernini, as a final salute and last word.\nAmong his minor commissions for non-Roman patrons or venues, in 1677 Bernini worked along with Ercole Ferrata to create a fountain for the Lisbon palace of the Portuguese nobleman, Lu\u00eds de Meneses, 3rd Count of Ericeira: copying his earlier fountains, Bernini supplied the design of the fountain sculpted by Ferrata, featuring Neptune with four tritons around a basin. The fountain has survived and since 1945 has been outside the precincts of the gardens of the Palace of Queluz, several miles outside of Lisbon.\nPaintings, drawings, and work for the theater.\nBernini would have studied painting as a normal part of his artistic training begun in early adolescence under the guidance of his father, Pietro, in addition to some further training in the studio of the Florentine painter, Cigoli. His earliest activity as a painter was probably no more than a sporadic diversion practised mainly in his youth, until the mid-1620s, that is, the beginning of the pontificate of Pope Urban VIII (reigned 1623\u20131644) who ordered Bernini to study painting in greater earnest because the pontiff wanted him to decorate the Benediction Loggia of St. Peter's. The latter commission was never executed most likely because the required large-scale narrative compositions were simply beyond Bernini's ability as a painter. According to his early biographers, Baldinucci and Domenico Bernini, Bernini completed at least 150 canvases, mostly in the decades of the 1620s and 30s, but currently, there are no more than 35\u201340 surviving paintings that can be confidently attributed to his hand. The extant, securely attributed works are mostly portraits, seen close up and set against an empty background, employing a confident, indeed brilliant, painterly brushstroke (similar to that of his Spanish contemporary Velasquez), free from any trace of pedantry, and a very limited palette of mostly warm, subdued colours with deep chiaroscuro. His work was immediately sought after by major collectors. Most noteworthy among these extant works are several, vividly penetrating self-portraits (all dating to the mid-1620s \u2013 early 1630s), especially that in the Uffizi Gallery, Florence, purchased during Bernini's lifetime by Cardinal Leopoldo de' Medici. Bernini's \"Apostles Andrew and Thomas\" in London's National Gallery is the sole canvas by the artist whose attribution, approximate date of execution (c.\u20091625) and provenance (the Barberini Collection, Rome) are securely known.\nAs for Bernini's drawings, about 350 still exist; but this represents a minuscule percentage of the drawings he would have created in his lifetime; these include rapid sketches relating to major sculptural or architectural commissions, presentation drawings given as gifts to his patrons and aristocratic friends, and exquisite, fully finished portraits, such as those of Agostino Mascardi (Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Paris) and Scipione Borghese and Sisinio Poli (both in New York's Morgan Library).\nAnother area of artistic endeavour to which Bernini devoted much of his spare time between major commissions and which earned him further popular acclaim was that of the theatre. For many years (especially during the reign of Pope Urban VIII, 1623\u201344), Bernini created a long series of theatrical productions in which he simultaneously served as scriptwriter, stage director, actor, scenographer, and special-effects technician. These plays were mostly Carnival comedies (held often in his own home) which drew large audiences and much attention and in which the artist satirized contemporary Roman life (especially court life) with his pungent witticisms. At the same time, they also dazzled spectators with daring displays of special effects such as the flooding of the Tiber river or a controlled but very real fiery blaze, as reported by his son Domenico's biography. However, although there is much disparate, scattered documentation showing that all of this theatrical work was not simply a limited or passing diversion for Bernini, the only extant remains of these endeavours are the partial script of one play and a drawing of a sunset (or sunrise) relating to the creation of a special effect on stage.\nInfluence and post-mortem reputation.\nDisciples, collaborators, and rivals.\nAmong the many sculptors who worked under his supervision (even though most were accomplished masters in their own right) were Luigi Bernini, Stefano Speranza, Giuliano Finelli, Andrea Bolgi, Giacomo Antonio Fancelli, Lazzaro Morelli, Francesco Baratta, Ercole Ferrata, the Frenchman Niccol\u00f2 Sale, Giovanni Antonio Mari, Antonio Raggi, and Fran\u00e7ois Duquesnoy. But his most trusted right-hand man in sculpture was Giulio Cartari, while in architecture it was Mattia de Rossi, both of whom travelled to Paris with Bernini to assist him in his work there for King Louis XIV. Other architect disciples include Giovanni Battista Contini and Carlo Fontana while Swedish architect, Nicodemus Tessin the Younger, who visited Rome twice after Bernini's death, was also much influenced by him.\nAmong his rivals in architecture were, above all, Francesco Borromini and Pietro da Cortona. Early in their careers, they had all worked at the same time at the Palazzo Barberini, initially under Carlo Maderno and, following his death, under Bernini. Later on, however, they were in competition for commissions, and fierce rivalries developed, particularly between Bernini and Borromini. In sculpture, Bernini competed with Alessandro Algardi and Fran\u00e7ois Duquesnoy, but they both died decades earlier than Bernini (respectively in 1654 and 1643), leaving Bernini effectively with no sculptor of his same exalted status in Rome. Francesco Mochi can also be included among Bernini's significant rivals, though he was not as accomplished in his art as Bernini, Algardi or Duquesnoy.\nThere was also a succession of painters (the so-called 'pittori berniniani') who, working under the master's close guidance and at times according to his designs, produced canvases and frescos that were integral components of Bernini's larger multi-media works such as churches and chapels: Carlo Pellegrini, Guido Ubaldo Abbatini, Frenchman Guillaume Courtois (Guglielmo Cortese, known as 'Il Borgognone'), Ludovico Gimignani, and Giovanni Battista Gaulli (who, thanks to Bernini, was granted the prized commission to fresco the vault of the Jesuit mother Church of the Ges\u00f9 by Bernini's friend, Jesuit Superior General, Giovanni Paolo Oliva).\nAs far as Caravaggio is concerned, in all the voluminous Bernini sources, his name appears only once: this occurs in the Chantelou Diary in which the French diarist claims that Bernini agreed with his disparaging remark about Caravaggio (specifically his \"Fortune Teller\" that had just arrived from Italy as a Pamphilj gift to King Louis XIV). Yet, how much Bernini really scorned Caravaggio's art is a matter of debate whereas arguments have been made in favour of a strong influence of Caravaggio on Bernini. Bernini would, of course, have heard much about Caravaggio and seen many of his works not only because in Rome at the time such contact was impossible to avoid, but also because during his own lifetime, Caravaggio had come to the favourable attention of Bernini's own early patrons, both the Borghese and the Barberini. Indeed, much like Caravaggio, Bernini often devised strikingly bold compositions, akin to theatrical tableaux that arrest the scene at its dramatic key moment (such as in his \"Ecstasy of Saint Teresa\" in Santa Maria della Vittoria). And again much like Caravaggio, he made full and skillful use of theatrical lighting as an important aesthetic and metaphorical device in his religious settings, often employing hidden light sources that could intensify the focus of religious worship or enhance the dramatic moment of a sculptural narrative.\nFirst biographies.\nThe most important primary source for the life of Bernini is the biography written by his youngest son, Domenico, entitled \"Vita del Cavalier Gio. Lorenzo Bernino,\" published in 1713 though first compiled in the last years of his father's life (c.\u20091675\u201380). Filippo Baldinucci's \"Life of Bernini\" was published in 1682, and a meticulous private journal, the \"Diary of the Cavaliere Bernini's Visit to France,\" was kept by the Frenchman Paul Fr\u00e9art de Chantelou during the artist's four-month stay from June through October 1665 at the court of King Louis XIV. Also, there is a short biographical narrative, \"The Vita Brevis of Gian Lorenzo Bernini\", written by his eldest son, Monsignor Pietro Filippo Bernini, in the mid-1670s.\nUntil the late 20th century, it was generally believed that two years after Bernini's death, Queen Christina of Sweden, then living in Rome, commissioned Filippo Baldinucci to write his biography, which was published in Florence in 1682. However, recent research now strongly suggests that it was in fact Bernini's sons (and specifically the eldest son, Mons. Pietro Filippo) who commissioned the biography from Baldinucci sometime in the late 1670s, with the intent of publishing it while their father was still alive. This would mean that first, the commission did not at all originate in Queen Christina who would have merely lent her name as patron (in order to hide the fact that the biography was coming directly from the family) and secondly, that Baldinucci's narrative was largely derived from some pre-publication version of Domenico Bernini's much longer biography of his father, as evidenced by the extremely large amount of text repeated verbatim (there is no other explanation, otherwise, for the massive amount of verbatim repetition, and it is known that Baldinucci routinely copied verbatim material for his artists' biographies supplied by family and friends of his subjects). As the most detailed account and the only one coming directly from a member of the artist's immediate family, Domenico's biography, despite having been published later than Baldinucci's, therefore represents the earliest and more important full-length biographical source of Bernini's life, even though it idealizes its subject and whitewashes a number of less-than-flattering facts about his life and personality.\nLegacy.\nAs one Bernini scholar has summarized, \"Perhaps the most important result of all of the [Bernini] studies and research of these past few decades has been to restore to Bernini his status as the great, principal protagonist of Baroque art, the one who was able to create undisputed masterpieces, to interpret in an original and genial fashion the new spiritual sensibilities of the age, to give the city of Rome an entirely new face, and to unify the [artistic] language of the times.\" Few artists have had as decisive an influence on the physical appearance and emotional tenor of a city as Bernini had on Rome. Maintaining a controlling influence over all aspects of his many and large commissions and over those who aided him in executing them, he was able to carry out his unique and harmoniously uniform vision over decades of work with his long and productive life Although by the end of Bernini's life there was in motion a decided reaction against his brand of flamboyant Baroque, the fact is that sculptors and architects continued to study his works and be influenced by them for several more decades (Nicola Salvi's later Trevi Fountain [inaugurated in 1735] is a prime example of the enduring post-mortem influence of Bernini on the city's landscape).\nIn the eighteenth century, Bernini and virtually all Baroque artists fell from favor in the neoclassical criticism of the Baroque, that criticism aimed above all at the latter's supposedly extravagant (and thus illegitimate) departures from the pristine, sober models of Greek and Roman antiquity. It is only from the late nineteenth century that art historical scholarship, in seeking a more objective understanding of artistic output within the specific cultural context in which it was produced, without the a priori prejudices of neoclassicism, began to recognize Bernini's achievements and slowly began to restore his artistic reputation. However, the reaction against Bernini and the too-sensual (and therefore \"decadent\"), too-emotionally charged Baroque in the larger culture (especially in non-Catholic countries of northern Europe, and particularly in Victorian England) remained in effect until well into the twentieth century (most notable are the public disparagement of Bernini by Francesco Milizia, Joshua Reynolds, and Jacob Burkhardt).\nAmong the influential 18th- and 19th-century figures who despised Bernini's art was also and most prominently Johann Joachim Winckelmann (1717\u201368), considered by many the father of the modern discipline of art history. For the neo-classicist Winkelmann, the one true, laudable \"high style\" of art was characterized by noble simplicity joined with a quiet grandeur that eschewed any exuberance of emotion, whether positive or negative, as exemplified by ancient Greek sculpture. The Baroque Bernini, instead, represented the opposite of this ideal and, moreover, according to Winkelmann, had been \u201cutterly corrupted...by a vulgar flattery of the coarse and uncultivated, in attempting to render everything more intelligible to them.\u201d Another major condemning voice is that of Colen Campbell (1676\u20131729), who on the very first page of his monumental and influential \"Vitruvius Britannicus\" (London, 1715, Introduction, vol. 1, p.\u00a01) singles out Bernini and Borromini as examples of the utter degradation of post-Palladian architecture in Italy: \"With (the great Palladio) the great Manner and exquisite Taste of Building is lost; for the Italians can no more now relish the Antique Simplicity, but are entirely employed in capricious Ornaments, which must at last end in the Gothick. For Proof of this Assertion, I appeal to the Productions of the last Century: How affected and licentious are the Works of Bernini and Fontana? How wildly Extravagant are the Designs of Boromini, who has endeavoured to debauch Mankind with his odd and chimerical Beauties\u2026?\" Accordingly, most of the popular eighteenth- and nineteenth-century tourist guides to Rome all but ignore Bernini and his work, or treat it with disdain, as in the case of the best-selling \"Walks in Rome\" (22 editions between 1871 and 1925) by Augustus J.C. Hare, who describes the angels on the Ponte Sant'Angelo as 'Bernini's Breezy Maniacs.'\nBut now in the twenty-first century, Bernini and his Baroque have been fully and enthusiastically restored to favour, both critical and popular. Since the anniversary year of his birth in 1998, there have been numerous Bernini exhibitions throughout the world, especially in Europe and North America, on all aspects of his work, expanding our knowledge of his work and its influence. In the late twentieth century, Bernini was commemorated on the front of the Bank of Italy's 50,000 lire banknote in the 1980s and 90s (before Italy switched to the euro) with the back showing his equestrian statue of Constantine. Another outstanding sign of Bernini's enduring reputation came in the decision by architect I.M. Pei to insert a faithful copy in lead of his King Louis XIV Equestrian statue as the sole ornamental element in his massive modernist redesign of the entrance plaza to the Louvre Museum, completed to great acclaim in 1989, and featuring the giant Louvre Pyramid in glass. In 2000 best-selling novelist, Dan Brown, made Bernini and several of his Roman works, the centrepiece of his political thriller, \"Angels &amp; Demons\", while British novelist Iain Pears made a missing Bernini bust the centrepiece of his best-selling murder mystery, \"The Bernini Bust\" (2003). There is even a crater near the south pole of Mercury named after Bernini (in 1976).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12636", "revid": "1315952569", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12636", "title": "German literature", "text": "German literature () comprises those literary texts written in the German language. This includes literature written in Germany, Austria, the German parts of Switzerland and Belgium, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, South Tyrol in Italy and to a lesser extent works of the German diaspora. German literature of the modern period is mostly in Standard German, but there are some currents of literature influenced to a greater or lesser degree by dialects (e.g. Alemannic).\nMedieval German literature is literature written in Germany, stretching from the Carolingian dynasty; various dates have been given for the end of the German literary Middle Ages, the Reformation (1517) being the last possible cut-off point. The Old High German period is reckoned to run until about the mid-11th century; the most famous works are the \"Hildebrandslied\" and a heroic epic known as the \"Heliand\". Middle High German starts in the 12th century; the key works include \"The Ring\" (c.\u20091410) and the poems of Oswald von Wolkenstein and Johannes von Tepl. The Baroque period (1600 to 1720) was one of the most fertile times in German literature. Modern literature in German begins with the authors of the Enlightenment (such as Herder). The Sensibility movement of the 1750s\u20131770s ended with Goethe's best-selling \"The Sorrows of Young Werther\" (1774). The Sturm und Drang and Weimar Classicism movements were led by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Friedrich Schiller. German Romanticism was the dominant movement of the late 18th and early 19th centuries.\nBiedermeier refers to the literature, music, the visual arts and interior design in the period between the years 1815 (Vienna Congress), the end of the Napoleonic Wars, and 1848, the year of the European revolutions. Under the Nazi regime, some authors went into exile (\"Exilliteratur\") and others submitted to censorship (\"internal emigration\", \"Innere Emigration\"). The Nobel Prize in Literature has been awarded to German language authors fourteen times (as of 2023), or the third most often, behind only French language authors (with 16 laureates) and English language authors (with 32 laureates) with winners including Thomas Mann, Hermann Hesse, G\u00fcnter Grass, and Peter Handke.\nPeriodization.\nPeriodization is not an exact science but the following list contains movements or time periods typically used in discussing German literature. It seems worth noting that the periods of medieval German literature span two or three centuries, those of early modern German literature span one century, and those of modern German literature each span one or two decades. The closer one nears the present, the more debated the periodizations become.\nMiddle Ages.\nMedieval German literature refers to literature written in Germany, stretching from the Carolingian dynasty; various dates have been given for the end of the German literary Middle Ages, the Reformation (1517) being the last possible cut-off point.\nOld High German.\nThe Old High German period is reckoned to run until about the mid-11th century, though the boundary to Early Middle High German (second half of the 11th century) is not clear-cut.\nThe earliest texts date from the second half of the 8th century: translation aids (glosses and glossaries) for those learning to read Latin and translations of Latin Christian texts (prayers, creeds, confessions) for use in missionary or pastoral work among the lay population. Translations and, later, adaptations of Latin Christian texts, continue throughout the period, and are seen in Otfrid's gospel harmony in the 9th century and the extensive works of Notker III in the early 11th century.\nThe most famous work in OHG is the \"Hildebrandslied\", a short piece of Germanic alliterative heroic verse which besides the \"Muspilli\" is the sole survivor of what must have been a vast oral tradition. Another important work, in the northern dialect of Old Saxon, is a life of Christ in the style of a heroic epic known as the \"Heliand\".\nMiddle High German.\nMiddle High German proper runs from the beginning of the 12th century, and in the second half of the 12th century, there was a sudden intensification of activity, leading to a 60-year \"golden age\" of medieval German literature referred to as the \"mittelhochdeutsche Bl\u00fctezeit\" (1170\u20131230). This was the period of the blossoming of MHG lyric poetry, particularly \"Minnesang\" (the German variety of the originally French tradition of courtly love). One of the most important of these poets was Walther von der Vogelweide. The same sixty years saw the composition of the most important courtly romances. These are written in rhyming couplets, and again draw on French models such as Chr\u00e9tien de Troyes, many of them relating Arthurian material, for example, \"Parzival\" by Wolfram von Eschenbach. The third literary movement of these years was a new revamping of the heroic tradition, in which the ancient Germanic oral tradition can still be discerned, but tamed and Christianized and adapted for the court. These high medieval heroic epics are written in rhymed strophes, not the alliterative verse of Germanic prehistory (for example, the \"Nibelungenlied\").\nThe Middle High German period is conventionally taken to end in 1350, while the Early New High German is taken to begin with the German Renaissance, after the invention of movable type in the mid-15th century. Therefore, the literature of the late 14th and the early 15th century falls, as it were, in the cracks between Middle and New High German, and can be classified as either. Works of this transitional period include \"The Ring\" (c. 1410), the poems of Oswald von Wolkenstein and Johannes von Tepl, the German versions of \"Pontus and Sidonia\", and arguably the works of Hans Folz and Sebastian Brant (\"Ship of Fools\", 1494), among others. The \"Volksbuch\" (chapbook) tradition which would flourish in the 16th century also finds its origin in the second half of the 15th century.\nEarly Modern period.\nBaroque period.\nThe Baroque period (1600 to 1720) was one of the most fertile times in German literature. Many writers reflected the horrible experiences of the Thirty Years' War, in poetry and prose. Grimmelshausen's adventures of the young and na\u00efve Simplicissimus, in the eponymous book \"Simplicius Simplicissimus\", became the most famous novel of the Baroque period. Martin Opitz established rules for the \"purity\" of language, style, verse and rhyme. Andreas Gryphius and Daniel Caspar von Lohenstein wrote German language tragedies, or \"Trauerspiele\", often on Classical themes and frequently quite violent. Erotic, religious and occasional poetry appeared in both German and Latin. Sibylle Ursula von Braunschweig-L\u00fcneburg wrote part of a novel, \"Die Durchlauchtige Syrerin Aramena\" (\"Aramena, the noble Syrian lady\"), which when complete would be the most famous courtly novel in German Baroque literature; it was finished by her brother Anton Ulrich and edited by Sigmund von Birken.\n18th century.\nSensibility.\n\"Empfindsamkeit\" / Sensibility (1750s\u20131770s)\nFriedrich Gottlieb Klopstock (1724\u20131803), Christian F\u00fcrchtegott Gellert (1715\u20131769), Sophie de La Roche (1730\u20131807). The period culminates and ends in Goethe's best-selling \"Die Leiden des jungen Werthers\" (1774).\nSturm und Drang.\n\"Sturm und Drang\" (the conventional translation is \"Storm and Stress\"; a more literal translation, however, might be \"storm and urge\", \"storm and longing\", or \"storm and impulse\") is the name of a movement in German literature and music taking place from the late 1760s through the early 1780s in which individual subjectivity and, in particular, extremes of emotion were given free expression in response to the confines of rationalism imposed by the Enlightenment and associated aesthetic movements. The philosopher Johann Georg Hamann is considered to be the ideologue of \"Sturm und Drang\", and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe was a notable proponent of the movement, though he and Friedrich Schiller ended their period of association with it, initiating what would become Weimar Classicism.\nThe first ideas of Romanticism arose from this movement, directly criticizing the Enlightenment's position that humans can fully comprehend the world through rationality alone, suggesting that intuition and emotion are key components of insight and understanding. Published in 1774, \"The Sorrows of Young Werther\" by Goethe began to shape the Romanticist movement and its ideals.\n19th century.\nGerman Classicism.\nWeimar Classicism (German \u201c\"Weimarer Klassik\"\u201d and \u201c\"Weimarer Klassizismus\"\u201d) is a cultural and literary movement of Europe, and its central ideas were originally propounded by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Johann Christoph Friedrich von Schiller during the period 1786 to 1805.\nThe \"Weimarer Klassik\" movement began in 1771 when Duchess Anna Amalia of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel invited the Seyler Theatre Company led by Abel Seyler, pioneers of the movement, to her court in Weimar. The Seyler company was soon thereafter followed by Christoph Martin Wieland, then Goethe, Johann Gottfried Herder and finally Schiller. The movement was eventually centred upon Goethe and Schiller, previously also exponents of the movement, during the period of 1786\u20131805.\nRomanticism.\nGerman Romanticism was the dominant movement of the late 18th and early 19th centuries. German Romanticism developed relatively late compared to its English counterpart, coinciding in its early years with the movement known as German Classicism or Weimar Classicism, which it opposed. In contrast to the seriousness of English Romanticism, the German variety is notable for valuing humor and wit as well as beauty. The early German romantics tried to create a new synthesis of art, philosophy, and science, looking to the Middle Ages as a simpler, more integrated period. As time went on, however, they became increasingly aware of the tenuousness of the unity they were seeking. Later German Romanticism emphasized the tension between the everyday world and the seemingly irrational and supernatural projections of creative genius. Heinrich Heine in particular criticized the tendency of the early romantics to look to the medieval past for a model of unity in art and society.\nBiedermeier and Vorm\u00e4rz.\nBiedermeier refers to work in the fields of literature, music, the visual arts and interior design in the period between the years 1815 (Vienna Congress), the end of the Napoleonic Wars, and 1848, the year of the European revolutions and contrasts with the Romantic era which preceded it. Typical Biedermeier poets are Annette von Droste-H\u00fclshoff, Adelbert von Chamisso, Eduard M\u00f6rike, and Wilhelm M\u00fcller, the last three named having well-known musical settings by Robert Schumann, Hugo Wolf and Franz Schubert respectively.\nYoung Germany (\"Junges Deutschland\") was a loose group of Vorm\u00e4rz writers which existed from about 1830 to 1850. It was essentially a youth movement (similar to those that had swept France and Ireland and originated in Italy). Its main proponents were Karl Gutzkow, Heinrich Laube, Theodor Mundt and Ludolf Wienbarg; Heinrich Heine, Ludwig B\u00f6rne and Georg B\u00fcchner were also considered part of the movement. The wider circle included Willibald Alexis, Adolf Glassbrenner and Gustav K\u00fchne.\nRealism and Naturalism.\nPoetic Realism (1848\u20131890): 19th-century German Realism in literature, emerging after 1848, focused on depicting everyday life with accuracy and restraint. Writers moved away from Romantic idealism, emphasizing the middle class, social norms, and personal morality. Rather than political upheaval, they portrayed quiet, internal conflicts and the subtle ironies of bourgeois life. This literary realism aimed for poetic realism, blending realistic detail with refined artistic form. Key authors include Theodor Fontane, Gustav Freitag, Gottfried Keller, Wilhelm Raabe, Adalbert Stifter, Theodor Storm. Their works reflect a belief in gradual societal progress, often with a sense of quiet resignation and irony, avoiding extremes of sentimentality or revolutionary zeal.\nNaturalism (1880\u20131900): German Naturalism in literature, emerging in the late 19th century, aimed to depict life with scientific objectivity and detailed realism. Influenced by French Naturalists like \u00c9mile Zola, it focused on the deterministic effects of environment, heredity, and social conditions on individuals, especially the marginalized. Naturalist writers rejected idealization, portraying poverty, disease, and moral decay with stark precision. Dialogue often mimicked actual speech patterns, including dialects. Prominent figures include Gerhart Hauptmann, whose play Before Sunrise exemplifies the movement. German Naturalism sought to expose societal injustices, emphasizing a mechanistic, cause-and-effect view of human behavior shaped by forces beyond individual control. Key authors include naturalistic writers were Gerhart Hauptmann, Arno Holz and Johannes Schlaf.\n20th century.\nWell known writers of the 20th century.\nA well-known writer of German literature was Franz Kafka. A Kafka novel, \"The Trial\", was ranked #3 on Le Monde's 100 Books of the Century. Kafka's iconic writing style that captures themes of bureaucracy and existentialism resulted in the coining of the term \u201cKafkaesque.\u201d Kafka's writing allowed a peek into his melancholic life, one where he felt isolated from all human beings, one of his inspirations for writing.\nKafka is therefore widely regarded as a major figure of 20th-century literature with his work been interpreted as exploring themes of alienation, existential anxiety, guilt, and absurdity. His best-known works include the novella \"The Metamorphosis\" (1915) and the novels \"The Trial\" (1924) and \"The Castle\" (1926).\nNazi Germany.\nUnder the Nazi regime, some authors went into exile (\"Exilliteratur\") and others submitted to censorship (\"inner emigration\", \"Innere Emigration\")\n21st century.\nMuch of contemporary poetry in the German language is published in literary magazines. DAS GEDICHT, for instance, has featured German poetry from Germany, Austria, Switzerland, and Luxemburg for the last twenty years.\nChildren's literature.\nThe Brothers Grimm ( or ), Jacob (1785\u20131863) and Wilhelm (1786\u20131859), were German academics who together collected and published folklore. The brothers are among the best-known storytellers of folktales, popularizing stories such as \"Cinderella\" (\"\"), \"The Frog Prince\" (\"\"), \"Hansel and Gretel\" (\"\"), \"Town Musicians of Bremen\" (\"\"), \"Little Red Riding Hood\" (\"\"), \"Rapunzel\", \"Rumpelstiltskin\" (\"\"), \"Sleeping Beauty\" (\"\"), and \"Snow White\" (\"\"). Their first collection of folktales, \"Children's and Household Tales\" (), was first published in 1812.\nA Physician Heinrich Hoffmann (1809\u20131894) written a book filled with cautionary tales called: Der Struwwelpeter it was published in 1845 and was given as a Christmas gift for his 3-year-old son. After that, the anniversary of Struwwelpeter and its legacy still goes on until 1864 it was reillustrated by the author himself and it was still claimed as a classic.\nAnother book was also inspired by Der Struwwelpeter was a book Called: (Max und Moritz) \"Max and Moritz\" written and illustrated by a poet and artist Wilhelm Busch (1832\u20131908) and it was published in 1865 it certainly became popular because of its goofy cartoon style from Busch's mind and imagination with the word of phrases and rhymes to it.\nThe rise of Romanticism in 19th-century Europe revived interest in traditional folk stories, which to the Brothers Grimm represented a pure form of national literature and culture. With the goal of researching a scholarly treatise on folktales, they established a methodology for collecting and recording folk stories that became the basis for folklore studies. Between 1812 and 1857 their first collection was revised and republished many times, growing from 86 stories to more than 200. In addition to writing and modifying folktales, the brothers wrote collections of well-respected Germanic and Scandinavian mythologies, and in 1838 they began writing a definitive German dictionary (), which they were unable to finish.\nThe popularity of the Grimms' collected folktales has endured. They are available in more than 100 translations and have been adapted by renowned filmmakers, including Lotte Reiniger and Walt Disney, in films such as \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\".\nNobel Prize laureates.\nThe Nobel Prize in Literature has been awarded to German-language authors fourteen times (as of 2020), tying with French-language authors, or the second most often after English-language authors (with 32).\nThe following writers are from Germany unless stated otherwise:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12638", "revid": "29293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12638", "title": "Gemini program", "text": ""}
{"id": "12639", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12639", "title": "Galilee", "text": "Region in northern Israel\nGalilee (; ; ; ) is a region located in northern Israel and southern Lebanon consisting of two parts: the Upper Galilee (, ; , ) and the Lower Galilee (, ; , ).\n\"Galilee\" encompasses the area north of the Mount Carmel-Mount Gilboa ridge and south of the east-west section of the Litani River. It extends from the Israeli coastal plain and the shores of the Mediterranean Sea with Acre in the west, to the Jordan Valley to the east; and from the Litani in the north plus a piece bordering on the Golan Heights to Dan at the base of Mount Hermon in the northeast, to Mount Carmel and Mount Gilboa in the south.\nIt includes the plains of the Jezreel Valley north of Jenin and the Beit She'an Valley, the Sea of Galilee, and the Hula Valley.\nEtymology.\nThe region's Hebrew name is , meaning 'district' or 'circle'. The Hebrew form used in Isaiah 8:23 (Isaiah 9:1 in the Christian Old Testament) is in the construct state, leading to \"Galilee of the nations\", which refers to gentiles who settled there at the time the book was written, either by their own volition or as a result of the resettlement policy of the Neo-Assyrian Empire.\nBorders and geography.\nThe borders of Galilee, split into Upper Galilee and Lower Galilee, were described by Josephus in his \"The Jewish War\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now Phoenicia and Syria encompass about the Galilees, which are two, and called the Upper Galilee and the Lower. They are bounded toward the sun-setting, with the borders of the territory belonging to Ptolemais, and by Carmel; which mountain had formerly belonged to the Galileans, but now belonged to the Tyrians; to which mountain adjoins Gaba, which is called the City of Horsemen, because those horsemen that were dismissed by Herod the king dwelt therein; they are bounded on the south with Samaria and Scythopolis, as far as the river Jordan; on the east with Hippeae and Gadaris, and also with Ganlonitis, and the borders of the kingdom of Agrippa; its northern parts are bounded by Tyre, and the country of the Tyrians. As for that Galilee which is called the Lower, it extends in length from Tiberias to Zabulon, and of the maritime places Ptolemais is its neighbor; its breadth is from the village called Xaloth, which lies in the great plain, as far as Bersabe, from which beginning also is taken the breadth of the Upper Galilee, as far as the village Baca, which divides the land of the Tyrians from it; its length is also from Meloth to Thella, a village near to Jordan.\nMost of Galilee consists of rocky terrain, at heights of . Several high mountains are in the region, including Mount Tabor and Mount Meron, which have relatively low temperatures and high rainfall. As a result of this climate, flora and fauna thrive in the region. At the same time, many birds annually migrate from colder climates to Africa and back through the Hula\u2013Jordan corridor. The streams and waterfalls, the latter mainly in Upper Galilee, along with vast fields of greenery and colourful wildflowers, as well as numerous towns of biblical importance, make the region a popular tourist destination.\nDue to its high rainfall , mild temperatures and high mountains (Mount Meron's elevation is ), the upper Galilee region contains some distinctive flora and fauna: prickly juniper (\"Juniperus oxycedrus\"), Lebanese cedar (\"Cedrus libani\"), which grows in a small grove on Mount Meron, cyclamens, paeonias, and \"Rhododendron ponticum\" which sometimes appears on Meron.\nWestern Galilee () is a modern term referring to the western part of the Upper Galilee and its shore, and usually also the northwestern part of the Lower Galilee, mostly overlapping with Acre sub-district. Galilee Panhandle is a common term referring to the \"panhandle\" in the east that extends to the north, where Lebanon is to the west, and includes Hula Valley and Ramot Naftali mountains of the Upper Galilee.\nHistory.\nIron Age and Hebrew Bible.\nAccording to the Bible, Galilee was named by the Israelites and was the tribal region of Naphtali and Dan, at times overlapping the Tribe of Asher's land. Normally, Galilee is just referred to as \"Naphthali\".\n1 Kings 9 states that Solomon rewarded his Phoenician ally, King Hiram I of Sidon, with twenty cities in the land of Galilee, which would then have been either settled by foreigners during and after the reign of Hiram or by those who had been forcibly deported there by later conquerors such as the Neo-Assyrian Empire. Hiram, to reciprocate previous gifts given to David, accepted the upland plain among the Naftali Mountains and renamed it \"the land of Cabul\" for a time.\nIn the Iron Age II, Galilee was part of the Kingdom of Israel, which fell to the Assyrians. Archaeological survey conducted by Zvi Gal in Lower Galilee indicates that the area became deserted following the Assyrian conquest in the 8th century and remained so for several centuries; the local Israelite population was carried off to Assyria after 732 BCE. Yardenna Alexandre discovered minor short-lived Israelite settlements in the Na\u1e25al \u1e92ippori basin, which were built by survivors of the Assyrian conquest. Elsewhere, Galilee was depopulated. But there is evidence of Assyrian presence, based on artefacts in Cana, and Konrad Schmid and Jens Schroter believe it was likely that Assyrians settled in the region.\nHellenistic period.\nUp until the end of the Hellenistic period and before the Hasmonean conquest, the Galilee was sparsely populated, with the majority of its inhabitants concentrated in large fortified centers on the edges of the western and central valleys. Based on archeological evidence from Tel Anafa, Kedesh, and ash-Shuhara, the Upper Galilee was then home to a pagan population with close ties to the Phoenician coast.\nHasmonean period.\nDuring the expansion of the Hasmonean kingdom of Judea, much of the Galilee region was conquered and annexed by the first Hasmonean king Aristobulus I (104\u2013103 BCE). Following the Hasmonean conquest, there was a significant Jewish influx into the area. Sites including Yodfat, Meiron, Sepphoris, Shikhin, Qana, Bersabe, Zalmon, Mimlah, Migdal, Arbel, Kefar Hittaya, and Beth Ma'on have archeological-chronological evidence for this settlement wave.\nJosephus, who based his account on Timagenes of Alexandria, claimed that Aristobulus I had forcibly converted the Itureans to Judaism while annexing a portion of their territory. Sch\u00fcrer believed this information to be accurate and came to the conclusion that the \"Jewish\" Galilee of Jesus' day was actually inhabited by the offspring of those same Iturean converts. Other scholars have suggested that the Itureans underwent a voluntary conversion to Judaism in the Upper Galilee, or at the very least in the Eastern Upper Galilee. However, archeological information does not support either proposal, as Iturean material culture has been identified clearly in the northern Golan Heights and Mount Hermon, and not in the Galilee, and it is clear that this area remained outside Hasmonean borders.\nRoman period.\nIn the early Roman period, Galilee was predominantly Jewish. Archaeological evidence from multiple sites reveals Jewish customs, including the use of limestone vessels, ritual baths for purity, and secondary burial practices. A significant wave of Jewish settlement arrived in the region following the Roman conquest of 63 BCE. Large towns such as Kefar Hananya, Parod, Ravid, Mashkaneh, Sabban, and Tiberias were established by the end of the first century BCE or the start of the first century CE. By the end of the first century CE, the Galilee was dotted with small towns and villages. While Josephus writes there were 204 small towns, modern scholars consider this an exaggeration.\nGalilee's economy under Roman rule thrived on a combination of agriculture, fishing, and specialized crafts. Excavations in villages like Nazareth have revealed extensive agricultural infrastructure, including numerous olive presses and granaries. Olive was extensively grown in parts of Upper Galilee. Many towns and villages, particularly those around the Sea of Galilee benefited from both fertile land and a thriving fishing industry. In Tarichaea (Magdala), salted, dried, and pickled fish were significant export goods. Galilee also had specialized production centers. Shihin, near Sepphoris, produced most of the region's storage jars. Kefar Hananya in Upper Galilee manufactured various tableware forms, supplying markets across Galilee, the Golan Heights, the Decapolis, coastal areas, and the Beth Shean Valley.\nJosephus describes the Jewish population of Galilee as being nationalist and hostile to Jewish city-dwellers, making them the first target for the Romans during the Jewish-Roman wars. Bargil Pixner believes they descended from a Davidic Jewish clan from Babylon. But according to archaeological and literary evidence, upper and lower Galilee were 'very much in constant touch with the gentile, Greek-speaking cities that surrounded them.' Many Galileans were bilingual and made daily contacts with Jerusalem and gentiles around the Roman territory.\nMarkus Cromhout states that while Galileans, Judeans and diasporic Judeans were all Jewish, the Galileans had their unique social, political and economic matrix. In terms of ethnicity, Galileans were ethnic Judeans, which generally saw themselves also as Israelites, but could be also identified with localized characteristics, such as Sepphorean. Others argue that Galileans and Judeans were distinct people groups. Outsiders generally conflated them due to Hellenistic-Roman culture, which grouped all diverse groups in Palestine and their related diasporas as \"Judean\".In 4 BCE, a rebel named Judah plundered Galilee's largest city, Sepphoris. According to Josephus, the Syrian governor Publius Quinctilius Varus responded by sacking Sepphoris and selling the population into slavery, but the region's archaeology lacks evidence of such destruction. After the death of Herod the Great that same year, his son Herod Antipas was appointed as tetrarch of Galilee by the Roman emperor Augustus. Galilee remained a Roman client state and Antipas paid tribute to the Roman Empire in exchange for Roman protection.\nThe Romans did not station troops in Galilee, but threatened to retaliate against anyone who attacked it. As long as he continued to pay tribute, Antipas was permitted to govern however he wished and was permitted to mint his own coinage. Antipas was relatively observant of Jewish laws and customs. Although his palace was decorated with animal carvings, which many Jews regarded as a transgression against the law prohibiting idols, his coins bore only agricultural designs, which his subjects deemed acceptable.\nIn general, Antipas was a capable ruler. Josephus does not record any instance of his use of force to put down an uprising and he had a long, prosperous reign. However, many Jews probably resented him as not sufficiently devout. Antipas rebuilt the city of Sepphoris, and in either 18 CE or 19 CE, he founded the new city of Tiberias. These two cities became Galilee's largest cultural centers. They were the main centers of Greco-Roman influence, but were still predominantly Jewish. A massive gap existed between the rich and poor, but lack of uprisings suggest that taxes were not exorbitantly high and that most Galileans did not feel their livelihoods were being threatened.\nLate in his reign, Antipas married his half-niece Herodias, who was already married to one of her other uncles. His wife, whom he divorced, fled to her father Aretas, an Arab king, who invaded Galilee and defeated Antipas's troops before withdrawing. Both Josephus and the Gospel of Mark record that the itinerant preacher John the Baptist criticized Antipas over his marriage, and Antipas consequently had him imprisoned and then beheaded. In around 39 CE, at the urging of Herodias, Antipas went to Rome to request that he be elevated from the status of tetrarch to the status of king. The Romans found him guilty of storing arms, so he was removed from power and exiled, ending his forty-three-year reign. During the Great Revolt (66\u201373 CE), a Jewish mob destroyed Herod Antipas's palace.\nOverall, Galilee under Antipas's rule was marked by significant demographic instability. Diseases like malaria were rampant, internal migration between urban and rural areas were frequent and women generally gave birth at young ages while married to older men. Birth control, including infanticide, was not practiced. Many young men, especially marginal villagers, migrated to urban areas to find wives or alternatively, employment. Finding wives was presumed to be competitive since widows often refused to marry past the age of 30 compared to widowers. According to Jonathan L. Reed, this can provide insight on the tropes of New Testament literature, such as miraculous healings and the itinerant lifestyle of Jesus and his disciples.\nIn 66 CE, during the Great Jewish Revolt, Josephus was appointed by the Jerusalem provisional government to command Galilee. The region experienced internal conflicts among cities such as Sepphoris and Tiberias, with factions opposing Josephus's authority and warring for control. Sepphoris and other strong cities attempted to remain neutral by maintaining alliances with Rome. Despite opposition, Josephus managed to secure internal peace and fortified nineteen cities in preparation for the Roman invasion; nearly half of them were uncovered by archaeologists. In 67 CE, the Roman army, led by general Vespasian, arrived in Acre. Josephus's account, \"The Jewish War\", details the Roman campaign in Galilee, starting with the siege and capture of Gabara, followed by Jotapata (where Josephus was captured), and continuing with Tiberias, Taricheae, Gamala, Tabor, and ending in Gischala. While not all of Galilee was devastated, the conquered cities were razed, and many inhabitants were sold into slavery.\nLate Roman period.\nJudaism reached its political and cultural zenith in the Galilee during the late second and early third century CE. According to rabbinic sources, Judah ha-Nasi's political leadership was at its strongest in relation to the Jewish community in Syria Palaestina, the Diaspora, and the Roman Authorities during this time. Judah's redaction of the Mishnah at this time period represented the peak of intense cultural activity. Archaeological surveys in the Galilee have revealed that the region experienced its height of thriving settlement during this time.\nAccording to medieval Hebrew legend, Shimon bar Yochai, one of the most famed of all the tannaim, wrote the \"Zohar\" while living in Galilee.\nByzantine period.\nAfter the completion of the Mishnah, which marked the conclusion of the tannaitic era, came the period of the \"amoraim\". The Jerusalem Talmud, the principal work of the amoraim in Palestine, is primarily discussions and interpretations of the Mishnah, and according to academic research, most of it was edited in Tiberias. The vast majority of the \"amoraim\" named there, as well as the majority of the settlements or place names referenced, were Galileans. By the middle of the fourth century, the Jerusalem Talmud's compilation and editing processes abruptly came to a halt, as Talmudic scholar Yaacov Sussmann put it: \"The development of the Jerusalem Talmud seems to have abruptly ceased, as if severed by a sharp and sudden blade\".\nDemographically, during the fourth century the entire region witnessed a significant population decrease, resulting in the abandonment of several notable settlements. In approximately 320 CE, Christian bishop Epiphanius reported that all the major cities and villages in Galilee were entirely Jewish. During the Byzantine period, however, Galilee's Jewish population experienced a decline, while Christian settlement grew. Archaeological data indicates that in the third and fourth centuries, several Jewish sites were abandoned, and some Christian villages were established on or near these deserted locations. Certain settlements, such as Rama, Magdala, Kafr Kanna, Daburiyya, and Iksal, which were materially Jewish during the Roman period, were now predominantly inhabited by Christians or had a significant Christian population. Safrai and Liebner argue that the decline of the Jewish population and the expansion of the Christian population in the region were separate events that happened at different times. Throughout this period, religious segregation between Christian and Jewish villages endured, with few exceptions like Capernaum and perhaps Nazareth, due to their sanctity in Christian tradition.\nLeibner has proposed tying the end of the Palestinian Amoraic period, the impact of historical occurrences like the Christianization of the Roman Empire and of Palestine, the apparent cessation of activities of at least some of the \"batei midrash\" and the transformation of the Galilee from a densely populated Jewish area to a collection of communities surrounded by non-Jewish areas to this demographic crisis. He assumed that Christian population in Galilee was not composed of Jews who converted to Christianity. This is supported by the fact that trustworthy historical records, which mention Jewish conversion to Christianity in Byzantine Palestine, refer to individual cases rather than entire villages, unlike the records from the western part of the empire.\nEastern Galilee retained a Jewish majority until at least the seventh century. Over time, this area experienced a decline in population due to raids by nomadic groups and insufficient protection from the central government.\nEarly Muslim and Crusader periods.\nAfter the Muslim conquest of the Levant in the 630s, the Galilee formed part of Jund al-Urdunn (the military district of Jordan), itself part of Bilad al-Sham (Islamic Syria). Its major towns were Tiberias the capital of the district, Qadas, Beisan, Acre, Saffuriya, and Kabul. During the early Islamic period, Galilee underwent a process of Arabization and Islamization, similar to other areas in the region. Under Umayyad rule, Islamic rule was gradually consolidated in newly conquered territories, and some Muslims settled in the villages, establishing residency there. Later, under Abbasid rule, geographer al-Ya'qubi (d. 891), who referred to the region as \"'Jabal al-Jalil\"', noted that its inhabitants were Arabs from the Amila tribe.\nThe Islamization process in which began with the settlement of nomadic tribes. Michael Ehrlich suggests that during the Early Islamic period, the majority of people in the Western Galilee and Lower Galilee likely converted to Islam, while in the Eastern Galilee, the Islamization process continued for a more extended period, lasting until the Mamluk period. According to Moshe Gil, Jews in rural Galilean areas frequently succeeded in upholding community life during and for decades after the Umayyad period. He comes to the conclusion that several Galilean Jewish communities \"retained their ancient character\".\nThe Shia Fatimids conquered the region in the 10th century; a breakaway sect, venerating the Fatimid caliph al-Hakim, formed the Druze religion, centered in Mount Lebanon and partially in the Galilee. During the Crusades, Galilee was organized into the Principality of Galilee, one of the most important Crusader seigneuries. According to Moshe Gil, during the periods of Fatimid and Crusader rule, the rural Jewish population of Galilee experienced a gradual decline and flight. He supports his argument by referring to 11th-century Cairo Geniza documents related to transactions in Ramla and other areas in central Palestine, where Jews claimed to have ancestral ties to places like Gush Halav, Dalton, or 'Amuqa, suggesting that Jewish flight from Galilee occurred during that time.\nAyyubid and Mamluk periods.\nSunni Muslims began to immigrate to Safed and its surroundings starting in the Ayyubid period, and in particular during the Mamluk period. These immigrants included Sufi preachers who were crucial in converting the locals to Islam in Safed's rural area. Jewish immigrants did, however, come to the area in waves, during the period of the destruction of Tyre and Acre in 1291 and particularly after the Jewish expulsion from Spain in 1492. These immigrants, who included scholars and other urban elites, turned the Jewish community from a rural community into an urban hub which exerted its influence well beyond the regional boundaries of Upper Galilee.\nOttoman era.\nDuring Early Ottoman era, the Galilee was governed as the Safad Sanjak, initially part of the larger administrative unit of Damascus Eyalet (1549\u20131660) and later as part of Sidon Eyalet (1660\u20131864). During the 18th century, the administrative division of Galilee was renamed to Acre Sanjak, and the Eyalet itself became centered in Acre, factually becoming the Acre Eyalet between 1775 and 1841.\nThe Jewish population of Galilee increased significantly following their expulsion from Spain and welcome from the Ottoman Empire. The community for a time made Safed an international center of cloth weaving and manufacturing, as well as a key site for Jewish learning. Today it remains one of Judaism's four holy cities and a center for kabbalah.\nIn the mid-17th century Galilee and Mount Lebanon became the scene of the Druze power struggle, which came in parallel with much destruction in the region and decline of major cities.\nIn the mid-18th century, Galilee was caught up in a struggle between the Arab leader Zahir al-Umar and the Ottoman authorities who were centred in Damascus. Zahir ruled Galilee for 25 years until Ottoman loyalist Jezzar Pasha conquered the region in 1775.\nIn 1831, the Galilee, a part of Ottoman Syria, switched hands from Ottomans to Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt until 1840. During this period, aggressive social and politic policies were introduced, which led to a violent 1834 Arab revolt. In the process of this revolt the Jewish community of Safed was greatly reduced, in the event of Safed Plunder by the rebels. The Arab rebels were subsequently defeated by the Egyptian troops, though in 1838, the Druze of Galilee led another uprising. In 1834 and 1837, major earthquakes leveled most of the towns, resulting in great loss of life.\nFollowing the 1864 Tanzimat reforms in the Ottoman Empire, the Galilee remained within Acre Sanjak, but was transferred from Sidon Eyalet to the newly formed Syria Vilayet and shortly, from 1888, became administered from Beirut Vilayet.\nIn 1866, Galilee's first hospital, the Nazareth Hospital, was founded under the leadership of American-Armenian missionary Dr. Kaloost Vartan, assisted by German missionary John Zeller.\nIn the early 20th century, Galilee remained part of Acre Sanjak of Ottoman Syria. It was administered as the southernmost territory of the Beirut Vilayet.\nBritish administration.\nFollowing the defeat of the Ottoman Empire in World War I, and the Armistice of Mudros, it came under British rule, as part of the Occupied Enemy Territory Administration. Shortly after, in 1920, the region was included in the British Mandate territory, officially a part of Mandatory Palestine from 1923.\nModern Israeli period.\nAfter the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli war, nearly the whole of Galilee came under Israel's control. A large portion of the population fled or was forced to leave, leaving dozens of entire villages empty; however, a large Israeli Arab community remained based in and near the cities of Nazareth, Acre, Tamra, Sakhnin, and Shefa-'Amr, due to some extent to a successful rapprochement with the Druze. The kibbutzim around the Sea of Galilee were sometimes shelled by the Syrian army's artillery until Israel seized Western Golan Heights in the 1967 Six-Day War.\nDuring the 1970s and the early 1980s, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) launched multiple attacks on towns and villages of the Upper and Western Galilee from Lebanon. This came in parallel to the general destabilization of Southern Lebanon, which became a scene of fierce sectarian fighting which deteriorated into the Lebanese Civil War. On the course of the war, Israel initiated Operation Litani (1979) and Operation Peace For Galilee (1982) with the stated objectives of destroying the PLO infrastructure in Lebanon, protecting the citizens of the Galilee and supporting allied Christian Lebanese militias. Israel took over much of southern Lebanon in support of Christian Lebanese militias until 1985, when it withdrew to a narrow security buffer zone.\nFrom 1985 to 2000, Hezbollah, and earlier Amal, engaged the South Lebanon Army supported by the Israel Defense Forces, sometimes shelling Upper Galilee communities with Katyusha rockets. In May 2000, Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak unilaterally withdrew IDF troops from southern Lebanon, maintaining a security force on the Israeli side of the international border recognized by the United Nations. The move brought a collapse to the South Lebanon Army and takeover of Southern Lebanon by Hezbollah. However, despite Israeli withdrawal, clashes between Hezbollah and Israel continued along the border, and UN observers condemned both for their attacks.\nThe 2006 Israel-Lebanon conflict was characterized by round-the-clock Katyusha rocket attacks (with a greatly extended range) by Hezbollah on the whole of Galilee, with long-range, ground-launched missiles hitting as far south as the Sharon Plain, Jezreel Valley, and Jordan Valley below the Sea of Galilee.\nDemography.\nIn 2006, there were 1.2\u00a0million residents in Galilee, of whom 47% were Jewish. The Jewish Agency has attempted to increase the Jewish population in this area, but the non-Jewish population also has a high growth rate.\nThe largest cities in the region are Acre, Nahariya, Nazareth, Safed, Karmiel, Shaghur, Shefa-'Amr, Afula, and Tiberias. The port city of Haifa serves as a commercial center for the whole region.\nBecause of its hilly terrain, most of the people in the Galilee live in small villages connected by relatively few roads. A railroad runs south from Nahariya along the Mediterranean coast, and a fork to the east was opened in 2016. The main sources of livelihood throughout the area are agriculture and tourism. Industrial parks are being developed, bringing further employment opportunities to the local population which includes many recent immigrants. The Israeli government is contributing funding to the private initiative, the Galilee Finance Facility, organised by the Milken Institute and Koret Economic Development Fund.\nThe Galilee is home to a large Arab population, with a Muslim majority and two smaller populations, of Druze and Arab Christians, of comparable sizes. Both Israeli Druze and Christians have their majorities in the Galilee. Other notable minorities are the Bedouin, the Maronites and the Circassians.\nThe north-central portion of the Galilee is also known as Central Galilee, stretching from the border with Lebanon to the northern edge of the Jezreel Valley. It includes the cities of Nazareth and Sakhnin, has an Arab majority of 75%, with most of the Jewish population living in hilltop cities like Upper Nazareth. The northern half of the central Lower Galilee, surrounding Karmiel and Sakhnin, is known as the \"Heart of the Galilee\".\nThe eastern Galilee is nearly 100% Jewish. This part includes the Finger of the Galilee, the Jordan River Valley, and the shores the Sea of Galilee, and contains two of Judaism's Four Holy Cities.\nThe southern part of the Galilee, including Jezreel Valley, and the Gilboa region are nearly 100% Jewish, with a few small Arab villages near the West Bank border. About 80% of the population of the Western Galilee is Jewish, all the way up to the Lebanese border. Jews form a small majority in the mountainous Upper Galilee, with a significant minority Arab population, mainly Druze and Christians.\nAs of 2011, the Galilee is attracting significant internal migration of Haredi Jews, who are increasingly moving to the Galilee and Negev as an answer to rising housing prices in central Israel.\nTourism.\nGalilee is a popular destination for domestic and foreign tourists who enjoy its scenic, recreational, and gastronomic offerings. The Galilee attracts many Christian pilgrims, as many of the miracles of Jesus occurred, according to the New Testament, on the shores of the Sea of Galilee\u2014including his walking on water, calming the storm, and feeding five thousand people in Tabgha. Numerous sites of biblical importance are located in the Galilee, such as Megiddo, Jezreel Valley, Mount Tabor, Hazor, Horns of Hattin, and more.\nA popular hiking trail known as the \"yam leyam\", or sea-to-sea, starts hikers at the Mediterranean. They then hike through the Galilee mountains, Tabor, Neria, and Meron, until their final destination, the Kinneret (Sea of Galilee).\nIn April 2011, Israel unveiled the Jesus Trail, a 40-mile (60-km) hiking trail in the Galilee for Christian pilgrims. The trail includes a network of footpaths, roads, and bicycle paths linking sites central to the lives of Jesus and his disciples, including Tabgha, the traditional site of Jesus's miracle of the loaves and fishes, and the Mount of Beatitudes, where he delivered his Sermon on the Mount. It ends at Capernaum on the shores of the Sea of Galilee, where Jesus espoused his teachings.\nMany kibbutzim and moshav families operate \"Zimmerim\", from the Yiddish word for 'room', \u05e6\u05d9\u05de\u05e2\u05e8, from 'Zimmer' in German, with the Hebrew ending for plural, -im; the local term for a Bed and breakfast. Numerous festivals are held throughout the year, especially in the autumn and spring holiday seasons. These include the Acre (Acco) Festival of Alternative Theater, the olive harvest festival, music festivals featuring Anglo-American folk, klezmer, Renaissance, and chamber music, and Karmiel Dance Festival.\nCuisine.\nThe cuisine of the Galilee is very diverse. The meals are lighter than in the central and southern regions. Dairy products are heavily consumed, especially the Safed cheese that originated in the mountains of the Upper Galilee. Herbs like thyme, mint, parsley, basil, and rosemary are very common with everything, including dips, meat, fish, stews and cheese. In the eastern part of the Galilee, there is freshwater fish as much as meat, especially the Tilapia that lives in the Sea of Galilee, Jordan river, and other streams in the region.\nFish is filled with thyme and grilled with rosemary to flavor, or stuffed with oregano leaves, then topped with parsley and served with lemon to squash. This technique exists in other parts of the country including the coasts of the Mediterranean and the Red Sea. A specialty of the region is a baked Tilapia flavored with celery, mint and a lot of lemon juice. Baked fish with tahini is also common in Tiberias. The coastal Galileans prefer to replace the tahini with yogurt and add sumac on top.\nThe Galilee is famous for its olives, pomegranates, wine and especially its Labneh w'Za'atar which is served with pita bread, meat stews with wine, pomegranates and herbs such as akub, parsley, khalmit, mint, fennel, etc. are common. Galilean kubba is usually flavored with cumin, cinnamon, cardamom, concentrated pomegranate juice, onion, parsley and pine nuts and served as meze with tahini dip.\nKebabs are made almost in the same way, with sumac replacing cardamom and with carob sometimes replacing the pomegranate juice. Because of its climate, beef has become more popular than lamb, although both are still eaten there. Dates are popular in the tropical climate of the Eastern Galilee.\nSubregions.\nThe definition of Galilee varies depending on the period, author, and point of view (geological, geographical, administrative). Ancient Galilee consisted in broad terms of the Upper and Lower Galilee. Today the northwestern part of the Upper Galilee is in Southern Lebanon, with the rest being in Israel. The Israeli Galilee is often divided into these subregions, which often overlap:\nThe following subregions are sometimes regarded, from different points of view, as distinct from the Galilee, for instance the entire Jordan Valley including the Sea of Galilee and its continuation to the south as one geological and geographical unit, and the Jezreel, Harod, and Beit She'an valleys as \"the northern valleys\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12641", "revid": "367949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12641", "title": "Goths", "text": "Early Germanic people\nThe Goths were a Germanic people who played a major role in the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the emergence of medieval Europe. They were first mentioned by Graeco-Roman authors in the 3rd century AD, living north of the Danube in what is now Ukraine, Moldova, and Romania. From here they conducted raids into Roman territory, and large numbers of them joined the Roman military. These early Goths lived in the regions where archaeologists find the Chernyakhov culture, which flourished throughout this region during the 3rd and 4th centuries.\nIn the late 4th century, the lands of the Goths in present-day Ukraine were overwhelmed by a significant westward movement of Alans and Huns from the east. Large numbers of Goths subsequently began to concentrate near the Roman border at the Lower Danube, seeking refuge within the Roman Empire. Their entry into the Empire resulted in violence, and Goth-led forces inflicted a devastating defeat upon the Romans at the Battle of Adrianople in 378. Roman forces regained a level of control but many Goths and other eastern peoples were quickly settled in and near the empire. One of these groups, initially led by their king Alaric I, sacked the city of Rome in 410, they were the precursors of the Visigoths. The successors of the Visigoths eventually established a Visigothic Kingdom in Spain at Toledo. Meanwhile, Goths under Hunnic rule gained their independence in the 5th century, most importantly the Ostrogoths. Under their king Theodoric the Great, these Goths established the Ostrogothic Kingdom in Italy at Ravenna.\nThe Ostrogothic Kingdom was destroyed by Byzantium (Eastern Roman Empire) in the 6th century, while the Visigothic Kingdom was largely conquered by the Umayyad Caliphate in the early 8th century, with a remnant in Asturias which would go on to initiate the \"Reconquista\" under Pelagius. Remnants of Gothic communities in Crimea, known as the Crimean Goths, established a culture that survived for more than a thousand years, although Goths would eventually cease to exist as a distinct people.\nGothic architecture, Gothic literature and the modern-day Goth subculture ultimately derive their names from the ancient Goths, though the Goths themselves did not directly create or influence these art forms.\nName.\nIn the Gothic language, the Goths were called the *\"Gut-\u00feiuda\" ('Gothic people') or *\"Gutans\" ('Goths'). The Proto-Germanic form of the Gothic name is reconstructed as *\"Gut\u014dz\", but it is proposed that this co-existed with an n-stem variant *\"Gutaniz\", attested in \"Gutones\", \"gutani\", or \"gutniskr\". The form *\"Gut\u014dz\" is etymologically identical to that of the Gutes from Gotland, Sweden, and closely related to that of the Geats, from mainland Sweden, whose name is reconstructed as *\"Gaut\u014dz\". Though these names probably all mean the same thing, that meaning is uncertain. They are all thought to be related to the Proto-Germanic verb *\"geuta-\", which means \"to pour\".\nThe similarity of these Scandinavian names has long been noted by scholars in connection with the 6th-century book \"Getica\" (c.\u2009551), by the historian Jordanes who wrote that the Goths originated on Scandza many centuries earlier, and moved to the Vistula delta. However, the accuracy of Jordanes' account for such early Gothic history has been questioned by scholars. A people called the \"Gutones\"\u00a0\u2013 possibly early Goths\u00a0\u2013 are documented living near the lower Vistula River in current Poland in the 1st century, where they are associated with the archaeological Wielbark culture.\nClassification.\nThe Goths are classified as a Germanic people in modern scholarship. Along with the Burgundians, Vandals and others they belong to the East Germanic group. Roman authors of late antiquity did not classify the Goths as \"Germani\". In modern scholarship the Goths are sometimes referred to as being \"Germani\".\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nA crucial source on Gothic history is the \"Getica\" of the 6th-century historian Jordanes, who may have been of Gothic descent. Jordanes claims to have based the \"Getica\" on an earlier lost work by Cassiodorus, but also cites material from fifteen other classical sources, including an otherwise unknown writer, Ablabius. Many scholars accept that Jordanes' account on Gothic origins is at least partially derived from Gothic tribal tradition and accurate on certain details, and as a result the Goths are often identified as originating from south-central Sweden.\nAccording to Jordanes, the Goths originated on an island called \"Scandza\" (Scandinavia), from where they emigrated by sea to an area called \"Gothiscandza\" under their king Berig. Historians are not in agreement on the authenticity and accuracy of this account. Most scholars agree that Gothic migration from Scandinavia is reflected in the archaeological record, but the evidence is not entirely clear. Rather than a single mass migration of an entire people, scholars open to hypothetical Scandinavian origins envision a process of gradual migration in the 1st centuries BC and AD, which was probably preceded by long-term contacts and perhaps limited to a few elite clans from Scandinavia.\nSimilarities between the name of the Goths, some Swedish place names and the names of the Gutes and Geats have been cited as evidence that the Goths originated in Gotland or G\u00f6taland. The Goths, Geats and Gutes may all have descended from an early community of seafarers active on both sides of the Baltic. Similarities and dissimilarities between the Gothic language and Scandinavian languages (particularly Gutnish) have been cited as evidence both for and against a Scandinavian origin.\nScholars generally locate \"Gothiscandza\" in the area of the Wielbark culture. This culture emerged in the lower Vistula and along the Pomeranian coast in the 1st century AD, replacing the preceding Oksywie culture. It is primarily distinguished from the Oksywie by the practice of inhumation, the absence of weapons in graves, and the presence of stone circles. This area had been intimately connected with Scandinavia since the time of the Nordic Bronze Age and the Lusatian culture. Its inhabitants in the Wielbark period are usually thought to have been Germanic peoples, such as the Goths and Rugii. Jordanes writes that the Goths, soon after settling \"Gothiscandza\", seized the lands of the Ulmerugi (Rugii).\nEarly history.\nThe Goths are generally believed to have been first attested by Greco-Roman sources in the 1st century under the name \"Gutones\". The equation between Gutones and later Goths is disputed by several historians.\nAround 15 AD, Strabo mentions the Butones, Lugii, and Semnones as part of a large group of peoples who came under the domination of the Marcomannic king Maroboduus. The \"Butones\" are generally equated with the Gutones. The Lugii have sometimes been considered the same people as the Vandals, with whom they were certainly closely affiliated. The Vandals are associated with the Przeworsk culture, which was located to the south of the Wielbark culture. Wolfram suggests that the Gutones were clients of the Lugii and Vandals in the 1st century AD.\nIn 77 AD, Pliny the Elder mentions the Gutones as one of the peoples of Germania. He writes that the Gutones, Burgundiones, Varini, and Carini belong to the Vandili. Pliny classifies the Vandili as one of the five principal \"German races\", along with the coastal Ingvaeones, Istvaeones, Irminones, and Peucini. In an earlier chapter Pliny writes that the 4th century BC traveler Pytheas encountered a people called the \"Guiones\". Some scholars have equated these \"Guiones\" with the Gutones, but the authenticity of the Pytheas account is uncertain.\nIn his work \"Germania\" from around 98 AD, Tacitus writes that the Gotones (or Gothones) and the neighbouring Rugii and Lemovii were \"Germani\" who carried round shields and short swords, and lived near the ocean, beyond the Vandals. He described them as \"ruled by kings, a little more strictly than the other German tribes\". In another notable work, the \"Annals\", Tacitus writes that the Gotones had assisted Catualda, a young Marcomannic exile, in overthrowing the rule of Maroboduus. Prior to this, it is probable that both the Gutones and Vandals had been subjects of the Marcomanni.\nSometime after settling \"Gothiscandza\", Jordanes writes that the Goths defeated the neighbouring Vandals. Wolfram believes the Gutones freed themselves from Vandalic domination at the beginning of the 2nd century AD.\nIn his \"Geography\" from around 150 AD, Ptolemy mentions the Gythones (or Gutones) as living east of the Vistula in Sarmatia, between the Veneti and the Fenni. In an earlier chapter he mentions a people called the Gutae (or Gautae) as living in southern Scandia. These Gutae are probably the same as the later Gauti mentioned by Procopius. Wolfram suggests that there were close relations between the Gythones and Gutae, and that they might have been of common origin.\nMovement towards the Black Sea.\nBeginning in the middle of the 2nd century, the Wielbark culture shifted southeast towards the Black Sea. During this time the Wielbark culture is believed to have ejected and partially absorbed peoples of the Przeworsk culture. This was part of a wider southward movement of eastern Germanic tribes, which was probably caused by massive population growth. As a result, other tribes were pushed towards the Roman Empire, contributing to the beginning of the Marcomannic Wars. By 200 AD, Wielbark Goths were probably being recruited into the Roman army.\nAccording to Jordanes, the Goths entered Oium, part of Scythia, under the king Filimer, where they defeated the Spali. This migration account partly corresponds with the archaeological evidence. The name \"Spali\" may mean \"the giants\" in Slavic, and the Spali were thus probably not Slavs. In the early 3rd century AD, western Scythia was inhabited by the agricultural Zarubintsy culture and the nomadic Sarmatians. Prior to the Sarmatians, the area had been settled by the Bastarnae, who are believed to have carried out a migration similar to the Goths in the 3rd century BC. Peter Heather considers the Filimer story to be at least partially derived from Gothic oral tradition. The fact that the expanding Goths appear to have preserved their Gothic language during their migration suggests that their movement involved a fairly large number of people.\nBy the mid-3rd century AD, the Wielbark culture had contributed to the formation of the Chernyakhov culture in Scythia. This strikingly uniform culture came to stretch from the Danube in the west to the Don in the east. It is believed to have been dominated by the Goths and other Germanic groups such as the Heruli. It nevertheless also included Iranian, Dacian, Roman and probably Slavic elements as well.\n3rd century raids on the Roman Empire.\nThe first incursion into the Roman Empire attributable to Goths involved the sack of Histria (near the then mouth of the Danube) in 238. The first documentary references to the Goths in the 3rd century call them \"Scythians\", as their base, known as Scythia, had historically been occupied by an unrelated people of that name. In the late 3rd century the name \"Goths\" () is first mentioned. Ancient authors do not identify the Goths with the earlier Gutones. Philologists and linguists have no doubt that the names are linked.\nOn the Pontic steppe the Goths quickly adopted several nomadic customs from the Sarmatians. They excelled at horsemanship, archery and falconry, and also became accomplished agriculturalists and seafarers. J. B. Bury describes the Gothic period as \"the only non-nomadic episode in the history of the steppe\". Liebeschuetz sees the Goths of this period as \"nomadic or semi-nomadic\".\nWilliam H. McNeill compares the migration of the Goths to that of the early Mongols, who migrated southward from the forests and came to dominate the eastern Eurasian steppe around the same time as the Goths predominated in the west. From the 240s at the earliest, Goths were heavily recruited into the Roman Army to fight in the Roman\u2013Persian Wars, notably participating in the Battle of Misiche in 244. An inscription at the Ka'ba-ye Zartosht in Parthian, Persian and Greek commemorates the Persian victory over the Romans and the troops drawn from \"gwt W g'rmny x\u0161tr\", the Gothic and German kingdoms, which is probably a Parthian gloss for the Danubian (Gothic) \"limes\" and the Germanic \"limes\".\nMeanwhile, Gothic raids on the Roman Empire continued, In 250\u201351, the Gothic king Cniva captured the city of Philippopolis and inflicted a devastating defeat upon the Romans at the Battle of Abrittus, killing the Roman Emperor Decius. This was one of the most disastrous defeats in the history of the Roman army.\nThe first Gothic seaborne raids took place in the 250s. The first two incursions into Asia Minor occurred between 253 and 256; Zosimus attributes them to Boranoi. This may not be an ethnic term but may just mean \"people from the north\". It is unknown if Goths were involved in these first raids. Gregory Thaumaturgus attributes a third attack to Goths and Boradoi, and claims that some, \"forgetting that they were men of Pontus and Christians\", joined the invaders. An unsuccessful attack on Pityus was followed in the second year by another, which sacked Pityus and Trabzon and ravaged large areas in the Pontus. In the third year, a much larger force devastated large areas of Bithynia and the Propontis, including the cities of Chalcedon, Nicomedia, Nicaea, Apamea Myrlea, Cius and Bursa. By the end of the raids, the Goths had seized control over Crimea and the Bosporus and captured several cities on the Euxine coast, including Olbia and Tyras, which enabled them to engage in widespread naval activities.\nAfter a 10-year hiatus, the Goths and the Heruli, with a raiding fleet of 500 ships, sacked Heraclea Pontica, Cyzicus and Byzantium. They were defeated by the Roman navy but managed to escape into the Aegean Sea, where they ravaged the islands of Lemnos and Scyros, broke through Thermopylae and sacked several cities of southern Greece (province of Achaea) including Athens, Corinth, Argos, Olympia and Sparta. Then an Athenian militia, led by the historian Dexippus, pushed the invaders to the north where they were intercepted by the Roman army under Gallienus. He won an important victory near the Nessos (Nestos) river, on the boundary between Macedonia and Thrace, the Dalmatian cavalry of the Roman army earning a reputation as good fighters. Reported barbarian casualties were 3,000 men. Subsequently, the Heruli leader Naulobatus came to terms with the Romans.\nAfter Gallienus was assassinated outside Milan in the summer of 268 in a plot led by high officers in his army, Claudius was proclaimed emperor and headed to Rome to establish his rule. Claudius' immediate concerns were with the Alamanni, who had invaded Raetia and Italy. After he defeated them in the Battle of Lake Benacus, he was finally able to take care of the invasions in the Balkan provinces.\nIn the meantime, a second and larger sea-borne invasion had started. An enormous coalition consisting of Goths (Greuthungi and Thervingi), Gepids and Peucini, led again by the Heruli, assembled at the mouth of river Tyras (Dniester). The \"Augustan History\" and Zosimus claim a total number of 2,000\u20136,000 ships and 325,000 men. This is probably a gross exaggeration but remains indicative of the scale of the invasion. After failing to storm some towns on the coasts of the western Black Sea and the Danube (Tomi, Marcianopolis), the invaders attacked Byzantium and Chrysopolis. Part of their fleet was wrecked, either because of the Goth's inexperience in sailing through the violent currents of the Propontis or because they were defeated by the Roman navy. Then they entered the Aegean Sea and a detachment ravaged the Aegean islands as far as Crete, Rhodes and Cyprus. According to the \"Augustan History\", the Goths achieved no success on this expedition because they were struck by the Cyprianic Plague. The fleet probably also sacked Troy and Ephesus, damaging the Temple of Artemis, though the temple was repaired and then later torn down by Christians a century later, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. While their main force had constructed siege works and was close to taking the cities of Thessalonica and Cassandreia, it retreated to the Balkan interior at the news that the emperor was advancing.\nLearning of the approach of Claudius, the Goths first attempted to directly invade Italy. They were engaged near Naissus by a Roman army led by Claudius advancing from the north. The battle most likely took place in 269, and was fiercely contested. Large numbers on both sides were killed but, at the critical point, the Romans tricked the Goths into an ambush by pretending to retreat. Some 50,000 Goths were allegedly killed or taken captive and their base at Thessalonika destroyed. Apparently Aurelian, who was in charge of all Roman cavalry during Claudius' reign, led the decisive attack in the battle. Some survivors were resettled within the empire, while others were incorporated into the Roman army. The battle ensured the survival of the Roman Empire for another two centuries.\nIn 270, after the death of Claudius, Goths under the leadership of Cannabaudes again launched an invasion of the Roman Empire, but were defeated by Aurelian, who, however, did surrender Dacia beyond the Danube.\nAround 275 the Goths launched a last major assault on Asia Minor, where piracy by Black Sea Goths was causing great trouble in Colchis, Pontus, Cappadocia, Galatia and even Cilicia. They were defeated sometime in 276 by Emperor Marcus Claudius Tacitus.\nBy the late 3rd century, there were at least two groups of Goths, separated by the Dniester River: the Thervingi and the Greuthungi. The Gepids, who lived northwest of the Goths, are also attested as this time. Jordanes writes that the Gepids shared common origins with the Goths.\nIn the late 3rd century, as recorded by Jordanes, the Gepids, under their king Fastida, utterly defeated the Burgundians, and then attacked the Goths and their king Ostrogotha. Out of this conflict, Ostrogotha and the Goths emerged victorious. In the last decades of the 3rd century, large numbers of Carpi are recorded as fleeing from Dacia to the Roman Empire, having probably been driven from the area by Goths.\nCo-existence with the Roman Empire (300\u2013375).\nIn 332, Constantine helped the Sarmatians to settle on the north banks of the Danube to defend against the Goths' attacks and thereby enforce the Roman border. Around 100,000\u00a0Goths were reportedly killed in battle, and Aoric, son of the Thervingian king Ariaric, was captured. Eusebius, a historian who wrote in Greek in the early 4th century, wrote that in 334, Constantine evacuated approximately 300,000\u00a0Sarmatians from the north bank of the Danube after a revolt of the Sarmatians' slaves. From 335 to 336, Constantine, continuing his Danube campaign, defeated many Gothic tribes.\nHaving been driven from the Danube by the Romans, the Thervingi invaded the territory of the Sarmatians of the Tisza. In this conflict, the Thervingi were led by Vidigoia, \"the bravest of the Goths\" and were victorious, although Vidigoia was killed. Jordanes states that Aoric was succeeded by Geberic, \"a man renowned for his valor and noble birth\", who waged war on the Hasdingi Vandals and their king Visimar, forcing them to settle in Pannonia under Roman protection.\nBoth the Greuthungi and Thervingi became heavily Romanized during the 4th century. This came about through trade with the Romans, as well as through Gothic membership of a military covenant, which was based in Byzantium and involved pledges of military assistance. Reportedly, 40,000\u00a0Goths were brought by Constantine to defend Constantinople in his later reign, and the Palace Guard was thereafter mostly composed of Germanic warriors, as Roman soldiers by this time had largely lost military value. The Goths increasingly became soldiers in the Roman armies in the 4th century leading to a significant Germanization of the Roman Army. Without the recruitment of Germanic warriors in the Roman Army, the Roman Empire would not have survived for as long as it did. Goths who gained prominent positions in the Roman military include Gainas, Tribigild, Fravitta and Aspar. Mardonius, a Gothic eunuch, was the childhood tutor and later adviser of Roman emperor Julian, on whom he had an immense influence.\nThe Gothic penchant for wearing skins became fashionable in Constantinople, a fashion which was loudly denounced by conservatives. The 4th-century Greek bishop Synesius compared the Goths to wolves among sheep, mocked them for wearing skins and questioned their loyalty towards Rome: A man in skins leading warriors who wear the chlamys, exchanging his sheepskins for the toga to debate with Roman magistrates and perhaps even sit next to a Roman consul, while law-abiding men sit behind. Then these same men, once they have gone a little way from the senate house, put on their sheepskins again, and when they have rejoined their fellows they mock the toga, saying that they cannot comfortably draw their swords in it.\nIn the 4th century, Geberic was succeeded by the Greuthungian king Ermanaric, who embarked on a large-scale expansion. Jordanes states that Ermanaric conquered a large number of warlike tribes, including the Heruli (who were led by Alaric), the Aesti and the Vistula Veneti, who, although militarily weak, were very numerous, and put up a strong resistance. Jordanes compares the conquests of Ermanaric to those of Alexander the Great, and states that he \"ruled all the nations of Scythia and Germany by his own prowess alone.\" Interpreting Jordanes, Herwig Wolfram estimates that Ermanaric dominated a vast area of the Pontic Steppe stretching from the Baltic Sea to the Black Sea as far eastwards as the Ural Mountains, encompassing not only the Greuthungi, but also Baltic Finnic peoples, Slavs (such as the Antes), Rosomoni (Roxolani), Alans, Huns, Sarmatians and probably Aestii (Balts). According to Wolfram, it is certainly possible that the sphere of influence of the Chernyakhov culture could have extended well beyond its archaeological extent. Chernyakhov archaeological finds have been found far to the north in the forest steppe, suggesting Gothic domination of this area. Peter Heather on the other hand, contends that the extent of Ermanaric's power is exaggerated. Ermanaric's possible dominance of the Volga-Don trade routes has led historian to consider his realm a forerunner of the Viking-founded state of Kievan Rus'. In the western part of Gothic territories, dominated by the Thervingi, there were also populations of Taifali, Sarmatians and other Iranian peoples, Dacians, Daco-Romans and other Romanized populations.\nAccording to Hervarar saga ok Hei\u00f0reks (The Saga of Herv\u00f6r and Heidrek), a 13th-century legendary saga, \u00c1rheimar was the capital of Reidgotaland, the land of the Goths. The saga states that it was located on the Dnieper river. Jordanes refers to the region as Oium.\nIn the 360s, Athanaric, son of Aoric and leader of the Thervingi, supported the usurper Procopius against the Eastern Roman Emperor Valens. In retaliation, Valens invaded the territories of Athanaric and defeated him, but was unable to achieve a decisive victory. Athanaric and Valens thereupon negotiated a peace treaty, favorable to the Thervingi, on a boat in the Danube river, as Athanaric refused to set his feet within the Roman Empire. Soon afterwards, Fritigern, a rival of Athanaric, converted to Arianism, gaining the favor of Valens. Athanaric and Fritigern thereafter fought a civil war in which Athanaric appears to have been victorious. Athanaric thereafter carried out a crackdown on Christianity in his realm.\nArrival of the Huns (about 375).\nAround 375 the Huns overran the Alans, an Iranian people living to the east of the Goths, and then, along with Alans, invaded the territory of the Goths. A source for this period is the Roman historian Ammianus Marcellinus, who wrote that Hunnic domination of the Gothic kingdoms in Scythia began in the 370s. It is possible that the Hunnic attack came as a response to the Gothic expansion eastwards.\nUpon the suicide of Ermanaric (died 376), the Greuthungi gradually fell under Hunnic domination. Christopher I. Beckwith suggests that the Hunnic thrust into Europe and the Roman Empire was an attempt to subdue the independent Goths in the west. The Huns fell upon the Thervingi, and Athanaric sought refuge in the mountains (referred to as Caucaland in the sagas). Ambrose makes a passing reference to Athanaric's royal titles before 376 in his \"De Spiritu Sancto\" (On the Holy Spirit).\nBattles between the Goths and the Huns are described in the \"Hl\u00f6\u00f0skvi\u00f0a\" (The Battle of the Goths and Huns), a medieval Icelandic saga. The sagas recall that Gizur, king of the Geats, came to the aid of the Goths in an epic conflict with the Huns, although this saga might derive from a later Gothic-Hunnic conflict.\nAlthough the Huns successfully subdued many of the Goths who subsequently joined their ranks, Fritigern approached the Eastern Roman emperor Valens in 376 with a portion of his people and asked to be allowed to settle on the south bank of the Danube. Valens permitted this, and even assisted the Goths in their crossing of the river (probably at the fortress of Durostorum). The Gothic evacuation across the Danube was probably not spontaneous, but rather a carefully planned operation initiated after long debate among leading members of the community. Upon arrival, the Goths were to be disarmed according to their agreement with the Romans, although many of them still managed to keep their arms. The Moesogoths settled in Thrace and Moesia.\nThe Gothic War of 376\u2013382.\nMistreated by corrupt local Roman officials, the Gothic refugees were soon experiencing a famine; some are recorded as having been forced to sell their children to Roman slave traders in return for rotten dog meat. Enraged by this treachery, Fritigern unleashed a widescale rebellion in Thrace, in which he was joined not only by Gothic refugees and slaves, but also by disgruntled Roman workers and peasants, and Gothic deserters from the Roman Army. The ensuing conflict, known as the Gothic War, lasted for several years. Meanwhile, a group of Greuthungi, led by the chieftains Alatheus and Saphrax, who were co-regents with Vithericus, son and heir of the Greuthungi king Vithimiris, crossed the Danube without Roman permission. The Gothic War culminated in the Battle of Adrianople in 378, in which the Romans were badly defeated and Valens was killed.\nFollowing the decisive Gothic victory at Adrianople, Julius, the magister militum of the Eastern Roman Empire, organized a wholesale massacre of Goths in Asia Minor, Syria and other parts of the Roman East. Fearing rebellion, Julian lured the Goths into the confines of urban streets from which they could not escape and massacred soldiers and civilians alike. As word spread, the Goths rioted throughout the region, and large numbers were killed. Survivors may have settled in Phrygia.\nWith the rise of Theodosius I in 379, the Romans launched a renewed offensive to subdue Fritigern and his followers. Around the same time, Athanaric arrived in Constantinople, having fled Caucaland through the scheming of Fritigern. Athanaric received a warm reception by Theodosius, praised the Roman Emperor in return, and was honoured with a magnificent funeral by the emperor following his death shortly after his arrival. In 382, Theodosius decided to enter peace negotiations with the Thervingi, which were concluded on 3 October 382. The Thervingi were subsequently made foederati of the Romans in Thrace and obliged to provide troops to the Roman army.\nLater division and spread of the Goths.\nIn the aftermath of the Hunnic onslaught, two major groups of the Goths would eventually emerge, the Visigoths and Ostrogoths. Visigoths means the \"Goths of the west\", while Ostrogoths means \"Goths of the east\". The Visigoths, led by the Balti dynasty, claimed descent from the Thervingi and lived as foederati inside Roman territory, while the Ostrogoths, led by the Amali dynasty, claimed descent from the Greuthungi and were subjects of the Huns. Procopius interpreted the name \"Visigoth\" as \"western Goths\" and the name \"Ostrogoth\" as \"eastern Goth\", reflecting the geographic distribution of the Gothic realms at that time. A people closely related to the Goths, the Gepids, were also living under Hunnic domination. A smaller group of Goths were the Crimean Goths, who remained in Crimea and maintained their Gothic identity well into the 18th century.\nIn his biography of the West Saxon monarch Alfred the Great, the Welsh historian Asser states that Alfred's mother Osburh was of partial Goth ancestry through her father Oslac.\nVisigoths.\nThe Visigoths were a new Gothic political unit brought together during the career of their first leader, Alaric I. Following a major settlement of Goths in the Balkans made by Theodosius in 382, Goths received prominent positions in the Roman army. Relations with Roman civilians were sometimes uneasy. In 391, Gothic soldiers, with the blessing of Theodosius I, massacred thousands of Roman spectators at the Hippodrome in Thessalonica as vengeance for the lynching of the Gothic general Butheric.\nThe Goths suffered heavy losses while serving Theodosius in the civil war of 394 against Eugenius and Arbogast. In 395, following the death of Theodosius I, Alaric and his Balkan Goths invaded Greece, where they sacked Piraeus (the port of Athens) and destroyed Corinth, Megara, Argos, and Sparta. Athens itself was spared by paying a large bribe, and the Eastern emperor Flavius Arcadius subsequently appointed Alaric magister militum (\"master of the soldiers\") in Illyricum in 397.\nIn 401 and 402, Alaric made two attempts at invading Italy, but was defeated by Stilicho. In 405\u2013406, another Gothic leader, Radagaisus, also attempted to invade Italy, and was also defeated by Stilicho. In 408, the Western Roman emperor Flavius Honorius ordered the execution of Stilicho and his family, then incited the Roman population to massacre tens of thousands of wives and children of Goths serving in the Roman military. Subsequently, around 30,000 Gothic soldiers defected to Alaric. Alaric in turn invaded Italy, seeking to pressure Honorious into granting him permission to settle his people in North Africa. In Italy, Alaric liberated tens of thousands of Gothic slaves, and in 410 he sacked the city of Rome. Although the city's riches were plundered, the civilian inhabitants of the city were treated humanely, and only a few buildings were burned. Alaric died soon afterwards, and was buried along with his treasure in an unknown grave under the Busento river.\nAlaric was succeeded by his brother-in\u2013law Athaulf, husband of Honorius' sister Galla Placidia, who had been seized during Alaric's sack of Rome. Athaulf settled the Visigoths in southern Gaul. After failing to gain recognition from the Romans, Athaulf retreated into Hispania in early 415, and was assassinated in Barcelona shortly afterwards. He was succeeded by Sigeric and then Wallia, who succeeded in having the Visigoths accepted by Honorius as foederati in southern Gaul, with their capital at Toulouse. Wallia subsequently inflicted severe defeats upon the Silingi Vandals and the Alans in Hispania.\nWallia was succeeded by Theodoric I who completed the settlement of the Goths in Aquitania.\nPeriodically they marched on Arles, the seat of the praetorian prefect but were always pushed back. In 439 the Visigoths signed a treaty with the Romans which they kept.\nUnder Theodoric II the Visigoths allied with the Romans and fought Attila to a stalemate in the Battle of the Catalaunian Fields, although Theodoric was killed in the battle. Under Euric, the Visigoths established an independent Visigothic Kingdom and succeeded in driving the Suebi out of Hispania proper and back into Galicia. Although they controlled Spain, they still formed a tiny minority among a much larger Hispano-Roman population, approximately 200,000 out of 6,000,000.\nIn 507, the Visigoths were pushed out of most of Gaul by the Frankish king Clovis I at the Battle of Vouill\u00e9. They were able to retain Narbonensis and Provence after the timely arrival of an Ostrogoth detachment sent by Theodoric the Great. The defeat at Vouill\u00e9 resulted in their penetrating further into Hispania and establishing a new capital at Toledo.\nUnder Liuvigild in the latter part of the 6th century, the Visigoths succeeded in subduing the Suebi in Galicia and the Byzantines in the south-west, and thus achieved dominance over most of the Iberian peninsula. Liuvigild also abolished the law that prevented intermarriage between Hispano-Romans and Goths, and he remained an Arian Christian. The conversion of Reccared I to Roman Catholicism in the late 6th century prompted the assimilation of Goths with the Hispano-Romans.\nAt the end of the 7th century, the Visigothic Kingdom began to suffer from internal troubles. Their kingdom fell and was progressively conquered by the Umayyad Caliphate from 711 after the defeat of their last king Roderic at the Battle of Guadalete. Some Visigothic nobles found refuge in the mountain areas of the Asturias, Pyrenees and Cantabria. According to Joseph F. O'Callaghan, the remnants of the Hispano-Gothic aristocracy still played an important role in the society of Hispania. At the end of Visigothic rule, the assimilation of Hispano-Romans and Visigoths was occurring at a fast pace. Their nobility had begun to think of themselves as constituting one people, the \"gens Gothorum\" or the \"Hispani\". An unknown number of them fled and took refuge in Asturias or Septimania. In Asturias they supported Pelagius's uprising, and joining with the indigenous leaders, formed a new aristocracy. The population of the mountain region consisted of native Astures, Galicians, Cantabri, Basques and other groups unassimilated into Hispano-Gothic society. The Christians began to regain control under the leadership of the nobleman Pelagius of Asturias, who founded the Kingdom of Asturias in 718 and defeated the Muslims at the Battle of Covadonga in c. 722, in what is taken by historians to be the beginning of the Reconquista. It was from the Asturian kingdom that modern Spain and Portugal evolved.\nThe Visigoths were never completely Romanized; rather, they were 'Hispanicized' as they spread widely over a large territory and population. They progressively adopted a new culture, retaining little of their original culture except for practical military customs, some artistic modalities, family traditions such as heroic songs and folklore, as well as select conventions to include Germanic names still in use in present-day Spain. It is these artifacts of the original Visigothic culture that give ample evidence of its contributing foundation for the present regional culture. Portraying themselves heirs of the Visigoths, the subsequent Christian Spanish monarchs declared their responsibility for the Reconquista of Muslim Spain, which was completed with the Fall of Granada in 1492.\nOstrogoths.\nAfter the Hunnic invasion, many Goths became subjects of the Huns. A section of these Goths under the leadership of the Amali dynasty came to be known as the Ostrogoths. Others sought refuge in the Roman Empire, where many of them were recruited into the Roman army. In the spring of 399, Tribigild, a Gothic leader in charge of troops in Nakoleia, rose up in rebellion and defeated the first imperial army sent against him, possibly seeking to emulate Alaric's successes in the west. Gainas, a Goth who along with Stilicho and Eutropius had deposed Rufinus in 395, was sent to suppress Tribigild's rebellion, but instead plotted to use the situation to seize power in the Eastern Roman Empire. This attempt was however thwarted by the pro-Roman Goth Fravitta, and in the aftermath, thousands of Gothic civilians were massacred in Constantinople, many being burned alive in the local Arian church where they had taken shelter. As late as the 6th century Goths were settled as \"foederati\" in parts of Asia Minor. Their descendants, who formed the elite \"Optimatoi\" regiment, still lived there in the early 8th century. While they were largely assimilated, their Gothic origin was still well\u2013known: the chronicler Theophanes the Confessor calls them Gothograeci.\nThe Ostrogoths fought together with the Huns at the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains in 451. Following the death of Attila and the defeat of the Huns at the Battle of Nedao in 454, the Ostrogoths broke away from Hunnic rule under their king Valamir. Mentions of this event were probably preserved in Slavic epic songs. Under his successor, Theodemir, they utterly defeated the Huns at the Bassianae in 468, and then defeated a coalition of Roman\u2013supported Germanic tribes at the Battle of Bolia in 469, which gained them supremacy in Pannonia.\nTheodemir was succeeded by his son Theodoric in 471, who was forced to compete with Theodoric Strabo, leader of the Thracian Goths, for the leadership of his people. Fearing the threat posed by Theodoric to Constantinople, the Eastern Roman emperor Zeno ordered Theodoric to invade Italy in 488. By 493, Theodoric had conquered all of Italy from the Scirian Odoacer, whom he killed with his own hands; he subsequently formed the Ostrogothic Kingdom. Theodoric settled his entire people in Italy, estimated at 100,000\u2013200,000, mostly in the northern part of the country, and ruled the country very efficiently. The Goths in Italy constituted a small minority of the population in the country. Intermarriage between Goths and Romans were forbidden, and Romans were also forbidden from carrying arms. Nevertheless, the Roman majority was treated fairly.\nThe Goths were briefly reunited under one crown in the early 6th century under Theodoric, who became regent of the Visigothic kingdom following the death of Alaric II at the Battle of Vouill\u00e9 in 507. Shortly after Theodoric's death, the country was invaded by the Eastern Roman Empire in the Gothic War, which severely devastated and depopulated the Italian peninsula. The Ostrogoths made a brief resurgence under their king Totila, who was, however, killed at the Battle of Taginae in 552. After the last stand of the Ostrogothic king Teia at the Battle of Mons Lactarius in 553, Ostrogothic resistance ended, and the remaining Goths in Italy were assimilated by the Lombards, another Germanic tribe, who invaded Italy and founded the Kingdom of the Lombards in 567.\nCrimean Goths.\nGothic tribes who remained in the lands around the Black Sea, especially in Crimea, were known as the Crimean Goths. During the late 5th and early 6th century, the Crimean Goths had to fend off hordes of Huns who were migrating back eastward after losing control of their European empire. In the 5th century, Theodoric the Great tried to recruit Crimean Goths for his campaigns in Italy, but few showed interest in joining him. They affiliated with the Eastern Orthodox Church through the Metropolitanate of Gothia, and were then closely associated with the Byzantine Empire.\nDuring the Middle Ages, the Crimean Goths were in perpetual conflict with the Khazars. John of Gothia, the metropolitan bishop of Doros, capital of the Crimean Goths, briefly expelled the Khazars from Crimea in the late 8th century, and was subsequently canonized as an Eastern Orthodox saint.\nIn the 10th century, the lands of the Crimean Goths were once again raided by the Khazars. As a response, the leaders of the Crimean Goths made an alliance with Sviatoslav I of Kiev, who subsequently waged war upon and utterly destroyed the Khazar Khaganate. In the late Middle Ages the Crimean Goths were part of the Principality of Theodoro, which was conquered by the Ottoman Empire in the late 15th century. As late as the 18th century a small number of people in Crimea may still have spoken Crimean Gothic.\nLanguage.\nThe Goths were Germanic-speaking. The Gothic language is the Germanic language with the earliest attestation (the 4th century), and the only East Germanic language documented in more than proper names, short phrases that survived in historical accounts, and loan-words in other languages, making it a language of great interest in comparative linguistics. Gothic is known primarily from the Codex Argenteus, now preserved in Uppsala, Sweden, which contains a partial translation of the Bible credited to Ulfilas.\nThe language was in decline by the mid-500s, due to the military victory of the Franks, the elimination of the Goths in Italy, and geographic isolation. In Spain, the language lost its last and probably already declining function as a church language when the Visigoths converted to Catholicism in 589; it survived as a domestic language in the Iberian peninsula (modern Spain and Portugal) as late as the 8th century.\nFrankish author Walafrid Strabo wrote that Gothic was still spoken in the lower Danube area, in what is now Bulgaria, in the early 9th century, and a related dialect known as Crimean Gothic was spoken in the Crimea until the 16th century, according to references in the writings of travelers. Most modern scholars believe that Crimean Gothic did not derive from the dialect that was the basis for Ulfilas' translation of the Bible.\nCulture.\nArt.\nEarly.\nBefore the invasion of the Huns, the Gothic Chernyakhov culture produced jewelry, vessels, and decorative objects in a style much influenced by Greek and Roman craftsmen. They developed a polychrome style of gold work, using wrought cells or setting to encrust gemstones into their gold objects.\nOstrogoths.\nThe eagle-shaped fibula, part of the Domagnano Treasure, was used to join clothes c. AD 500; the piece on display in the Germanisches Nationalmuseum in Nuremberg is well-known.\nVisigoths.\nIn Spain an important collection of Visigothic metalwork was found in the treasure of Guarrazar, Guadamur, Province of Toledo, Castile-La Mancha, an archeological find composed of twenty-six votive crowns and gold crosses from the royal workshop in Toledo, with Byzantine influence. The treasure represents the high point of Visigothic goldsmithery, according to . The two most important votive crowns are those of Recceswinth and of Suintila, displayed in the National Archaeological Museum of Madrid; both are made of gold, encrusted with sapphires, pearls, and other precious stones. Suintila's crown was stolen in 1921 and never recovered. There are several other small crowns and many votive crosses in the treasure.\nThese findings, along with others from some neighbouring sites and with the archaeological excavation of the Spanish Ministry of Public Works and the Royal Spanish Academy of History (April 1859), formed a group consisting of:\nThe aquiliform (eagle-shaped) fibulae that have been discovered in necropolises such as Duraton, Madrona or Castiltierra (cities of Segovia), are an unmistakable indication of the Visigothic presence in Spain. These fibulae were used individually or in pairs, as clasps or pins in gold, bronze and glass to join clothes, showing the work of the goldsmiths of Visigothic Hispania.\nThe Visigothic belt buckles, a symbol of rank and status characteristic of Visigothic women's clothing, are also notable as works of goldsmithery. Some pieces contain exceptional Byzantine-style lapis lazuli inlays and are generally rectangular in shape, with copper alloy, garnets and glass.\nSociety.\nArchaeological evidence in Visigothic cemeteries shows that social stratification was analogous to that of the village of Sabbas the Goth. The majority of villagers were common peasants. Paupers were buried with funeral rites, unlike slaves. In a village of 50 to 100 people, there were four or five elite couples. In Eastern Europe, houses include sunken-floored dwellings, surface dwellings, and stall-houses. The largest known settlement is the Criuleni District. Chernyakhov cemeteries feature both cremation and inhumation burials; among the latter the head aligned to the north. Some graves were left empty. Grave goods often include pottery, bone combs, and iron tools, but hardly ever weapons.\nPeter Heather suggests that the freemen constituted the core of Gothic society. These were ranked below the nobility, but above the freedmen and slaves. It is estimated that around a quarter to a fifth of weapon-bearing Gothic males of the Ostrogothic Kingdom were freemen.\nReligion.\nInitially practising Gothic paganism, the Goths were gradually converted to Arianism in the course of the 4th century. According to Basil of Caesarea, a prisoner named Eutychus taken captive in a raid on Cappadocia in 260 preached the gospel to the Goths and was martyred. It was only in the 4th century, as a result of missionary activity by the Gothic bishop Ulfilas, whose grandparents were Cappadocians taken captive in the raids of the 250s, that the Goths were gradually converted. Ulfilas devised a Gothic alphabet and translated the Gothic Bible.\nDuring the 370s, Goths converting to Christianity were subject to persecution by the Thervingian king Athanaric, who was a pagan.\nThe Visigothic Kingdom in Hispania converted to Catholicism in the late 6th\u00a0century.\nThe Ostrogoths (and their remnants, the Crimean Goths) were closely connected to the Patriarchate of Constantinople from the 5th century, and became fully incorporated under the Metropolitanate of Gothia from the 9th century.\nWarfare.\nGothic arms and armour usually consisted of wooden shield, spear and often swords. 'Rank and file' troops did not wear much protection, while warriors of higher social class were better equipped, as was common for most tribal peoples of the time.\nArmour was either a chainmail shirt or lamellar cuirass. Lamellar was popular among horsemen. Shields were either round or oval with a central boss grip. They were decorated with tribe or clan symbols, such as animal drawings. Helmets were often of spangenhelm type, often with cheek and neck plates. Spears were used both for thrusting and throwing, although specialized javelins were also in use. Swords were one handed, double edged and straight, with a very small crossguard and large pommel. It was called the Spatha by the Romans, and it is believed to have first been used by the Celts. Short wooden bows were also used, as well as occasional throwing axes.\nMissile weapons were mainly short throwing-axes such as Fransica and short wooden bows. Specialized javelins such as angon were more rare but still used.\nEconomy.\nArchaeology shows that the Visigoths, unlike the Ostrogoths, were predominantly farmers. They sowed wheat, barley, rye, and flax. They also raised pigs, poultry, and goats. Horses and donkeys were raised as working animals and fed with hay. Sheep were raised for their wool, which they fashioned into clothing. Archaeology indicates they were skilled potters and blacksmiths. When peace treaties were negotiated with the Romans, the Goths demanded free trade. Imports from Rome included wine and cooking-oil.\nRoman writers note that the Goths neither assessed taxes on their own people nor on their subjects. The early 5th-century Christian writer Salvian compared the Goths' and related people's favourable treatment of the poor to the miserable state of peasants in Roman Gaul:\nFor in the Gothic country the barbarians are so far from tolerating this sort of oppression that not even Romans who live among them have to bear it. Hence all the Romans in that region have but one desire, that they may never have to return to the Roman jurisdiction. It is the unanimous prayer of the Roman people in that district that they may be permitted to continue to lead their present life among the barbarians.\nArchitecture.\nOstrogoths.\nThe Mausoleum of Theodoric (Italian: \"Mausoleo di Teodorico\") is an ancient monument just outside Ravenna, Italy. It was built in 520 AD by Theodoric the Great, an Ostrogoth, as his future tomb.\nThe current structure of the mausoleum is divided into two decagonal orders, one above the other; both are made of Istria stone. Its roof is a single 230-tonne Istrian stone, 10 meters in diameter. Possibly as a reference to the Goths' tradition of an origin in Scandinavia, the architect decorated the frieze with a pattern found in 5th- and 6th-century Scandinavian metal adornments. A niche leads down to a room that was probably a chapel for funeral liturgies; a stair leads to the upper floor. Located in the centre of the floor is a circular porphyry stone grave, in which Theodoric was buried. His remains were removed during Byzantine rule, when the mausoleum was turned into a Christian oratory. In the late 19th century, silting from a nearby rivulet that had partly submerged the mausoleum was drained and excavated.\nThe Palace of Theodoric, also in Ravenna, has a symmetrical composition with arches and monolithic marble columns, reused from previous Roman buildings. With capitals of different shapes and sizes. The Ostrogoths restored Roman buildings, some of which have come down to us thanks to them.\nVisigoths.\nDuring their governance of Hispania, the Visigoths built several churches of basilical or cruciform floor plan that survive, including the churches of San Pedro de la Nave in El Campillo, Santa Mar\u00eda de Melque in San Mart\u00edn de Montalb\u00e1n, Santa Luc\u00eda del Trampal in Alcu\u00e9scar, Santa Comba in Bande, and Santa Mar\u00eda de Lara in Quintanilla de las Vi\u00f1as; the Visigothic crypt (the Crypt of San Antol\u00edn) in the Palencia Cathedral is a Visigothic chapel from the mid 7th century, built during the reign of Wamba to preserve the remains of the martyr Saint Antoninus of Pamiers, a Visigothic-Gallic nobleman brought from Narbonne to Visigothic Hispania in 672 or 673 by Wamba himself. These are the only remains of the Visigothic cathedral of Palencia.\nReccopolis (Spanish: \"Rec\u00f3polis\"), located near the tiny modern village of Zorita de los Canes in the province of Guadalajara, Castile-La Mancha, Spain, is an archaeological site of one of at least four cities founded in Hispania by the Visigoths. It is the only city in Western Europe to have been founded between the fifth and eighth centuries. According to Lauro Olmo Enciso who is a professor of archaeology at the University of Alcal\u00e1, the city was ordered to build by the Visigothic king Leovigild to honor his son Reccared I and to serve as Reccared's seat as co-king in the Visigothic province of Celtiberia, to the west of Carpetania, where the main capital, Toledo, lay.\nPhysical appearance.\nIn ancient sources, the Goths are always described as tall and athletic, with light skin, blonde hair and blue eyes. The 4th-century Greek historian Eunapius described their characteristic powerful musculature in a pejorative way: \"Their bodies provoked contempt in all who saw them, for they were far too big and far too heavy for their feet to carry them, and they were pinched in at the waist \u2013 just like those insects Aristotle writes of.\" Procopius notes that the Vandals and Gepids looked similar to the Goths, and on this basis, he suggested that they were all of common origin. Of the Goths, he wrote that \"they all have white bodies and fair hair, and are tall and handsome to look upon.\"\nGenetics.\nStolarek et al. (2023) and Antonio et al. (2022) both sequenced genomes from the Wielbark culture Goths. Stolarek et al. includes samples from multiple sites all over the territory of the Wielbark culture, in large numbers. The results are in alignment with archaeological and historical evidence, strongly suggesting that the Wielbark culture formed through migration from Southern Scandinavia. A large majority of the Wielbark culture samples are autosomally Scandinavian-like, and carry predominantly Scandinavian Y-DNA haplogroups. The most common Y-DNA haplogroup among the Wielbark individuals was Y-DNA haplogroup I1-M253, characteristic of the Nordic Bronze Age in Southern Scandinavia, in which it was found at a very high frequency and from where it first expanded. Among the Wielbark Goths, substantial subclade diversity is seen among the I1 carriers, suggesting that the male founders of the culture descended from clans from a rather widespread area in Scandinavia.\nAssessing the population movement during late Antiquity, a 2023 study on the Roman frontier on the Danube concludes that \"Goths were ethnically diverse confederations\". A number of samples obtained from Roman sites close to the limes (such as Viminacium) dated to the 3rd century or later were shown to carry admixture from Central/North European and Pontic-Kazakh Steppe ancestries in addition to 42%\u201355% local Balkan Iron Age-related ancestry. 7 out of 9 males among these samples belonged to haplogroups associated with these trans-frontier ancestry sources (I1 and R1b-U106: North European; Z93: Iron Age Steppe). Many of these samples suggest that admixture between Central/North European and Pontic-Kazakh Steppe ancestries likely occurred beyond the frontier prior to the movement into the Roman Empire, \"perhaps indicative of, e.g., the formation of diverse confederations under Gothic leadership\".\nLegacy.\nThe Goths' relationship with Sweden became an important part of Swedish nationalism, and until the 19th\u00a0century, before the Gothic origin had been thoroughly researched by archaeologists, Swedish scholars considered Swedes to be the direct descendants of the Goths. Today, scholars identify this as a cultural movement called Gothicismus, which included an enthusiasm for things Old Norse.\nIn medieval and modern Spain, the Visigoths were believed to be the progenitors of the Spanish nobility (compare Gobineau for a similar French idea). By the early 7th century, the ethnic distinction between Visigoths and Hispano-Romans had all but disappeared, but recognition of a Gothic origin, e.g. on gravestones, still survived among the nobility. The 7th century Visigothic aristocracy saw itself as bearers of a particular Gothic consciousness and as guardians of old traditions such as Germanic namegiving; probably these traditions were on the whole restricted to the family sphere (Hispano-Roman nobles were doing service for the Visigothic Royal Court in Toulouse already in the 5th century and the two branches of Spanish aristocracy had fully adopted similar customs two centuries later).\nBeginning in 1278, when King Magnus Ladul\u00e5s ascended to the throne, a reference to Gothic origins was included in the title of the king of Sweden: \"We N.N. by the Grace of God King of the Swedes, the Goths and the Vends\". In 1973, with the accession of King Carl XVI Gustaf, the title was changed to simply \"King of Sweden\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn all history there is nothing more romantically marvellous than the swift rise of this people to the height of greatness, or than the suddenness and the tragic completeness of their ruin.\n \u2014 Henry Bradley\n , The Story of the Goths (1888)\nThe Spanish and Swedish claims of Gothic origins led to a clash at the Council of Basel in 1434. Before the assembled cardinals and delegations could engage in theological discussion, they had to decide how to sit during the proceedings. The delegations from the more prominent nations argued that they should sit closest to the Pope, and there were also disputes over who were to have the finest chairs and who were to have their chairs on mats. In some cases, they compromised so that some would have half a chair leg on the rim of a mat. In this conflict, Nicolaus Ragvaldi, bishop of the Diocese of V\u00e4xj\u00f6, claimed that the Swedes were the descendants of the great Goths, and that the people of V\u00e4sterg\u00f6tland (\"Westrogothia\" in Latin) were the Visigoths and the people of \u00d6sterg\u00f6tland (\"Ostrogothia\" in Latin) were the Ostrogoths. The Spanish delegation retorted that it was only the \"lazy\" and \"unenterprising\" Goths who had remained in Sweden, whereas the \"heroic\" Goths had left Sweden, invaded the Roman empire and settled in Spain.\nIn Spain, a man acting with arrogance would be said to be \"haci\u00e9ndose los godos\" (\"making himself to act like the Goths\"). In Chile, Argentina, and the Canary Islands, \"godo\" was an ethnic slur used against European Spaniards, who in the early colonial period often felt superior to the people born locally (\"criollos\"). In Colombia, it remains as slang for a person with conservative views.\nA large amount of literature has been produced on the Goths, with Henry Bradley's \"The Goths\" (1888) being the standard English-language text for many decades. More recently, Peter Heather has established himself as the leading authority on the Goths in the English-speaking world. The leading authority on the Goths in the German-speaking world is Herwig Wolfram.\nList of early literature on the Goths.\nIn Greek and Roman literature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAncient sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12644", "revid": "46369120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12644", "title": "Glycolysis", "text": "Series of interconnected biochemical reactions\nGlycolysis is the metabolic pathway that converts glucose () into pyruvate and, in most organisms, occurs in the liquid part of cells (the cytosol). The free energy released in this process is used to form the high-energy molecules adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH). Glycolysis is a sequence of ten reactions catalyzed by enzymes.\nThe wide occurrence of glycolysis in other species indicates that it is an ancient metabolic pathway. Indeed, the reactions that make up glycolysis and its parallel pathway, the pentose phosphate pathway, can occur in the oxygen-free conditions of the Archean oceans, also in the absence of enzymes, catalyzed by metal ions, meaning this is a plausible prebiotic pathway for abiogenesis.\nThe most common type of glycolysis is the \"Embden\u2013Meyerhof\u2013Parnas (EMP) pathway\", which was discovered by Gustav Embden, Otto Meyerhof, and Jakub Karol Parnas. Glycolysis also refers to other pathways, such as the \"Entner\u2013Doudoroff pathway\" and various heterofermentative and homofermentative pathways. However, the discussion here will be limited to the Embden\u2013Meyerhof\u2013Parnas pathway.\nThe glycolysis pathway can be separated into two phases:\nOverview.\nThe overall reaction of glycolysis is:\nd-Glucose\n\u00a0\n+\u00a02\u00a0[NAD]++\u00a02\u00a0[ADP]+\u00a02\u00a0[P]i\npx;\"&gt;\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\n2 \u00d7 Pyruvate\n2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0 \n+\u00a02\u00a0[NADH]+\u00a02\u00a0H++\u00a02\u00a0[ATP]+\u00a02\u00a0H2O\nThe use of symbols in this equation makes it appear unbalanced with respect to oxygen atoms, hydrogen atoms, and charges. Atom balance is maintained by the two phosphate (Pi) groups:\nCharges are balanced by the difference between ADP and ATP. In the cellular environment, all three hydroxyl groups of ADP dissociate into \u2212O\u2212 and H+, giving ADP3\u2212, and this ion tends to exist in an ionic bond with Mg2+, giving ADPMg\u2212. ATP behaves identically except that it has four hydroxyl groups, giving ATPMg2\u2212. When these differences along with the true charges on the two phosphate groups are considered together, the net charges of \u22124 on each side are balanced.\nIn high-oxygen (aerobic) conditions, eukaryotic cells can continue from glycolysis to metabolise the pyruvate through the citric acid cycle or the electron transport chain to produce significantly more ATP.\nImportantly, under low-oxygen (anaerobic) conditions, glycolysis is the only biochemical pathway in eukaryotes that can generate ATP, and, for many anaerobic respiring organisms the most important producer of ATP. Therefore, many organisms have evolved fermentation pathways to recycle NAD+ to continue glycolysis to produce ATP for survival. These pathways include ethanol fermentation and lactic acid fermentation.\nHistory.\nThe modern understanding of the pathway of glycolysis took almost 100 years to fully learn. The combined results of many smaller experiments were required to understand the entire pathway.\nThe first steps in understanding glycolysis began in the 19th century. For economic reasons, the French wine industry sought to investigate why wine sometimes turned distasteful, instead of fermenting into alcohol. The French scientist Louis Pasteur researched this issue during the 1850s. His experiments showed that alcohol fermentation occurs by the action of living microorganisms, yeasts, and that glucose consumption decreased under aerobic conditions (the Pasteur effect).\nThe component steps of glycolysis were first analysed by the non-cellular fermentation experiments of Eduard Buchner during the 1890s. Buchner demonstrated that the conversion of glucose to ethanol was possible using a non-living extract of yeast, due to the action of enzymes in the extract. This experiment not only revolutionized biochemistry, but also allowed later scientists to analyze this pathway in a more controlled laboratory setting. In a series of experiments (1905\u20131911), scientists Arthur Harden and William Young discovered more pieces of glycolysis. They discovered the regulatory effects of ATP on glucose consumption during alcohol fermentation. They also shed light on the role of one compound as a glycolysis intermediate: fructose 1,6-bisphosphate.\nThe elucidation of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate was accomplished by measuring levels when yeast juice was incubated with glucose. production increased rapidly then slowed down. Harden and Young noted that this process would restart if an inorganic phosphate (Pi) was added to the mixture. Harden and Young deduced that this process produced organic phosphate esters, and further experiments allowed them to extract fructose diphosphate (F-1,6-DP).\nArthur Harden and William Young along with Nick Sheppard determined, in a second experiment, that a heat-sensitive high-molecular-weight subcellular fraction (the enzymes) and a heat-insensitive low-molecular-weight cytoplasm fraction (ADP, ATP and NAD+ and other cofactors) are required together for fermentation to proceed. This experiment begun by observing that dialyzed (purified) yeast juice could not ferment or even create a sugar phosphate. This mixture was rescued with the addition of undialyzed yeast extract that had been boiled. Boiling the yeast extract renders all proteins inactive (as it denatures them). The ability of boiled extract plus dialyzed juice to complete fermentation suggests that the cofactors were non-protein in character.\nIn the 1920s Otto Meyerhof was able to link together some of the many individual pieces of glycolysis discovered by Buchner, Harden, and Young. Meyerhof and his team were able to extract different glycolytic enzymes from muscle tissue, and combine them to artificially create the pathway from glycogen to lactic acid.\nIn one paper, Meyerhof and scientist Renate Junowicz-Kockolaty investigated the reaction that splits fructose 1,6-diphosphate into the two triose phosphates. Previous work proposed that the split occurred via 1,3-diphosphoglyceraldehyde plus an oxidizing enzyme and cozymase. Meyerhoff and Junowicz found that the equilibrium constant for the isomerase and aldoses reaction were not affected by inorganic phosphates or any other cozymase or oxidizing enzymes. They further removed diphosphoglyceraldehyde as a possible intermediate in glycolysis.\nWith all of these pieces available by the 1930s, Gustav Embden proposed a detailed, step-by-step outline of that pathway we now know as glycolysis. The biggest difficulties in determining the intricacies of the pathway were due to the very short lifetime and low steady-state concentrations of the intermediates of the fast glycolytic reactions. By the 1940s, Meyerhof, Embden and many other biochemists had finally completed the puzzle of glycolysis. The understanding of the isolated pathway has been expanded in the subsequent decades, to include further details of its regulation and integration with other metabolic pathways.\nSequence of reactions.\nSummary of reactions.\nGlucose\nHexokinase\nATP\nADP\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\nGlucose 6-phosphate\nGlucose-6-phosphate&lt;br&gt;isomerase\npx;\"&gt;\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\nFructose 6-phosphate\nPhosphofructokinase-1\nATP\nADP\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\nFructose 1,6-bisphosphate\nFructose-bisphosphate&lt;br&gt;aldolase\npx;\"&gt;\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\nDihydroxyacetone phosphate\n+\nGlyceraldehyde 3-phosphate\nTriosephosphate&lt;br&gt;isomerase\npx;\"&gt;\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\n2 \u00d7 Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate\n2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0 \nGlyceraldehyde-3-phosphate&lt;br&gt;dehydrogenase\nNAD++ Pi\nNADH + H+\npx;\"&gt;NAD++ Pi\nNADH + H+\n2 \u00d7 1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate\n2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0 \nPhosphoglycerate kinase\nADP\nATP\npx;\"&gt;ADP\nATP\n2 \u00d7 3-Phosphoglycerate\n2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0 \nPhosphoglycerate mutase\npx;\"&gt;\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\n2 \u00d7 2-Phosphoglycerate\n2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0 \nPhosphopyruvate&lt;br&gt;hydratase (enolase)\nH2O\npx;\"&gt;\u00a0\nH2O\n2 \u00d7 Phosphoenolpyruvate\n2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0 \nPyruvate kinase\nADP\nATP\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\n2 \u00d7 Pyruvate\n2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0 \nPreparatory phase.\nThe first five steps of Glycolysis are regarded as the preparatory (or investment) phase, since they consume energy to convert the glucose into two three-carbon sugar phosphates (G3P).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOnce glucose enters the cell, the first step is phosphorylation of glucose by a family of enzymes called hexokinases to form glucose 6-phosphate (G6P). This reaction consumes ATP, but it acts to keep the glucose concentration inside the cell low, promoting continuous transport of blood glucose into the cell through the plasma membrane transporters. In addition, phosphorylation blocks the glucose from leaking out \u2013 the cell lacks transporters for G6P, and free diffusion out of the cell is prevented due to the charged nature of G6P. Glucose may alternatively be formed from the phosphorolysis or hydrolysis of intracellular starch or glycogen.\nIn animals, an isozyme of hexokinase called glucokinase is also used in the liver, which has a much lower affinity for glucose (Km in the vicinity of normal glycemia), and differs in regulatory properties. The different substrate affinity and alternate regulation of this enzyme are a reflection of the role of the liver in maintaining blood sugar levels.\n\"Cofactors:\" Mg2+\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nG6P is then rearranged into fructose 6-phosphate (F6P) by glucose phosphate isomerase. Fructose can also enter the glycolytic pathway by phosphorylation at this point.\nThe change in structure is an isomerization, in which the G6P has been converted to F6P. The reaction requires an enzyme, phosphoglucose isomerase, to proceed. This reaction is freely reversible under normal cell conditions. However, it is often driven forward because of a low concentration of F6P, which is constantly consumed during the next step of glycolysis. Under conditions of high F6P concentration, this reaction readily runs in reverse. This phenomenon can be explained through Le Chatelier's Principle. Isomerization to a keto sugar is necessary for carbanion stabilization in the fourth reaction step (below).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe energy expenditure of another ATP in this step is justified in 2 ways: The glycolytic process (up to this step) becomes irreversible, and the energy supplied destabilizes the molecule. Because the reaction catalyzed by phosphofructokinase 1 (PFK-1) is coupled to the hydrolysis of ATP (an energetically favorable step) it is, in essence, irreversible, and a different pathway must be used to do the reverse conversion during gluconeogenesis. This makes the reaction a key regulatory point (see below).\nFurthermore, the second phosphorylation event is necessary to allow the formation of two charged groups (rather than only one) in the subsequent step of glycolysis, ensuring the prevention of free diffusion of substrates out of the cell.\nThe same reaction can also be catalyzed by pyrophosphate-dependent phosphofructokinase (PFP or PPi-PFK), which is found in most plants, some bacteria, archea, and protists, but not in animals. This enzyme uses pyrophosphate (PPi) as a phosphate donor instead of ATP. It is a reversible reaction, increasing the flexibility of glycolytic metabolism. A rarer ADP-dependent PFK enzyme variant has been identified in archaean species.\n\"Cofactors:\" Mg2+\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDestabilizing the molecule in the previous reaction allows the hexose ring to be split by aldolase into two triose sugars: dihydroxyacetone phosphate (a ketose), and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (an aldose). There are two classes of aldolases: class I aldolases, present in animals and plants, and class II aldolases, present in fungi and bacteria; the two classes use different mechanisms in cleaving the ketose ring.\nElectrons delocalized in the carbon-carbon bond cleavage associate with the alcohol group. The resulting carbanion is stabilized by the structure of the carbanion itself via resonance charge distribution and by the presence of a charged ion prosthetic group.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTriosephosphate isomerase rapidly interconverts dihydroxyacetone phosphate with glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (GADP) that proceeds further into glycolysis. This is advantageous, as it directs dihydroxyacetone phosphate down the same pathway as glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, simplifying regulation.\nPay-off phase.\nThe second half of glycolysis is known as the pay-off phase, characterised by a net gain of the energy-rich molecules ATP and NADH. Since glucose leads to two triose sugars in the preparatory phase, each reaction in the pay-off phase occurs twice per glucose molecule. This yields 2 NADH molecules and 4 ATP molecules, leading to a net gain of 2 NADH molecules and 2 ATP molecules from the glycolytic pathway per glucose.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe aldehyde groups of the triose sugars are oxidised, and inorganic phosphate is added to them, forming 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate.\nThe hydrogen is used to reduce two molecules of NAD+, a hydrogen carrier, to give NADH + H+ for each triose.\nHydrogen atom balance and charge balance are both maintained because the phosphate (Pi) group actually exists in the form of a hydrogen phosphate anion (), which dissociates to contribute the extra H+ ion and gives a net charge of \u22123 on both sides.\nHere, arsenate (), an anion akin to inorganic phosphate may replace phosphate as a substrate to form 1-arseno-3-phosphoglycerate. This, however, is unstable and readily hydrolyzes to form 3-phosphoglycerate, the intermediate in the next step of the pathway. As a consequence of bypassing this step, the molecule of ATP generated from 1\u20133 bisphosphoglycerate in the next reaction will not be made, even though the reaction proceeds. As a result, arsenate is an uncoupler of glycolysis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThis step is the enzymatic transfer of a phosphate group from 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate to ADP by phosphoglycerate kinase, forming ATP and 3-phosphoglycerate. At this step, glycolysis has reached the break-even point: 2 molecules of ATP were consumed, and 2 new molecules have now been synthesized. This step, one of the two substrate-level phosphorylation steps, requires ADP; thus, when the cell has plenty of ATP (and little ADP), this reaction does not occur. Because ATP decays relatively quickly when it is not metabolized, this is an important regulatory point in the glycolytic pathway.\nADP actually exists as ADPMg\u2212, and ATP as ATPMg2\u2212, balancing the charges at \u22125 both sides.\n\"Cofactors:\" Mg2+\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPhosphoglycerate mutase isomerises 3-phosphoglycerate into 2-phosphoglycerate.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEnolase next converts 2-phosphoglycerate to phosphoenolpyruvate. This reaction is an elimination reaction involving an E1cB mechanism.\n\"Cofactors:\" 2 Mg2+, one \"conformational\" ion to coordinate with the carboxylate group of the substrate, and one \"catalytic\" ion that participates in the dehydration.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA final substrate-level phosphorylation now forms a molecule of pyruvate and a molecule of ATP by means of the enzyme pyruvate kinase. This serves as an additional regulatory step, similar to the phosphoglycerate kinase step.\n\"Cofactors:\" Mg2+\nBiochemical logic.\nThe existence of more than one point of regulation indicates that intermediates between those points enter and leave the glycolysis pathway by other processes. For example, in the first regulated step, hexokinase converts glucose into glucose-6-phosphate. Instead of continuing through the glycolysis pathway, this intermediate can be converted into glucose storage molecules, such as glycogen or starch. The reverse reaction, breaking down, e.g., glycogen, produces mainly glucose-6-phosphate; very little free glucose is formed in the reaction. The glucose-6-phosphate so produced can enter glycolysis \"after\" the first control point.\nIn the second regulated step (the third step of glycolysis), phosphofructokinase converts fructose-6-phosphate into fructose-1,6-bisphosphate, which then is converted into glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate. The dihydroxyacetone phosphate can be removed from glycolysis by conversion into glycerol-3-phosphate, which can be used to form triglycerides. Conversely, triglycerides can be broken down into fatty acids and glycerol; the latter, in turn, can be converted into dihydroxyacetone phosphate, which can enter glycolysis \"after\" the second control point.\nFree energy changes.\nThe change in free energy, \u0394\"G\", for each step in the glycolysis pathway can be calculated using \u0394\"G\" = \u0394\"G\"\u00b0\u2032 + \"RT\"ln \"Q\", where \"Q\" is the reaction quotient. This requires knowing the concentrations of the metabolites. All of these values are available for erythrocytes, with the exception of the concentrations of NAD+ and NADH. The ratio of NAD+ to NADH in the cytoplasm is approximately 1000, which makes the oxidation of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (step 6) more favourable.\nUsing the measured concentrations of each step, and the standard free energy changes, the actual free energy change can be calculated. (Neglecting this is very common\u2014the delta G of ATP hydrolysis in cells is not the standard free energy change of ATP hydrolysis quoted in textbooks).\nFrom measuring the physiological concentrations of metabolites in an erythrocyte it seems that about seven of the steps in glycolysis are in equilibrium for that cell type. Three of the steps\u2014the ones with large negative free energy changes\u2014are not in equilibrium and are referred to as \"irreversible\"; such steps are often subject to regulation.\nStep 5 in the figure is shown behind the other steps, because that step is a side-reaction that can decrease or increase the concentration of the intermediate glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. That compound is converted to dihydroxyacetone phosphate by the enzyme triose phosphate isomerase, which is a catalytically perfect enzyme; its rate is so fast that the reaction can be assumed to be in equilibrium. The fact that \u0394\"G\" is not zero indicates that the actual concentrations in the erythrocyte are not accurately known.\nRegulation.\nThe enzymes that catalyse glycolysis are regulated via a range of biological mechanisms in order to control overall flux through the pathway. This is vital for both homeostatsis in a static environment, and metabolic adaptation to a changing environment or need. The details of regulation for some enzymes are highly conserved between species, whereas others vary widely.\nRegulation by insulin in animals.\nIn animals, regulation of blood glucose levels by the pancreas in conjunction with the liver is a vital part of homeostasis. The beta cells in the pancreatic islets are sensitive to the blood glucose concentration. A rise in the blood glucose concentration causes them to release insulin into the blood, which has an effect particularly on the liver, but also on fat and muscle cells, causing these tissues to remove glucose from the blood. When the blood sugar falls the pancreatic beta cells cease insulin production, but, instead, stimulate the neighboring pancreatic alpha cells to release glucagon into the blood. This, in turn, causes the liver to release glucose into the blood by breaking down stored glycogen, and by means of gluconeogenesis. If the fall in the blood glucose level is particularly rapid or severe, other glucose sensors cause the release of epinephrine from the adrenal glands into the blood. This has the same action as glucagon on glucose metabolism, but its effect is more pronounced. In the liver glucagon and epinephrine cause the phosphorylation of the key, regulated enzymes of glycolysis, fatty acid synthesis, cholesterol synthesis, gluconeogenesis, and glycogenolysis. Insulin has the opposite effect on these enzymes. The phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of these enzymes (ultimately in response to the glucose level in the blood) is the dominant manner by which these pathways are controlled in the liver, fat, and muscle cells. Thus the phosphorylation of phosphofructokinase inhibits glycolysis, whereas its dephosphorylation through the action of insulin stimulates glycolysis.\nRegulated Enzymes in Glycolysis.\nThe three regulatory enzymes are hexokinase (or glucokinase in the liver), phosphofructokinase, and pyruvate kinase. The flux through the glycolytic pathway is adjusted in response to conditions both inside and outside the cell. The internal factors that regulate glycolysis do so primarily to provide ATP in adequate quantities for the cell's needs. The external factors act primarily on the liver, fat tissue, and muscles, which can remove large quantities of glucose from the blood after meals (thus preventing hyperglycemia by storing the excess glucose as fat or glycogen, depending on the tissue type). The liver is also capable of releasing glucose into the blood between meals, during fasting, and exercise thus preventing hypoglycemia by means of glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. These latter reactions coincide with the halting of glycolysis in the liver.\nIn addition hexokinase and glucokinase act independently of the hormonal effects as controls at the entry points of glucose into the cells of different tissues. Hexokinase responds to the glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) level in the cell, or, in the case of glucokinase, to the blood sugar level in the blood to impart entirely intracellular controls of the glycolytic pathway in different tissues (see below).\nWhen glucose has been converted into G6P by hexokinase or glucokinase, it can either be converted to glucose-1-phosphate (G1P) for conversion to glycogen, or it is alternatively converted by glycolysis to pyruvate, which enters the mitochondrion where it is converted into acetyl-CoA and then into citrate. Excess citrate is exported from the mitochondrion back into the cytosol, where ATP citrate lyase regenerates acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate (OAA). The acetyl-CoA is then used for fatty acid synthesis and cholesterol synthesis, two important ways of utilizing excess glucose when its concentration is high in blood. The regulated enzymes catalyzing these reactions perform these functions when they have been dephosphorylated through the action of insulin on the liver cells. Between meals, during fasting, exercise or hypoglycemia, glucagon and epinephrine are released into the blood. This causes liver glycogen to be converted back to G6P, and then converted to glucose by the liver-specific enzyme glucose 6-phosphatase and released into the blood. Glucagon and epinephrine also stimulate gluconeogenesis, which converts non-carbohydrate substrates into G6P, which joins the G6P derived from glycogen, or substitutes for it when the liver glycogen store have been depleted. This is critical for brain function, since the brain utilizes glucose as an energy source under most conditions. The simultaneously phosphorylation of, particularly, phosphofructokinase, but also, to a certain extent pyruvate kinase, prevents glycolysis occurring at the same time as gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis.\nHexokinase and glucokinase.\nAll cells contain the enzyme hexokinase, which catalyzes the conversion of glucose that has entered the cell into glucose-6-phosphate (G6P). Since the cell membrane is impervious to G6P, hexokinase essentially acts to transport glucose into the cells from which it can then no longer escape. Hexokinase is inhibited by high levels of G6P in the cell. Thus the rate of entry of glucose into cells partially depends on how fast G6P can be disposed of by glycolysis, and by glycogen synthesis (in the cells which store glycogen, namely liver and muscles).\nGlucokinase, unlike hexokinase, is not inhibited by G6P. It occurs in liver cells, and will only phosphorylate the glucose entering the cell to form G6P, when the glucose in the blood is abundant. This being the first step in the glycolytic pathway in the liver, it therefore imparts an additional layer of control of the glycolytic pathway in this organ.\nPhosphofructokinase.\nPhosphofructokinase is an important control point in the glycolytic pathway, since it is one of the irreversible steps and has key allosteric effectors, AMP and fructose 2,6-bisphosphate (F2,6BP).\nF2,6BP is a very potent activator of phosphofructokinase (PFK-1) that is synthesized when F6P is phosphorylated by a second phosphofructokinase (PFK2). In the liver, when blood sugar is low and glucagon elevates cAMP, PFK2 is phosphorylated by protein kinase A. The phosphorylation inactivates PFK2, and another domain on this protein becomes active as fructose bisphosphatase-2, which converts F2,6BP back to F6P. Both glucagon and epinephrine cause high levels of cAMP in the liver. The result of lower levels of liver F2,6BP is a decrease in activity of phosphofructokinase and an increase in activity of fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase, so that gluconeogenesis (in essence, \"glycolysis in reverse\") is favored. This is consistent with the role of the liver in such situations, since the response of the liver to these hormones is to release glucose to the blood.\nATP competes with AMP for the allosteric effector site on the PFK enzyme. ATP concentrations in cells are much higher than those of AMP, typically 100-fold higher, but the concentration of ATP does not change more than about 10% under physiological conditions, whereas a 10% drop in ATP results in a 6-fold increase in AMP. Thus, the relevance of ATP as an allosteric effector is questionable. An increase in AMP is a consequence of a decrease in energy charge in the cell.\nCitrate inhibits phosphofructokinase when tested \"in vitro\" by enhancing the inhibitory effect of ATP. However, it is doubtful that this is a meaningful effect \"in vivo\", because citrate in the cytosol is utilized mainly for conversion to acetyl-CoA for fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis.\nTIGAR, a p53 induced enzyme, is responsible for the regulation of phosphofructokinase and acts to protect against oxidative stress. TIGAR is a single enzyme with dual function that regulates F2,6BP. It can behave as a phosphatase (fructuose-2,6-bisphosphatase) which cleaves the phosphate at carbon-2 producing F6P. It can also behave as a kinase (PFK2) adding a phosphate onto carbon-2 of F6P which produces F2,6BP. In humans, the TIGAR protein is encoded by \"C12orf5\" gene. The TIGAR enzyme will hinder the forward progression of glycolysis, by creating a build up of fructose-6-phosphate (F6P) which is isomerized into glucose-6-phosphate (G6P). The accumulation of G6P will shunt carbons into the pentose phosphate pathway.\nPyruvate kinase.\nThe final step of glycolysis is catalysed by pyruvate kinase to form pyruvate and another ATP. It is regulated by a range of different transcriptional, covalent and non-covalent regulation mechanisms, which can vary widely in different tissues. For example, in the liver, pyruvate kinase is regulated based on glucose availability. During fasting (no glucose available), glucagon activates protein kinase A which phosphorylates pyruvate kinase to inhibit it. An increase in blood sugar leads to secretion of insulin, which activates protein phosphatase 1, leading to dephosphorylation and re-activation of pyruvate kinase. These controls prevent pyruvate kinase from being active at the same time as the enzymes that catalyze the reverse reaction (pyruvate carboxylase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase), preventing a futile cycle. Conversely, the isoform of pyruvate kinasein found in muscle is not affected by protein kinase A (which is activated by adrenaline in that tissue), so that glycolysis remains active in muscles even during fasting.\nPost-glycolysis processes.\nThe overall process of glycolysis is:\nGlucose + 2 NAD+ + 2 ADP + 2 Pi \u2192 2 Pyruvate + 2 NADH + 2 H+ + 2 ATP + 2 H2O\nIf glycolysis were to continue indefinitely, all of the NAD+ would be used up, and glycolysis would stop. To allow glycolysis to continue, organisms must be able to oxidize NADH back to NAD+. How this is performed depends on which external electron acceptor is available.\nAnoxic regeneration of NAD+.\nOne method of doing this is to simply have the pyruvate do the oxidation; in this process, pyruvate is converted to lactate (the conjugate base of lactic acid) in a process called lactic acid fermentation:\nPyruvate + NADH + H+ \u2192 Lactate + NAD+\nThis process occurs in the bacteria involved in making yogurt (the lactic acid causes the milk to curdle). This process also occurs in animals under hypoxic (or partially anaerobic) conditions, found, for example, in overworked muscles that are starved of oxygen. In many tissues, this is a cellular last resort for energy; most animal tissue cannot tolerate anaerobic conditions for an extended period of time.\nSome organisms, such as yeast, convert NADH back to NAD+ in a process called ethanol fermentation. In this process, the pyruvate is converted first to acetaldehyde and carbon dioxide, and then to ethanol.\nLactic acid fermentation and ethanol fermentation can occur in the absence of oxygen. This anaerobic fermentation allows many single-cell organisms to use glycolysis as their only energy source.\nAnoxic regeneration of NAD+ is only an effective means of energy production during short, intense exercise in vertebrates, for a period ranging from 10 seconds to 2 minutes during a maximal effort in humans. (At lower exercise intensities it can sustain muscle activity in diving animals, such as seals, whales and other aquatic vertebrates, for very much longer periods of time.) Under these conditions NAD+ is replenished by NADH donating its electrons to pyruvate to form lactate. This produces 2 ATP molecules per glucose molecule, or about 5% of glucose's energy potential (38 ATP molecules in bacteria). But the speed at which ATP is produced in this manner is about 100 times that of oxidative phosphorylation. The pH in the cytoplasm quickly drops when hydrogen ions accumulate in the muscle, eventually inhibiting the enzymes involved in glycolysis.\nThe burning sensation in muscles during hard exercise can be attributed to the release of hydrogen ions during the shift to glucose fermentation from glucose oxidation to carbon dioxide and water, when aerobic metabolism can no longer keep pace with the energy demands of the muscles. These hydrogen ions form a part of lactic acid. The body falls back on this less efficient but faster method of producing ATP under low oxygen conditions. This is thought to have been the primary means of energy production in earlier organisms before oxygen reached high concentrations in the atmosphere between 2000 and 2500 million years ago, and thus would represent a more ancient form of energy production than the aerobic replenishment of NAD+ in cells.\nThe liver in mammals gets rid of this excess lactate by transforming it back into pyruvate under aerobic conditions; see Cori cycle.\nFermentation of pyruvate to lactate is sometimes also called \"anaerobic glycolysis\", however, glycolysis ends with the production of pyruvate regardless of the presence or absence of oxygen.\nIn the above two examples of fermentation, NADH is oxidized by transferring two electrons to pyruvate. However, anaerobic bacteria use a wide variety of compounds as the terminal electron acceptors in cellular respiration: nitrogenous compounds, such as nitrates and nitrites; sulfur compounds, such as sulfates, sulfites, sulfur dioxide, and elemental sulfur; carbon dioxide; iron compounds; manganese compounds; cobalt compounds; and uranium compounds.\nAerobic regeneration of NAD+ and further catabolism of pyruvate.\nIn aerobic eukaryotes, a complex mechanism has developed to use the oxygen in air as the final electron acceptor, in a process called oxidative phosphorylation. Aerobic prokaryotes, which lack mitochondria, use a variety of simpler mechanisms.\nConversion of carbohydrates into fatty acids and cholesterol.\nThe pyruvate produced by glycolysis is an important intermediary in the conversion of carbohydrates into fatty acids and cholesterol. This occurs via the conversion of pyruvate into acetyl-CoA in the mitochondrion. However, this acetyl CoA needs to be transported into cytosol where the synthesis of fatty acids and cholesterol occurs. This cannot occur directly. To obtain cytosolic acetyl-CoA, citrate (produced by the condensation of acetyl CoA with oxaloacetate) is removed from the citric acid cycle and carried across the inner mitochondrial membrane into the cytosol. There it is cleaved by ATP citrate lyase into acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate. The oxaloacetate is returned to mitochondrion as malate (and then back into oxaloacetate to transfer more acetyl-CoA out of the mitochondrion). The cytosolic acetyl-CoA can be carboxylated by acetyl-CoA carboxylase into malonyl CoA, the first committed step in the synthesis of fatty acids, or it can be combined with acetoacetyl-CoA to form 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) which is the rate limiting step controlling the synthesis of cholesterol. Cholesterol can be used as is, as a structural component of cellular membranes, or it can be used to synthesize the steroid hormones, bile salts, and vitamin D.\nConversion of pyruvate into oxaloacetate for the citric acid cycle.\nPyruvate molecules produced by glycolysis are actively transported across the inner mitochondrial membrane, and into the matrix where they can either be oxidized and combined with coenzyme A to form , acetyl-CoA, and NADH, or they can be carboxylated (by pyruvate carboxylase) to form oxaloacetate. This latter reaction \"fills up\" the amount of oxaloacetate in the citric acid cycle, and is therefore an anaplerotic reaction (from the Greek meaning to \"fill up\"), increasing the cycle's capacity to metabolize acetyl-CoA when the tissue's energy needs (e.g. in heart and skeletal muscle) are suddenly increased by activity.\nIn the citric acid cycle all the intermediates (e.g. citrate, iso-citrate, alpha-ketoglutarate, succinate, fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate) are regenerated during each turn of the cycle. Adding more of any of these intermediates to the mitochondrion therefore means that that additional amount is retained within the cycle, increasing all the other intermediates as one is converted into the other. Hence the addition of oxaloacetate greatly increases the amounts of all the citric acid intermediates, thereby increasing the cycle's capacity to metabolize acetyl CoA, converting its acetate component into and water, with the release of enough energy to form 11 ATP and 1 GTP molecule for each additional molecule of acetyl CoA that combines with oxaloacetate in the cycle.\nTo cataplerotically remove oxaloacetate from the citric cycle, malate can be transported from the mitochondrion into the cytoplasm, decreasing the amount of oxaloacetate that can be regenerated. Furthermore, citric acid intermediates are constantly used to form a variety of substances such as the purines, pyrimidines and porphyrins.\nIntermediates for other pathways.\nThis article concentrates on the catabolic role of glycolysis with regard to converting potential chemical energy to usable chemical energy during the oxidation of glucose to pyruvate. Many of the metabolites in the glycolytic pathway are also used by anabolic pathways, and, as a consequence, flux through the pathway is critical to maintain a supply of carbon skeletons for biosynthesis.\nThe following metabolic pathways are all strongly reliant on glycolysis as a source of metabolites: and many more.\n* Fatty acid synthesis\n* Cholesterol synthesis\n* The citric acid cycle which in turn leads to:\n*Amino acid synthesis\n*Nucleotide synthesis\n*Tetrapyrrole synthesis\nAlthough gluconeogenesis and glycolysis share many intermediates the one is not functionally a branch or tributary of the other. There are two regulatory steps in both pathways which, when active in the one pathway, are automatically inactive in the other. The two processes can therefore not be simultaneously active. Indeed, if both sets of reactions were highly active at the same time the net result would be the hydrolysis of four high energy phosphate bonds (two ATP and two GTP) per reaction cycle.\nNAD+ is the oxidizing agent in glycolysis, as it is in most other energy yielding metabolic reactions (e.g. beta-oxidation of fatty acids, and during the citric acid cycle). The NADH thus produced is primarily used to ultimately transfer electrons to to produce water, or, when is not available, to produce compounds such as lactate or ethanol (see \"Anoxic regeneration of NAD+\" above). NADH is rarely used for synthetic processes, the notable exception being gluconeogenesis. During fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis the reducing agent is NADPH. This difference exemplifies a general principle that NADPH is consumed during biosynthetic reactions, whereas NADH is generated in energy-yielding reactions. The source of the NADPH is two-fold. When malate is oxidatively decarboxylated by \"NADP+-linked malic enzyme\" pyruvate, and NADPH are formed. NADPH is also formed by the pentose phosphate pathway which converts glucose into ribose, which can be used in synthesis of nucleotides and nucleic acids, or it can be catabolized to pyruvate.\nGlycolysis in disease.\nDiabetes.\nCellular uptake of glucose occurs in response to insulin signals, and glucose is subsequently broken down through glycolysis, lowering blood sugar levels. However, insulin resistance or low insulin levels seen in diabetes result in hyperglycemia, where glucose levels in the blood rise and glucose is not properly taken up by cells. Hepatocytes further contribute to this hyperglycemia through gluconeogenesis. Glycolysis in hepatocytes controls hepatic glucose production, and when glucose is overproduced by the liver without having a means of being broken down by the body, hyperglycemia results.\nGenetic diseases.\nGlycolytic mutations are generally rare due to importance of the metabolic pathway; the majority of occurring mutations result in an inability of the cell to respire, and therefore cause the death of the cell at an early stage. However, some mutations (glycogen storage diseases and other inborn errors of carbohydrate metabolism) are seen with one notable example being pyruvate kinase deficiency, leading to chronic hemolytic anemia.\nIn combined malonic and methylmalonic aciduria (CMAMMA) due to ACSF3 deficiency, glycolysis is reduced by \u221250%, which is caused by reduced lipoylation of mitochondrial enzymes such as the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and \u03b1-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex.\nCancer.\nMalignant tumor cells perform glycolysis at a rate that is ten times faster than their noncancerous tissue counterparts. During their genesis, limited capillary support often results in hypoxia (decreased O2 supply) within the tumor cells. Thus, these cells rely on anaerobic metabolic processes such as glycolysis for ATP (adenosine triphosphate). Some tumor cells overexpress specific glycolytic enzymes which result in higher rates of glycolysis. Often these enzymes are Isoenzymes, of traditional glycolysis enzymes, that vary in their susceptibility to traditional feedback inhibition. The increase in glycolytic activity ultimately counteracts the effects of hypoxia by generating sufficient ATP from this anaerobic pathway. This phenomenon was first described in 1930 by Otto Warburg and is referred to as the Warburg effect. The Warburg hypothesis claims that cancer is primarily caused by dysfunctionality in mitochondrial metabolism, rather than because of the uncontrolled growth of cells.\nA number of theories have been advanced to explain the Warburg effect. One such theory suggests that the increased glycolysis is a normal protective process of the body and that malignant change could be primarily caused by energy metabolism.\nThis high glycolysis rate has important medical applications, as high aerobic glycolysis by malignant tumors is utilized clinically to diagnose and monitor treatment responses of cancers by imaging uptake of 2-18F-2-deoxyglucose (FDG) (a radioactive modified hexokinase substrate) with positron emission tomography (PET).\nThere is ongoing research to affect mitochondrial metabolism and treat cancer by reducing glycolysis and thus starving cancerous cells in various new ways, including a ketogenic diet.\nInteractive pathway map.\nThe diagram below shows human protein names. Names in other organisms may be different and the number of isozymes (such as HK1, HK2, ...) is likely to be different too.\nAlternative nomenclature.\nSome of the metabolites in glycolysis have alternative names and nomenclature. In part, this is because some of them are common to other pathways, such as the Calvin cycle.\nStructure of glycolysis components in Fischer projections and polygonal model.\nThe intermediates of glycolysis depicted in Fischer projections show the chemical changing step by step. Such image can be compared to polygonal model representation.\nStructure of glycolysis components in skeletal diagram and conservation-of-matter model.\nThe intermediates of glycolysis depicted in skeletal diagram show the chemical structures changing step by step, with cofactors such as NADH, ATP, and water and phosphates to balance reactions' stoichiometry. Each enzyme that mediates each reaction is indicated in the reversible arrow model of chemical reactions, as most enzymes catalyze bidirectional chemical reactions. Duplicates, such as the reversible re-arrangement between dihydroxyacetone and glyceraldehyde on the bottom row of reactions, represent two moles of C3 fragments derived from a single mole of the preceding C6 fragment of fructose bisphosphate, giving a net of two ATP generated. Thus the diagram must be read with rules of stoichiometry and balance-of-matter principles in mind. Follow the green \"START\" button to the red \"END\" button to trace the pathway through the structural pathway diagram.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12645", "revid": "41211452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12645", "title": "Gary North (economist)", "text": "American historian and author (1942\u20132022)\nGary Kilgore North (February 11, 1942 \u2013 February 24, 2022) was an American writer, Austrian School economic historian, and leading figure in the Christian reconstructionist movement. North authored or coauthored over fifty books on topics including Reformed Protestant theology, economics, and history. He was an Associated Scholar of the Mises Institute.\nHe is known for his advocacy of biblical or \"radically libertarian\" economics and also as a theorist of dominionism and theonomy. North often invoked the Protestant work ethic to advance these views. He supported the establishment and enforcement of Bible-based religious law, a view which put him in conflict with other libertarians. He believed that capital punishment is appropriate punishment for male homosexuality, adultery, blasphemy, abortion, and witchcraft.\nEarly life and education.\nNorth was born in Los Angeles, California, on February 11, 1942, and grew up in Southern California, the son of FBI special agent Samuel W. North Jr. and his wife Peggy. North converted to Christianity in high school and, after attending a rally where anti-communist activist Fred Schwarz spoke, began frequenting conservative book-stores in the Los Angeles area during his college years. Between 1961 and 1963, while an undergraduate student at University of California, Riverside, North became acquainted with the works of Wilhelm R\u00f6pke, Rose Wilder Lane, Cornelius Van Til, Austrian School economists Eugen B\u00f6hm von Bawerk, Ludwig von Mises, F. A. Hayek and Murray Rothbard, and also read the works of Calvinist philosopher Rousas John Rushdoony. Later he married Rushdoony's daughter, collaborated with him and eulogized Rushdoony in a blog post on LewRockwell.com.\nCareer.\nStarting in 1967, North became a contributor to the libertarian journal \"The Freeman\" where he had first read the work of Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich Hayek. In the 1970s, he was the director of seminars for the Foundation for Economic Education (FEE). North received a PhD in history from the University of California, Riverside in 1972. His dissertation was \"The Concept of Property in Puritan New England, 1630\u20131720\".\nHe served as research assistant for libertarian Republican Congressman Ron Paul in Paul's first term (1976). North was a regular contributor to the LewRockwell.com website, which lists an extensive archive of his articles there. North's own website, Garynorth.com, posts commentary on religious, social, and political issues and offers paid access to investment advice and other premium content. North also published a blog called \"Deliverance from Debt\" which provided advice about relief from debt. Another North website, \"Free Christian Curriculum\", seeks to provide a free Christian homeschooling curriculum for children from age 3 through grade 12.\nRon Paul curriculum.\nIn addition, North contributed to the \"Ron Paul Curriculum\", a home school online curriculum associated with former U.S. Congressman Ron Paul, which is free for grades K\u20135 and available to paid members from grades 6\u201312. As director of curriculum development, North outlined four goals of the educational project: providing a \"detailed study\" of the \"history of liberty\"; teaching a \"thorough understanding of Austrian economics\"; serving as \"an academically rigorous curriculum that is tied to primary source\" material rather than textbooks; and teaching \"the Biblical principle of self-government and personal responsibility\", which North called \"the foundation of the market economy\".\nChristian, Bible-based economic methodology.\nNorth wrote that the \"starting point for all economic analysis\" lies in accepting that \"God [has] cursed the earth\" in the Book of Genesis 3:17\u201319; this \"made scarcity an inescapable fact of man's existence\". In his 1982 \"Dominion Covenant: Genesis\", North wrote that mainstream modern economics, whether libertarian, conservative or liberal, is \"in disintegration\" because it is \"humanist\" in its approach and consequently rejects the notion that \"biblical revelation\" is necessary for sound economic theory. He also wrote that economics \"must begin with the [Biblical] story of creation\" if it is not to collapse into \"total chaos\".\nProposed \"Christian theocratic\" political and social order.\nA 2011 article in \"The New York Times\" identified North as a central figure in Christian reconstructionism, the philosophy which advocates the institution of \"a Christian theocracy under Old Testament law [as] the best form of government, and a radically libertarian one.\" North wrote: \"I certainly believe in biblical theocracy.\"\nThe article also described North as \"the leading proponent of 'Christian economics,' which applies biblical principles to economic issues and the free market.\" North supported the abolition of the fractional-reserve banking system and a return to the gold standard. According to the \"Times\", North believed that the Bible forbids inflation, welfare programs, and also writes that \"God would prefer gold money to paper\".\nRange of capital offenses.\nNorth favored capital punishment for a range of offenders, including murderers, blasphemers, children who curse their parents, male homosexuals, and other people who commit some of the acts deemed capital offenses in the Old Testament. (North believed that the death penalty for sabbath breaking and some other crimes no longer applies.) North stated that the biblical admonition to kill homosexuals in the Book of Leviticus is God's \"law and its morally appropriate sanction\", arguing that \"God is indeed a homophobe\" who \"hates the practice [of homosexuality] and those who practice it\" and \"hates the sin and hates the sinner.\"\nNorth said that capital punishment should be carried out by stoning, because it is the biblically approved method of execution and it is cheap due to the plentiful and convenient supply of stones. For non-capital offenses, North eschewed prisons as a punishment, but preferred \"whipping, restitution in the form of indentured servitude, or slavery\".\nReligious liberty.\nNorth said: \"We must use the doctrine of religious liberty to gain independence for Christian schools until we train up a generation of people who know that there is no religious neutrality, no neutral law, no neutral education, and no neutral civil government. Then they will get busy in constructing a Bible-based social, political and religious order which finally denies the religious liberty of the enemies of God.\"\nAdam C. English suggests that this quote implies that \"religious liberty is a useful tool to Christians in the present, yet is ultimately to be denied to anyone who is not Christian once the Christians are in power\". English argues that although this may seem inconsistent (advocating religious liberty but denying the reality of the notion), North and his fellow reconstructionists understand \"liberty\" in a theological sense. According to the reconstructionists, \"anyone outside of the Christian faith is in bondage,\" and so \"government by rigorous theonomy is not oppressive but liberating\".\nY2K.\nNorth was also a prominent promoter of exaggerated predictions of computer failure from the Year 2000 problem (Y2K) during the late 1990s, earning him the nickname \"Scary Gary.\" His main website became dominated by links to extremist predictions for Y2K damage, including widespread collapse of governments and financial institutions. North declared on his home page that Y2K \"may be the biggest problem that the modern world has ever faced\" and labeled 2000 as \"The Year the Earth Stands Still\".\nCritics said the motivation for North's predictions was linked to his Christian reconstructionist aims, which require widespread societal collapse to set the stage for a new theocratic order. North made the connection explicit in communications with fellow reconstructionists: \"The Y2K crisis is systemic. It cannot possibly be fixed. I think it will wipe out every national government in the West. Not just modify them\u2014destroy them...That is what I have wanted all my adult life. In my view, Y2K is our deliverance.\"\nDeath.\nNorth was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2017, and underwent treatment for about five years. He died in Dallas, Georgia, on February 24, 2022, at the age of 80.\nPublications.\nInstitute for Christian Economics.\nNorth was the founder of the Institute for Christian Economics (ICE), which publishes online books and magazines focusing on Christian ethics. ICE, along with Dominion Press in Tyler, Texas, are important sources for reconstructionist publications.\nBooks and newsletters.\nNorth authored or coauthored more than fifty books, many of which are available for free download. For many years, North was the author and editor of the newsletter \"The Remnant Review\". He also provided \"Gary North's Reality Check\", a free e-newsletter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12646", "revid": "9337959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12646", "title": "Guernica", "text": "Guernica (, ), officially Gernika () in Basque, is a town in the province of Biscay, in the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country, Spain. The town of Guernica is one part (along with neighbouring Lumo) of the municipality of Gernika-Lumo (), whose population was 16,224 as of 2009[ [update]].\nOn April 26, 1937, Guernica was bombed by Nazi Germany's Condor Legion and Fascist Italy's Aviazione Legionaria, in one of the first aerial bombings. The attack inspired Pablo Picasso's painting \"Guernica\", depicting his outrage at the attack.\nLocation.\nThe village is situated in the region of Busturialdea, in the valley of the Oka River. The river ends in an estuary that gives its name to the village of Guernika. Its mouth is known as the Urdaibai's estuary's heart.\nHistory.\n1366\u20131936.\nThe town of Guernica was founded by Tello Alfonso, Lord of Biscay, on April 28, 1366, at the intersection of the road from Bermeo to Durango with the road from Bilbao to Elantxobe and Lekeitio. The strategic importance of the site was increased by the fact that it lay on a major river estuary, where vessels could dock at the port of Suso.\nIn time, it took on the typical shape of a Basque town, comprising a series of parallel streets (Goienkale, Azokekale, Artekale and Barrenkale; respectively: \u2018upper, market, between, lower roads\u2019) and a transverse street called Santa Mar\u00eda, with a church at each end of the built-up area.\nLife in the town became rigidly structured, with the aim being to preserve the privileges of the dominant middle classes. This pattern continued practically unaltered until the late 17th century.\nOn a small hillock in the town, stands the Meeting House and the Tree of Gernika. By ancient tradition, Basques, and indeed other peoples in medieval Europe, held assemblies under a tree, usually an oak, to discuss matters affecting the community.\nIn Biscay, each administrative district (known as a merindad) had its appointed tree, but over the centuries, the Tree of Guernica acquired particular importance. It stood in the parish of Lumo, on a site known as Gernikazarra, beside a small shrine.\nThe laws of Biscay continued to be drawn up under this tree until 1876, with each town and village in the province sending two representatives to the sessions, known as General Assemblies. This early form of democracy was recorded by the philosopher Rousseau, by the poet William Wordsworth, by the dramatist Tirso de Molina and by the composer Iparragirre, who wrote the piece called Gernikako Arbola\u00a0(\"The Tree of\u00a0Gernika\" in\u00a0Basque).\nWhen the Domain of Biscay was incorporated into the kingdom of Castile, the king of Castile visited Guernica and swore an oath under the Tree promising to uphold the \"fueros\" or local laws of Biscay. The oath of King Ferdinand, known as the \"Catholic Monarch\", on June 30, 1476, is depicted in a painting by Francisco de Mendieta popularly known as \"El besamanos\" (\"The Royal audience\"). On July 3, 1875, during the Carlist Wars, the pretender to the throne, Don Carlos, also visited Guernica and swore the oath. Throughout the 19th century, there were frequent meetings under the Tree, including both General Assemblies and other political events.\nBy the 18th century, there was a square at the centre of the town, flanked by the town hall, a public gaol housing prisoners from all over the Lordship of Biscay, a hospital and a poor-house for local people. Day-to-day life comprised agriculture (growing of cereals, vegetable and fruit), crafts (menders, tailors, cobblers, flax manufacturers) and trade (transportation and sale of goods and produce).\nThis was also a time of continual conflicts with the neighbouring parish of Lumo over disputed land. These disputes were not finally settled until 1882, when the two parishes joined to form Gernika-Lumo.\nThe first industrial factories were set up in the early years of the 20th century. This encouraged population growth, and the town grew from 4,500 inhabitants in 1920 to 6,000 in 1936.\nCivil War: 1937 bombing.\nOn April 26, 1937, during the Spanish Civil War, Guernica was the scene of a massive aerial bombing attack by the Condor Legion of Nazi Germany's \"Luftwaffe\" and the Italian Aviazione Legionaria. According to official Basque figures, 1,654 civilians were killed. The raid was requested by Francisco Franco to aid in his overthrowing the Basque Government and the Spanish Republican government. The town was devastated, though the Biscayan assembly and the Oak of Guernica survived. The Bombing of Guernica, which went on continuously for three hours, is considered the beginning of the Luftwaffe doctrine of terror bombing civilian targets in order to demoralize the enemy.\nIn art.\nPablo Picasso painted his \"Guernica\" painting to commemorate the horrors of the bombing and Ren\u00e9 Ich\u00e9 made a violent sculpture the day after the bombing. It has inspired musical compositions by Octavio Vazquez (\"Gernika\" piano trio), Ren\u00e9-Louis Baron, Lenny White, and Mike Batt (performed by Katie Melua), and poems by Paul Eluard (\"Victory of Guernica\"), and Uys Krige (\"Nag van die Fascistiese Bomwerpers\"; English translation from the Afrikaans: \"Night of the Fascist Bombers\"). There is also a short film from 1950, by Alain Resnais, titled \"Guernica\".\nCelebrations were staged in 1966 to mark the 600th anniversary of the founding of the town. As part of these celebrations, a statue of Count Tello, made by local sculptor Agust\u00edn Herranz, was set up in the Fueros Square.\n21st century.\nAs of 2009, Gernika-Lumo had 16,244 inhabitants. It is a town with a prosperous service sector, and is also home to industrial companies, as well as good cultural and educational amenities.\nCultural importance.\nGuernica is historically the seat of the parliament of the province of Biscay, whose executive branch is located in nearby Bilbao.\nIn prior centuries, Lumo had been the meeting place of the traditional Biscayan assembly, Urdu\u00f1a and chartered towns like Guernica were under the direct authority of the Lord of Biscay, and Enkarterri and the Durango area had separate assemblies. All would hold assemblies under local big trees. As time passed, the role of separate assemblies was superseded by the single assembly in Guernica, and by 1512, its oak, known as the Gernikako Arbola, became symbolic of the traditional rights of the Basque people as a whole.\nThe trees are always renewed from their own acorns. One of these trees (the \"Old Tree\") lived until the 19th century, and may be seen, as a dry stump, near the assembly house. A tree planted in 1860 to replace it died in 2004 and was in turn replaced; the sapling that had been chosen to become the official Oak of Guernica is also sick so the tree will not be replaced until the earth around the site has been restored to health.\nA hermitage was built beside the Gernikako Arbola to double as an assembly place, followed by the current house of assembly (\"Biltzar Jauregia\" in Basque), built in 1826.\nSymbol for peace.\nOn April 26, 1937, during the Spanish Civil War, the town was razed to the ground by German aircraft belonging to the Condor Legion, sent by Hitler to support Franco's troops. For almost four hours bombs rained down on Guernica in an \"experiment\" for the blitzkrieg tactics and bombing of civilians seen in later wars.\nIn 1987 the 50th anniversary of the bombing was commemorated as the town hosted the Preliminary Congress of the World Association of Martyr Cities. The full congress was held subsequently in Madrid, bringing together representatives of cities all over the world. Since then, Gernika-Lumo has been a member of this association. 1988 saw the setting up of the monument \"Gure Aitaren Etxea\", by Basque sculptor Eduardo Chillida, and in 1990 \"Large Figure in a Shelter\", by British sculptor Henry Moore, was erected beside it. These monuments are symbolic of Gernika-Lumo as a city of peace.\nAs part of the \"Symbol for Peace\" movement, Gernika has twinned with several towns, including Berga (Catalonia \u2013 1986), Pforzheim (Germany \u2013 1988) and Boise, Idaho (United States \u2013 1993). The twinning agreements include co-operation in the fields of culture, education and industry.\nMarket day.\nThere is a popular saying in Guernica which runs as follows: \"lunes gerniqu\u00e9s, golperik ez\". A combination of both local languages (Castillian and Basque) into a single sentence, this translates roughly as \"not a stroke of work gets done on Mondays\". The Monday market day has for decades been considered as a holiday in the town.\nPeople would flock to Guernica not just from the immediate vicinity, but from all over the province, so that the town was packed. They came not just to buy or sell at the produce market, but also to eat at the town's renowned restaurants and afterwards perhaps to watch a pelota game at the local court. The Monday market has been fulfilling its age-old function of bringing people together since the times when people could not afford to travel far and it provided them with a chance to socialise. The bombing of Guernica by Nazi Germany's \"Luftwaffe\" and the Italian Aviazione Legionaria was deliberately chosen to occur on a Monday (April 26, 1937), because it was known that the Basque people who lived outside of Guernica proper would travel into town for the Market Day, thus affording the pilots of the German and Italian aircraft the opportunity to murder as many people as possible.\nSports.\nJai alai (cesta-punta) is a form of pelota. The Guernica jai alai court is the biggest operational court of its type in the world. It was designed by Secundino Zuano, one of Spain's leading architects of the 20th century and first opened in 1963. It is acknowledged by players of the game to be the world's finest court.\nBare-handed pelota games are held at the Santanape court. This is the most popular form of the sport.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12648", "revid": "50999943", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12648", "title": "Gerrit Rietveld", "text": "Dutch furniture designer and architect\nGerrit Rietveld (24 June 1888 \u2013 25 June 1964) was a Dutch furniture designer and architect.\nEarly life.\nRietveld was born in Utrecht on 24 June 1888 as the son of a joiner. He left school at 11 to be apprenticed to his father and enrolled at night school before working as a draughtsman for C. J. Begeer, a jeweller in Utrecht, from 1906 to 1911.\nDe Stijl.\nBy the time he opened his own furniture workshop in 1917, Rietveld had taught himself drawing, painting and model-making. He afterwards set up in business as a cabinet-maker.\nRietveld designed his Red and Blue Chair in 1917 which has become an iconic piece of modern furniture. Hoping that much of his furniture would eventually be mass-produced rather than handcrafted, Rietveld aimed for simplicity in construction. In 1918, he started his own furniture factory, and changed the chair's colours after becoming influenced by the \"De Stijl\" movement, of which he became a member in 1919, the same year in which he became an architect. The contacts that he made at \"De Stijl\" gave him the opportunity to exhibit abroad as well. In 1923, Walter Gropius invited Rietveld to exhibit at the Bauhaus.\nHe built the Rietveld Schr\u00f6der House, in 1924, in close collaboration with the owner Truus Schr\u00f6der-Schr\u00e4der. Built in Utrecht on the Prins Hendriklaan 50, the house has a conventional ground floor, but is radical on the top floor, lacking fixed walls but instead relying on sliding walls to create and change living spaces. The house has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 2000. His involvement in the Schr\u00f6der House exerted a strong influence on Truus' daughter, Han Schr\u00f6der, who became one of the first female architects in the Netherlands.\n\"Nieuwe Zakelijkheid\".\nRietveld broke with \"De Stijl\" in 1928 and became associated with a more functionalist style of architecture, known as either \"Nieuwe Zakelijkheid\" or \"Nieuwe Bouwen\". The same year he joined the \"Congr\u00e8s Internationaux d'Architecture Moderne\". From the late 1920s he was concerned with social housing, inexpensive production methods, new materials, prefabrication and standardisation. In 1927 he was already experimenting with prefabricated concrete slabs, a very unusual material at that time. In the 1920s and 1930s, however, all his commissions came from private individuals, and it was not until the 1950s that he was able to put his progressive ideas about social housing into practice, in projects in Utrecht and Reeuwijk.\nRietveld designed the Zig-Zag Chair in 1934 and started the design of the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam, which was finished after his death.\nDe Stijl revival.\nIn 1951 Rietveld designed a retrospective exhibition about \"De Stijl\" which was held in Amsterdam, Venice and New York. Interest in his work revived as a result. In subsequent years he was given many commissions, including the Dutch pavilion for the Venice Biennale (1953), the art academies in Amsterdam and Arnhem, and the press room for the UNESCO building in Paris. Designed for the display of small sculptures at the Third International Sculpture Exhibition in Arnhem's Sonsbeek Park in 1955, Rietveld's 'Sonsbeek Pavilion' was rebuilt at the Kr\u00f6ller-M\u00fcller Museum in 1965. Due to irreparable damages caused by regular decay, it was once again rebuilt, this time with new materials, in 2010. In order to handle all these projects, in 1961 Rietveld set up a partnership with the architects Johan van Dillen and J. van Tricht built hundreds of homes, many of them in the city of Utrecht.\nHis work was neglected when rationalism came into vogue, but he later benefited from a revival of the style of the 1920s thirty years later.\nDeath.\nRietveld died on 25 June 1964 in Utrecht.\nHis son Wim Rietveld also became a renowned industrial designer.\nRecognition.\nRietveld had his first retrospective exhibition devoted to his architectural work at the Central Museum, Utrecht, in 1958. When the art academy in Amsterdam became part of the higher professional education system in 1968 and was given the status of an Academy for Fine Arts and Design, the name was changed to the Gerrit Rietveld Academy in honour of Rietveld. \"Gerrit Rietveld: A Centenary Exhibition\" at the Barry Friedman Gallery, New York, in 1988 was the first comprehensive presentation of the Dutch architect's original works ever held in the U.S. The highlight of a celebratory \"Rietveld Year\" in Utrecht, the exhibition \"Rietveld's Universe\" opened at the Centraal Museum and compared him and his work with famous contemporaries like Wright, Le Corbusier and Mies van der Rohe.\nTwo software tools, both for code review, have been named after Gerrit Rietveld: Gerrit and Rietveld.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12649", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12649", "title": "Gary", "text": "Gary may refer to: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nGary (snail), fictional character Gary from the American animated TV show SpongeBob SquarePants\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12650", "revid": "50881917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12650", "title": "Gary, Indiana", "text": "City in Lake County, Indiana, United States\nGary is a city in Lake County, Indiana, United States. The population was 69,093 at the 2020 census, making it Indiana's eleventh-most populous city. The city has been historically dominated by major industrial activity and is home to U.S. Steel's Gary Works, the largest steel mill complex in North America.\nGary is located along the southern shore of Lake Michigan about southeast of downtown Chicago. The city is the western gateway to the Indiana Dunes National Park, and is within the Chicago metropolitan area.\nGary was named after lawyer Elbert Henry Gary, who was the founding chairman of the United States Steel Corporation. U.S. Steel had established the city in 1906 as a company town to serve its steel mills. Since the 1970s, Gary and other Rust Belt cities have lost a high number of people as the steel industry has gone through restructuring and manufacturing jobs moved offshore. As a result of this economic shift, the city's population has declined 61% since the 1960 census.\nAlthough initially a very diverse city, Gary currently has one of the nation's highest percentages of African Americans. Between 1970 and 2010, Gary had the nation's highest Black population per capita. The city has a legacy of African-American cultural and historical accomplishments. In 1945, Gary was the first city in the Midwest (and one of the first in the United States) to fully integrate its public school system. It elected the country's first Black mayor, Richard Hatcher in 1968, and in 1972 hosted the first and largest National Black Political Convention.\nGary is served by the Gary/Chicago International Airport, an alternative to the Chicago region's two larger airports. The city's public transport is provided by the Gary Public Transportation Corporation and the South Shore Line passenger railway, which connects to the Chicago transit system.\nIt is home to a professional baseball team, the Gary SouthShore RailCats. In addition to its large steel mills, the city is known as the birthplace of the Jackson family, well-known entertainers whose members include singer Michael Jackson.\nHistory.\nFounding and early years.\nGary, Indiana, was founded in 1906 by the U.S. Steel corporation as the home for its new plant, Gary Works. The city was named after lawyer Elbert Henry Gary, who was the founding chairman of the United States Steel Corporation.\nGary was the site of civil unrest in the 1919 General Steel Strike. On October 4, 1919, a riot broke out on Broadway, the main north\u2013south street through downtown Gary, between steel workers and strike breakers brought in from outside. Indiana governor James P. Goodrich declared martial law three days later. Shortly after that, over 4,000 federal troops under the command of Major General Leonard Wood arrived to restore order.\nThe steel industry's jobs provided Gary with rapid growth and a diverse population within the first 26 years of its founding. According to the 1920 United States census, 29.7% of Gary's population at the time was classified as foreign-born, mostly from eastern European countries, with another 30.8% classified as native-born with at least one foreign-born parent. By the 1930 United States census, the first census in which Gary's population exceeded 100,000, the city was the fifth largest in Indiana and comparable in size to South Bend, Fort Wayne, and Evansville. At that time, 78.7% of the population was classified as white, with 19.3% as foreign-born and another 25.9% as native-born with at least one foreign-born parent. In addition to white internal migrants, Gary had attracted numerous African-American migrants from the South in the Great Migration, and 17.8% of the population was classified as black. Some 3.5% were classified as Mexican (now likely to be identified as Hispanic, as they included citizens and immigrants of other Spanish-speaking ethnicities).\nPost-World War II.\nGary's fortunes have risen and fallen with those of the steel industry. The growth of the steel industry brought prosperity to the community, and industrial workers gained middle-class standards of living. Broadway was known as a commercial center for the region. Department stores and architecturally significant movie houses were built in the downtown and Glen Park neighborhoods.\nBut in the 1960s, as manufacturing jobs moved offshore, Gary entered a period of decline. This also occurred in many other American urban centers that were reliant on one particular industry. Gary's decline was brought on by reduced employment in the steel industry overall, which caused U.S. Steel to lay off many workers from the Gary area.\nThe U.S. Steel Gary Works employed over 30,000 in 1970; the workforce declined to 6,000 by 1990, and to 5,100 by August 2015. Attempts to shore up the city's economy with major construction projects, such as a Holiday Inn hotel and the Genesis Convention Center, failed to reverse the decline.\n1968 riots.\nIn July 1968, riots broke out in Gary following the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. The governor ordered 3,000 National Guard members to assist local police with restoring order to the city. Curfews were enforced, and a ban on gasoline and liquor sales helped calm the violence. During the unrest, more than 110 people were arrested, at least three stores were set on fire, and at least 15 fire-bombings were reported.\nRacial changes.\nA rapid racial change occurred in Gary during the late 20th century. Political power reflected Gary's racial demographics: the Black and Hispanic share of the city's population increased from 21% in 1930 to 39% in 1960, and to 53% in 1970. Black and Hispanic people primarily lived in the Midtown section just south of downtown (per the 1950 Census, 97% of Gary's black population lived in this neighborhood).\nGary voters elected one of the nation's first African-American mayors, Richard G. Hatcher, and hosted the groundbreaking 1972 National Black Political Convention.\nIn the late 1990s and early 2000s, Gary had the highest percentage of African-American residents among U.S. cities with a population of 100,000 or more, 84% (as of the 2000 census).\nThe city's population has fallen well below 100,000 residents. In 2013, the Gary Department of Redevelopment estimated that one-third of all homes in the city were unoccupied and/or abandoned.\nU.S. Steel.\nU.S. Steel continues to be a major steel producer but has a small fraction of its previous workforce.\nWhile Gary has been unable to establish or replace the manufacturing base, it has worked to diversify. Two casinos opened along the Gary lakeshore in the 1990s, to create an entertainment destination. Their success has been adversely affected by the state closing Cline Avenue, an important means of access to the area.\nToday, Gary faces the difficulties of a Rust Belt city, including high unemployment and decaying infrastructure.\n21st century.\nGary has closed 21 public schools. While some school buildings have been reused, most remain unused since closing. As of 2014, Gary is considering closing additional schools in response to budget deficits.\nGary Chief of Police Thomas Houston was convicted of excessive force and abuse of authority in 2008. He died in 2010 while serving a three-year, five-month federal prison sentence.\nIn April 2011, 75-year-old mayor Rudolph M. Clay announced that he would suspend his campaign for reelection as he was being treated for prostate cancer. He endorsed rival Karen Freeman-Wilson, who won the Democratic mayoral primary in May 2011. Freeman-Wilson won election with 87 percent of the vote and her term began in January 2012; she is the first woman elected mayor in the city's history. She was reelected in 2015. She was defeated in her bid for a third term in the 2019 Democratic primary by Lake County Assessor Jerome Prince. Since no challengers filed for the November 2019 general election, Prince's nomination was effectively tantamount to election. He officially succeeded Freeman-Wilson on January 1, 2020, two days after being sworn in as the city's 21st mayor on December 30, 2019.\nIn May 2021, a $300 million Hard Rock Casino opened in the city. Branded as Hard Rock Casino Northern Indiana, the location includes memorabilia from the local entertainment family, the Jackson 5, and a 1,950-seat Hard Rock Live performance hall.\nGeography.\nThe city is located at the southern end of the former lake bed of the prehistoric Lake Chicago and the current Lake Michigan. Most of the city's soil, nearly one foot below the surface, is pure sand. The sand beneath Gary and on its beaches is of such volume and quality that for over a century, companies have mined it, especially for the manufacture of glass.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water.\nGary is T-shaped, with its northern border on Lake Michigan. In the northwesternmost section, Gary borders Hammond and East Chicago; 165th Street, one of several roads connecting Hammond and Gary, has been walled off from Gary since 1981, initially due to a toxic flood. Miller Beach, Gary's easternmost neighborhood, borders Lake Station and Portage. Gary's southernmost section borders Griffith, Hobart, Merrillville, and unincorporated Ross. Gary is about from the Chicago Loop.\nGary contains the western portion of Indiana Dunes National Park, including Miller Woods, the western part of Long Lake, and the Paul H. Douglas Center for Environmental Education. Much of this is within Gary's Miller Beach neighborhood, although the park's western tip extends to downtown Gary.\nClimate.\nGary is listed by the K\u00f6ppen-Geiger climate classification system as humid continental (Dfa). In July and August, the warmest months, high temperatures average 84\u00a0\u00b0F (29\u00a0\u00b0C) and peak just above 100\u00a0\u00b0F (38\u00a0\u00b0C), and low temperatures average 63\u00a0\u00b0F (17\u00a0\u00b0C). In January and February, the coldest months, high temperatures average around 29\u00a0\u00b0F (\u22122\u00a0\u00b0C) and low temperatures average 13\u00a0\u00b0F (\u221211\u00a0\u00b0C), with at least a few days of temperatures dipping below 0\u00a0\u00b0F (\u221218\u00a0\u00b0C).\nThe weather in Gary is greatly regulated by its proximity to Lake Michigan. Weather varies yearly. In the summer months Gary is humid. The city's yearly precipitation averages about 40 inches. Summer is the rainiest season. Winters vary but are predominantly snowy. Snowfall in Gary averages approximately 25 inches per year. Sometimes large blizzards hit because of \"lake effect snow\", a phenomenon whereby large amounts of water evaporated from the lake deposit onto the shoreline areas as inordinate amounts of snow.\nNeighborhoods.\nDowntown.\nDowntown Gary is separated by Broadway into two distinctive communities. Originally, the City of Gary consisted of The East Side, The West Side, The South Side (the area south of the train tracks near 9th Avenue), and Glen Park, located further South along Broadway. The East Side was demarcated by streets named after the States in order of their acceptance into the Union. This area contained mostly wood-frame houses, some of the earliest in the city, and became known in the 20th century for its ethnic populations from Europe and large families. The single-family houses had repeating house designs that alternated from one street to another, with some streets looking very similar. Among the East Side's most notable buildings were Memorial Auditorium (a large red-brick and stone civic auditorium and the site of numerous events, concerts and graduations), The Palace Theater, Emerson School, St. Luke's Church, H.C. Gordon &amp; Sons, and Goldblatt's Department stores, in addition to the Fair Department Store. All fronted Broadway as the main street that divided Gary.\nThe West Side of Gary, or West of Broadway, the principal commercial street, had streets named after the presidents of the United States in order of their election. Lytton's, Hudson's ladies store, J.C. Penney, and Radigan Bros Furniture Store developed on the west side of Broadway. Developed later, this side of town was known for its masonry or brick residences, its taller and larger commercial buildings, including the Gary National Bank Building, Hotel Gary (now Genesis Towers), The Knights of Columbus Hotel &amp; Building (now affordable housing fronting 5th Avenue), the Tivoli Theater (demolished), the U.S. Post Office, Main Library, Mercy and Methodist Hospitals and Holy Angels Cathedral and School. The West Side also had a secondary principal street, Fifth Avenue, which was lined with many commercial businesses, restaurants, theaters, tall buildings, and elegant apartment buildings. The West Side was viewed as having wealthier residents. The houses dated from about 1908 to the 1930s. Much of the West Side's housing were for executives of U.S. Steel and other prominent businessmen. Notable mansions were 413 Tyler Street and 636 Lincoln Street. Many of the houses were on larger lots. By contrast, a working-class area was made up of row houses made of poured concrete which were arranged together and known as \"Mill Houses\"; they were built to house steel mill workers.\nThe areas known as Emerson and Downtown West combine to form Downtown Gary. It was developed in the 1920s and houses several pieces of impressive architecture, including the Moe House, designed by Frank Lloyd Wright, and another, the Wynant House (1917), which was destroyed by fire. A significant number of older structures have been demolished in recent years because of the cost of restoration. Restructuring of the steel and other heavy industry in the late 20th century resulted in a loss of jobs, adversely affecting the city.\nAbandoned buildings in the downtown area include historic structures such as Union Station, the Palace Theater, and City Methodist Church. A large area of the downtown neighborhood (including City Methodist) was devastated by a major fire on October 12, 1997. Interstate 90 was constructed between downtown Gary and the United States Steel plant.\nWest.\nAmbridge Mann is a neighborhood located on Gary's near west side along 5th Avenue. Ambridge was developed for workers at the nearby steel plant in the 1910s and 1920s. It is named after the American Bridge Works, which was a subsidiary of U.S. Steel. The neighborhood is home to a huge stock of prairie-style and art deco homes. The Gary Masonic Temple was located in the neighborhood, along with the Ambassador apartment building. Located just south of Interstate 90, the neighborhood can be seen while passing Buchanan Street.\nBrunswick is located on Gary's far west side. The neighborhood is located just south of Interstate 90 and can also be seen from the expressway. The Brunswick area includes the Tri-City Plaza shopping center on West 5th Avenue (U.S. 20). The area is south of the Gary Chicago International Airport.\nDowntown West is located in north-central Gary on the west side of Broadway just south of Interstate 90. The Genesis Convention Center, the Gary Police Department, the Lake Superior Court House, and the Main Branch of the Gary Public Library are located along 5th Avenue. A new 123-unit mixed-income apartment development was built using a HUD HOPE VI grant in 2006. The Adam Benjamin Metro Center is located just north of 4th Avenue. It is operated by the Gary Public Transportation Corporation and serves as a multi-modal hub. It serves both as the Downtown Gary South Shore train station and an intercity bus stop.\nTolleston is one of Gary's oldest neighborhoods, predating much of the rest of the city. It was platted by George Tolle in 1857 when the railroads were constructed in this area. This area is west of Midtown and south of Ambridge Mann. Tarrytown is a subdivision located in Tolleston between Whitcomb Street and Clark Road.\nSouth.\nBlack Oak is located on the far southwest side of Gary, in the vicinity of the Burr Street exit to the Borman Expressway. It was annexed in the 1970s. Prior to that, Black Oak was an unincorporated area informally associated with Hammond, and the area has Hammond telephone numbers. After three referendums, the community voters approved annexation, having been persuaded by Mayor Hatcher that they would benefit more from services provided by the city than from those provided by the county. In the 21st century, it is the only majority-white neighborhood in Gary.\nGlen Park is located on Gary's far south side and is made up mostly of mid-twentieth-century houses. Glen Park is divided from the remainder of the city by the Borman Expressway. The northern portion of Glen Park is home to Gary's Gleason Park Golf Course and the campus of Indiana University Northwest. The far western portion of Glen Park is home to the Village Shopping Center. Glen Park includes the 37th Avenue corridor at Broadway.\nMidtown is located south of Downtown Gary, along Broadway. In the pre-1960s days of \"de facto\" segregation, this developed historically as a \"black\" neighborhood as African Americans came to Gary from the rural South in the Great Migration to seek jobs in the industrial economy.\nNorth and East.\nAetna is located on Gary's far east side along the Dunes Highway. Aetna predates the city of Gary. This company town was founded in 1881 by the Aetna Powder Works, an explosives company. Their factory closed after the end of World War I.\nThe Town of Aetna was annexed by Gary in 1928, around the same time that the city annexed the Town of Miller. In the late 1920s and early 1930s, Gary's prosperous industries helped generate residential and other development in Aetna, resulting in an impressive collection of art deco architecture. The rest of the community was built after World War II and the Korean War in the 1950s, in a series of phases. On its south and east, Aetna borders the undeveloped floodplain of the Little Calumet River.\nEmerson is located in north-central Gary on the east side of Broadway. Located just south of Interstate 90, Gary City Hall is located in Emerson, along with the Indiana Department of Social Services building and the Calumet Township Trustee's office. A 6,000-seat minor league baseball stadium for the Gary SouthShore RailCats, U.S. Steel Yard, was constructed in 2002, along with contiguous commercial space and minor residential development.\nMiller Beach, also known simply as Miller, is on Gary's far northeast side. Settled in the 1850s and incorporated as an independent town in 1907, Miller was annexed by the city of Gary in 1918. Miller developed around the old stagecoach stop and train station known by the 1850s as Miller's Junction and/or Miller's Station. Miller Beach is racially and economically diverse. It attracts investor interest due to the many year-round and summer homes within walking distance of Marquette Park and Lake Michigan. Prices for lakefront property are affordable compared to those in Illinois suburban communities. Lake Street provides shopping and dining options for Miller Beach visitors and residents. East Edge, a development of 28 upscale condominium, townhome, and single-family homes, began construction in 2007 at the eastern edge of Miller Beach along County Line Road, one block south of Lake Michigan.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe change in the economy and resulting loss of jobs has caused a drop in population by nearly two thirds since its peak in 1960. Gary, along with St. Louis, have each lost more than two thirds of their peak populations.\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 69,093 people, 28,610 households, and 16,459 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 37,274 housing units. The racial makeup of the city was 10.6% White, 80.2% African American, 0.4% Native American, 0.2% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 3.3% from some other races and 5.2% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 7.6% of the population. 27.6% of residents were under the age of 18, 7.0% were under 5 years of age, and 18.5% were 65 and older.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 80,294 people, 31,380 households, and 19,691 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 39,531 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 84.8% African American, 10.7% White, 0.3% Native American, 0.2% Asian, 1.8% from other races, and 2.1% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 5.1% of the population. Non-Hispanic Whites were 8.9% of the population in 2010, down from 39.1% in 1970.\nThere were 31,380 households, of which 33.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 25.2% were married couples living together, 30.9% had a female householder with no husband present, 6.7% had a male householder with no wife present, and 37.2% were non-families. 32.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.54 and the average family size was 3.23.\nThe median age in the city was 36.7 years. 28.1% of residents were under the age of 18; 8.6% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 21.8% were from 25 to 44; 27.1% were from 45 to 64; and 14.5% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 46.0% male and 54.0% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 census, there were 102,746 people, 38,244 households, and 25,623 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 43,630 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 84.03% African American, 11.92% White, 0.21% Native American, 0.14% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.97% from other races, and 1.71% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 4.93% of the population.\nThere were 38,244 households, out of which 31.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 30.2% were married couples living together, 30.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.0% were non-families. 28.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.66 and the average family size was 3.28.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 29.9% under the age of 18, 10.1% from 18 to 24, 25.1% from 25 to 44, 22.2% from 45 to 64, and 12.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 84.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 78.0 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $27,195, and the median income for a family was $32,205. Males had a median income of $34,992 versus $24,432 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,383. About 22.2% of families and 25.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 37.9% of those under age 18 and 14.1% of those age 65 or over.\nArts and culture.\nArts and film.\nMeredith Willson's 1957 Broadway musical \"The Music Man\" featured the song \"Gary, Indiana\", in which lead character (and con man) Professor Harold Hill wistfully recalls his purported hometown, then prosperous. Hill claims to be an alumnus of \"Gary Conservatory of Music, Class of '05\", but this is later revealed to be another of his lies. The City of Gary was not founded until 1906. Willson's musical, set in 1912, was adapted both as a film of the same name released in 1962, and as a television film, produced in 2003.\nThe 1996 urban film \"Original Gangstas\" was filmed in the city. It starred Gary native Fred Williamson, Pam Grier, Jim Brown, Richard Roundtree, and Isabel Sanford, among others. Since the early 2000s, Gary has been the setting for numerous films made by Hollywood filmmakers. In 2009, scenes for the remake of \"A Nightmare on Elm Street\" were filmed in Gary. Scenes from \"\" wrapped up filming on August 16, 2010.\nThe History Channel documentary \"Life After People\" was filmed in Gary, exploring areas that have deteriorated or been abandoned because of the loss of jobs and residents.\nIn John Mellencamp's 1985 song, \"Minutes to Memories\", an old man on a bus, recalling his humble life, tells the young man beside him, \"I worked my whole life in the steel mills of Gary.\"\nOn Beyonc\u00e9's 2024 Grammy Winning Album of the Year, \"Cowboy Carter\", the song \"YA YA\", Gary is mentioned as the intermediary stop on a 3-city tour along the Chitlin' Circuit.\nHistoric places on the National Register.\nThe following single properties and national historic districts are listed on the National Register of Historic Places:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPublic libraries.\nThe Gary Public Library System consists of the main library at 220 West 5th Avenue and several branches: Brunswick Branch, W. E. B. DuBois Branch, J. F. Kennedy Branch, Tolleston Branch, and Woodson Branch. In March 2011, the Gary Library Board voted to close the main library on 5th Avenue and the Tolleston branch in what officials said was their best economic option. The main library closed at the end of 2011. The building now houses a museum.\nLake County Public Library operates the Black Oak Branch at 5921 West 25th Avenue in the Gary city limits. In addition, Indiana University Northwest operates the John W. Anderson Library on its campus.\nSports.\nThe following sports franchises are based in Gary:\nEducation.\nThree school districts serve the city, and multiple charter schools are located within the city.\nPublic schools.\nMost areas of Gary are within the Gary Community School Corporation. Other areas within the city are administered by Lake Ridge Schools Corporation, which is the school system for the Black Oak neighborhood and unincorporated Calumet Township. Due to annexation law, Black Oak residents retained their original school system and were not required to attend Gary public schools. In 1927, it was mandated that Black students attend a separate high school. A few parts of Gary to the southeast are in the River Forest Community School Corporation.\nCharter schools.\nCharter schools in Indiana, including those in Gary, are granted charters by one of a small number of chartering institutions. Indiana charter schools are generally managed in cooperation between the chartering institution, a local board of parents and community members, salaried school administrators, and a management company. Charter schools in Gary as of 2011 include Thea Bowman Leadership Academy, Charter School of the Dunes, Gary Lighthouse Charter School (formerly Blessed Sacrament Parish and Grade School), and 21st Century Charter.\nHigher education.\nGary is home to two regional state college campuses:\nMedia.\nNewspapers.\nGary is served by two major newspapers based outside the city, and by a Gary-based, largely African-American interest paper. These papers provide regional topics, and cover events in Gary.\nTelevision and radio.\nGary is served by five local broadcasters plus government access and numerous Chicago area radio and stations, and by other nearby stations in Illinois and Indiana.\nInfrastructure.\nGary Police Department.\nGary is served by the Gary Police Department and the Lake County Sheriff.\nAccording to the ODMP, since 1912 to the present day, 16 officers and 1 K9 of the Gary Police Department have been killed in the line of duty.\nFire department.\nThe Gary Fire Department (GFD) provides fire protection and emergency medical services to the city of Gary.\nNotable people.\nThe Jacksons.\nGary is the hometown of the Jackson family, a family of musicians who influenced the sound of modern popular music. In 1950, Joseph and Katherine Jackson moved from East Chicago, Indiana into their two-bedroom house at 2300 Jackson Street. They had married on November 5, 1949. Their entertainer children later recorded a song entitled \"2300 Jackson Street\" (1989). The Jackson children include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12651", "revid": "35138333", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12651", "title": "Gregory the Illuminator", "text": "Patron saint of the Armenian Apostolic Church (c.257\u2013c.331)\nGregory the Illuminator (c.\u2009257\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009331) was the founder and first official head of the Armenian Apostolic Church. He converted Armenia from Zoroastrianism to Christianity in the early fourth century (traditionally dated to 301), making Armenia the first state to adopt Christianity as its official religion. He is venerated as a saint in the Armenian Apostolic Church and in some other churches.\nGregory is said to have been the son of a Parthian nobleman, Anak, who assassinated the Arsacid king of Armenia Khosrov II. The young Gregory was saved from the extermination of Anak's family and was raised as a Christian in Caesarea of Cappadocia, then part of the Roman Empire. Gregory returned to Armenia as an adult and entered the service of King Tiridates III, who had Gregory tortured after he refused to make a sacrifice to a pagan goddess. After discovering Gregory's true identity, Tiridates had him thrown into a deep pit well called Khor Virap for 14 years. Gregory was miraculously saved from death and released after many years with the help of Tiridates' sister Khosrovidukht. Gregory then converted the King to Christianity, and Armenia then became the first country to adopt Christianity as a state religion in 301 AD. Gregory, the Illuminator, then healed King Tiridates, who the hagiographical sources say had been driven mad by his sins, and preached Christianity in Armenia. He was consecrated bishop of Armenia at Caesarea, baptized King Tiridates and the Armenian people, and traveled throughout Armenia, destroying pagan temples and building churches in their place.\nGregory eventually gave up the patriarchate to live as a hermit and was succeeded by his son Aristaces. Gregory's descendants, called the Gregorids, hereditarily held the office of Patriarch of Armenia with some interruptions until the fifth century. It is in Gregory's honor that the Armenian Church is sometimes called (\"of the Illuminator\") or Gregorian.\nEarly life.\nIn the Armenian tradition, the standard version of the life of Gregory the Illuminator derives from the fifth-century hagiographic history attributed to Agathangelos. According to Agathangelos's account, Gregory was the son of the Parthian nobleman Anak; the later Armenian historian Movses Khorenatsi identifies Anak as a member of the Parthian noble house of Suren. At the incitation of the Sasanian king Ardashir I, who promised to return Anak his domain as a reward, the Parthian nobleman went to Armenia and assassinated the Arsacid king of Armenia Khosrov II after gaining his confidence. Anak was then put to death by the Armenian nobles along with his entire family\u2024 Anak's son Gregory narrowly escaped execution with the help of his nurse, whom Khorenatsi calls Sophy, sister of a Cappadocian notable named Euthalius (Ewt\u02bbagh). Gregory was taken to Caesarea in Cappadocia, where he received a Christian upbringing. Jean-Michel Thierry described him as of \"Cappadocian culture and religion\" and credited him with having introduced \"Greek civilization to Armenia.\"\nAccording to Khorenatsi, upon coming of age, Gregory married Mariam, daughter of a Christian named David. He had two children with Mariam: Aristaces and Vrtanes, who would later succeed Gregory as patriarchs of Armenia.\nChristianization of Armenia.\nAfter the birth of their sons, Mariam and Gregory separated, and Gregory went to Armenia to enter the service of King Tiridates III, son of the assassinated king Khosrov II. After Gregory refused to sacrifice to the goddess Anahit, the king had Gregory imprisoned and subjected to many tortures. Once Tiridates discovered that Gregory was the son of his father's killer, he had Gregory thrown into a deep pit called Khor Virap near Artaxata, where he remained for thirteen (or fifteen) years. In Agathangelos's history, Gregory is miraculously saved and brought out from the pit after Tiridates' sister Khosrovidukht sees a vision. Gregory then healed the king, who, Agathangelos writes, had been driven into animal madness for his sinful behavior. Tiridates and his court accepted Christianity, making Armenia the first state to adopt Christianity as its official religion.\nAfter being released, Gregory preached the Christian faith in Armenia and erected shrines to the martyrs Gayane and Hripsime in Vagharshapat on a spot indicated to him in a vision. Vagharshapat would later become home to the mother church of Armenian Christianity and, by medieval times, called Ejmiatsin (\"descent of the only-begotten\") in reference to Gregory's vision. Gregory, sometimes accompanied by Tiridates, went around Armenia destroying pagan temples, defeating the armed resistance of the pagan priests. Gregory then went to Caesarea with a retinue of Armenian princes and was consecrated bishop of Armenia by Leontius of Caesarea. Until the death of Nerses I in the late fourth century, Gregory's successors would go to Caesarea to be confirmed as bishops of Armenia, and Armenia remained under the titular authority of the metropolitans of Caesarea.\nReturning to Armenia, Gregory raised churches in place of the destroyed pagan temples and seized their estates and wealth for the Armenian Church and his house. On the site of the destroyed temple to Vahagn at Ashtishat, Gregory raised a church which became the original center of the Armenian Church and remained so until after the partition of the country in 387. Gregory met King Tiridates near the town of Bagavan and baptized the Armenian king, army and people in the Euphrates. In two non-Armenian versions of Agathangelos's history, Gregory also baptizes together with Tiridates the kings of Caucasian Albania, Georgia and Lazica/Abkhazia. He founded schools for the Christian education of children, where the languages of instruction were Greek and Syriac. He established the ecclesiastical structure of Armenia, appointing as bishops some of the children of pagan priests. Gregory is also said to have journeyed to Rome with King Tiridates in an embassy to the recently converted Constantine the Great, but scholar Robert W. Thomson views this as fictional.\nThe conversion of Armenia to Christianity is traditionally dated to 301, but modern scholarship considers a later date, approximately 314, to be a more likely. Additionally, the history of Agathangelos depicts the spread of Christianity of Armenia as having occurred practically entirely within Gregory's lifetime, when, in fact, it was a more gradual process.\nRetirement and death.\nSome time after converting Armenia to Christianity, Gregory appointed his younger son Aristaces as his successor and went to live an ascetic life in the \"cave of Man\u0113\" in the district of Daranali in Upper Armenia. The Patriarchate of Armenia would be held as a hereditary office, with some interruptions, by the house of Gregory, called the Gregorids, until the death of Patriarch Isaac in the fifth century. According to Movses Khorenatsi, Gregory sometimes came out from his hermitage and traveled around the country until Aristaces returned from the Council of Nicaea (325), after which Gregory never appeared to anyone again. He died in seclusion in the cave of Man\u0113 and was buried nearby by shepherds who did not know who he was. All of the sources indicate that Gregory's death occurred not long after the Council of Nicaea; Cyril Toumanoff gives 328 as the year of Gregory's death.\nHistorical assessment.\nLevon Ter-Petrosyan, philologist and Armenia's first president, postulates that Gregory and Mesrop Mashtots had the most influence on the course of Armenian history. James R. Russell argues that both Gregory and Mashtots were visionaries, found a champion for their program in the king, looked to the West, had very strong pro-Hellenic bias, trained the children of pagan priests and assembled their own disciples to spread the faith through learning.\nRelics and veneration.\nAfter his death his corpse was removed to the village of Thodanum (T'ordan, modern Do\u011fank\u00f6y, Kemah, near Erzincan).\nThe Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin, the Armenian Catholicosate of the Great House of Cilicia, the Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem and the Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople each claim to have relics from the right arm of the saint, in an arm-shaped reliquary. The catholicosates of Etchmiadzin and Cilicia use the arm relic for the blessing of the Holy Myron every seven years.\nIn the calendar of the Armenian Church, the discovery of the relics of St. Gregory is an important feast and is commemorated on the Saturday before the Fourth Sunday after Pentecost. Two other feast days in the Armenian Apostolic Church are devoted to St. Gregory: the feast of his entry into Khor Virap, the 'deep pit or dungeon' (commemorated on the last Saturday of Lent) and his deliverance from Khor Virap (commemorated on the Saturday before the second Sunday after Pentecost).\nDepictions in Armenian art.\nGregory has been depicted widely in Armenian art since the early Middle Ages on various media. He is most likely the figure, a saint, carved on a seventh-century stele in Talin. He is depicted next to John the Baptist, the prophet Elijah, and most likely Thaddeus, James of Nisibis, and the apostle Bartholomew on the east fa\u00e7ade of the tenth-century Aghtamar Cathedral in Lake Van. Sixteen scenes depicting Gregory's life are painted in the Church of Tigran Honents in Ani (1215), that contains the most complete painted interior of all medieval Armenian monuments.\nGregory is depicted on the silver reliquary of Skevra (1293), the best known work of precious metal from Armenian Cilicia, along with Saint Thaddeus, and on the reliquary of the Holy Sign (1300), another significant piece of Armenian metalwork made at the , along with John the Baptist. Gregory is depicted with King Trdat on the left and Hripsime on a 1448 processional banner of embroidered silk kept at the Treasury of Etchmiadzin. At the Vank Cathedral in New Julfa, the Armenian district of Isfahan, Iran, Gregory's martyrdom was painted in a European style by the Italian-trained Hovhannes M'rkuz Ju\u0142ayeci in 1646.\nByzantium and the Orthodox world.\nGregory is commemorated on September 30 by the Eastern Orthodox Church, which styles him \"Holy Hieromartyr Gregory, Bishop of Greater Armenia, Equal of the Apostles and Enlightener of Armenia.\"\nHis relics were scattered near and far in the reign of the Eastern Roman Emperor Zeno. Relic fragments are found at the Karakallou Monastery and Iviron Monastery on Mount Athos; the Gregoriou Monastery claims to have the saint's skull.\nVeneration of Gregory began in the Byzantine Empire in the late 9th century with the ascend of Basil I. A 9th century mosaic of Gregory was uncovered in Hagia Sophia under a layer of plaster in 1847\u201349 during the restoration by the Fossati brothers. Located in the south tympanum, next to the Fathers of the Church, it shows Gregory standing in bishop robes, blessing with one hand and holding the Book of the Gospels with the other. The mosaic, thought to have been destroyed in the 1894 earthquake, survives in drawing by and the Fossati brothers. Sirarpie Der Nersessian argued that his inclusion in the series of the Church Fathers is explained by the myth of the Arsacid origin of Basil I, likely fabricated by Patriarch Photios I of Constantinople.\nGregory is depicted in two prominent Byzantine illuminated manuscripts\u2014the \"Menologion of Basil II\" (c. 1000) and the \"Theodore Psalter\" (1066)\u2014and in a number of Byzantine churches and monasteries, most notably Hosios Loukas (11th century), Church of Panagia Chalkeon in Thessaloniki (11th century), and the Pammakaristos Church in Constantinople (14th century).\nOne of the sections of Moscow's iconic Saint Basil's Cathedral is named after Gregory the Armenian (\"Tserkov Grigoriya Armyanskogo\"). It is dedicated to the capture of Ars Tower of the Kazan Kremlin by Ivan the Terrible during the Siege of Kazan on September 30, 1552, on his feast day.\nItaly and the Catholic world.\nIn the 8th century, the iconoclast decrees in Greece caused a number of religious orders to flee the Byzantine Empire and seek refuge elsewhere. San Gregorio Armeno in Naples was built in that century over the remains of a Roman temple dedicated to Ceres, by a group of nuns escaping from the Byzantine Empire with the relics of Gregory, including his skull, arms, a femur bone, his staff, the leather straps used in his torture and the manacles that held the saint. The femur and manacles were returned by Pope John Paul II to Catholicos Karekin II and are now enshrined at Saint Gregory the Illuminator Cathedral in Yerevan.\nOn February 20, 1743, Nard\u00f2, Italy was hit by a devastating earthquake that destroyed almost the entire city. The only structure to survive intact after the quake was the city's statue of St. Gregory the Illuminator. According to the city's registers, only 350 out of the city's 10,000 inhabitants died in the earthquake, leading the inhabitants to believe that St. Gregory saved the city. Every year, they mark the anniversary of the earthquake by holding three days of celebrations in his honor. Two relics of the saint are at Nard\u00f2 Cathedral: one is kept in a silver bust of the saint, which is carried in processions, and the other, the metacarpus, is kept within a silver arm-shaped reliquary.\nThe feast day of Saint Gregory the Illuminator is on September 30 according to both the 2004 Roman Martyrology of the Ordinary Form and the 1956 Roman Martyrology of the Extraordinary Form of the Catholic Church; however, the 1962 Roman Missal and its previous editions list the feast day of \"Saint Gregory, Bishop of Greater Armenia and Martyr\" on October 1.\nA tall statue of Gregory in the Carrara marble was installed in the north courtyard of St. Peter's Basilica in Vatican City in January 2005. Sculpted by France-based Lebanese-Armenian sculptor Khatchik Kazandjian, the statue was inaugurated by Pope John Paul II. Gregory is depicted holding a cross in one hand and the Bible in the other. Pope Benedict XVI inaugurated the area as in February 2008.\nChurch of San Gregorio Armeno is a church and a monastery in Naples, Italy named after the Gregory the Illuminator\nAnglican Communion.\nHe is honored with a feast day on the liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church (USA) on March 23.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12653", "revid": "46223180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12653", "title": "God Emperor of Dune", "text": "1981 science fiction novel by Frank Herbert\nGod Emperor of Dune is a science fiction novel by American writer Frank Herbert, published in 1981. The fourth in his \"Dune\" series of six novels, it was ranked as the No. 11 hardcover fiction best seller of 1981 by \"Publishers Weekly\".\nPlot.\nLeto II Atreides, the God Emperor, has ruled the universe as a tyrant for 3,500 years after becoming a hybrid of human and sandworm. The death of all other sandworms as a result of the terraforming of Arrakis, and his control of the remaining supply of the all-important spice, has allowed him to keep civilization under his complete command. Leto has been physically transformed into a worm, retaining only his human face and arms, and though he is now seemingly immortal and invulnerable to harm, he is prone to instinct-driven bouts of violence when provoked to anger. As a result, his rule is one of religious awe and despotic fear.\nLeto has disbanded the Landsraad to all but a few Great Houses; the remaining powers defer to his authority, although they individually conspire against him in secret. The Fremen have long since lost their military power and have been replaced by the Fish Speakers, an all-female army who obey Leto without question. He has rendered the human population into a state of trans-galactic stagnation; space travel is non-existent to most people in his empire, which he has deliberately kept to a near-medieval level of technological sophistication. All of this he has done in accordance with a prophecy divined through precognition that will establish an enforced peace preventing humanity from destroying itself through aggressive behavior.\nArrakis has been transformed via terraforming from a desert planet to a lush forested biosphere with the exception of \"The Sareer\", a single section of desert retained by Leto for his Citadel. A string of Duncan Idaho gholas have served Leto over the millennia, and, during that time, Leto has also fostered the bloodline of his twin sister Ghanima. Her descendant, Moneo Atreides, is Leto's majordomo and closest confidant, while Moneo's daughter, Siona, has become the leader of an Arrakis-based rebellion against Leto. She steals a set of Leto's secret journals from his archives, not realizing that he has allowed it. Leto intends to breed Siona with the latest Duncan ghola, but is aware that the ghola, moved by his own morality, may try to assassinate him before this can occur.\nThe Ixians send a new ambassador named Hwi Noree to serve Leto, and though he realizes that she has been specifically designed and trained to ensnare him, he cannot resist falling in love with her. She agrees to marry him. Leto tests Siona by taking her out to the middle of the desert. After improperly using her stillsuit to preserve moisture, dehydration forces her to accept Leto's offer of spice essence from his body to replenish her. Awakened to Leto's prophecy, which he calls the Golden Path, Siona is convinced of the importance of it. She remains dedicated to Leto's destruction, and an errant rainstorm demonstrates to her his mortal vulnerability to water.\nWhen Duncan falls in love and copulates with Hwi, Moneo sends him and Siona out to Tuono Village, an outcropping along the Royal Procession road, to keep them safe from Leto's wrath. Leto changes the venue of his wedding from Tabur Village to Tuono Village. Siona and Duncan overcome a mutual hatred of each other to plan an assassination. As Leto's wedding procession moves across a high bridge over a river, Siona's Fish Speaker bodyguard Nayla, ordered by Leto to do whatever Siona says, destroys the support beams with a lasgun. The bridge collapses and Leto and his entourage, including Hwi, fall to their deaths into the river below. Leto's body rends apart in the water; the sandtrout which are part of his body encyst the water and scurry off, while the worm portion burns and disintegrates on the shore. Enraged by Hwi's death, Duncan kills Nayla.\nWith his dying breaths, Leto reveals a secret portion of the Golden Path: the production of a human who is invisible to prescient vision. Having begun millennia before with the union of Leto's twin sister Ghanima and Farad'n of House Corrino, Siona is the finished result, and she and her descendants will retain this ability. He explains that humanity is now free from the domination of oracles, free to scatter throughout the universe, never again to face complete domination or complete destruction. After revealing the location of his secret spice hoard, Leto dies, leaving Duncan and Siona to face the task of managing the empire.\nThe Ixians have also begun the construction of navigation computers that will render the Spacing Guild's Navigators obsolete. Leto's death causes the Scattering, a great forced exodus of the former Imperium citizens to other galaxies and planets.\nAnalysis.\nIn \"God Emperor of Dune\", Frank Herbert analyzes the cyclical patterns of human society, as well as humanity's evolutionary drives. Using his ancestral memories, Leto II has knowledge of the entirety of human history and is able to recall the effects and patterns of tyrannical institutions, from the Babylonian empire through to the Jesuits on ancient Earth, and thus builds an empire existing as a complete nexus encompassing all these methods. This galactic empire differs from the historical tyrants in that it is deliberately designed to end in destruction, and is only instituted in the first place as part of a plan to rescue humanity from an absolute destruction which Leto II has foreseen through his prescient visions. Leto II personally explores the emergent effects of civilization, noting that most hierarchical structures are remnants of evolutionary urges toward safety. Thus, by forming a perfectly safe and stable empire, Leto II delivers a message to be felt throughout history.\nStylistically, the novel is permeated by quotations from, and speeches by its main character, Leto, to a degree unseen in any of the other \"Dune\" novels. The quotations are from Leto's own dictated records, made for future humanity. In part, this stylistic shift is an artifact of how Herbert wrote it: the first draft was written almost entirely in the first-person narrative voice, only being revised in later drafts to insert more third-person narration of events.\nCritical reception.\n\"God Emperor of Dune\" was ranked as the No. 11 hardcover fiction best seller of 1981 by \"Publishers Weekly\". The \"Los Angeles Times\" wrote that the novel was \"Rich fare ... heady stuff\", and \"Time\" called it \"a fourth visit to distant Arrakis that is every bit as fascinating as the other three\u2014every bit as timely.\" Critic John Leonard of \"The New York Times\" was less charitable, stating the original \"Dune\" novel \"was just about a perfect science fiction\" that had not been improved on: \"not in \"Dune Messiah,\" in \"Children of Dune\" or in \"God Emperor of Dune.\"\"\nIn popular culture.\nThe book is parodied in the animated television show \"The Grim Adventures of Billy &amp; Mandy\" in the 2003\u201304 season episode \"Mandy, the Merciless\", with Mandy as the emperor Leto II, and Billy as Duncan Idaho.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12654", "revid": "1312765684", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12654", "title": "Goonhilly Satellite Earth Station", "text": "Radiocommunication site in Cornwall, England\nObservatory\nGoonhilly Satellite Earth Station is a large radiocommunication site located on Goonhilly Downs near Helston on the Lizard peninsula in Cornwall, England. Owned by Goonhilly Earth Station Ltd under a 999-year lease from BT Group plc, it was at one time the largest satellite earth station in the world, with more than 30 communication antennas and dishes in use. The site also links into undersea cable lines.\nHistory.\nIts first dish, Antenna One (dubbed \"Arthur\"), was built in 1962 to link with Telstar. It was the first open parabolic design and is 25.9 metres (85 feet) in diameter and weighs 1,118 tonnes. After Pleumeur-Bodou Ground Station (Brittany) which received the first live transatlantic television broadcasts from the United States via the Telstar satellite at 0H47 GMT on 11 July 1962, Arthur received his first video in the middle of the same day. It is now a Grade II listed structure and is therefore protected.\nThe site has also played a key role in communications events such as the Muhammad Ali fights, the Olympic Games, the Apollo 11 Moon landing, and 1985's Live Aid concert.\nThe site was especially suitable for siting the satellite equipment: below Goonhilly Downs are thousands of feet of serpentine rock a metamorphic rock of great hardness which was ideal for bearing the great weight of this equipment. It was also found that the serpentine provided the least interference with the minute signals received.\nStatistics.\nThe site's largest dish, dubbed \"Merlin\", has a diameter of 32 metres (105 feet). Other dishes include Guinevere, Tristan, and Isolde after characters in Arthurian legend, much of which takes place in Cornwall.\nThe earth station is powered by the National Grid. If power fails, all essential equipment will run off huge batteries for up to 20 minutes, during which time two one-megawatt bio-diesel generators will take over. The nearby wind generator farm is not part of the complex.\nClosure.\nOn 12 September 2006, BT announced it would shut down satellite operations at Goonhilly in 2008, and move them to Madley Communications Centre in Herefordshire, making that centre BT's only earth station.\nVisitor centre.\nUntil Easter 2010 the site had a visitor centre inside which the Connected Earth gallery told the history of satellite communications. There were many other interactive exhibits, a cafe, a shop and one of Britain's fastest cybercaf\u00e9s (a one gigabit pipe and a theoretical maximum speed per computer of 100\u00a0Mbit). There were also tours around the main BT site and into the heart of Arthur.\nAt its prime, the site attracted around 80,000 visitors a year, but in March 2010 BT announced that the visitor centre would be \"Closed for Easter and beyond, until further notice.\"\nDevelopment to Commercial Deep Space Communication.\nOn 11 January 2011 it was announced that part of the site was to be sold to create a space science centre. This would involve upgrading some of the dishes to make them suitable for deep space communication with spacecraft missions. A new company was formed to manage the operations, Goonhilly Earth Station Ltd. The company leased most of the antennas for at least three years with the option to buy the entire complex in the future. Goonhilly Earth Station Ltd. took ownership of the site in January 2014.\nThere are plans to connect one or more of the Goonhilly dishes into global radio astronomy interferometer networks.\nThere are also plans to upgrade the former visitor centre into \"an outreach centre promoting space and space science for visitors, including local residents and schools\".\nIn July 2015 European Space Agency examined if antenna Goonhilly 6 could be used to support Artemis 1 of the Orion spacecraft. Since then the 30 and 32 metre dishes have been refurbished, upgraded, tested and certified as deep space stations and confirm to CCSDS and now can enhance NASA's Deep-Space-Network or ESA's ESTRACK network. The services are offered to NASA, ESA, JAXA, ASI, CNES, CSA, DLR and UKSA.\nThe site is a partner in the bid by Newquay Airport to become the UK's first Spaceport.\nSupport for Moon exploration.\nIn April 2018, Goonhilly became part of a collaboration partnership for commercial lunar mission support services, with the European Space Agency and Surrey Satellite Technology. The agreement calls for the upgrade of Goonhilly, and development of the Lunar Pathfinder mission. Plans exist for small landers with a lunar mothership providing communications relay.\nOn 22 February 2024 the station served as the Earth station for the Intuitive Machines IM-1 spacecraft as it landed on the Moon. The first American spacecraft to do so since the Apollo 17 mission in 1972.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12655", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12655", "title": "Global Warming", "text": ""}
{"id": "12656", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12656", "title": "Godwin's law", "text": "Internet adage about Nazi comparisons\nGodwin's law (or Godwin's rule), short for Godwin's law of Nazi analogies, is an Internet adage asserting: \"As an online discussion grows longer, the probability of a comparison involving Nazis or Hitler approaches one.\" The law's creator, Mike Godwin, maintains these comparisons often trivialize the Holocaust. It is an example of the fallacy.\nIn 2021, Harvard researchers published an article showing that the Nazi-comparison phenomenon does not occur with statistically meaningful frequency in Reddit discussions.\nHistory.\nPromulgated by the American attorney and author Mike Godwin in 1990, Godwin's law originally referred specifically to Usenet newsgroup discussions. He stated that he introduced Godwin's law in 1990 as an experiment in memetics, specifically to address the ubiquity of such comparisons which he believes regrettably trivialize the Holocaust. Later, it was applied to any threaded online discussion, such as Internet forums, chat rooms, and social-media comment threads, as well as to speeches, articles, and other rhetoric where occurs.\nIn 2012, \"Godwin's law\" became an entry in the third edition of the \"Oxford English Dictionary\".\nGeneralization, corollaries, and usage.\nGodwin's law can be applied mistakenly or abused as a distraction, a diversion, or even censorship, when miscasting an opponent's argument as hyperbole even when the comparison made by the argument is appropriate. Godwin has criticized the over-application of the adage, claiming that it does not articulate a fallacy, but rather is intended to reduce the frequency of inappropriate and hyperbolic comparisons:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although deliberately framed as if it were a law of nature or of mathematics, its purpose has always been rhetorical and pedagogical: I wanted folks who glibly compared someone else to Hitler to think a bit harder about the Holocaust.\nGodwin's law has many corollaries, some considered more canonical (by being adopted by Godwin himself) than others. For example, many newsgroups and other Internet discussion forums have a tradition that, when a Nazi or Hitler comparison is made, the thread is finished and whoever made the comparison loses whatever debate is in progress. This idea is itself sometimes mistakenly referred to as Godwin's law. \nGodwin rejects the idea that whoever invokes Godwin's law has lost the argument, and suggests that, applied appropriately, the rule \"should function less as a conversation ender and more as a conversation starter.\" In an interview with \"Time Magazine\", Godwin said that making comparisons to Hitler would actually be appropriate under the right circumstances:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I urge people to develop enough perspective to do it thoughtfully. If you think the comparison is valid, and you've given it some thought, do it. All I ask you to do is think about the human beings capable of acting very badly. We have to keep the magnitude of those events in mind, and not be glib. Our society needs to be more humane, more civilized and to grow up.\nIn August 2017, while commenting on the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, Godwin himself endorsed and encouraged social-media users to compare its alt-right participants to Nazis.\nGodwin has denied the need to update or amend the rule. In June 2018, he wrote, in an opinion piece for the \"Los Angeles Times\": \"It still serves us as a tool to recognize specious comparisons to Nazism\u00a0\u2013 but also, by contrast, to recognize comparisons that aren't.\" Additionally, when a potential subject of Godwin's law seems \"intent on making the Hitler comparison\", the comparison with fascism may be appropriate rather than devaluing the argument; a \"MAGA\" corollary to the Law recognizes the pernicious embrace of Nazi-inspired tropes and phrases by the \"alt-right\".\nAs an illustration, in an interview with \"Politico\" published on December 19, 2023, Godwin pointed out that Donald Trump might actually be using Hitler's rhetoric on purpose, for instance when accusing immigrants of \"poisoning the blood\" of the country or calling his political opponents \"vermin\":You could say the 'vermin' remark or the 'poisoning the blood' remark, maybe one of them would be a coincidence. But both of them pretty much make it clear that there's something thematic going on, and I can't believe it's accidental.\"In an opinion published the same day in \"The Washington Post\", Godwin stated: \"Yes, it's okay to compare Trump to Hitler. Don't let me stop you.\" In the article, Godwin says that \"when people draw parallels between Donald Trump's 2024 candidacy and Hitler's progression from fringe figure to Great Dictator, we aren't joking. Those of us who hope to preserve our democratic institutions need to underscore the resemblance before we enter the twilight of American democracy.\" \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12657", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12657", "title": "Groningen (disambiguation)", "text": "Groningen is a city in the Netherlands.\nGroningen may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12658", "revid": "1559905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12658", "title": "Galego language", "text": ""}
{"id": "12659", "revid": "24812038", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12659", "title": "Goidelic", "text": ""}
{"id": "12660", "revid": "24013162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12660", "title": "Gibberish language", "text": ""}
{"id": "12662", "revid": "43237577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12662", "title": "Goya (disambiguation)", "text": "Francisco Goya (1746\u20131828) was a Spanish romantic painter and printmaker.\nGoya may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12663", "revid": "5308300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12663", "title": "Green Bay Packers", "text": "National Football League franchise in Wisconsin\nThe Green Bay Packers are a professional American football team based in Green Bay, Wisconsin. The Packers compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the National Football Conference (NFC) North division. They are the third-oldest franchise in the NFL, established in 1919, and are the only non-profit, community-owned major league professional sports team based in the United States. Since 1957, home games have been played at Lambeau Field. They hold the record for the most wins in NFL history.\nThe Packers are the last of the \"small-town teams\" that were common in the NFL during the league's early days of the 1920s and 1930s. Founded in 1919 by Earl \"Curly\" Lambeau and George Whitney Calhoun, the franchise traces its lineage to other semi-professional teams in Green Bay dating back to 1896. Between 1919 and 1920, the Packers competed against other semi-pro clubs from around Wisconsin and the Midwest, before joining the American Professional Football Association (APFA), the forerunner of today's NFL, in 1921. In 1933, the Packers began playing part of their home slate in Milwaukee until changes at Lambeau Field in 1995 made it more lucrative to stay in Green Bay full-time; Milwaukee is still considered a home media market for the team. Although Green Bay is the smallest major league professional sports market in North America, \"Forbes\" ranked the Packers as the world's 27th-most-valuable sports franchise in 2019, with a value of $2.63\u00a0billion.\nThe Packers have won 13 league championships, the most in NFL history, with nine pre-Super Bowl NFL titles and four Super Bowl victories. The Packers, under coach Vince Lombardi, won the first two Super Bowls in 1966 and 1967; they were the only NFL team to defeat the American Football League (AFL) before the AFL\u2013NFL merger. After Lombardi retired, the Super Bowl trophy was named for him, but the team struggled through the 1970s and 1980s. The team's performance shifted after acquiring Brett Favre in 1992 and his eventual successor Aaron Rodgers in 2005, beginning a new ongoing era which has been characterized by consistent regular-season success, with 23 playoff appearances and two Super Bowl wins in 1996 and 2010, under head coaches Mike Holmgren and Mike McCarthy, respectively. In addition to the most wins, the Packers hold the second-highest win\u2013loss record (.571) in NFL history, including both regular season and playoff games.\nThe Packers are longstanding adversaries of the Chicago Bears, Minnesota Vikings, and Detroit Lions, who today form the NFL's NFC North division (formerly known as the NFC Central Division). They have played more than 100 games against each of those teams, and have a winning overall record against all of them, a distinction only shared with the Kansas City Chiefs, Dallas Cowboys, and Miami Dolphins. The Bears\u2013Packers rivalry is one of the oldest rivalries in U.S. professional sports history, dating to 1921.\nHistory.\nCurly Lambeau years (1919\u20131949).\nThe Green Bay Packers were founded on August 11, 1919, by former high-school football rivals Earl \"Curly\" Lambeau and George Whitney Calhoun. Lambeau solicited funds for uniforms from his employer, the Indian Packing Company, a meat packing company. He was given $500 ($ today) for uniforms and equipment, on the condition that the team be named after its sponsor. The Green Bay Packers have played in their original city longer than any other team in the NFL.\nOn August 27, 1921, the Packers were granted a franchise in the American Professional Football Association, a new national pro football league that had been formed the previous year. The APFA changed its name to the National Football League a year later. Financial troubles plagued the team, and the franchise was forfeited within the year before Lambeau found new financial backers and regained the franchise the next year. These backers, known as \"The Hungry Five\", formed the Green Bay Football Corporation.\nNFL champions (1929, 1930, 1931).\nAfter a near-miss in 1927, Lambeau's squad claimed the Packers' first NFL title in 1929 with an undefeated 12\u20130\u20131 campaign, behind a stifling defense which registered eight shutouts. Green Bay would repeat as league champions in 1930 and 1931, bettering teams from New York, Chicago and throughout the league, with all-time greats and future Hall of Famers Mike Michalske, Johnny (Blood) McNally, Cal Hubbard and Green Bay native Arnie Herber. Among the many impressive accomplishments of these years was the Packers' streak of 29 consecutive home games without defeat, an NFL record which still stands.\nNFL champions (1936, 1939, 1944).\nThe arrival of the end Don Hutson from Alabama in 1935 gave Lambeau and the Packers the most feared and dynamic offensive weapon in the game. Credited with inventing pass patterns, Hutson would lead the league in receptions in eight seasons and spur the Packers to NFL championships in 1936, 1939 and 1944. An Iron Man, Hutson played both ways, leading the league in interceptions as a safety in 1940. Hutson claimed 18 NFL records when he retired in 1945, many of which still stand. In 1951, his number 14 was the first to be retired by the Packers, and he was inducted as a charter member of the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1963.\nAfter Hutson's retirement, Lambeau could not stop the Packers' slide. He purchased a large lodge near Green Bay for team members and families to live in. Rockwood Lodge was the home of the 1946\u201349 Packers. The 1947 and 1948 seasons produced a record of 12\u201310\u20131, and 1949 was even worse at 3\u20139. The lodge burned down on January 24, 1950, and insurance money paid for many of the Packers' debts.\nCurly Lambeau departed after the 1949 season. Gene Ronzani and Lisle Blackbourn could not coach the Packers back to their former magic, even as a new stadium was unveiled in 1957. The losing would descend to the disastrous 1958 campaign under coach Ray \"Scooter\" McLean, whose lone 1\u201310\u20131 year at the helm is the worst in Packers history.\nVince Lombardi years (1959\u20131967).\nFormer New York Giants assistant Vince Lombardi was hired as Packers head coach and general manager on February 2, 1959. Few suspected the hiring represented the beginning of a remarkable, immediate turnaround. Under Lombardi, the Packers would become \"the\" team of the 1960s, winning five championships over seven years, including victories in the first two Super Bowls. During the Lombardi era, the stars of the Packers' offense included Bart Starr, Jim Taylor, Carroll Dale, Paul Hornung (as halfback and placekicker), Forrest Gregg, and Jerry Kramer. The defense included Willie Davis, Henry Jordan, Willie Wood, Ray Nitschke, Dave Robinson, and Herb Adderley.\nThe Packers' first regular-season game under Lombardi was on September 27, 1959, a 9\u20136 victory over the Chicago Bears in Green Bay. After winning their first three, the Packers lost the next five before finishing strong by sweeping their final four. The 7\u20135 record represented the Packers' first winning season since 1947, enough to earn rookie head coach Lombardi the NFL Coach of the Year.\nThe next year, the Packers, led by Paul Hornung's 176 points, won the NFL West title and played in the NFL Championship against the Philadelphia Eagles at Philadelphia. In a see-saw game, the Packers trailed by only four points when All-Pro Eagle linebacker Chuck Bednarik tackled Jim Taylor just nine yards short of the goal line as time expired.\nNFL champions (1961, 1962, 1965).\nThe Packers returned to the NFL Championship game the following season and faced the New York Giants in the first league title game to be played in Green Bay. The Packers scored 24-second-quarter points, including a championship-record 19 by Paul Hornung, on special \"loan\" from the Army (one touchdown, four extra points, and three field goals), powering the Packers to a 37\u20130 rout of the Giants, their first NFL Championship since 1944. It was in 1961 that Green Bay became known as \"Titletown\".\nThe Packers stormed back in the 1962 season, jumping out to a 10\u20130 start on their way to a 13\u20131 season. This consistent level of success would lead to Lombardi's Packers becoming one of the most prominent teams of their era, and to be featured as the face of the NFL on the cover of \"Time\" on December 21, 1962, as part of the magazine's cover story on \"The Sport of the '60s\". Shortly after \"Time\"'s article, the Packers faced the Giants in a much more brutal championship game than the previous year, but the Packers prevailed on the kicking of Jerry Kramer and the determined running of Jim Taylor. The Packers defeated the Giants in New York, 16\u20137. The 1963 team went 11\u20132\u20131 but finished second in the NFL West. The 1964 went 8\u20135\u20131 and finished second in the NFL West.\nThe Packers returned to the championship game in 1965 following a two-year absence when they defeated the Colts in a playoff for the Western Conference title. That game would be remembered for Don Chandler's controversial tying field goal in which the ball allegedly went wide right, but the officials signaled \"good\". The 13\u201310 overtime win earned the Packers a trip to the NFL Championship game, where Hornung and Taylor ran through the defending champion Cleveland Browns, helping the Packers win, 23\u201312, to earn their third NFL Championship under Lombardi and ninth overall. Goalpost uprights would be made taller the next year.\nSuper Bowl I champions (1966).\nThe 1966 season saw the Packers led to the first-ever Super Bowl by MVP quarterback Bart Starr. The team went 12\u20132, and as time wound down in the NFL Championship against the Dallas Cowboys, the Packers clung to a 34\u201327 lead. Dallas had the ball on the Packers' two-yard line, threatening to tie the game, but on fourth down, the Packers' Tom Brown intercepted Don Meredith's pass in the end zone to seal the win. The team crowned its season by rolling over the AFL champion Kansas City Chiefs 35\u201310 in Super Bowl I.\nSuper Bowl II champions (1967).\nThe 1967 season was the last for Lombardi as the Packers' head coach. The NFL Championship game, a rematch of the 1966 contest against Dallas, became indelibly known as the \"Ice Bowl\" as a result of the brutally cold conditions at Lambeau Field. Still the coldest NFL game ever played, it remains one of the most famous football games at any level in the history of the sport. With 16 seconds left, Bart Starr's touchdown on a quarterback sneak brought the Packers a 21\u201317 victory and their still unequaled third straight NFL Championship. They then won Super Bowl II with a 33\u201314 victory over the Oakland Raiders. Lombardi stepped down as head coach after the game, and Phil Bengtson was named his successor. Lombardi remained as general manager for one season but left in 1969 to become head coach and minority owner of the Washington Redskins.\nAfter Lombardi died of cancer on September 3, 1970, the NFL renamed the Super Bowl trophy the Vince Lombardi Trophy in recognition of his accomplishments with the Packers. The city of Green Bay renamed Highland Avenue in his honor in 1968, placing Lambeau Field at 1265 Lombardi Avenue ever since.\nFor about a quarter-century after Lombardi's departure, the Packers had relatively little on-field success. In the 24 seasons from 1968 to 1991, they had only five seasons with a winning record, one being the shortened 1982 strike season. They appeared in the playoffs twice, with a 1\u20132 record. The period saw five different head coaches\u2014Phil Bengtson, Dan Devine, Bart Starr, Forrest Gregg, and Lindy Infante\u2014two of whom, Starr and Gregg, were Lombardi's era stars, while Bengtson was a former Packer coach. Each led the Packers to a worse record than his predecessor. Poor personnel decisions were rife, notoriously the 1974 trade by acting general manager Dan Devine which sent five 1975 or 1976 draft picks (two first-rounders, two-second-rounders and a third) to the Los Angeles Rams for aging quarterback John Hadl, who would spend only 1&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 seasons in Green Bay. Another came in the 1989 NFL draft, when offensive lineman Tony Mandarich was taken with the second overall pick ahead of future Hall of Fame inductees Barry Sanders, Derrick Thomas, and Deion Sanders. Though rated highly by nearly every professional scout at the time, Mandarich's performance failed to meet expectations, earning him ESPN's ranking as the third \"biggest sports flop\" in the last 25 years.\nThe Packers' performance in the 1970s, 1980s, and early 1990s led to a shakeup, with Ron Wolf hired as general manager and given full control of the team's football operations to start the 1991 season.\nMike Holmgren years (1992\u20131998).\nIn 1992, Wolf hired San Francisco 49ers offensive coordinator Mike Holmgren as the Packers' new head coach.\nSoon afterward, Wolf acquired quarterback Brett Favre from the Atlanta Falcons for a first-round pick. Favre got the Packers their first win of the 1992 season, stepping in for injured quarterback Don Majkowski and leading a comeback over the Cincinnati Bengals. He started the following week, a win against the Pittsburgh Steelers, and never missed another start for Green Bay through the end of the 2007 season. He would go on to break the record for consecutive starts by an NFL quarterback, starting 297 consecutive games including stints with the New York Jets and Minnesota Vikings with the streak finally coming to an end late in the 2010 season.\nThe Packers had a 9\u20137 record in 1992 and began to turn heads around the league when they signed perhaps the most prized free agent in NFL history in Reggie White on the defense in 1993. White believed that Wolf, Holmgren, and Favre had the team heading in the right direction with a \"total commitment to winning\". With White on board, the Packers made it to the second round of the playoffs during both the 1993 and 1994 seasons but lost their 2nd-round matches to their playoff rival, the Dallas Cowboys, playing in Dallas on both occasions. In 1995, the Packers won the NFC Central Division championship for the first time since 1972. After a home playoff 37\u201320 win against Favre's former team, the Atlanta Falcons, the Packers defeated the defending Super Bowl champion San Francisco 49ers 27\u201317 in San Francisco on the road to advance to the NFC Championship Game, where they lost again to the Dallas Cowboys 38\u201327.\nSuper Bowl XXXI champions (1996).\nIn 1996, the Packers' turnaround was complete. The team posted a league-best 13\u20133 record in the regular season, dominating the competition and securing home-field advantage throughout the playoffs. They were ranked no. 1 in offense with Brett Favre leading the way, no. 1 in defense with Reggie White as the leader of the defense, and no. 1 in special teams with former Heisman Trophy winner Desmond Howard returning punts and kickoffs for touchdowns. After relatively easy wins against the San Francisco 49ers in a muddy 35\u201314 beatdown and Carolina Panthers 30\u201313, the Packers advanced to the Super Bowl for the first time in 29 years. In Super Bowl XXXI, Green Bay defeated the New England Patriots 35\u201321 to win their 12th championship. Desmond Howard was named MVP of the game for his kickoff return for a touchdown that ended the Patriots' bid for a comeback. Then-Packers president Bob Harlan credited Wolf, Holmgren, Favre, and White for ultimately changing the fortunes of the organization and turning the Green Bay Packers into a model NFL franchise. A 2007 panel of football experts at ESPN ranked the 1996 Packers the 6th-greatest team ever to play in the Super Bowl. \nThe following season the Packers recorded another 13\u20133 record and won their second consecutive NFC championship. After defeating the Tampa Bay Buccaneers 21\u20137 and San Francisco 49ers 23\u201310 in the playoffs, the Packers returned to the Super Bowl as an 11 point favorite. The team ended up losing in an upset to John Elway and the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XXXII, by the score of 31\u201324.\nIn 1998, the Packers went 11\u20135 and met the San Francisco 49ers in the first round of the NFC playoffs. It was the fourth consecutive year these teams had met in the playoffs and the sixth overall contest since the 1995 season. The Packers had won all previous games, and the media speculated that another 49ers loss would result in the dismissal of San Francisco head coach Steve Mariucci. Unlike the previous playoff matches, this game was hotly contested, with the teams frequently exchanging leads. With 4:19 left in the 4th quarter, Brett Favre and the Packers embarked on an 89-yard drive, which concluded with a Favre touchdown pass to receiver Antonio Freeman. This play appeared to give Green Bay the victory. But San Francisco quarterback Steve Young led the 49ers on an improbable touchdown drive, which culminated when Terrell Owens caught Young's pass between several defenders to give the 49ers a lead with three seconds remaining. Afterward, the game was mired in controversy. Many argued that during the 49ers game-winning drive, Niners receiver Jerry Rice fumbled the ball but officials stated he was down by contact. Television replays confirmed the fumble, but referees were unable to review the play; the next season the NFL reinstituted an instant replay system. In the end, this game turned out to be the end of an era in Green Bay. Days later Mike Holmgren left the Packers to become vice president, general manager, and head coach of the Seattle Seahawks. Much of Holmgren's coaching staff went with him, and Reggie White also retired after the season (but later played one season for the Carolina Panthers in 2000).\nIn 1999, the team struggled to find an identity after the departure of so many of the individuals responsible for their Super Bowl run. Ray Rhodes was hired in 1999 as the team's new head coach. Rhodes had served around the league as a highly regarded defensive coordinator and more recently experienced moderate success as head coach of the Philadelphia Eagles from 1995 to 1998. Ron Wolf believed that Rhodes' experience and player-friendly demeanor would fit nicely in Green Bay's veteran locker room, but Rhodes was fired after one 8\u20138 season. Wolf visited team practice late in the 1999 season and believed that players had become too comfortable with Rhodes' style, and said the atmosphere resembled a country club.\nIn 2000, Wolf replaced Rhodes with Mike Sherman. Sherman had never been a head coach at any level of football and was relatively unknown in NFL circles. He had only coached in professional football for three years starting as the Packers' tight ends coach in 1997 and 1998. In 1999, he followed Mike Holmgren to Seattle and became the Seahawks' offensive coordinator, although Sherman did not call the plays during games. Despite Sherman's apparent anonymity, Wolf was blown away in the interview process by the coach's organizational skills and attention to detail. Sherman's inaugural season started slowly, but the Packers won their final four games to achieve a 9\u20137 record. Brett Favre praised the atmosphere Sherman had cultivated in Green Bay's locker room and fans were optimistic about the team's future. In the offseason, however, Wolf suddenly announced his own resignation as general manager to take effect after the April 2001 draft. Packers' president Bob Harlan was surprised by Wolf's decision and felt unsure of how to replace him. Harlan preferred the structure Green Bay had employed since 1991; a general manager who ran football operations and hired a subservient head coach. But with the momentum and locker room chemistry that was built during the 2000 season, Harlan was reluctant to bring in a new individual with a potentially different philosophy. Wolf recommended that Harlan give the job to Sherman. Though Harlan was wary of the structure in principle, he agreed with Wolf that it was the best solution. In 2001, Sherman assumed the duties of both general manager and head coach.\nFrom 2001 to 2004, Sherman coached the Packers to respectable regular-season success, led by the spectacular play of Brett Favre, Ahman Green, and a formidable offensive line. But Sherman's teams faltered in the playoffs. Before 2003, the Packers had never lost a home playoff game since the NFL instituted a post-season in 1933 (they were 13\u20130, with 11 of the wins at Lambeau and two more in Milwaukee.). That ended on January 4, 2003, when the Atlanta Falcons defeated the Packers 27\u20137 in an NFC Wild Card game. The Packers would also lose at home in the playoffs to the Minnesota Vikings two years later.\nBy the end of the 2004 season, the Packers' team depth appeared to be diminishing. Sherman also seemed overworked and reportedly had trouble communicating with players on the practice field with whom he was also negotiating contracts. Harlan felt the dual roles were too much for one man to handle and removed Sherman from the general manager position in early 2005 while retaining him as a head coach. Harlan hired the Seattle Seahawks' vice president of operations Ted Thompson as the new executive vice president, general manager, and director of football operations. The relationship between Thompson and Sherman appeared strained, as Thompson immediately began rebuilding Green Bay's roster. Following a dismal 4\u201312 season, Thompson fired Sherman.\nMike McCarthy years (2006\u20132018).\nIn 2006, Thompson hired Mike McCarthy, former offensive coordinator for the San Francisco 49ers and New Orleans Saints, as head coach. McCarthy had served as quarterbacks coach for the Packers in 1999. In McCarthy's debut year coaching the Packers, the team began with a 4\u20138 record. Then, Brett Favre sustained injuries, as did backup quarterback, Aaron Rodgers. Despite the injuries, McCarthy coached the team to four consecutive wins, finishing with an 8\u20138 record.\nAfter missing the playoffs in 2006, Favre announced he would return for the 2007 season, it would be one of his best. The Packers finished 13\u20133, earning a first-round bye in the playoffs. The Packers' passing offense finished second in the NFC, behind the Dallas Cowboys, and third in the league. Running back Ryan Grant, became the featured back in Green Bay. In the divisional playoff round, in a snowstorm, the Packers beat the Seattle Seahawks 42\u201320. Grant rushed for 201 yards and three touchdowns, while Favre tossed an additional three touchdown passes to receiver Donald Driver (as well as a snowball, in celebration). On January 20, 2008, Green Bay appeared in their first NFC Championship Game in 10 years facing the New York Giants. The game was lost 23\u201320 on a field goal by Lawrence Tynes. This would be Favre's final game as a Packer. McCarthy coached the NFC team during the 2008 Pro Bowl in Hawaii.\nIn December 2007, Ted Thompson was signed to a 5-year contract extension with the Packers. On February 5, 2008, McCarthy signed a 5-year contract extension. On March 4, Favre announced his retirement. Within five months, however, he filed for reinstatement. On August 6, it was announced that Favre was traded to the New York Jets for a conditional draft pick in 2009.\nThe Packers began their 2008 season with their 2005 first-round draft pick, quarterback Aaron Rodgers, under center, as the first QB other than Favre to start for the Packers in 16 years. Rodgers played well in his first year, throwing for over 4,000 yards and 28 touchdowns. However, injuries plagued the Packers' defense, as they lost 7 close games by 4 points or fewer, finishing with a 6\u201310 record. 8 assistant coaches were dismissed, including Bob Sanders, the team's defensive coordinator, who was replaced by Dom Capers.\nIn March 2009, the organization assured fans that Favre's jersey number would be retired, but not during the 2009 season. In April 2009, the Packers selected nose tackle B. J. Raji of Boston College as the team's first pick in the draft. The team then traded three draft picks for another first-round pick, selecting linebacker Clay Matthews III. During the 2009 NFL season, two matchups between the franchise and Favre were highly anticipated after Favre's arrival with division-rival Vikings in August. The first encounter took place in Week 4, a Monday Night Football game that broke TV audience records. This scheduling was made possible when Baseball Commissioner and Packer board of directors member Bud Selig forced baseball's Minnesota Twins to play 2 games within 12 hours. The Vikings won 30\u201323; Favre threw 3 TDs, no interceptions, and had a passer rating of 135. The teams met again in Week 8, Favre leading the Vikings to a second win, 38\u201326, in Green Bay. Rodgers was heavily pressured in both games, being sacked 14 times total, but still played well, throwing five touchdowns. The next week, the Packers were upset by the winless Tampa Bay Buccaneers. Green Bay won 7 of their last 8 games, including their 16th regular-season finale from 17 seasons, and earning an NFC wild-card playoff bid with an 11\u20135 regular-season record. Rodgers became the first quarterback in NFL history to throw for at least 4,000 yards in each of his first two seasons as a starter. Cornerback Charles Woodson won NFL Defensive Player of the Year honors, his 9 interceptions were more than the 8 collected by all Packer opponents. The season ended with an overtime loss in a wild card round shootout at the Arizona Cardinals, 51\u201345. It was the second time McCarthy led the Packers to the postseason. While they were not as successful as their 90s counterparts in the postseason, the 2000s were by no means a dark time for the Packers. The team finished the decade with the 5th highest winning percentage.\nSuper Bowl XLV champions (2010).\nThe team lost Johnny Jolly to a season long suspension after he violated NFL drug policy. Their running corps suffered a blow when RB Ryan Grant sustained a season-ending ankle injury in Week 1. By the end of the season, the team had 16 people on injured reserve, including 7 starters. Key injuries did not stop McCarthy's team from finishing the regular season with a 10\u20136 record. In week 7, the team faced the Minnesota Vikings, then led by former Packers quarterback Brett Favre. Green Bay beat Favre's new team 28\u201324 when Favre's final pass to Randy Moss in the end zone flew incomplete. In week 17, the Packers clinched their playoff berth with a 10\u20133 victory over the Chicago Bears at Lambeau Field, aided in large part by Nick Collins' interception of Jay Cutler's throw that allowed Green Bay to run out the clock.\nThe Packers 10\u20136 record allowed them to clinch the No. 6 seed in the NFC playoffs. They first faced Philadelphia, winning 21\u201316. In the Divisional round, they defeated No. 1 seed Atlanta 48\u201321. They then played the Chicago Bears at Soldier Field in the NFC Championship Game\u2014only the second playoff meeting between the two storied rivals. Packers won 21\u201314 to move on to Super Bowl XLV, having secured a 3\u20130 record in the postseason.\nOn the evening before the Super Bowl, McCarthy had each player fitted for a championship ring. Aware of the motivational tactic, team president Mark Murphy instructed his organization to begin designing the ring. The following day on February 6, 2011, they defeated the AFC champion Pittsburgh Steelers 31\u201325, becoming the first No. 6 seed from the NFC to win a Super Bowl. It was the first time the Packers had won the Lombardi Trophy since 1996. Aaron Rodgers was named Super Bowl MVP.\nDuring Super Bowl XLV, McCarthy's team initially enjoyed a comfortable 21\u20133 lead over the Steelers. Then, Charles Woodson had to leave the game with a broken collarbone and the Steelers' Hines Ward found the endzone to make the score 21\u201310 by halftime. During the third quarter, Pittsburgh scored 7 more points. In the fourth quarter, Green Bay's Clay Matthews tackled Pittsburgh's Rashard Mendenhall, and Desmond Bishop recovered the ball for a key turnover.\nIn 2011, the Packers won their first 13 games, eventually finishing the season 15\u20131, a franchise record for wins in a season and tied for the second-most regular-season wins in NFL history, behind only the 2007 Patriots who went 16\u20130. Aaron Rodgers was named the NFL's MVP, his first such award. McCarthy's offensive strategies aided Rodgers in throwing for 4,643 yards and 45 touchdowns. These strategies propelled the Packers to lead the NFL in scoring that year. Despite receiving homefield advantage, Green Bay lost their first postseason game to eventual Super Bowl XLVI champion New York Giants, 37\u201320.\nFinishing the 2012 season with an 11\u20135 record and their second straight division title, the Packers beat the Minnesota Vikings in the NFC wild-card round 24\u201310, but lost in the playoffs to the eventual NFC Champion San Francisco 49ers by 45\u201331. The Packers offense finished the season fifth in points. Rodgers passed for 4,295 yards. The Packers topped the first-ever AP Pro32 rankings, a new pro football version of the AP Top 25 college football and basketball polls.\nIn 2013, the Packers started 5\u20132, leading up to a Week 9 match up against the Bears. It was in that game that the Packers lost Rodgers to a broken collarbone; Rodgers missed the next six games, during which the club would go 2\u20133\u20131 under three different quarterbacks. Despite having a 7\u20137\u20131 record, the Packers were still in a position to win the NFC North division, if they were able to win their final game. With Rodgers returning, the Packers managed to beat the Bears in a Week 9 rematch, 33\u201328. Finishing at 8\u20137\u20131, the Packers won their division and were awarded a home playoff game. It was the fifth consecutive time that McCarthy led his team to a playoff appearance. However, the Packers would lose to the 49ers 20\u201323 in the playoffs.\nThe Packers recorded their 700th victory, against the Bears, in Week 4 of 2014. The team went undefeated at home for the first time since the 2011 season; they led the league in scoring, with 486 points. 2014 marked the first time since 2009 that the team had a 4,000-yard passer, two 1,000-yard receivers, and a 1,000-yard rusher. McCarthy led an offense that finished sixth in the league in total offense. After winning against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in Week 16, McCarthy (99 wins) passed Hall of Famer Vince Lombardi (98) on the all-time wins list for the Packers. Overall, the team went 12\u20134, clinching a fourth consecutive NFC North division title, making the playoffs for the sixth straight season, tying a franchise record. The Packers beat the Cowboys in the divisional round, advancing to the NFC Championship to face the Seattle Seahawks. After leading throughout most of regulation, the Packers lost 28\u201322 in an overtime rally by Seattle. Rodgers was named the league's Most Valuable Player for the second time.\nDuring Week 2 of the 2015 preseason against the Pittsburgh Steelers, wide receiver Jordy Nelson caught an eight-yard pass from Aaron Rodgers but fell to the turf, Nelson had torn his ACL. He would remain inactive for the rest of 2015. Even without Nelson, the Packers managed to get off to a 6\u20130 start, but then lost four of their next five games, falling to 7\u20134. On December 3, against the Detroit Lions, the Packers quickly fell to a 20\u20130 deficit going into halftime. Green Bay started to make a comeback in the second half thanks to a touchdown by Davante Adams and a 27-yard touchdown run by Rodgers to narrow the game to 23\u201321. The Packers then got the ball back with 23 seconds left. While attempting a \"lateral\" play, Rodgers was sacked with no time remaining but then a flag was thrown for a facemask penalty on Detroit. The Packers now had one more un-timed play, which Rodgers threw a 61-yard Hail Mary touchdown to tight end Richard Rodgers. It was the longest Hail Mary touchdown pass thrown in NFL history.\nUp until week 14, McCarthy delegated playcalling duties to associate head coach Tom Clements. However, the team's struggling offense made McCarthy decide to take back play-calling duties. During that first game that McCarthy resumed play calling, the Packers ran the ball for 230 yards in 44 carries. Green Bay then finished the season 10\u20136 and 2nd in the NFC North behind the Minnesota Vikings. The Packers beat the Washington Redskins in the NFC wild-card game to advance to the divisional round with the Arizona Cardinals. A similar play to tie the game against the Cardinals happened between Aaron Rodgers and Jeff Janis. Janis caught a 41-yard touchdown which sent the game into overtime. However, the Packers fell to Arizona 26\u201320, ending their season.\nAfter a 4\u20136 start to the 2017 season, the Packers went on a six-game winning streak to finish the regular season with a 10\u20136 record. The team clinched the NFC North for the fifth time in six years. They routed the New York Giants, 38\u201313, in the wild-card round of the playoffs and upset the top-seeded Dallas Cowboys, 34\u201331, in the divisional round, but their season ended when they were beaten by the Atlanta Falcons in the NFC Championship Game, 44\u201321.\nThe Packers began the 2017 regular season with a 4\u20132 record. On October 15, during a week 6 game, Rodgers was driven to the ground by Minnesota Vikings linebacker Anthony Barr. Rodgers suffered a broken collarbone, and the Packers placed him on injured reserve, with the stipulation that he could return, especially if the injury healed quickly and the Packers were still in playoff contention. Rodgers did return for a week 15 game against the Carolina Panthers on December 17, but the Packers were eliminated from the playoff hunt after a 31\u201324 loss. The team placed Rodgers back on injured reserve, which prompted several teams to complain the Packers had violated rules about reactivating injured players. During Rodgers' absence, backup quarterback Brett Hundley stepped into the starting role for the first time in his professional career, but struggled to replicate Rodgers' success, despite a Pro Bowl-caliber season by receiver Davante Adams. In a 23\u20130 loss to the Baltimore Ravens in week 11, the Packers suffered their first shutout at Lambeau Field in 11 years. The Packers finished the season at 7\u20139, missing the playoffs for the first time since 2008. Off the field, the Packers organization opened the Titletown District adjacent to Lambeau Field. This shopping, entertainment, and restaurant district includes a public plaza, park, and commercial businesses.\nIn 2018, the Packers again failed to qualify for the playoffs, finishing third in the NFC North with a record of 6\u20139\u20131. Following a Week 13 loss to the Cardinals, McCarthy was released as head coach, replaced by Offensive Coordinator Joe Philbin on an interim basis. McCarthy left having tallied a 125\u201377\u20132 (.618) regular season record, as well as a postseason record of 10\u20138 (.556). His total record with the Packers was 135\u201385\u20132. McCarthy had brought the team to nine playoff berths and a Super Bowl win. Following the season, Matt LaFleur, the Offensive Coordinator of the Tennessee Titans the prior season, was hired as the Packers' new coach.\nMatt LaFleur years (since 2019).\nUnder first-year head coach Matt LaFleur, Aaron Rodgers and the Packers opened the season by defeating the Chicago Bears in the season's opening game, the first time since 2003 that the league-wide kickoff game did not feature the defending Super Bowl champions, with the Packers and Bears being selected for their historic rivalry in the NFL's 100th season. The Packers returned to the playoffs for the first time since 2016, finishing with a record of 13\u20133 and securing a first-round bye as the NFC's second seed. They defeated the Seattle Seahawks 28\u201323 in the NFC Divisional round to advance to the NFC Championship game, where they were defeated 37\u201320 by the San Francisco 49ers.\nIn 2020, the Green Bay Packers won the NFC North Division for the second consecutive year. They also earned a first-round bye, with the top seed in the NFC. They defeated the Los Angeles Rams 32\u201318 in the Divisional Round, but fell to the underdog Tampa Bay Buccaneers in the NFC championship- their fourth straight loss in the game in five appearances under Rodgers. Rodgers won his third MVP award during the season.\nThe next year, they clinched the top seed in the NFC again, with a 13\u20134 record, before losing 13\u201310 to the 49ers in the Divisional round. The special teams unit was consistently the worst in the NFL during the season, though their defense was noted as an improvement from previous seasons. The special teams was especially costly in the postseason game as a field goal attempt and punt were both blocked, the latter of which the 49ers returned for a touchdown. The defense did not allow any touchdowns in that game, as the only other points the 49ers scored were off two field goals. Matt LaFleur became the first coach to have three straight 13-win seasons, however, none of them ended with a trip to the Super Bowl. For his performance in the season, Aaron Rodgers won his fourth MVP award- the second most for any quarterback, only behind Peyton Manning who has five.\nIn the 2022 season, the Green Bay Packers struggled and were eliminated from advancing to the NFL's wild-card playoffs when they lost their last regular-season game 20\u201316 to the Detroit Lions. This was the first time the team missed the playoffs during Matt LaFleur's coaching stint. The team finished with an 8\u20139 record.\nThe 2023 season was the first without longtime quarterback Aaron Rodgers, who was traded to the New York Jets during the offseason. Jordan Love, who was drafted to the Green Bay Packers in 2020, took over as starting quarterback. The team finished with an 9\u20138 record which secured 2nd place in the NFC North division, and the 7th seed in the NFC. The Packers defeated the 2nd seed Dallas Cowboys 48\u201332 in their Wild-Card matchup, becoming the first 7th seed team to win a playoff game. The Packers would go on to lose to the 1st seed San Francisco 49ers 24\u201321 in the Divisional round. Following the loss, the team announced that defensive coordinator Joe Barry would not return next season.\nIn 2024 the Packers finished the season with a record of 11\u20136. This was thanks in part due to some new additions to the team, including running back Josh Jacobs and safety Xavier McKinney, who were both named to the Pro Bowl that year. New backup quarterback Malik Willis, who was acquired in a trade with the Tennessee Titans during the preseason, filled in and won multiple games for an injured Jordan Love. Some other additions to the team came in the coaching department, including new defensive coordinator Jeff Hafley, and former New York Jets head coach Robert Saleh, who joined the team as an offensive assistant shortly after being fired by the Jets following a 2\u20133 start. Despite their record however, the Packers only managed to finish in 3rd place in the NFC North. Both the Detroit Lions and the Minnesota Vikings finished above them at 1st and 2nd with records of 15\u20132 and 14\u20133 respectively. Their record was still good enough to earn the 7th seed in the NFC for the second year in a row. In their Wild-Card matchup, the Packers were defeated by the 2nd seeded Philadelphia Eagles with a final score of 22\u201310.\nCommunity ownership.\nThe Packers are the only community-owned franchise in North America's four traditional major leagues. Rather than being the property of an individual, partnership, or corporate entity, they are held by stockholders, more than 537,000 in total as of 2022. No one is allowed to hold more than 200,000 shares. It is this broad-based community support and non-profit structure which has kept the team in Green Bay for nearly a century even though it is the smallest market in North American professional sports.\nThe city of Green Bay had a population of only 107,395 as of the 2020 census, and 600,000 in its television market, significantly less than the average NFL figures. The team, however, has long had an extended fan base throughout Wisconsin and parts of the Midwest, thanks in part to playing one pre-season and three regular-season home games each year in Milwaukee through 1995. It was only when baseball-only Miller Park preempted football there that the Packers' home slate became played entirely in Green Bay.\nAs of 2021, there have been six stock sales to fund Packer operations over the team's history, beginning with $5,000 being raised through 1,000 shares offered at $5 apiece in 1923. The latest was in November 2021, where they sold almost 200,000 shares.\nThe original \"Articles of Incorporation for the Green Bay Football Corporation\", enacted in 1923, specified that should the franchise be sold, any post-expenses money would have gone to the Sullivan-Wallen Post of the American Legion to build \"a proper soldier's memorial\". This stipulation was included to ensure there could never be any financial inducement for shareholders to move the club from Green Bay. At the November 1997 annual meeting, shareholders voted to change the beneficiary from the Sullivan-Wallen Post to the Green Bay Packers Foundation, which makes donations to many charities and institutions throughout Wisconsin.\nEven though it is referred to as \"common stock\" in corporate offering documents, a share of Packers stock does not share the same rights traditionally associated with common or preferred stock. It does not include an equity interest, does not pay dividends, cannot be traded, has no securities-law protection, and brings no season ticket purchase privileges. All shareholders receive are voting rights, an invitation to the corporation's annual meeting, and an opportunity to buy exclusive shareholder-only merchandise. Shares of stock cannot be resold, except back to the team for a fraction of the original price. While new shares can be given as gifts, transfers are technically allowed only between immediate family members once ownership has been established.\nGreen Bay is the only team with this form of ownership structure in the NFL, which does not comply with current league rules stipulating a maximum of 32 owners per team, with one holding a minimum 30% stake. The Packers' corporation was grandfathered when the NFL's current ownership policy was established in the 1980s. As a publicly held nonprofit, the Packers are also the only American major-league sports franchise to release its financial balance sheet every year.\nBoard of directors.\nGreen Bay Packers, Inc., is governed by a seven-member executive committee elected from a 45-member board of directors. It consists of a president, vice president, treasurer, secretary, and three members-at-large; only the president is compensated. Responsibilities include directing corporate management, approving major capital expenditures, establishing broad policy, and monitoring management performance.\nThe team's elected president normally represents the Packers in NFL owner's meetings. During his time as coach, Vince Lombardi generally represented the team at league meetings in his role as general manager, except at owners-only meetings, where president Dominic Olejniczak appeared.\nGreen Bay Packers Foundation.\nThe team created the Green Bay Packers Foundation in December 1986. It assists in a wide variety of activities and programs benefiting education, civic affairs, health services, human services and youth-related programs.\nAt the team's 1997 annual stockholders meeting the foundation was designated in place of a Sullivan-Wallen Post soldiers memorial as the recipient of any residual assets upon the team's sale or dissolution.\nFan base.\nThe Packers have an exceptionally loyal fan base. Regardless of team performance, every game played in Green Bay\u2014preseason, regular season, and playoffs\u2014has been sold out since 1960. Despite the Packers having by far the smallest local TV market, the team consistently ranks as one of the most popular in the NFL. They also have one of the longest season ticket waiting lists in professional sports: 140,000 names long, more than there are seats at Lambeau Field. The average wait is said to be over 30 years, but with only 90 or so tickets turned over annually it would be 955 years before the newest name on the list got theirs. As a result, season tickets are willed to next of kin, and newborns are placed optimistically on the waiting list.\nPackers fans are often referred to as cheeseheads, a nickname for Wisconsin residents reflecting the state's bountiful cheese production first leveled as an insult at a 1987 game between the Chicago White Sox and Milwaukee Brewers. Instead, it came to be a statewide source of pride, and particularly since 1994 has been embraced by Packers fans. Bright orange triangular cheesehead hats are a fixture wherever the team plays.\nDuring training camp in the summer months, held outside the Don Hutson Center, young Packers fans can bring their bikes and have their favorite players ride them from the locker room to practice at Ray Nitschke Field. This old tradition began around the time of Lambeau Field's construction in 1957. Gary Knafelc, a Packers end at the time, said, \"I think it was just that kids wanted us to ride their bikes. I can remember kids saying, 'Hey, ride my bike.'\"\nThe team holds an annual scrimmage called Family Night, typically an intra-squad affair, at Lambeau Field. During 2004 and 2005 sellout crowds of over 60,000 fans showed up, with an all-time mark of 62,492 set in 2005 when the Buffalo Bills appeared.\nIn August 2008, ESPN.com ranked Packers fans as second-best in the NFL. The team initially finished tied with the Pittsburgh Steelers (who finished ahead of the Packers) as having the best fans, but the tie was broken by ESPN's own John Clayton, a Pittsburgh native.\nBranding.\nNickname.\nNeeding to outfit his new squad, team founder Curly Lambeau solicited funds from his employer, the Indian Packing Company. He was given $500 for uniforms and equipment in return for the team being named for its sponsor. An early newspaper article referred to the fledglings as \"the Indians\", but by the time they played their first game \"Packers\" had taken hold.\nIndian Packing was purchased in 1920 by the Acme Packing Company. Acme continued to support the team, which played its first NFL season with \"ACME PACKERS\" emblazoned on its jerseys.\nTeam colors.\nLambeau, a Notre Dame alumnus, borrowed its Irish's navy blue and gold team colors, much as George Halas borrowed his Illinois alma mater's for the Chicago Bears. As a result, the early Packers were often referred to as the \"Bays\" or the \"Blues\" (and even occasionally as \"the Big Bay Blues\").\nBy 1950, Green Bay replaced navy blue with kelly green but kept what was by then a lighter shade of athletic gold. Navy blue was kept as a secondary color, seen primarily on sideline capes, but was quietly dropped on all official materials shortly after that. In 1958, this kelly green was replaced by a darker hunter green; it and athletic gold have served as the team colors since. The team's current uniform combination of forest green or white jerseys and metallic gold pants was adopted soon after Vince Lombardi arrived in 1959. However, to celebrate the NFL's 75th anniversary in 1994, the Packers joined in a league-wide donning of \"throwback\" jerseys, back to navy blue and gold. The team would go throwback again for two Thanksgiving Day games against the Detroit Lions, in blue and gold 1930s-era uniforms in 2001, and 1960s green and gold (only slightly different from the current ones) in 2003.\nLogo.\nIn 1951, the team finally stopped wearing leather helmets, adopting the metallic gold plastic headgear it has used ever since. The oval \"G\" logo was added in 1961 when Lombardi asked Packers equipment manager Gerald \"Dad\" Braisher to design a logo. Braisher tasked his assistant, St. Norbert College art student John Gordon. Satisfied with a football-shaped letter \"G\", the pair presented it to Lombardi, who then approved the addition. Tiki Barber falsely reported it to stand for \"greatness\" without a reliable source to back up his claims. Other reputable media outlets then published similar stories using Barber's false claim as a source. The Packers' Assistant Director of PR and Corporate Communications had the following to say: \"There's nothing in our history that suggests there's any truth to this. The Packers Hall of Fame archivist said the same thing.\" The team used several different logos before 1961, but the \"G\" is the only logo that has ever appeared on the helmet. The Packers hold the trademark on the \"G\" logo, and have granted limited permission to other organizations to utilize a similar logo, such as the University of Georgia and Grambling State University, in addition to the city of Green Bay itself as part of its civic logo. Adopted in 1964, the Georgia \"G\", though different in design and color, was similar to the Packers' \"G\". Then-Georgia head coach Vince Dooley thought it best to clear the use of Georgia's new emblem with the Packers.\nUniform variation.\nWhile several NFL teams choose to wear white jerseys at home early in the season due to white's ability to reflect the late summer sun rays, the Packers have done so only twice, during the opening two games of the 1989 season. In 2016, the Packers debuted their Color Rush uniform, wearing white pants and socks with a white uniform. This set has been worn five times, four of them at home and two against the Chicago Bears. In 2024, the all-white Color Rush uniform would be paired with a new alternate white helmet, which is essentially the primary helmet minus the gold elements. Although alternate gold jerseys with green numbers are sold on a retail basis, the team currently has no plans to introduce such a jersey to be used in actual games.\nDuring the 2010 season, the Packers paid tribute to their historical roots with a throwback jersey modeled after that worn by the club in 1929, during its first championship season. The jersey was navy blue with a gold circle and navy numbers, again making the Packers \"the Blues\". These were then changed in 2015 to the navy blue throwback worn from 1937 to 1949, featuring gold shoulders and numbers. In 2021, the Packers changed their throwback thirds to an all-green design, resembling the uniforms worn from 1950 to 1953. Originally, the Packers wore brown helmets with the throwbacks, but in 2013, they started wearing their gold helmets without any decals due to the then-implementation of the NFL's one-shell rule; this rule has been abolished in 2022. As a result, they changed their throwbacks in both 2015 and 2021 to properly recreate those original uniforms, which had gold helmets with them. In 2025, the Packers unveiled a 1923 throwback navy blue uniform with dark gold numbers, tan pants and navy socks, featuring a special alternate helmet that was meticulously hand-painted to simulate the leather helmets of the era. The helmets would be equipped with navy blue facemasks.\nThe Packers' uniform manufacturer is Berlin-based Ripon Athletic, who has manufactured the team's uniforms since the 1960s. Upon the NFL's switch of uniform suppliers in 2012 to Nike from Reebok, the Packers refused any changes to their uniform in any way outside of the required supplier's logo and new league uniform logos, declining all of Nike's \"Elite 51\" enhancements, including retaining the traditional striped collar of the jersey rather than Nike's new collar design. However, in 2025, the Packers' new 1923 throwback uniform became the first to adopt Nike's \"Vapor FUSE\" template.\nRivalries.\nDivisional.\nChicago Bears.\nThe Packers and Chicago Bears have been rivals since their team's inception in 1920, becoming one of the oldest and most storied rivalries in the league's history. The Packers currently lead the series 107\u201395\u20136, and the teams have met twice in the postseason. The Bears won the 1941 meeting, 33\u201314, and eventually defeated the New York Giants in the 1941 NFL Championship Game, and the Packers won the 2011 meeting, 21\u201314, en route to a Super Bowl XLV win over the Pittsburgh Steelers. The teams' first meeting was a victory for the Bears (known as the Staleys at the time) in 1921 in a shutout, 20\u20130. The Packers claimed their first win over the Bears in 1925, 14\u201310. The 1924 matchup (which ended in a 3\u20130 win for Chicago) was notable for featuring the first-ever ejection of players in a game in NFL history, as Frank Hanny of the Bears and Walter Voss of the Packers were ejected for punching each other. The rivalry also featured one of the last successful fair catch kicks in 1968, when Bears kicker Mac Percival kicked the game-winning field goal. As of the 2024 season, the Packers lead the all-time series 108\u201396\u20136.\nMinnesota Vikings.\nThe rivalry between the Packers and Minnesota Vikings began in 1961, similar to their other divisional rivalries. It is also considered to be one of the most intense rivalries in the NFL, due to the intensity of most of the matchups over the years, As is the case with many of their respective state's college teams sharing a rivalry; (Minnesota and Wisconsin) have a rivalry in multiple sports, seen between the Big Ten rivals, the University of Wisconsin and University of Minnesota. Events such as Randy Moss mooning the Green Bay crowd in the first playoff game between these two teams (won by the Vikings), and former Packer great Brett Favre's move to the Vikings have created more resentment between these teams. The Packers lead the all-time series 66\u201360\u20133, despite the two teams splitting their two playoff contests.\nDetroit Lions.\nThe Packers' rivalry with the Detroit Lions has been another one of the oldest regular matchups in the NFL. They first met in 1930 when the Lions were known as the Portsmouth Spartans and based in Portsmouth, Ohio. The team eventually moved to Detroit for the 1934 season. The Lions and Packers have been division rivals since 1933 and have always met at least twice a season since 1932, without any canceled games between both rivals. The Packers lead the series 106\u201378\u20137 as of the end of the 2024 season, the first time in NFL history that a team has recorded 100 wins over an opponent.\nConference.\nDallas Cowboys.\nThe rivalry between the Packers and Dallas Cowboys has resulted in several notable games in league history, including the \"Ice Bowl\" and other games impacting the playoff race. The rivalry heated up during the 2010s, with several of their games impacting the NFC playoff race during that decade. During the Brett Favre era in Green Bay, the Cowboys dominated the rivalry, going 9\u20132 (including 9\u20130 in Dallas) against the Packers when Favre was the quarterback. However, in the Aaron Rodgers era from 2008 to 2022, the Packers have dominated the rivalry, as Rodgers had an 8\u20132 record against the Cowboys with Green Bay, including a perfect 3\u20130 record in Dallas. The Packers lead the all-time series 22\u201317. The Packers lead 5\u20134 in the playoffs, with the last playoff match taking place in January 2024 at AT&amp;T Stadium in the Wild Card round with a 48\u201332 Packers win.\nSan Francisco 49ers.\nThe rivalry between the Packers and the San Francisco 49ers ignited during the 1990s, with the two teams facing each other in four consecutive playoff games. The Packers won four of five playoff games against the 49ers with Brett Favre as its quarterback, with four of those games pitting Favre against the 49ers' Hall of Fame quarterback Steve Young. Since 2012, the 49ers have defeated the Aaron Rodgers-led Packers four times in the playoffs.\nThe Packers currently lead the series 39\u201334\u20131, but the 49ers have won the last four postseason meetings to take a 6\u20134 lead.\nSeattle Seahawks.\nFollowing Seattle's relocation to the NFC in 2002, the Packers have faced the Seattle Seahawks multiple times in the playoffs, developing an intense rivalry as well. Some notable moments include the clubs' first playoff meeting in 2003 in which Seahawks quarterback Matt Hasselbeck threw a game-losing pick-six in overtime after guaranteeing a game-winning drive, the Fail Mary, and Russell Wilson overcoming four interceptions and a 16\u20130 Packers lead to lead Seattle to a 28\u201322 overtime win to advance to Super Bowl XLIX. As of the 2023 season, the Packers lead the all-time series 16\u20139.\nNew York Giants.\nThe series between the Packers and New York Giants has been one of the oldest regular matchups in the league as the two teams first met in 1928. The two teams have played since 1970 in the National Football Conference, and they play each other in the regular season either every three years or depending on its NFC division placement, and in the postseason, The Packers lead the all-time series 34\u201328\u20132 and postseason series 5\u20133.\nTampa Bay Buccaneers.\nThe Tampa Bay Buccaneers and Packers were division rivals from 1977 to 2002 when both were in the NFC Central division. The teams have played several notable games, including a Snow Bowl game in 1985, a and the . As of the 2024 season, the Packers lead the series 34\u201324\u20131.\nStadium history.\nAfter their early seasons at Bellevue Park and Hagemeister Park, the Packers played home games in City Stadium from 1925 to 1956. The team won its first six NFL championships there.\nBy the 1950s, the wooden 25,000-seat arena was considered outmoded. The NFL threatened to move the franchise to Milwaukee full-time unless it got a better stadium. The city responded by building a new 32,150 seat City Stadium for the team, the first built exclusively for an NFL team, which opened in time for the 1957 season. It was renamed Lambeau Field in 1965 to honor Curly Lambeau, who had died earlier in the year.\nExpanded seven times before the end of the 1990s, Lambeau Field capacity reached 60,890. In 2003, it was extensively renovated to expand seating, modernize stadium facilities, and add an atrium area. Even with a current seating capacity of 72,928, ticket demand far outpaces supply, as all Packers games have been sold out since 1960. About 86,000 names are on the waiting list for season tickets.\nThe Packers played part of their home slate in Milwaukee starting in 1933, including two to three home games each year in Milwaukee's County Stadium from 1953 to 1994. Indeed, County Stadium had been built partly to entice the Packers to move to Milwaukee full-time. The Packers worked to capture their growing fan base in Milwaukee and the larger crowds. By the 1960s, the threat of an American Football League franchise in Milwaukee prompted the Packers to stay, including scheduling a game in 1967.\nCounty Stadium was built primarily as a baseball stadium and made only the bare minimum adjustments to accommodate football. At its height, it only seated 56,000 people, just barely above the NFL minimum; many of those seats were badly obstructed. The field was just barely large enough to fit a football field. Both teams shared the same sideline (separated by a piece of tape) and the end zones extended onto the warning track. By 1994, improvements and seating expansions at Lambeau, along with the Brewers preparing to campaign for their new stadium prompted the Packers to play their full slate in Green Bay for the first time in 62 years. Former season ticketholders for the Milwaukee package continue to receive preference for one pre-season and the second and fifth regular-season games at Lambeau Field each season, along with playoff games through a lottery under the \"Gold Package\" plan.\nThe Packers have three practice facilities across the street from Lambeau Field in Ashwaubenon, Wisconsin: the Don Hutson Center, an indoor facility; Ray Nitschke Field, an outdoor field with artificial FieldTurf; and Clarke Hinkle Field, an outdoor field with natural grass.\nThe Packers Pro Shop has been the official retail store of the Packers since 1989. The primary retail store is located at Lambeau Field, having been expanded numerous times since it opened. The Pro Shop reported sales of over $7 million in 2015.\nStatistics and records.\nSeason-by-season results.\nThis is a partial list of the Packers' last five completed seasons. For the full season-by-season franchise results, see List of Green Bay Packers seasons.\n\"Note: The finish, wins, losses, and ties columns list regular season results and exclude any postseason play.\"\nChampionships.\nThe Packers have been league champions a record 13 times, topping their nearest rival, the Chicago Bears, by four. The first three were decided by league standing, the next six by the NFL Title Game, and the last four by Super Bowl victories. The Packers are also the only team to win three consecutive NFL titles, having accomplished this twice\u2014from 1929 to 1931 under Lambeau, and from 1965 to 1967 under Lombardi.\nSuper Bowl championships.\nStarting in 1966, the NFL began holding the Super Bowl. The Packers have won four Super Bowls.\nNFL championships (pre Super Bowl era).\nFrom 1933 to 1969, the NFL held a championship game to decide their champion. The Packers won 8 NFL Championship Games. From 1966 to 1969, the NFL Championship Game was followed by the Super Bowl.\nNFC championships.\nThe Packers have won three NFC Championship Games, with twice as many losses. NFC Championships did not exist before the AFL\u2013NFL merger in 1970.\nNFL championship by standings.\nFrom 1920 to 1932, the NFL championship was awarded based on standings, with no championship game taking place. The Packers won three such championships.\nDivision Championships.\nThe Packers have won 21 divisional championships.\nNotable players.\nPro Football Hall of Fame members.\nThe Packers have the second most members in the Pro Football Hall of Fame with 30, 25 of which were inducted as Packers. They trail only the Chicago Bears with 37 Hall of Famers, 30 of which were inducted as Bears.\nWisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame.\nMany Packers players and coaches are also enshrined in the Wisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame. In 2018 Ron Wolf, the most recent Packers contributor to be honored, was inducted.\nRetired numbers.\nIn nearly nine decades of Packers football, the Packers have formally retired six numbers. All six Packers are members of the Pro Football Hall of Fame and their numbers and names are displayed on the green facade of Lambeau Field's north endzone as well as in the Lambeau Field Atrium.\nGreen Bay Packers Hall of Fame.\nThe Green Bay Packers Hall of Fame was the first hall of fame built to honor a single professional American football team. John P. Holloway, a Brown County administrator and arena director, and William L. Brault, a Green Bay restaurateur and Packers fan, co-founded the Packer Hall of Fame museum in 1966.\nAs of 2019, the Packers Hall of Fame has inducted 162 people, 24 of whom have been inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nMedia.\nThe Packers are unique in having their market area cover two media markets, both Green Bay and Milwaukee. NFL blackout restrictions for the team apply within both areas. However, Packers games have not been blacked out locally since 1972 (the last year home game local telecasts were prohibited regardless of sellout status) due to strong home attendance and popularity. As mentioned above, every Packers home game\u2014preseason, regular season and playoffs\u2014has been sold out since 1960.\nRadio.\nThe flagship station of the Packers Radio Network is iHeartMedia's WRIT-FM (95.7) in Milwaukee. Formerly, Good Karma Brands's WTMJ in Milwaukee, served as the flagship station, and had broadcast the team's games since 1929, producing the games until the end of the 2018 season, when the team brought their broadcast operations in-house, thus the personnel is directly employed by the team. WTMJ's relationship with the team was the longest-lived between a radio station and an NFL team, and the only rights deal in American professional sports where a station outside of the team's main metro area is the radio flagship, as WTMJ's signal is city-grade across eastern Wisconsin. Games air in Green Bay on WTAQ (1360/97.5) and WIXX-FM (101.1), and WYDR (94.3) in Appleton and the Fox Cities.\nWayne Larrivee is the play-by-play announcer and Larry McCarren is the color analyst. Larrivee joined the team after many years as the Chicago Bears' announcer. Jim Irwin and Max McGee were the longtime radio announcers before Larrivee and McCarren. When victory is assured for the Packers, either a game-winning touchdown, interception or a crucial 4th down defensive stop, Larrivee's trademark declaration of \"And there is your dagger!\" signifies the event.\nOn October 27, 2021, the Packers announced that it would end its longtime association with WTMJ at the end of the season, with WRNW becoming the team's Milwaukee radio affiliate in 2022. WRIT-FM became the team's Milwaukee affiliate starting with the team's away game with Arizona on October 19, 2025, after WRNW switched to an adult contemporary format after layoffs which affected most of the sports talk station's hosts and personnel.\nTelevision.\nThe TV rights for pre-season games not nationally broadcast are held by E. W. Scripps Company-owned television stations WGBA-TV (channel 26) in Green Bay and WTMJ-TV (channel 4) in Milwaukee; the game broadcasts are distributed to 19 further TV stations in Wisconsin, Michigan, North Dakota, South Dakota, Iowa, Nebraska, Illinois, Missouri, and Alaska, as well as Spanish-language WYTU-LD \"Telemundo Wisconsin\" in Milwaukee (also broadcast on its sister station WMEI in Green Bay, usually an English-language MeTV station). The deal marked a change in affiliate in Green Bay from WFRV-TV; in the wake of the 2012 deal, McCarren resigned his duties as sports director of WFRV to move to WTMJ/WGBA as a Packers analyst, becoming WGBA's official sports director on April 1, 2013. McCarren left WGBA in 2015 and became a team employee. Spectrum News 1 also rebroadcasts team programming, including the team's two programs aired across the preseason network on weeknights before prime time; \"Packers Live\" and \"The Matt LeFleur Show\", respectively.\nThe team's intra-squad Lambeau scrimmage at the beginning of the season, marketed as \"Packers Family Night\", was produced for over a decade by WLUK-TV in Green Bay and broadcast by the state's Fox affiliates through the 2016 season. In 2017, Scripps and the Packers Television Network began to originate the Packers Family Night broadcast.\nPreseason television games are announced by Kevin Harlan, son of former Packers president Bob Harlan, and color commentator Rich Gannon. Regular-season and postseason games not aired on a broadcast network are simulcast on broadcast stations in the Green Bay and Milwaukee markets.\nIn popular culture.\nOn the television sitcom \"That '70s Show\", in season 7 episode 14, Donna Pinciotti gives the gang and Red Forman, a long-time Packers fan, six free tickets to Lambeau Field for a Bears\u2013Packers game. Eric (who has no interest in football himself, including not knowing Packers lore) wears a Walter Payton jersey to the game, with Packers fans teasing and booing him for doing so. In the season 8 finale, Red declines to move to Florida after Steven Hyde acquires a season ticket package for him.\nIn 2015, five members of the Packers (David Bakhtiari, Don Barclay, T. J. Lang, Clay Matthews, and Josh Sitton) made an appearance as an \"a cappella\" group in the musical comedy \"Pitch Perfect 2\". Aaron Rodgers' brother Jordan also appeared. That same year, Rodgers himself appeared in an episode of the sketch comedy television series \"Key &amp; Peele\", along with Ha Ha Clinton-Dix.\nIn the television series \"Danny Phantom\", the main antagonist, Vlad Masters/Vlad Plasmius, is a Packers \"Fanatic\". His prized possession is a football autographed by Ray Nitschke, and his dream is to own the team.\nIn the 1998 film \"There's Something about Mary\", Mary, played by actress Cameron Diaz, consistently talks about her boyfriend \"Brett\". It is revealed towards the end of the film that \"Brett\" is then-Packers' quarterback Brett Favre.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "12664", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12664", "title": "General-purpose machine gun", "text": "Machine gun adaptable for several light and medium roles\nA general-purpose machine gun (GPMG) is an air-cooled, usually belt-fed machine gun that can be adapted flexibly to various tactical roles for light and medium machine guns. A GPMG typically features a quick-change barrel design calibered for various fully powered cartridges such as the 7.62\u00d751mm NATO, 7.62\u00d754mmR, 7.5\u00d754mm French, 7.5\u00d755mm Swiss and 7.92\u00d757mm Mauser, and be configured for mounting to different stabilizing platforms from bipods and tripods to vehicles, aircraft, boats and fortifications, usually as an infantry support weapon or squad automatic weapon.\nHistory.\nThe general-purpose machine gun (GPMG) originated with the MG 34, designed in 1934 by Heinrich Vollmer of Mauser on the commission of Nazi Germany to circumvent the restrictions on machine guns imposed by the Treaty of Versailles. It was introduced into the Wehrmacht as an entirely new concept in automatic firepower, dubbed the \"Einheitsmaschinengewehr\", meaning \"universal machine gun\" in German. In itself the MG 34 was an excellent weapon for its time: an air-cooled, recoil-operated machine gun that could run through belts of 7.92\u00d757mm Mauser ammunition at a rate of 850 rounds per minute, with lethality at ranges of more than 1,000 meters. The main feature of the MG 34 is that simply by changing its mount, sights and feed mechanism, the operator could radically transform its function: on its standard bipod it was a light machine gun ideal for infantry assaults; on a tripod it could serve as a sustained-fire medium machine gun; mounting on aircraft or vehicles turned it into an air defence weapon, and it also served as the coaxial machine gun on numerous German tanks.\nDuring World War II, the MG 34 was supplemented by a new GPMG, the MG 42, although it remained in combat use. The MG 42 was more efficient and cheaper to manufacture, and more robust, as well as having an extremely high cyclic rate of fire of 1,200 to 1,500 rounds per minute. One of the \"Einheits Maschinengewehr\" GPMG roles was to provide low level anti-aircraft coverage. A high cyclic rate of fire is advantageous for use against targets typically exposed to fire for a limited time span, like aircraft or targets minimizing their exposure by quickly moving from cover to cover. It was nicknamed \"Hitler's buzzsaw\" by Allied troops, and alongside the MG 34 it inflicted heavy casualties on Allied soldiers on all European and North African fronts of World War II. Following the war the victorious Allied nations took an interest in the MG 34 and MG 42, influencing many post-war general-purpose machine guns, many still in use today. They lent design elements to the Belgian FN MAG and the American M60, while spawning the Zastava M53, Swiss M51, and Austrian MG 74. The MG 42's qualities of firepower and usability meant that it became the foundation of an entire series of postwar machine guns, including the MG 1 and MG 3; the latter, as of 2023[ [update]], is still in production.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12665", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12665", "title": "Gdynia", "text": "City in Pomeranian Voivodeship, Poland\nGdynia is a city in northern Poland and a seaport on the Baltic Sea coast. With an estimated population of 257,000, it is the 12th-largest city in Poland and the second-largest in the Pomeranian Voivodeship after Gda\u0144sk. Gdynia is part of a conurbation with the spa town of Sopot, the city of Gda\u0144sk, and suburban communities, which together form a metropolitan area called the Tricity (\"Tr\u00f3jmiasto\") with around one million inhabitants.\nHistorically and culturally part of Kashubia and Eastern Pomerania, Gdynia for centuries remained a small fishing village. By the 20th-century it attracted visitors as a seaside resort town. In 1926, Gdynia was granted city rights after which it enjoyed demographic and urban development, with a modernist cityscape. It became a major seaport city of Poland. In 1970, protests in and around Gdynia contributed to the rise of the Solidarity movement in nearby Gda\u0144sk.\nThe port of Gdynia is a regular stopover on the cruising itinerary of luxury passenger ships and ferries travelling to Scandinavia. Gdynia's downtown, designated a historical monument of Poland in 2015, is an example of building an integrated European community and includes Functionalist architectural forms. It is also a candidate for the UNESCO World Heritage List. Its axis is based around 10 Lutego Street and connects the main train station with the Southern Pier. The city is also known for holding the annual Gdynia Film Festival. In 2013, Gdynia was ranked by readers of \"The News\" as Poland's best city to live in, and topped the national rankings in the category of \"general quality of life\". In 2021, the city entered the UNESCO Creative Cities Network and was named UNESCO City of Film.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe area of the later city of Gdynia shared its history with Pomerelia (Eastern Pomerania). In prehistoric times, it was the center of Oksywie culture; it was later populated by Lechites with minor Baltic Prussian influences. In the late 10th century, the region was united with the emerging state of Poland by its first historic ruler Mieszko I. During the reign of Boles\u0142aw II, the region seceded from Poland and became independent, to be reunited with Poland in 1116/1121 by Boles\u0142aw III. In 1209, the present-day district of Oksywie was first mentioned (\"Oxh\u00f6ft\"). Following the fragmentation of Poland, the region became part of the Duchy of Pomerania (Eastern), which became separate from Poland in 1227, to be reunited in 1282. The first known mention of the name \"Gdynia\", as a Pomeranian (Kashubian) fishing village dates back to 1253. The first church on this part of the Baltic Sea coast was built there. In 1309\u20131310, the Teutonic Order invaded and annexed the region from Poland. In 1380, the owner of the village which became Gdynia, Peter from Rusocin, gave the village to the Cistercian Order. In 1382, Gdynia became property of the Cistercian abbey in Oliwa. In 1454, King Casimir IV Jagiellon signed the act of reincorporation of the region to the Kingdom of Poland, and the Thirteen Years' War, the longest of all Polish-Teutonic wars, started. It ended in 1466, when the Teutonic Knights recognized the region as part of Poland. Administratively, Gdynia was located in the Pomeranian Voivodeship in the province of Royal Prussia in the Greater Poland Province of the Kingdom of Poland and later of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. The present-day neighbourhood of Kolibki was the location of the Kolibki estate, purchased by King John III Sobieski in 1685.\nIn 1772, Gdynia was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia in the First Partition of Poland. Gdynia, under the Germanized name \"Gdingen\", was included within the newly formed province of West Prussia and was expropriated from the Cistercian Order. In 1789, there were only 21 houses in Gdynia. Around that time Gdynia was so small that it was not marked on many maps of the period: it was about halfway from Oksywie and Ma\u0142y Kack, now districts of Gdynia. In 1871, the village became part of the German Empire. In the early 20th century Gdynia was not a poor fishing village as it is sometimes described; it had become a popular tourist spot with several guest houses, restaurants, caf\u00e9s, several brick houses and a small harbour with a pier for small trading ships. The first Kashubian mayor was Jan Radtke. It is estimated that around 1910 the population of Gdynia was 895 people.\nFollowing World War I, in 1918, Poland regained independence, and following the Treaty of Versailles, in 1920, Gdynia was re-integrated with the reborn Polish state. Simultaneously, the nearby city of Gda\u0144sk (\"Danzig\") and surrounding area was declared a free city and put under the League of Nations, though Poland was given economic liberties and requisitioned for matters of foreign representation.\nConstruction of the seaport.\nThe decision to build a major seaport at Gdynia village was made by the Polish government in winter 1920, in the midst of the Polish\u2013Soviet War (1919\u20131921). The authorities and seaport workers of the Free City of Danzig felt Poland's economic rights in the city were being misappropriated to help fight the war. German dockworkers went on strike, refusing to unload shipments of military supplies sent from the West to aid the Polish army, and Poland realized the need for a port city it was in complete control of, economically and politically.\nConstruction of Gdynia seaport started in 1921 but, because of financial difficulties, it was conducted slowly and with interruptions. It was accelerated after the Sejm (Polish parliament) passed the \"Gdynia Seaport Construction Act\" on 23 September 1922. By 1923 a 550-metre pier, of a wooden tide breaker, and a small harbour had been constructed. Ceremonial inauguration of Gdynia as a temporary military port and fishers' shelter took place on 23 April 1923. The first major seagoing ship, the French Line steamer \"Kentucky\", arrived on 13 August 1923 after being diverted because of a strike at Gdansk. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTo speed up the construction works, the Polish government in November 1924 signed a contract with the French-Polish Consortium for Gdynia Seaport Construction. By the end of 1925, they had built a small seven-metre-deep harbour, the south pier, part of the north pier, a railway, and had ordered the trans-shipment equipment. The works were going more slowly than expected, however. They accelerated only after May 1926, because of an increase in Polish exports by sea, economic prosperity, the outbreak of the German\u2013Polish trade war which reverted most Polish international trade to sea routes, and thanks to the personal engagement of Eugeniusz Kwiatkowski, Polish Minister of Industry and Trade (also responsible for the construction of Centralny Okr\u0119g Przemys\u0142owy). By the end of 1930 docks, piers, breakwaters, and many auxiliary and industrial installations were constructed (such as depots, trans-shipment equipment, and a rice processing factory) or started (such as a large cold store).\nTrans-shipments rose from 10,000 tons (1924) to 2,923,000 tons (1929). At this time Gdynia was the only transit and special seaport designed for coal exports.\nIn the years 1931\u20131939 Gdynia harbour was further extended to become a universal seaport. In 1938 Gdynia was the largest and most modern seaport on the Baltic Sea, as well as the tenth biggest in Europe. The trans-shipments rose to 8.7\u00a0million tons, which was 46% of Polish foreign trade. In 1938 the Gdynia shipyard started to build its first full-sea ship, the \"Olza\".\nConstruction of the city.\nThe city was constructed later than the seaport. In 1925 a special committee was inaugurated to build the city; city expansion plans were designed and city rights were granted in 1926, and tax privileges were granted for investors in 1927. The city started to grow significantly after 1928.\nA new railway station and the Post Office were completed. The State railways extended their lines, built bridges and also constructed a group of houses for their employees. Within a few years houses were built along some of road leading northward from the Free City of Danzig to Gdynia and beyond. Public institutions and private employers helped their staff to build houses.\nIn 1933 a plan of development providing for a population of 250,000 was worked out by a special commission appointed by a government committee, in collaboration with the municipal authorities. By 1939 the population had grown to over 120,000.\nGdynia during World War II (1939\u20131945).\nDuring the German invasion of Poland, which started World War II in September 1939, Gdynia was the site of fierce Polish defense. On 13 September 1939, the Germans carried out first arrests of local Poles in the southern part of the city, while the Polish defense was still ongoing in the northern part. On 14 September 1939, the Germans captured the entire city, and then occupied it until 1945. On 15\u201316 September, the Germans carried out further mass arrests of 7,000 Poles, while Polish soldiers still fought in nearby K\u0119pa Oksywska. The German police surrounded the city and carried out mass searches of weapons. Arrested Poles were held and interrogated in churches, cinemas and halls, and then around 3,000 people were released until 18 September. The occupiers established several prisons and camps for Polish people, who were afterwards either deported to concentration camps or executed. Some Poles from Gdynia were executed by the Germans near Starogard Gda\u0144ski in September 1939. In October and November 1939, the Germans carried out public executions of 52 Poles, including activists, bank directors and priests, in various parts of the city. In November 1939, the occupiers also murdered hundreds of Poles from Gdynia during the massacres in Pia\u015bnica committed nearby as part of the \"Intelligenzaktion\". Among the victims were policemen, officials, civil defenders of Gdynia, judges, court employees, the director and employees of the National Bank of Poland, merchants, priests, school principals, teachers, and students of local high schools. On the night of 10\u201311 November, the German security police carried out mass arrests of over 1,500 Poles in the Ob\u0142u\u017ce district, and then murdered 23 young men aged 16\u201320, in retaliation for breaking windows at the headquarters of the German security police. On 11 November, a German gendarme shot and killed two Polish boys who were collecting Polish books from the street, which were thrown out of the windows by new German settlers in the Oksywie district. The Germans renamed the city to \"Gotenhafen\" after the Goths, an ancient Germanic tribe, who had lived in the area. 10 Poles from Gdynia were also murdered by the Russians in the large Katyn massacre in April\u2013May 1940.\nSome 50,000 Polish citizens were expelled to the General Government (German-occupied central Poland) to make space for new German settlers in accordance with the \"Lebensraum\" policy. Local Kashubians who were suspected to support the Polish cause, particularly those with higher education, were also arrested and executed. The German gauleiter Albert Forster considered Kashubians of \"low value\" and did not support any attempts to create a Kashubian nationality. Despite such circumstances, local Poles, including Kashubians, organized Polish resistance groups, Kashubian Griffin (later Pomeranian Griffin), the exiled \"Zwi\u0105zek Pomorski\" in the United Kingdom, and local units of the Home Army, Service for Poland's Victory and Gray Ranks. Activities included distribution of underground Polish press, smuggling data on German persecution of Poles and Jews to Western Europe, sabotage actions, espionage of the local German industry, and facilitating escapes of endangered Polish resistance members and British and French prisoners of war who fled from German POW camps via the city's port to neutral Sweden. The Gestapo cracked down on the Polish resistance several times, with the Poles either killed or deported to the Stutthof and Ravensbr\u00fcck concentration camps. In 1943, local Poles managed to save some kidnapped Polish children from the Zamo\u015b\u0107 region, by buying them from the Germans at the local train station.\nThe harbour was transformed into a German naval base. The shipyard was expanded in 1940 and became a branch of the Kiel shipyard (\"Deutsche Werke Kiel A.G.\"). The city became an important base, due to its being relatively distant from the war theater, and many German large ships\u2014battleships and heavy cruisers\u2014were anchored there. During 1942, Dr Joseph Goebbels authorized relocation of to Gotenhafen Harbour as a stand-in for during filming of the German-produced movie \"Titanic\", directed by Herbert Selpin.\nThe Germans set up an \"Einsatzgruppen\"-operated penal camp in the Grab\u00f3wek district, a transit camp for Allied marine POWs, a forced labour subcamp of the Stalag XX-B POW camp for several hundred Allied POWs at the shipyard, and two subcamps of the Stutthof concentration camp, the first located in the Or\u0142owo district in 1941\u20131942, the second, named \"Gotenhafen\", located at the shipyard in 1944\u20131945.\nThe seaport and the shipyard both witnessed several air raids by the Allies from 1943 onwards, but suffered little damage. Gdynia was used during winter 1944\u201345 to evacuate German troops and refugees trapped by the Red Army. Some of the ships were hit by torpedoes from Soviet submarines in the Baltic Sea on the route west. The ship sank, taking about 9,400 people with her \u2013 the worst loss of life in a single sinking in maritime history. The seaport area was largely destroyed by withdrawing German troops and millions of encircled refugees in 1945 being bombarded by the Soviet military (90% of the buildings and equipment were destroyed) and the harbour entrance was blocked by the German battleship that had been brought to Gotenhafen for major repairs.\nAfter World War II.\nOn 28 March 1945, the city was captured by the Soviets and restored to Poland. The Soviets installed a communist regime, which stayed in power until the Fall of Communism in 1989. The post-war period saw an influx of settlers from Warsaw which was destroyed by Germany, and other parts of the country as well as Poles from the cities of Wilno (now Vilnius) and Lw\u00f3w (now Lviv) from the Soviet-annexed former eastern Poland. Also Greeks, refugees of the Greek Civil War, settled in the city. The port of Gdynia was one of the three Polish ports through which refugees of the Greek Civil War reached Poland.\nOn 17 December 1970, worker demonstrations took place at Gdynia Shipyard. Workers were fired upon by the police. Janek Wi\u015bniewski was one of 40 killed, and was commemorated in a song by Mieczys\u0142aw Cholewa, \"Pie\u015b\u0144 o Janku z Gdyni\". One of Gdynia's important streets is named after Janek Wi\u015bniewski. The event was also portrayed in Andrzej Wajda's movie \"Man of Iron\".\nOn 4 December 1999, a storm destroyed a huge crane in a shipyard. In 2002, the city was awarded the Europe Prize by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe for having made exceptional efforts to spread the ideal of European unity.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Gdynia is an oceanic climate owing to its position of the Baltic Sea, which moderates the temperatures, compared to the interior of Poland. The climate is mild and there is a somewhat uniform precipitation throughout the year. Autumns are significantly warmer than springs because of the warming influence of the Baltic Sea. Nights on average are warmer than in the interior of the country. Typical of Northern Europe, there is little sunshine during late autumn, winter and early spring, but plenty during late spring and summer. Because of its northerly latitude, Gdynia has 17 hours of daylight in midsummer but only around 7 hours in midwinter.\nThe lowest pressure in Poland was recorded in Gdynia - 960.2 hPa on 17 January 1931.\nDistricts.\nGdynia is divided into smaller divisions: \"dzielnicas\" and \"osiedles\". Gdynia's \"dzielnicas\" include: Babie Do\u0142y, Chwarzno-Wiczlino, Chylonia, Cisowa, D\u0105browa, Dzia\u0142ki Le\u015bne, Grab\u00f3wek, Kamienna G\u00f3ra, Karwiny, Leszczynki, Ma\u0142y Kack, Ob\u0142u\u017ce, Oksywie, Or\u0142owo, Pog\u00f3rze, Pustki Cisowskie-Demptowo, Red\u0142owo, \u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie, Wielki Kack, Witomino-Le\u015bnicz\u00f3wka, Witomino-Radiostacja, Wzg\u00f3rze \u015aw. Maksymiliana.\n&lt;br&gt;\nBabieDo\u0142y\nPog\u00f3rze\nOb\u0142u\u017ce\nOksywie\nCisowa\nChylonia\n\u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie\nLeszczynki\nGrab\u00f3wek\nPustki Cisowskie--Demptowo\nChwarzno-Wiczlino\nWitomino--Radiostacja\nOr\u0142owo\nRed\u0142owo\nMa\u0142y Kack\nWielki Kack\nKarwiny\nD\u0105browa\n\"Osiedles\": Bernadowo, Brzozowa G\u00f3ra, Chwarzno, D\u0105br\u00f3wka, Demptowo, D\u0119bowa G\u00f3ra, Fikakowo, Go\u0142\u0119biewo, Kacze Buki, Kolibki, Kolonia Chwaszczyno, Kolonia Rybacka, Krykulec, Marszewo, Mi\u0119dzytorze, Niemotowo, Osada Kolejowa, Osada Rybacka, Osiedle Bernadowo, Port, Pustki Cisowskie, Tasza, Wiczlino, Wielka Rola, Witomino, Wysoka, Zielenisz.\nCityscape.\nGdynia is a relatively modern city. Its architecture includes the 13th century St. Michael the Archangel's Church in Oksywie, the oldest building in Gdynia, and the 17th century neo-Gothic manor house located on Folwarczna Street in Or\u0142owo.\nThe surrounding hills and the coastline attract many nature lovers. A leisure pier and a cliff-like coastline in K\u0119pa Red\u0142owska, as well as the surrounding Nature Reserve, are also popular locations. In the harbour, there are two anchored museum ships, the destroyer and the tall ship \"Dar Pomorza\". A -long promenade leads from the marina in the city center, to the beach in Red\u0142owo.\nMost of Gdynia can be seen from Kamienna G\u00f3ra ( asl) or the viewing point near Chwaszczyno. There are also two viewing towers, one at G\u00f3ra Donas, the other at Kolibki.\nIn 2015 the Emigration Museum opened in the city. Other museums include the Gdynia Aquarium, Experyment Science Center, Abraham's house, \u017beromski's house, Gdynia Automotive Museum, Naval Museum, and Gdynia City Museum.\nModernist Center.\nGdynia holds many examples of early 20th-century architecture, especially monumentalism and early functionalism, and modernism. Historic Urban Layout of the City Center was drafted by Adam Kuncewicz and Roman Feli\u0144ski in 1926. The central axis of Gdynia is built around 10 Lutego Street, Kosciuszka Square and the Southern Pier. The structure of the city is designed to emphasize the connection of Gdynia and Poland with the Baltic Sea. Examples of modernist architecture are the buildings of the Bank of Poland and many tenement houses (\"kamienice\"). Another good example of modernism is \"PLO Building\" situated at 10 Lutego Street.\nThe architecture of central Gdynia was inspired by the work of European architects such as Erich Mendelssohn and is sometimes compared to the White City of Tel Aviv. The center of Gdynia has become a symbol of modernity, but was included in the list of historical monuments of Poland and is a candidate for the UNESCO World Heritage List.\nCulture.\nGdynia hosts the Gdynia Film Festival, the main Polish film festival. The International Random Film Festival was hosted in Gdynia in November 2014.\nSince 2003 Gdynia has been hosting the Open'er Festival, one of the biggest contemporary music festivals in Europe. The festival welcomes many foreign hip-hop, rock and electronic music artists every year. In record-high 2018 it was attended by over 140,000 people, who enjoyed the lineup headlined by Bruno Mars, Gorillaz, Arctic Monkeys, and Depeche Mode.\nAnother important summer event in Gdynia is the Viva Beach Party, which is a large two-day techno party made on Gdynia's Public Beach and a summer-welcoming concerts CudaWianki. Gdynia also hosts events for the annual Gda\u0144sk Shakespeare Festival.\nIn the summer of 2014 Gdynia hosted Red Bull Air Race World Championship.\nCultural references.\nIn 2008, Gdynia made it onto the \"Monopoly Here and Now World Edition\" board after being voted by fans through the Internet. Gdynia occupies the space traditionally held by Mediterranean Avenue, being the lowest voted city to make it onto the Monopoly Here and Now board, but also the smallest city to make it in the game. All of the other cities are large and widely known ones, the second smallest being Riga. The unexpected success of Gdynia can be attributed to a mobilization of the town's population to vote for it on the Internet.\nAn abandoned factory district in Gdynia was the scene for the survival series \"Man vs Wild\", season 6, episode 12. The host, Bear Grylls, manages to escape the district after blowing up a door and crawling through miles of sewer.\nErnst Stavro Blofeld, the supervillain in the James Bond novels, was born in Gdynia on 28 May 1908, according to \"Thunderball\".\nGdynia is sometimes called \"Polish Roswell\" due to the alleged UFO crash on 21 January 1959.\nSports.\n Sport teams\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nTransport.\nPort of Gdynia.\nIn 2007, 364,202 passengers, 17,025,000 tons of cargo and 614,373\u00a0TEU containers passed through the port. Regular car ferry service operates between Gdynia and Karlskrona, Sweden.\nPublic transport.\nGdynia operates one of only three trolleybus systems in Poland, alongside Lublin and Tychy. Today there are 18 trolleybus lines in Gdynia with a total length of . The fleet is modern and consists of Solaris Trollino cars. There is also a historic line, connecting city centre with a district of Or\u0142owo operated by five retro trolleybuses. In addition to that, Gdynia operates an extensive network of bus lines, connecting the city with the adjacent suburbs.\nAirport.\nThe conurbation's main airport, Gda\u0144sk Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa Airport, lays approximately south-west of central Gdynia, and has connections to approximately 55 destinations. It is the third largest airport in Poland. A second General Aviation terminal was scheduled to be opened by May 2012, which will increase the airport's capacity to 5mln passengers per year.\nAnother local airport, (Gdynia-Kosakowo Airport) is situated partly in the village of Kosakowo, just to the north of the city, and partly in Gdynia. This has been a military airport since the World War II, but it has been decided in 2006 that the airport will be used to serve civilians. Work was well in progress and was due to be ready for 2012 when the project collapsed following a February 2014 EU decision regarding Gdynia city funding as constituting unfair competition to Gda\u0144sk airport. In March 2014, the airport management company filed for bankruptcy, this being formally announced in May that year. The fate of some PLN 100\u00a0million of public funds from Gdynia remain unaccounted for with documents not being released, despite repeated requests for such from residents to the city president, Wojciech Szczurek.\nRoad transport.\nTrasa Kwiatkowskiego links Port of Gdynia and the city with Obwodnica Tr\u00f3jmiejska, and therefore A1 motorway. National road 6 connects Tricity with S\u0142upsk, Koszalin and Szczecin agglomeration.\nRailways.\nThe principal station in Gdynia is Gdynia G\u0142\u00f3wna railway station, the busiest railway station in the Tricity and northern Poland and sixth busiest in Poland overall, serving 13,41 mln passengers in 2022. Gdynia has eleven railway stations. Local train services are provided by the 'Fast Urban Railway,' Szybka Kolej Miejska (Tricity) operating frequent trains covering the Tricity area including Gda\u0144sk, Sopot and Gdynia. Long-distance trains from Warsaw via Gda\u0144sk terminate at Gdynia, and there are direct trains to Szczecin, Pozna\u0144, Katowice, Lublin and other major cities. In 2011-2015 the Warsaw-Gda\u0144sk-Gdynia route was undergoing a major upgrading costing $3\u00a0billion, partly funded by the European Investment Bank, including track replacement, realignment of curves and relocation of sections of track to allow speeds up to , modernization of stations, and installation of the most modern ETCS signalling system, which was completed in June 2015. In December 2014 new Alstom Pendolino high-speed trains were put into service between Gdynia, Warsaw and Krak\u00f3w reducing rail travel times to Gdynia by 2 hours.\nEconomy.\nNotable companies that have their headquarters or regional offices in Gdynia:\nFormer:\nEducation.\nThere are currently 8 universities and institutions of higher education based in Gdynia. Many students from Gdynia also attend universities located in the Tricity.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSport.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational relations.\nConsulates.\nThere are 10 honorary consulates in Gdynia \u2013 Belgium, Chile, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Norway.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nGdynia is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormer twin towns:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12666", "revid": "32452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12666", "title": "Gluon", "text": "Elementary particle that mediates the strong force\nA gluon ( ) is a type of massless elementary particle that mediates the strong interaction between quarks, acting as the exchange particle for the interaction. Gluons are massless vector bosons, thereby having a spin of 1. Through the strong interaction, gluons bind quarks into groups according to quantum chromodynamics (QCD), forming hadrons such as protons and neutrons.\nGluons carry the color charge of the strong interaction, thereby participating in the strong interaction as well as mediating it. Because gluons carry the color charge, QCD is more difficult to analyze compared to quantum electrodynamics (QED) where the photon carries no electric charge.\nThe term was coined by Murray Gell-Mann in 1962 for being similar to an adhesive or glue that keeps the nucleus together. Together with the quarks, these particles were referred to as partons by Richard Feynman.\nProperties.\nThe gluon is a vector boson, which means it has a spin of 1\u00a0\"\u0127\". While massive spin-1 particles have three polarization states, massless gauge bosons like the gluon have only two polarization states because gauge invariance requires the field polarization to be transverse to the direction that the gluon is traveling. In quantum field theory, unbroken gauge invariance requires that gauge bosons have zero mass. Experiments limit the gluon's rest mass (if any) to less than a few MeV/\"c\"2. The gluon has negative intrinsic parity.\nCounting gluons.\nThere are eight independent types of gluons in QCD. This is unlike the photon of QED or the three W and Z bosons of the weak interaction. \nAdditionally, gluons are subject to the color charge phenomena. Quarks carry three types of color charge; antiquarks carry three types of anticolor. Gluons carry both color and anticolor. This gives nine \"possible\" combinations of color and anticolor in gluons. The following is a list of those combinations (and their schematic names):\nThese \"possible\" combinations are only \"effective\" states, not the \"actual\" observed color states of gluons. To understand how they are combined, it is necessary to consider the mathematics of color charge in more detail.\nColor singlet states.\nThe stable strongly interacting particles, including hadrons like the proton or the neutron, are observed to be \"colorless\". More precisely, they are in a \"color singlet\" state, and mathematically analogous to a \"spin\" singlet state. The states allow interaction with other color singlets, but not other color states; because long-range gluon interactions do not exist, this illustrates that gluons in the singlet state do not exist either.\nThe color singlet state is:\n formula_1\nIf one could measure the color of the state, there would be equal probabilities of it being red\u2013antired, blue\u2013antiblue, or green\u2013antigreen.\nEight color states.\nThere are eight remaining independent color states corresponding to the \"eight types\" or \"eight colors\" of gluons. Since the states can be mixed together, there are multiple ways of presenting these states. These are known as the \"color octet\", and a commonly used list for each is:\nThese are equivalent to the Gell-Mann matrices. The critical feature of these particular eight states is that they are linearly independent, and also independent of the singlet state, hence 32\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 or 23. There is no way to add any combination of these states to produce any others. It is also impossible to add them to make \"r\"\"r\", \"g\"\"g\", or \"b\"\"b\" the forbidden singlet state. There are many other possible choices, but all are mathematically equivalent, at least equally complicated, and give the same physical results.\nGroup theory details.\nFormally, QCD is a gauge theory with SU(3) gauge symmetry. Quarks are introduced as spinors in \"N\"f flavors, each in the fundamental representation (triplet, denoted 3) of the color gauge group, SU(3). The gluons are vectors in the adjoint representation (octets, denoted 8) of color SU(3). For a general gauge group, the number of force-carriers, like photons or gluons, is always equal to the dimension of the adjoint representation. For the simple case of SU(\"n\"), the dimension of this representation is .\nIn group theory, there are no color singlet gluons because quantum chromodynamics has an SU(3) rather than a U(3) symmetry. There is no known \"a priori\" reason for one group to be preferred over the other, but as discussed above, the experimental evidence supports SU(3). If the group were U(3), the ninth (colorless singlet) gluon would behave like a \"second photon\" and not like the other eight gluons.\nConfinement.\nSince gluons themselves carry color charge, they participate in strong interactions. These gluon\u2013gluon interactions constrain color fields to string-like objects called \"flux tubes\", which exert constant force when stretched. Due to this force, quarks are confined within composite particles called hadrons. This effectively limits the range of the strong interaction to , roughly the size of a nucleon. Beyond a certain distance, the energy of the flux tube binding two quarks increases linearly. At a large enough distance, it becomes energetically more favorable to pull a quark\u2013antiquark pair out of the vacuum rather than increase the length of the flux tube.\nOne consequence of the hadron-confinement property of gluons is that they are not directly involved in the nuclear forces between hadrons. The force mediators for these are other hadrons called mesons.\nAlthough in the normal phase of QCD single gluons may not travel freely, it is predicted that there exist hadrons that are formed entirely of gluons \u2014 called glueballs. There are also conjectures about other exotic hadrons in which real gluons (as opposed to virtual ones found in ordinary hadrons) would be primary constituents. Beyond the normal phase of QCD (at extreme temperatures and pressures), quark\u2013gluon plasma forms. In such a plasma there are no hadrons; quarks and gluons become free particles.\nExperimental observations.\nQuarks and gluons (colored) manifest themselves by fragmenting into more quarks and gluons, which in turn hadronize into normal (colorless) particles, correlated in jets. As revealed in 1978\u00a0summer conferences, the PLUTO detector at the electron-positron collider DORIS (DESY) produced the first evidence that the hadronic decays of the very narrow resonance \u03a5(9.46) could be interpreted as three-jet event topologies produced by three gluons. Later, published analyses by the same experiment confirmed this interpretation and also the spin\u00a0=\u00a01 nature of the gluon (see also the recollection and PLUTO experiments).\nIn summer\u00a01979, at higher energies at the electron-positron collider PETRA (DESY), again three-jet topologies were observed, now clearly visible and interpreted as qq gluon bremsstrahlung, by TASSO, MARK-J and PLUTO experiments (later in 1980 also by JADE). The spin\u00a0=\u00a01 property of the gluon was confirmed in 1980 by TASSO and PLUTO experiments (see also the review). In 1991 a subsequent experiment at the LEP storage ring at CERN again confirmed this result.\nThe gluons play an important role in the elementary strong interactions between quarks and gluons, described by QCD and studied particularly at the electron-proton collider HERA at DESY. The number and momentum distribution of the gluons in the proton (gluon density) have been measured by two experiments, H1 and ZEUS, in the years 1996\u20132007. The gluon contribution to the proton spin has been studied by the HERMES experiment at HERA. The gluon density in the proton (when behaving hadronically) also has been measured.\nColor confinement is verified by the failure of free quark searches (searches of fractional charges). Quarks are normally produced in pairs (quark + antiquark) to compensate the quantum color and flavor numbers; however at Fermilab single production of top quarks has been shown. No glueball has been demonstrated.\nDeconfinement was claimed in 2000 at CERN SPS in heavy-ion collisions, and it implies a new state of matter: quark\u2013gluon plasma, less interactive than in the nucleus, almost as in a liquid. It was found at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) at Brookhaven in the years 2004\u20132010 by four contemporaneous experiments. A quark\u2013gluon plasma state has been confirmed at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC) by the three experiments ALICE, ATLAS and CMS in 2010.\nJefferson Lab's Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator Facility, in Newport News, Virginia, is one of 10\u00a0Department of Energy facilities doing research on gluons. The Virginia lab was competing with another facility \u2013 Brookhaven National Laboratory, on Long Island, New York \u2013 for funds to build a new electron-ion collider. In December 2019, the US Department of Energy selected the Brookhaven National Laboratory to host the electron-ion collider.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12667", "revid": "47357094", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12667", "title": "Book of Genesis", "text": "First book of the Bible\nThe Book of Genesis (from Greek ; ; ) is the first book of the Hebrew Bible and the Christian Old Testament. Its Hebrew name is the same as its first word, ('in the beginning'). The primary narrative of Genesis includes a legendary account of the creation of the world, the early history of humanity, and the origins of the Jewish people. In Judaism, the theological importance of Genesis centers on the covenants linking God to his chosen people and the people to the Promised Land.\nGenesis is part of the Torah or Pentateuch, the first five books of the Bible. Tradition credits Moses as the Torah's author. However, there is scholarly consensus that the Book of Genesis was composed several centuries later, after the Babylonian captivity, possibly in the fifth century BCE. Based on the scientific interpretation of archaeological, genetic, and linguistic evidence, mainstream biblical scholars consider Genesis to be primarily mythological rather than historical.\nIt is divisible into two parts, the primeval history (chapters 1\u201311) and the ancestral history (chapters 12\u201350). The primeval history sets out the author's concepts of the nature of the deity and of humanity's relationship with its maker: God creates a world which is good and fit for humans, but when humanity corrupts it with sin, God decides to destroy his creation, sparing only the righteous Noah and his family to re-establish the relationship between man and God. \nThe ancestral history (chapters 12\u201350) tells of the prehistory of Israel, God's chosen people. At God's command, Noah's descendant Abraham journeys from his birthplace (described as Ur of the Chaldeans and whose identification with Sumerian Ur is tentative in modern scholarship) into the God-given land of Canaan, where he dwells as a sojourner, as does his son Isaac and his grandson Jacob. Jacob's name is changed to \"Israel\", and through the agency of his son Joseph, the children of Israel descend into Egypt, 70 people in all with their households, and God promises them a future of greatness. Genesis ends with Israel in Egypt, ready for the coming of Moses and the Exodus (departure). The narrative is punctuated by a series of covenants with God, successively narrowing in scope from all peoples (the covenant with Noah) to a special relationship with one people alone (Abraham and his descendants through Isaac and Jacob).\nTitle.\nThe name \"Genesis\" is from the Latin Vulgate, in turn borrowed or transliterated from Greek , meaning 'origin'; , 'In [the] beginning'.\nComposition.\nGenesis was written anonymously, but both Jewish and Christian religious tradition attributes the entire Pentateuch\u2014Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy\u2014to Moses. During the Enlightenment, the philosophers Benedict Spinoza and Thomas Hobbes questioned Mosaic authorship. In the 17th century, Richard Simon proposed that the Pentateuch was written by multiple authors over a long period of time. The involvement of multiple authors is suggested by internal contradictions within the text. For example, Genesis includes two creation narratives.\nAt the end of the 19th century, most scholars adopted the documentary hypothesis. This theory held that the five books of the Pentateuch came from four sources: the Yahwist (abbreviated as J), the Elohist (E), the Deuteronomist (D) and the Priestly source (P). Each source was held to tell the same basic story, with the sources later combined by various editors. Scholars were able to distinguish sources based on the designations for God. For example, the Yahwist source uses Yahweh, while the Elohistic and Priestly sources use Elohim. Scholars also use repeated and duplicate stories to identify separate sources. In Genesis, these include the two creation stories, three different wife\u2013sister narratives, and the two versions of Abraham sending Hagar and Ishmael into the desert.\nAccording to the documentary hypothesis, J was produced during the 9th century BCE in the southern Kingdom of Judah and was believed to be the earliest source. E was written in the northern Kingdom of Israel during the 8th century BCE. D was written in Judah in the 7th century BCE and associated with the religious reforms of King Josiah c.\u2009625 BCE. The latest source was P, which was written during the 5th century in Babylon. Based on these dates, Genesis and the rest of the Pentateuch did not reach its final, present-day form until after the Babylonian Exile. Julius Wellhausen argued that the Pentateuch was finalized in the time of Ezra. Ezra 7:14 records that Ezra traveled from Babylon to Jerusalem in 458 BCE with God's law in his hand. Wellhausen argued that this was the newly compiled Pentateuch. Nehemiah 8\u201310, according to Wellhausen, describes the publication and public acceptance of this new law code c.\u2009444 BCE. There was now a large gap between the earliest sources of the Pentateuch and the period they claimed to describe, which ended c.\u20091200 BCE.\nMost scholars held to the documentary hypothesis until the 1980s. Since then, a number of variations and revisions of the documentary hypothesis have been proposed. The new supplementary hypothesis posits three main sources for the Pentateuch: J, D, and P. The E source is considered no more than a variation of J, and P is considered a body of revisions and expansions to the J (or \"non-Priestly\") material. The Deuteronomistic source does not appear in Genesis. G.I. Davies argued that J dates from either just before or during the Babylonian Exile, and the Priestly final edition was made late in the Exilic period or soon after. \nIn the 21st century, there is scholarly consensus that the Book of Genesis was composed after the Babylonian captivity, possibly in the fifth century BCE. In contrast, Ronald Hendel and Aaron Hornkohl have proposed a date prior to the Persian period (before 550 BCE) based on linguistic grounds. Russell Gmirkin has argued that Genesis was composed in the late 270s BCE, drawing on Greek sources like Berossus' Babyloniaca and reflecting the political context of the Seleucid and Ptolemaic realms.\nAs for why the book was created, a theory which has gained considerable interest, although still controversial, is that of Persian imperial authorisation. This proposes that the Persians of the Achaemenid Empire, after their conquest of Babylon in 539\u00a0BCE, agreed to grant Jerusalem a large measure of local autonomy within the empire, but required the local authorities to produce a single law code accepted by the entire community. The two powerful groups making up the community\u2014the priestly families who controlled the Second Temple and who traced their origin to Moses and the wilderness wanderings, and the major landowning families who made up the \"elders\" and who traced their own origins to Abraham, who had \"given\" them the land\u2014were in conflict over many issues, and each had its own \"history of origins\". However, the Persian promise of greatly increased local autonomy for all provided a powerful incentive to cooperate in producing a single text.\nGenre.\nGenesis is an example of a work in the \"antiquities\" genre, as the Romans knew it, a popular genre telling of the appearance of humans and their ancestors and heroes, with elaborate genealogies and chronologies fleshed out with stories and anecdotes. Notable examples are found in the work of Greek historians of the 6th century BCE: their intention was to connect notable families of their own day to a distant and heroic past, and in doing so they did not distinguish between myth, legend, and facts. Professor Jean-Louis Ska of the Pontifical Biblical Institute calls the basic rule of the antiquarian historian the \"law of conservation\": everything old is valuable, nothing is eliminated. This antiquity was needed to prove the worth of Israel's traditions to the nations (the neighbours of the Jews in the early Persian province of Judea), and to reconcile and unite the various factions within Israel itself.\nDescribing the work of the biblical authors, John Van Seters wrote that lacking many historical traditions and none from the distant past, \"They had to use myths and legends for earlier periods. In order to make sense out of the variety of different and often conflicting versions of stories, and to relate the stories to each other, they fitted them into a genealogical chronology.\" Tremper Longman describes Genesis as theological history: \"the fact that these events took place is assumed, and not argued. The concern of the text is not to prove the history but rather to impress the reader with the theological significance of these acts\".\nTextual variation.\nThe original manuscripts are lost, and the text of surviving copies varies. There are four major groupings of surviving manuscripts: the Masoretic Text, the Samaritan Pentateuch (in Samaritan script), the Septuagint (a Greek translation), and fragments of Genesis found in the Dead Sea Scrolls. The Dead Sea Scrolls are oldest but cover only a small portion of the book.\nStructure.\nGenesis appears to be structured around the recurring phrase , meaning \"these are the generations\", with the first use of the phrase referring to the \"generations of heaven and earth\" and the remainder marking individuals. The formula, occurring eleven times in the book of Genesis, serves as a heading which marks a transition to a new subject. The divide the book into the following sections:\nIt is not clear, however, what this meant to the original authors, and most modern commentators divide it into two parts based on the subject matter, a primeval history (chapters 1\u201311) and a patriarchal history (chapters 12\u201350). While the first is far shorter than the second, it sets out the basic themes and provides an interpretive key for understanding the entire book. The primeval history has a symmetrical structure hinging on the flood story (chapters 6\u20139) with the events before the flood mirrored by the events after. The ancestral history is structured around the three patriarchs Abraham, Jacob and Joseph. The stories of Isaac arguably do not make up a coherent cycle of stories and function as a bridge between the cycles of Abraham and Jacob.\nSummary.\nPrimeval history (chapters 1\u201311).\nThe Genesis creation narrative comprises two different stories; the first two chapters roughly correspond to these. In the first, Elohim, the generic Hebrew word for God, creates the heavens and the earth including man, in six days, and rests on the seventh. In the second, God, now referred to as \"Yahweh Elohim\" (rendered as \"the LORD God\" in English translations), creates two individuals, Adam and Eve, as the first man and woman, and places them in the Garden of Eden.\nGod commands the man that he is free to eat from any tree, including the tree of life, except from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. A serpent, portrayed as a deceptive creature or trickster, convinces Eve to eat the fruit. She then convinces Adam to eat it. Both become ashamed of their nudity, and are discovered by God, who exiles them from Eden and punishes them. Adam is forced to gain his sustenance by difficult toil, and Eve to giving birth in pain. This is interpreted by Christians as the \"fall of man\" into sin. Eve bears two sons, Cain and Abel. Cain works in the garden, and Abel works with meat; they both offer offerings to God one day, and God does not accept Cain's offering but does accept Abel's. This causes Cain to resent Abel; he takes Abel to a field and murders him. God then curses Cain. Eve bears another son, Seth, to take Abel's place.\nAfter many generations of Adam have passed from the lines of Cain and Seth, the world has become corrupted by human sin and Nephilim. God intends to wipe out humanity for their wickedness. However, Noah is righteous and blameless. God instructs Noah to construct an ark and store in it all the animals, seven pairs of every clean animal and one pair of every unclean. Then God sends a great flood to destroy all the world. When the waters recede, God establishes a covenant with Noah, promising he will never destroy the world with water again, and making a rainbow as a symbol of his promise. God sees mankind cooperating to build a great tower city, the Tower of Babel. He divides humanity with many languages and sets them apart with confusion. Then, a generation line from Shem to Abram is described.\nPatriarchal age (chapters 12\u201350).\nAbram, a man descended from Noah, is instructed by God to travel from his home in Ur of the Chaldees to the land of Canaan. There, God makes a promise to Abram, promising that his descendants shall be as numerous as the stars, but that people will suffer oppression in a foreign land for four hundred years, after which they will inherit the land \"from the river of Egypt to the great river, the river Euphrates\". Abram's name is changed to Abraham and that of his wife and half-sibling Sarai to Sarah (meaning 'princess'). God institutes that all males should be circumcised as a sign of his promise to Abraham. Due to her old age, Sarah tells Abraham to take her Egyptian handmaiden, Hagar, as a second wife. Through Hagar, Abraham fathers Ishmael.\nGod then plans to destroy the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah for the sins of their people. Abraham pleads for the city, that it may not be destroyed if ten righteous people are found there. Angels remove Abraham's nephew, Lot, and his family from Sodom. The cities are destroyed; his wife turns to view them and is turned into a pillar of salt. Lot's daughters, concerned that they are fugitives who will never find husbands, inebriate Lot so they can become pregnant by him, and give birth to the ancestors of the Moabites and Ammonites.\nAbraham and Sarah go to the Philistine town of Gerar, claiming to be brother and sister. The King of Gerar takes Sarah for his wife, but God warns him to return her and he obeys. God sends Sarah a son and tells her she should name him Isaac; through him will be the establishment of the covenant. Sarah then drives Ishmael and his mother Hagar out into the wilderness, but God saves them and promises to make Ishmael a great nation.\nGod tests Abraham by demanding that he sacrifice Isaac. As Abraham is about to lay the knife upon his son, \"the Angel of the LORD\" restrains him, rewarding his obedience by promising him again innumerable descendants. On the death of Sarah, Abraham purchases Machpelah (believed to be modern Hebron) for a family tomb and sends his servant to Mesopotamia to find among his relations a wife for Isaac; after proving herself worthy, Rebekah becomes Isaac's betrothed. Keturah, Abraham's other wife, births more children, among whose descendants are the Midianites. Abraham dies at a prosperous old age and his family lays him to rest in Hebron (Machpelah).\nIsaac's wife Rebekah gives birth to the twins Esau, father of the Edomites, and Jacob. Esau, being born first, is owed the birthright; however, through carelessness, he sells his birthright to Jacob for a bowl of stew. Rebekah ensures Jacob rightly gains his father's blessing as the firstborn son and inheritor. At 77 years of age, Jacob seeks a wife and meets Rachel at a well. He goes to her father and his uncle, Laban, where he works for fourteen years to acquire Leah, Laban's first-born daughter, and Rachel. Jacob leads his family out of Laban's household; by his wives and their handmaidens he has twelve sons, the ancestors of the Twelve Tribes of Israel, and a daughter, Dinah. Jacob's name is changed to Israel after wrestling with an angel.\nShechem, son of Hamor the Hivite, rapes Dinah and asks his father to get Dinah for him as his wife, Jacob agrees to the marriage but requires that all the males of Hamor's tribe be circumcised, including Hamor and Shechem. Jacob's sons Simeon and Levi murder all the males in Hamor's tribe while they are recuperating from their circumcisions. Jacob warns that their act would mean retribution by others, namely the Canaanites and Perizzites. Jacob and his tribe take all Hivite property.\nJoseph, Jacob's favorite son of the twelve, makes his brothers jealous. They covertly sell Joseph into slavery in Egypt. Joseph endures many trials including being innocently sentenced to jail but remains faithful to God. After several years, he prospers there after the pharaoh of Egypt asks him to interpret a dream he had about an upcoming famine, which Joseph does through God. He is then made second in command of Egypt by the grateful pharaoh, and later on, he is reunited with his father and brothers, who fail to recognize him and plead for food as the famine reaches Canaan. After testing their faith, Joseph reveals himself, forgives them for their actions, and lets them and their households into Egypt, where Pharaoh assigns to them the land of Goshen. Jacob calls his sons to his bedside and reveals their future before he dies. Joseph lives to old age and tells his brothers before his death that if God leads them out of the country, then they should take his bones with them.\nThemes.\nPromises to the ancestors.\nIn 1978, David Clines published \"The Theme of the Pentateuch\". Considered influential as one of the first authors to take up the question of the overarching theme of the Pentateuch, Clines' conclusion was that the overall theme is \"the partial fulfilment\u2014which implies also the partial nonfulfillment\u2014of the promise to or blessing of the Patriarchs\". (By calling the fulfilment \"partial\", Clines was drawing attention to the fact that at the end of Deuteronomy the people of Israel are still outside Canaan.)\nThe patriarchs, or ancestors, are Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, with their wives (Joseph is normally excluded). Since the name YHWH had not been revealed to them, they worshipped El in his various manifestations. (It is, however, worth noting that in the Jahwist source, the patriarchs refer to deity by the name YHWH, for example in Genesis 15.) Through the patriarchs, God announces the election of Israel, that is, he chooses Israel to be his special people and commits himself to their future. God tells the patriarchs that he will be faithful to their descendants (i.e. to Israel), and Israel is expected to have faith in God and his promise. (\"Faith\" in the context of Genesis and the Hebrew Bible means an agreement to the promissory relationship, not a body of a belief.)\nThe promise itself has three parts: offspring, blessings, and land. The fulfilment of the promise to each patriarch depends on having a male heir, and the story is constantly complicated by the fact that each prospective mother\u2014Sarah, Rebekah and Rachel\u2014is barren. The ancestors, however, retain their faith in God and God in each case gives a son\u2014in Jacob's case, twelve sons, the foundation of the chosen Israelites. Each succeeding generation of the three promises attains a more rich fulfilment, until through Joseph \"all the world\" attains salvation from famine, and by bringing the children of Israel down to Egypt he becomes the means through which the promise can be fulfilled.\nGod's chosen people.\nScholars generally agree that the theme of divine promise unites the patriarchal cycles, but many would dispute the efficacy of trying to examine Genesis' theology by pursuing a single overarching theme, instead citing as more productive the analysis of the Abraham cycle, the Jacob cycle, and the Joseph cycle, and the Yahwist and Priestly sources. The problem lies in finding a way to unite the patriarchal theme of the divine promise to the stories of Genesis 1\u201311 (the primeval history) with their theme of God's forgiveness in the face of man's evil nature. One solution is to see the patriarchal stories as resulting from God's decision not to remain alienated from man: God creates the world and humans, humans rebel, and God \"elects\" (chooses) Abraham.\nTo this basic plot (which comes from the Yahwist), the Priestly source has added a series of covenants dividing history into stages, each with its own distinctive \"sign\". The first covenant is between God and all living creatures, and is marked by the sign of the rainbow; the second is with the descendants of Abraham (Isaac and Ishmael), and its sign is circumcision; and the last, which does not appear until the Book of Exodus, is with Israel alone, and its sign is Sabbath. A great leader mediates each covenant (Noah, Abraham, Moses), and at each stage God progressively reveals himself by his name (Elohim with Noah, El Shaddai with Abraham, Yahweh with Moses).\nDeception.\nThroughout Genesis, various figures engage in deception or trickery to survive or prosper. Biblical scholar David M. Carr notes that such stories reflect the vulnerability felt by ancient Israelites and that \"such stories can be a major way of gaining hope and resisting domination\". Examples include:\nCultural impact.\nBy totaling the spans of time in the genealogies of Genesis, religious authorities have calculated what they consider to be the age of the world since creation. This \"Anno Mundi\" system of counting years is the basis of the Hebrew calendar and Byzantine calendar. Counts differ somewhat, but they generally place the age of the Earth at about six thousand years.\nDuring the Protestant Reformation, rivalry between Catholic and Protestant Christians led to a closer study of the Bible and a competition to take its words more seriously. Thus, scholars in Europe from the 16th to the 19th century treated the book of Genesis as factual. As evidence in the fields of paleontology, geology and other sciences was uncovered, scholars tried to fit these discoveries into the Genesis creation account. For example, Johann Jakob Scheuchzer in the 18th century believed that fossils were the remains of creatures killed during the flood. This literal understanding of Genesis fell out of favor with scholars during the Victorian crisis of faith as evidence mounted that the Earth was far older than six thousand years.\nJudaism's weekly Torah portions.\nIt is a custom among religious Jewish communities for a weekly Torah portion, popularly referred to as a , to be read during Jewish prayer services on Saturdays, Mondays and Thursdays. The full name, , is popularly abbreviated to (also or ), and is also known as a (or ).\nThe is a section of the Torah (Five Books of Moses) used in Jewish liturgy during a particular week. There are 54 weekly parshas, or in Hebrew, and the full cycle is read over the course of one Jewish year.\nThe first 12 of the 54 come from the Book of Genesis, and they are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nCommentaries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12669", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12669", "title": "GM", "text": "GM or Gm may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12670", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12670", "title": "GeV", "text": ""}
{"id": "12673", "revid": "49470071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12673", "title": "Galois group", "text": "Mathematical group\nIn mathematics, in the area of abstract algebra known as Galois theory, the Galois group of a certain type of field extension is a specific group associated with the field extension. The study of field extensions and their relationship to the polynomials that give rise to them via Galois groups is called Galois theory, so named in honor of \u00c9variste Galois who first discovered them.\nFor a more elementary discussion of Galois groups in terms of permutation groups, see the article on Galois theory.\nDefinition.\nSuppose that formula_1 is an extension of the field formula_2 (written as formula_3 and read \"\"E\" over \"F\"\"). An automorphism of formula_3 is defined to be an automorphism of formula_1 that fixes formula_2 pointwise. In other words, an automorphism of formula_3 is an isomorphism formula_8 such that formula_9 for each formula_10. The set of all automorphisms of formula_3 forms a group with the operation of function composition. This group is sometimes denoted by formula_12\nIf formula_3 is a Galois extension, then formula_14 is called the Galois group of formula_3, and is usually denoted by formula_16.\nIf formula_3 is not a Galois extension, then the Galois group of formula_3 is sometimes defined as formula_19, where formula_20 is the Galois closure of formula_1.\nGalois group of a polynomial.\nAnother definition of the Galois group comes from the Galois group of an irreducible polynomial formula_22. If there is a field formula_23 such that formula_24 factors as a product of distinct linear polynomials\nformula_25\nover the field formula_20, then the Galois group of the polynomial formula_24 is defined as the Galois group of formula_23 where formula_20 is minimal among all such fields.\nStructure of Galois groups.\nFundamental theorem of Galois theory.\nOne of the important structure theorems from Galois theory comes from the fundamental theorem of Galois theory. This states that given a finite Galois extension formula_30, there is a bijection between the set of subfields formula_31 and the subgroups formula_32 Then, formula_1 is given by the set of invariants of formula_20 under the action of formula_35, so\nformula_36\nMoreover, if formula_35 is a normal subgroup then formula_38. And conversely, if formula_39 is a normal field extension, then the associated subgroup in formula_40 is a normal group.\nLattice structure.\nSuppose formula_41 are Galois extensions of formula_42 with Galois groups formula_43 The field formula_44 with Galois group formula_45 has an injection formula_46 which is an isomorphism whenever formula_47.\nInducting.\nAs a corollary, this can be inducted finitely many times. Given Galois extensions formula_48 where formula_49 then there is an isomorphism of the corresponding Galois groups:\nformula_50\nExamples.\nIn the following examples formula_2 is a field, and formula_52 are the fields of complex, real, and rational numbers, respectively. The notation \"F\"(\"a\") indicates the field extension obtained by adjoining an element \"a\" to the field \"F\".\nComputational tools.\nCardinality of the Galois group and the degree of the field extension.\nOne of the basic propositions required for completely determining the Galois group of a finite field extension is the following: Given a polynomial formula_53, let formula_3 be its splitting field extension. Then the order of the Galois group is equal to the degree of the field extension; that is,\nformula_55\nEisenstein's criterion.\nA useful tool for determining the Galois group of a polynomial comes from Eisenstein's criterion. If a polynomial formula_22 factors into irreducible polynomials formula_57 the Galois group of formula_24 can be determined using the Galois groups of each formula_59 since the Galois group of formula_24 contains each of the Galois groups of the formula_61\nTrivial group.\nformula_62 is the trivial group that has a single element, namely the identity automorphism.\nAnother example of a Galois group which is trivial is formula_63 Indeed, it can be shown that any automorphism of formula_64 must preserve the ordering of the real numbers and hence must be the identity.\nConsider the field formula_65 The group formula_66 contains only the identity automorphism. This is because formula_20 is not a normal extension, since the other two cube roots of formula_68,\nformula_69\nare missing from the extension\u2014in other words \"K\" is not a splitting field.\nFinite abelian groups.\nThe Galois group formula_70 has two elements, the identity automorphism and the complex conjugation automorphism.\nQuadratic extensions.\nThe degree two field extension formula_71 has the Galois group formula_72 with two elements, the identity automorphism and the automorphism formula_73 which exchanges formula_74 and formula_75. This example generalizes for a prime number formula_76\nProduct of quadratic extensions.\nUsing the lattice structure of Galois groups, for non-equal prime numbers formula_77 the Galois group of formula_78 is\nformula_79\nCyclotomic extensions.\nAnother useful class of examples comes from the splitting fields of cyclotomic polynomials. These are polynomials formula_80 defined as\nformula_81\nwhose degree is formula_82, Euler's totient function at formula_83. Then, the splitting field over formula_84 is formula_85 and has automorphisms formula_86 sending formula_87 for formula_88 relatively prime to formula_83. Since the degree of the field is equal to the degree of the polynomial, these automorphisms generate the Galois group. If formula_90 then\nformula_91\nIf formula_83 is a prime formula_93, then a corollary of this is\nformula_94\nIn fact, any finite abelian group can be found as the Galois group of some subfield of a cyclotomic field extension by the Kronecker\u2013Weber theorem.\nFinite fields.\nAnother useful class of examples of Galois groups with finite abelian groups comes from finite fields. If \"q\" is a prime power, and if formula_95 and formula_96 denote the Galois fields of order formula_97 and formula_98 respectively, then formula_16 is cyclic of order \"n\" and generated by the Frobenius homomorphism.\nDegree 4 examples.\nThe field extension formula_100 is an example of a degree formula_101 field extension. This has two automorphisms formula_102 where formula_103 and formula_104 Since these two generators define a group of order formula_101, the Klein four-group, they determine the entire Galois group.\nAnother example is given from the splitting field formula_106 of the polynomial\nformula_107\nNote because formula_108 the roots of formula_109 are formula_110 There are automorphisms\nformula_111\ngenerating a group of order formula_101. Since formula_113 generates this group, the Galois group is isomorphic to formula_114.\nFinite non-abelian groups.\nConsider now formula_115 where formula_116 is a primitive cube root of unity. The group formula_117 is isomorphic to \"S\"3, the dihedral group of order 6, and \"L\" is in fact the splitting field of formula_118 over formula_119\nQuaternion group.\nThe Quaternion group can be found as the Galois group of a field extension of formula_84. For example, the field extension\nformula_121\nhas the prescribed Galois group.\nSymmetric group of prime order.\nIf formula_24 is an irreducible polynomial of prime degree formula_123 with rational coefficients and exactly two non-real roots, then the Galois group of formula_24 is the full symmetric group formula_125\nFor example, formula_126 is irreducible from Eisenstein's criterion. Plotting the graph of formula_24 with graphing software or paper shows it has three real roots, hence two complex roots, showing its Galois group is formula_128.\nComparing Galois groups of field extensions of global fields.\nGiven a global field extension formula_30 (such as formula_130) and equivalence classes of valuations formula_131 on formula_20 (such as the formula_123-adic valuation) and formula_134 on formula_42 such that their completions give a Galois field extensionformula_136of local fields, there is an induced action of the Galois group formula_137 on the set of equivalence classes of valuations such that the completions of the fields are compatible. This means if formula_138 then there is an induced isomorphism of local fieldsformula_139Since we have taken the hypothesis that formula_131 lies over formula_134 (i.e. there is a Galois field extension formula_136), the field morphism formula_143 is in fact an isomorphism of formula_144-algebras. If we take the isotropy subgroup of formula_145 for the valuation class formula_131formula_147then there is a surjection of the global Galois group to the local Galois group such that there is an isomorphism between the local Galois group and the isotropy subgroup. Diagrammatically, this meansformula_148where the vertical arrows are isomorphisms. This gives a technique for constructing Galois groups of local fields using global Galois groups.\nInfinite groups.\nA basic example of a field extension with an infinite group of automorphisms is formula_149, since it contains every algebraic field extension formula_106. For example, the field extensions formula_151 for a square-free element formula_152 each have a unique degree formula_68 automorphism, inducing an automorphism in formula_154\nOne of the most studied classes of infinite Galois group is the absolute Galois group, which is an infinite, profinite group defined as the inverse limit of all finite Galois extensions formula_3 for a fixed field. The inverse limit is denoted\nformula_156,\nwhere formula_157 is the separable closure of the field formula_2. Note this group is a topological group. Some basic examples include formula_159 and\nformula_160.\nAnother readily computable example comes from the field extension formula_161 containing the square root of every positive prime. It has Galois group\nformula_162,\nwhich can be deduced from the profinite limit\nformula_163\nand using the computation of the Galois groups.\nProperties.\nThe significance of an extension being Galois is that it obeys the fundamental theorem of Galois theory: the closed (with respect to the Krull topology) subgroups of the Galois group correspond to the intermediate fields of the field extension.\nIf formula_3 is a Galois extension, then formula_16 can be given a topology, called the Krull topology, that makes it into a profinite group.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12674", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12674", "title": "German Empire", "text": "German state from 1871 to 1918\nThe German Empire (), also referred to as Imperial Germany, the Second Reich, or simply Germany, was the period of the German Reich from the unification of Germany in 1871 until the November Revolution in 1918, when Germany changed its form of government to a republic. The German Empire consisted of 25 states, each with its own nobility: four constituent kingdoms, six grand duchies, five duchies (six before 1876), seven principalities, three free Hanseatic cities, and one imperial territory. While Prussia was only one of the four kingdoms in the realm, it contained about two-thirds of the Empire's population and territory, and Prussian dominance was also constitutionally established, since the King of Prussia was also the German Emperor (\"Deutscher Kaiser\").\nThe empire was founded on 18 January 1871, when the south German states, except for Austria, Switzerland and Liechtenstein, joined the North German Confederation. The new constitution came into force on 16 April, changing the name of the federal state to the German Empire and introducing the title of German Emperor for Wilhelm I, King of Prussia from the House of Hohenzollern. Berlin remained its capital, and Otto von Bismarck, Minister President of Prussia, became chancellor, the head of government. After 1850, the states of Germany had rapidly become industrialized. In 1871, Germany had a population of 41\u00a0million people; by 1913, this had increased to 68\u00a0million. A heavily rural collection of states in 1815, the now united Germany became predominantly urban. German factories were often larger and more modern than many of their British and French counterparts, but the preindustrial sector was more backward. The success of the German Empire in the natural sciences was such that one-third of all Nobel Prizes went to German inventors and researchers. During its 47 years of existence, the German Empire became an industrial, technological, and scientific power in Europe, and by 1913, Germany was the largest economy in continental Europe and the third largest in the world. Germany also became a great power, building the longest railway network of Europe, the world's strongest army, and a fast-growing industrial base. Starting very small in 1871, in a decade, the navy became second only to Britain's Royal Navy.\nOtto von Bismarck served as the first and longest-tenured chancellor of the German Empire from 1871 to 1890. His tenure began with relatively liberal measures and broad reforms but gradually shifted toward conservatism, marked by the against the Catholic Church. In foreign affairs, Bismarck concluded the Dual Alliance with Austria-Hungary in 1879, expanded into the Triple Alliance with Italy in 1882, while also fostering close ties to the Ottoman Empire. Despite denouncing liberals and socialists as \u201cenemies of the Reich\u201d, he introduced pioneering social programs \u2014 including accident insurance, pensions, medical care, and unemployment protection \u2014 that laid the foundation for the modern European welfare state. In the 1880s, Germany entered the colonial race despite Bismarck's earlier reluctance, acquiring territories in Africa, the Pacific, and China and building the world's third-largest colonial empire after the British and French. Following his dismissal in 1890, Wilhelm II pursued (\u201cworld politics\u201d), a more aggressive and expansionist course that abandoned Bismarck's complex alliance system, leaving Germany increasingly isolated. When the July Crisis of 1914 escalated into the First World War, Italy distanced itself from the Triple Alliance while the Ottoman Empire aligned with Germany. The emperor's inconsistent and often unpredictable decisions contributed to the tensions that culminated in the outbreak of the war.\nIn the First World War, German plans to capture Paris quickly in the autumn of 1914 failed, and the war on the Western Front became a stalemate. The Allied naval blockade caused severe shortages of food and supplements. However, Imperial Germany had success on the Eastern Front; it occupied a large amount of territory to its east following the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. The German declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare in early 1917 contributed to bringing the United States into the war. In October 1918, after the failed Spring Offensive, the German armies were in retreat, allies Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire had collapsed, and Bulgaria had surrendered. The empire collapsed in the November 1918 Revolution with the abdication of Wilhelm II, which left the post-war federal republic to govern a devastated populace. The Treaty of Versailles imposed post-war reparation costs of 132 billion gold marks (around US$269 billion or \u20ac240 billion in 2019, or roughly US$32 billion in 1921), as well as limiting the army to 100,000 men and disallowing conscription, armored vehicles, submarines, aircraft, and more than six battleships. The consequential economic devastation, later exacerbated by the Great Depression, as well as humiliation and outrage experienced by the German population are considered leading factors in the rise of Adolf Hitler and Nazism.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe German Confederation had been created by an act of the Congress of Vienna on 8 June 1815 as a result of the Napoleonic Wars, after being alluded to in of the 1814 Treaty of Paris.\nThe liberal Revolutions of 1848 were crushed after the relations between the educated, well-off middle-class liberals and the urban artisans broke down; Otto von Bismarck's pragmatic \"Realpolitik\", which appealed to peasants as well as the aristocracy, took its place. Bismarck sought to extend Hohenzollern hegemony throughout the German states; to do so meant unification of the German states and the exclusion of Prussia's main German rival, Austria, from the subsequent German Empire. He envisioned a conservative, Prussian-dominated Germany. The Second Schleswig War against Denmark in 1864, the Austro-Prussian War in 1866, and the Franco-Prussian War in 1870\u20131871 sparked a growing pan-German ideal and contributed to the formation of the German state, with victory to the \"Kleindeutsche L\u00f6sung\" (\"Lesser German solution\").\nThe German Confederation ended as a result of the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 between the constituent Confederation entities of the Austrian Empire and its allies on one side and Prussia and its allies on the other. The war resulted in the partial replacement of the Confederation in 1867 by a North German Confederation, comprising the 22 states north of the river Main. The patriotic fervor generated by the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 overwhelmed the remaining opposition to a unified Germany (aside from Austria) in the four states south of the Main, and during November 1870, they joined the North German Confederation by treaty.\nFoundation.\nOn 10 December 1870, the North German Confederation Reichstag renamed the Confederation the \"German Empire\" and gave the title of German Emperor to William I, the King of Prussia, as \"Bundespr\u00e4sidium\" of the Confederation. The new constitution (Constitution of the German Confederation) and the title Emperor came into effect on 1 January 1871. During the siege of Paris on 18 January 1871, William was proclaimed Emperor in the Hall of Mirrors at the Palace of Versailles.\nThe second German Constitution, adopted by the Reichstag on 14 April 1871 and proclaimed by the Emperor on 16 April, was substantially based upon Bismarck's North German Constitution. The political system remained the same. The empire had a parliament called the \"Reichstag\", which was elected by universal male suffrage. However, the original constituencies drawn in 1871 were never redrawn to reflect the growth of urban areas. As a result, by the time of the great expansion of German cities in the 1890s and 1900s, rural areas were grossly over-represented.\nThe legislation also required the consent of the \"Bundesrat\", the federal council of deputies from the 27 states. Executive power was vested in the emperor, or \"Kaiser\", who was assisted by a chancellor responsible only to him. The emperor was given extensive powers by the constitution. He alone appointed and dismissed the chancellor (so in practice, the emperor ruled the empire through the chancellor), was supreme commander-in-chief of the armed forces, and final arbiter of all foreign affairs, and could also disband the \"Reichstag\" to call for new elections. Officially, the chancellor was a one-man cabinet and was responsible for the conduct of all state affairs; in practice, the State Secretaries (top bureaucratic officials in charge of such fields as finance, war, foreign affairs, etc.) functioned much like ministers in other monarchies. The \"Reichstag\" had the power to pass, amend, or reject bills and to initiate legislation. However, as mentioned above, in practice, the real power was vested in the emperor, who exercised it through his chancellor.\nAlthough nominally a federal empire and league of equals, in practice, the empire was dominated by the largest and most powerful state, Prussia. It stretched across the northern two-thirds of the new \"Reich\" and contained three-fifths of the country's population. The imperial crown was hereditary in the ruling house of Prussia, the House of Hohenzollern. With the exception of 1872\u20131873 and 1892\u20131894, the chancellor was always simultaneously the prime minister of Prussia. With 17 out of 58 votes in the \"Bundesrat\", Berlin needed only a few votes from the smaller states to exercise effective control.\nThe other states retained their own governments but had only limited aspects of sovereignty. For example, both postage stamps and currency were issued for the empire as a whole. Coins through one mark were also minted in the name of the empire, while higher-valued pieces were issued by the states. However, these larger gold and silver issues were virtually commemorative coins and had limited circulation. While the states issued their own decorations and some had their own armies, the military forces of the smaller ones were put under Prussian control. Those of the larger states, such as the Kingdoms of Bavaria and Saxony, were coordinated along Prussian principles and would, in wartime, be controlled by the federal government. The evolution of the German Empire is somewhat in line with parallel developments in Italy, which became a united nation-state a decade earlier. Some key elements of the German Empire's authoritarian political structure were also the basis for conservative modernization in Imperial Japan under Emperor Meiji and the preservation of an authoritarian political structure under the tsars in the Russian Empire.\nOne factor in the social anatomy of these governments was the retention of a very substantial share in political power by the landed elite, the Junkers, resulting from the absence of a revolutionary breakthrough by the peasants in combination with urban areas.\nAlthough authoritarian in many respects, the empire had some democratic features. Besides universal manhood suffrage, it permitted the development of political parties. Bismarck intended to create a constitutional fa\u00e7ade that would mask the continuation of authoritarian policies. However, in the process, he created a system with a serious flaw. There was a significant disparity between the Prussian and German electoral systems. Prussia used a three-class voting system which weighted votes based on the amount of taxes paid, all but assuring a conservative majority. The king and (with two exceptions) the prime minister of Prussia were also the emperor and chancellor of the empire \u2013 meaning that the same rulers had to seek majorities from legislatures elected from completely different franchises. Universal suffrage was significantly diluted by gross over-representation of rural areas from the 1890s onward. From 1871 to the turn of the century, the urban-rural population balance shifted significantly, going from 64% rural and 36% urban in 1871 to 46% rural and 54% urban in 1900.\nBismarck era.\nBismarck's domestic policies played an important role in forging the authoritarian political culture of the \"Kaiserreich\". Less preoccupied with continental power politics following unification in 1871, Germany's semi-parliamentary government carried out a relatively smooth economic and political revolution from above that pushed them along the way towards becoming the world's leading industrial power of the time.\nBismarck's \"revolutionary conservatism\" was a conservative state-building strategy designed to make ordinary Germans\u2014not just the Junker elite\u2014more loyal to the throne and empire. According to Kees van Kersbergen and Barbara Vis, his strategy was:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;granting social rights to enhance the integration of a hierarchical society, to forge a bond between workers and the state so as to strengthen the latter, to maintain traditional relations of authority between social and status groups, and to provide a countervailing power against the modernist forces of liberalism and socialism.\nBismarck created the modern welfare state in Germany in the 1880s and enacted universal male suffrage in 1871. He became a great hero to German conservatives, who erected many monuments to his memory and tried to emulate his policies.\nForeign policy.\nBismarck's post-1871 foreign policy was conservative and sought to preserve the balance of power in Europe. British historian Eric Hobsbawm concludes that he \"remained undisputed world champion at the game of multilateral diplomatic chess for almost twenty years after 1871, [devoting] himself exclusively, and successfully, to maintaining peace between the powers\". This was a departure from his adventurous foreign policy for Prussia, where he favored strength and expansion, punctuating this by saying, \"The great questions of the age are not settled by speeches and majority votes \u2013 this was the error of 1848\u201349 \u2013 but by iron and blood.\"\nBismarck's chief concern was that France would plot revenge after its defeat in the Franco-Prussian War. As the French lacked the strength to defeat Germany by themselves, they sought an alliance with Russia, or perhaps even the newly reformed empire of Austria-Hungary, which would envelope Germany completely. Bismarck wanted to prevent this at all costs and maintain friendly relations with the Austrians and the Russians, signing the Dual Alliance (1879) with Austria-Hungary in 1879. The Dual Alliance was a defensive alliance that was established against Russia, and by association France, in the event alliance did not work out with the state. However, an alliance with Russia would come not long after the signing of the Dual Alliance with Austria, the \"Dreikaiserbund\" (League of Three Emperors), in 1881. During this period, individuals within the German military were advocating a preemptive strike against Russia, but Bismarck knew that such ideas were foolhardy. He once wrote that \"the most brilliant victories would not avail against the Russian nation, because of its climate, its desert, and its frugality, and having but one frontier to defend\", and because it would leave Germany with another bitter, resentful neighbor. Despite this, another alliance between Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy would be signed in 1882, preying on the fears of the German and Austro-Hungarian militaries of the untrustworthiness of Russia itself. This Triple Alliance continued to 1915, when Italy declared war on Austria-Hungary. Despite Germany, and especially Austria's, lack of faith in the Russian alliance, the would be first signed in 1887, and renewed up until 1890, when the Bismarckian system collapsed upon Bismarck's resignation.\nMeanwhile, the chancellor remained wary of any foreign policy developments that looked even remotely warlike. In 1886, he moved to stop an attempted sale of horses to France because they might be used for cavalry and also ordered an investigation into large Russian purchases of medicine from a German chemical works. Bismarck stubbornly refused to listen to Georg Herbert M\u00fcnster, ambassador to France, who reported back that the French were not seeking a revanchist war and were desperate for peace at all costs.\nBismarck and most of his contemporaries were conservative-minded and focused their foreign policy attention on Germany's neighboring states. In 1914, 60% of German foreign investment was in Europe, as opposed to just 5% of British investment. Most of the money went to developing nations such as Russia that lacked the capital or technical knowledge to industrialize on their own. The construction of the Berlin\u2013Baghdad railway, financed by German banks, was designed to eventually connect Germany with the Ottoman Empire and the Persian Gulf, but it also collided with British and Russian geopolitical interests. Conflict over the Baghdad Railway was resolved in June 1914.\nMany consider Bismarck's foreign policy as a coherent system and partly responsible for the preservation of Europe's stability. It was also marked by the need to balance circumspect defensiveness and the desire to be free from the constraints of its position as a major European power. Bismarck's successors did not pursue his foreign policy legacy. For instance, Kaiser Wilhelm II, who dismissed the chancellor in 1890, let the treaty with Russia lapse in favor of Germany's alliance with Austria, which finally led to a stronger coalition-building between Russia and France.\nColonies.\nGermans had dreamed of colonial imperialism since 1848. Although Bismarck had little interest in acquiring overseas possessions, most Germans were enthusiastic, and by 1884 he had acquired German New Guinea. By the 1890s, German colonial expansion in Asia and the Pacific (Jiaozhou Bay and Tianjin in China, the Marianas, the Caroline Islands, Samoa) led to frictions with the UK, Russia, Japan, and the US. The largest colonial enterprises were in Africa, where the Herero Wars in what is now Namibia in 1906\u20131907 resulted in the Herero and Nama genocide.\nEconomy.\nBy 1900, Germany became the largest economy in continental Europe and the third largest in the world behind the United States and the British Empire, which were also its main economic rivals. Throughout its existence, it experienced economic growth and modernization led by heavy industry. In 1871, it had a largely rural population of 41\u00a0million, while by 1913, this had increased to a predominantly urban population of 68\u00a0million.\nIndustrial power.\nFor 30 years, Germany struggled against Britain to be Europe's leading industrial power. Representative of Germany's industry was the steel giant Krupp, whose first factory was built in Essen. By 1902, the factory alone became \"A great city with its own streets, its own police force, fire department and traffic laws. There are 150 kilometers of rail, 60 different factory buildings, 8,500 machine tools, seven electrical stations, 140 kilometers of underground cable, and 46 overhead.\"\nUnder Bismarck, Germany was a world innovator in building the welfare state. German workers enjoyed health, accident and maternity benefits, canteens, changing rooms, and a national pension scheme.\nIndustrialisation progressed dynamically in Germany, and German manufacturers began to capture domestic markets from British imports, and also to compete with British industry abroad, particularly in the U.S. The German textile and metal industries had by 1870 surpassed those of Britain in organisation and technical efficiency and superseded British manufacturers in the domestic market. Germany became the dominant economic power on the continent and was the second-largest exporting nation after Britain.\nTechnological progress during German industrialisation occurred in four waves: the railway wave (1877\u20131886), the dye wave (1887\u20131896), the chemical wave (1897\u20131902), and the wave of electrical engineering (1903\u20131918). Since Germany industrialised later than Britain, it was able to model its factories after those of Britain, thus making more efficient use of its capital and avoiding legacy methods in its leap to the envelope of technology. Germany invested more heavily than the British in research, especially in chemistry, ICE engines and electricity. Germany's dominance in physics and chemistry was such that one-third of all Nobel Prizes went to German inventors and researchers. The German cartel system (known as \"Konzerne\"), being significantly concentrated, was able to make more efficient use of capital. Germany was not weighted down with an expensive worldwide empire that needed defense. Following Germany's annexation of Alsace-Lorraine in 1871, it absorbed parts of what had been France's industrial base.\nGermany overtook British steel production in 1893 and pig iron production in 1903. The German steel and pig iron production continued its rapid expansion: Between 1911 and 1913, the German steel and pig iron output reached one quarter of total global production.\nGerman factories were larger and more modern than their British and French counterparts. By 1913, the German electricity production was higher than the combined electricity production of Britain, France, Italy and Sweden.\nBy 1900, the German chemical industry dominated the world market for synthetic dyes. The three major firms BASF, Bayer and Hoechst produced several hundred different dyes, along with the five smaller firms. Imperial Germany built up the world's largest chemical industry, the production of German chemical industry was 60% higher than that of the United States. In 1913, these eight firms produced almost 90% of the world supply of dyestuffs and sold about 80% of their production abroad. The three major firms had also integrated upstream into the production of essential raw materials, and they began to expand into other areas of chemistry such as pharmaceuticals, photographic film, agricultural chemicals and electrochemicals. Top-level decision-making was in the hands of professional salaried managers; leading Chandler to call the German dye companies \"the world's first truly managerial industrial enterprises\". There were many spinoffs from research\u2014such as the pharmaceutical industry, which emerged from chemical research.\nBy the start of World War I (1914\u20131918), German industry switched to war production. The heaviest demands were for coal and steel for artillery and shell production, and for chemicals for the synthesis of materials that were subject to import restrictions and for chemical weapons and war supplies.\nRailways.\nLacking a technological base at first, the Germans imported their engineering and hardware from Britain but quickly learned the skills needed to operate and expand the railways. In many cities, the new railway shops were the centers of technological awareness and training, so that by 1850, Germany was self-sufficient in meeting the demands of railroad construction, and the railways were a major impetus for the growth of the new steel industry. German unification in 1870 stimulated consolidation, nationalisation into state-owned companies, and further rapid growth. Unlike the situation in France, the goal was support of industrialisation, and so heavy lines crisscrossed the Ruhr and other industrial districts and provided good connections to the major ports of Hamburg and Bremen. By 1880, Germany had 9,400 locomotives, pulling 43,000 passengers and 30,000 tons of freight per year per locomotive, and its rail network forged ahead of France. The total length of German railroad tracks expanded from in 1871 to by 1913, establishing the second largest rail network in the world after the United States. The German rail network was followed by Austria-Hungary (), France (), the United Kingdom (), Italy () and Spain ().\nConsolidation.\nThe creation of the Empire under Prussian leadership was a victory for the concept of (Smaller Germany) over the \"Gro\u00dfdeutschland\" concept. This meant that Austria-Hungary, a multi-ethnic Empire with a considerable German-speaking population, would remain outside of the German nation state. Bismarck's policy was to pursue a solution diplomatically. The effective alliance between Germany and Austria played a major role in Germany's decision to enter World War I in 1914.\nBismarck announced there would be no more territorial additions to Germany in Europe, and his diplomacy after 1871 was focused on stabilizing the European system and preventing any wars. He succeeded, and only after his departure from office in 1890 did the diplomatic tensions start rising again.\nSocial issues.\nAfter achieving formal unification in 1871, Bismarck devoted much of his attention to the cause of national unity. He opposed Catholic civil rights and emancipation, especially the influence of the Vatican under Pope Pius IX, and working-class radicalism, represented by the emerging Social Democratic Party.\nKulturkampf.\nPrussia in 1871 included 16,000,000 Protestants, both Reformed and Lutheran, and 8,000,000 Catholics. Most people were generally segregated into their own religious worlds, living in rural districts or city neighbourhoods that were overwhelmingly of the same religion, and sending their children to separate public schools where their religion was taught. There was little interaction or intermarriage. On the whole, the Protestants had a higher social status, and the Catholics were more likely to be peasant farmers or unskilled or semiskilled industrial workers. In 1870, the Catholics formed their own political party, the Centre Party, which generally supported unification and most of Bismarck's policies. However, Bismarck distrusted parliamentary democracy in general and opposition parties in particular, especially when the Centre Party showed signs of gaining support among dissident elements such as the Polish Catholics in Silesia. A powerful intellectual force of the time was anti-Catholicism, led by the liberal intellectuals who formed a vital part of Bismarck's coalition. They saw the Catholic Church as a powerful force of reaction and anti-modernity, especially after the proclamation of papal infallibility in 1870, and the tightening control of the Vatican over the local bishops.\nThe Kulturkampf launched by Bismarck 1871\u20131880 affected Prussia; although there were similar movements in Baden and Hesse, the rest of Germany was not affected. According to the new imperial constitution, the states were in charge of religious and educational affairs; they funded the Protestant and Catholic schools. In July 1871 Bismarck abolished the Catholic section of the Prussian Ministry of ecclesiastical and educational affairs, depriving Catholics of their voice at the highest level. The system of strict government supervision of schools was applied only in Catholic areas; the Protestant schools were left alone.\nMuch more serious were the May laws of 1873. One made the appointment of any priest dependent on his attendance at a German university, as opposed to the seminaries that the Catholics typically used. Furthermore, all candidates for the ministry had to pass an examination in German culture before a state board which weeded out intransigent Catholics. Another provision gave the government veto power over most church activities. A second law abolished the jurisdiction of the Vatican over the Catholic Church in Prussia; its authority was transferred to a government body controlled by Protestants.\nNearly all German bishops, clergy, and laymen rejected the legality of the new laws, and were defiant in the face of heavier and heavier penalties and imprisonments imposed by Bismarck's government. By 1876, all the Prussian bishops were imprisoned or in exile, and a third of the Catholic parishes were without a priest. In the face of systematic defiance, the Bismarck government increased both the penalties and its attacks. They were challenged in 1875 when a papal encyclical declared the whole ecclesiastical legislation of Prussia invalid and threatened to excommunicate any Catholic who obeyed. There was no violence, but the Catholics mobilized their support, set up numerous civic organizations, raised money to pay fines, and rallied behind their church and the Centre Party. The \"Old Catholic Church\", which rejected the First Vatican Council, attracted only a few thousand members. Bismarck, a devout pietistic Protestant, realized his Kulturkampf was backfiring when secular and socialist elements used the opportunity to attack all religion. In the long run, the most significant result was the mobilization of Catholic voters and their insistence on protecting their religious identity. In the elections of 1874, the Centre Party doubled its popular vote and became the second-largest party in the national parliament\u2014and remained a powerful force for the next 60 years, so that after Bismarck it became difficult to form a government without their support.\nSocial reform.\nBismarck built on a tradition of welfare programs in Prussia and Saxony that began as early as the 1840s. In the 1880s he introduced old-age pensions, accident insurance, medical care and unemployment insurance that formed the basis of the modern European welfare state. He came to realize that this sort of policy was very appealing, since it bound workers to the state, and also fit in very well with his authoritarian nature. The social security systems installed by Bismarck (health care in 1883, accident insurance in 1884, invalidity and old-age insurance in 1889) at the time were the largest in the world and, to a degree, still exist in Germany today.\nBismarck's paternalistic programs won the support of German industry because its goals were to win the support of the working classes for the Empire and reduce the outflow of immigrants to America, where wages were higher but welfare did not exist. Bismarck further won the support of both industry and skilled workers by his high tariff policies, which protected profits and wages from American competition, although they alienated the liberal intellectuals who wanted free trade.\nAntisemitism.\nAs it was throughout Europe at the time, antisemitism was endemic in Germany during the period. Before Napoleon's decrees ended the ghettos in the Confederation of the Rhine, it had been religiously motivated, but by the 19th century, it was a factor in German nationalism. In the popular mind, Jews became a symbol of capitalism and wealth. On the other hand, the constitution and legal system protected the rights of Jews as German citizens. Antisemitic parties were formed but soon collapsed. But after the Treaty of Versailles, and Adolf Hitler's rise to power in Germany, antisemitism in Germany would increase.\nGermanisation.\nOne of the effects of the unification policies was the gradually increasing tendency to eliminate the use of non-German languages in public life, schools and academic settings with the intent of pressuring the non-German population to abandon their national identity in what was called \"Germanisation\". These policies often had the reverse effect of stimulating resistance, usually in the form of homeschooling and tighter unity in the minority groups, especially the Poles.\nThe Germanisation policies were targeted particularly against the significant Polish minority of the empire, gained by Prussia in the partitions of Poland. Poles were treated as an ethnic minority even where they made up the majority, as in the Province of Posen, where a series of anti-Polish measures was enforced. Numerous anti-Polish laws had no great effect especially in the province of Posen where the German-speaking population dropped from 42.8% in 1871 to 38.1% in 1905, despite all efforts.\nLaw.\nBismarck's efforts also initiated the levelling of the enormous differences between the German states, which had been independent in their evolution for centuries, especially with legislation. The completely different legal histories and judicial systems posed enormous complications, especially for national trade. While a common trade code had already been introduced by the Confederation in 1861 (which was adapted for the Empire and, with great modifications, is still in effect today), there was little similarity in laws otherwise.\nIn 1871, a common criminal code was introduced; in 1877, common court procedures were established in the court system by the courts constitution act, code of civil procedure () and code of criminal procedure (). In 1873 the constitution was amended to allow the Empire to replace the various and greatly differing Civil Codes of the states (If they existed at all; for example, parts of Germany formerly occupied by Napoleon's France had adopted the French Civil Code, while in Prussia the of 1794 was still in effect). In 1881, a first commission was established to produce a common Civil Code for all of the Empire, an enormous effort that would produce the (BGB), possibly one of the most impressive legal works in the world; it was eventually put into effect on 1 January 1900. All of these codifications are, albeit with many amendments, still in effect today.\nYear of the three emperors.\nOn 9 March 1888, Wilhelm I died shortly before his 91st birthday, leaving his son Frederick as the new emperor. Frederick was a liberal and an admirer of the British constitution, while his links to Britain strengthened further with his marriage to Princess Victoria, eldest child of Queen Victoria. With his ascent to the throne, many hoped that Frederick's reign would lead to a liberalization of the Reich and an increase of parliament's influence on the political process. The dismissal of Robert von Puttkamer, the highly conservative Prussian interior minister, on 8 June was a sign of the expected direction and a blow to Bismarck's administration.\nBy the time of his accession, however, Frederick had developed incurable laryngeal cancer, which had been diagnosed in 1887. He died on the 99th day of his rule, on 15 June 1888. His son Wilhelm became emperor.\nWilhelmine era.\nBismarck's resignation.\nWilhelm II wanted to reassert his ruling prerogatives at a time when other monarchs in Europe were being transformed into constitutional figureheads. This decision led the ambitious Kaiser into conflict with Bismarck. The old chancellor had hoped to guide Wilhelm as he had guided his grandfather, but the emperor wanted to be the master in his own house and had many sycophants telling him that Frederick the Great would not have been great with a Bismarck at his side. A key difference between Wilhelm II and Bismarck was their approaches to handling political crises, especially in 1889, when German coal miners went on strike in Upper Silesia. Bismarck demanded that the German Army be sent in to crush the strike, but Wilhelm II rejected this authoritarian measure, responding \"I do not wish to stain my reign with the blood of my subjects.\" Instead of condoning repression, Wilhelm had the government negotiate with a delegation from the coal miners, which brought the strike to an end without violence. The fractious relationship ended in March 1890, after Wilhelm II and Bismarck quarrelled, and the chancellor resigned days later.\nWith Bismarck's departure, Wilhelm II became the dominant ruler of Germany. Unlike his grandfather, Wilhelm I, who had been largely content to leave government affairs to the chancellor, Wilhelm II wanted to be fully informed and actively involved in running Germany, not an ornamental figurehead, although most Germans found his claims of divine right to rule amusing. Wilhelm allowed politician Walther Rathenau to tutor him in European economics and industrial and financial realities in Europe.\nAs Isabel V. Hull noted in 2024, Bismarckian foreign policy \"was too sedate for the reckless Kaiser\". Wilhelm became internationally notorious for his aggressive stance on foreign policy and his strategic blunders (such as the Tangier Crisis), which pushed the German Empire into growing political isolation and eventually helped to cause World War I.\nDomestic affairs.\nUnder Wilhelm II, Germany no longer had long-ruling strong chancellors like Bismarck. The new chancellors had difficulty in performing their roles, especially the additional role as Prime Minister of Prussia assigned to them in the German Constitution. The reforms of Chancellor Leo von Caprivi, which liberalized trade and so reduced unemployment, were supported by the Kaiser and most Germans except for Prussian landowners, who feared loss of land and power and launched several campaigns against the reforms.\nWhile Prussian aristocrats challenged the demands of a united German state, in the 1890s several organizations were set up to challenge the authoritarian conservative Prussian militarism which was being imposed on the country. Educators opposed to the German state-run schools, which emphasized military education, set up their own independent liberal schools, which encouraged individuality and freedom. However nearly all the schools in Imperial Germany had a very high standard and kept abreast with modern developments in knowledge.\nArtists began experimental art in opposition to Kaiser Wilhelm's support for traditional art, to which Wilhelm responded \"art which transgresses the laws and limits laid down by me can no longer be called art\". It was largely thanks to Wilhelm's influence that most printed material in Germany used blackletter instead of the Roman type used in the rest of Western Europe. At the same time, a new generation of cultural creators emerged.\nFrom the 1890s onwards, the most effective opposition to the monarchy came from the newly formed Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), whose radicals advocated Marxism. The threat of the SPD to the German monarchy and industrialists caused the state both to crack down on the party's supporters and to implement its own programme of social reform to soothe discontent. Germany's large industries provided significant social welfare programmes and good care to their employees, as long as they were not identified as socialists or trade-union members. The larger industrial firms provided pensions, sickness benefits and even housing to their employees.\nHaving learned from the failure of Bismarck's Kulturkampf, Wilhelm II maintained good relations with the Roman Catholic Church and concentrated on opposing socialism. This policy failed when the Social Democrats won a third of the votes in the 1912 elections to the \"Reichstag\" and became the largest political party in Germany. The government remained in the hands of a succession of conservative coalitions supported by right-wing liberals or Catholic clerics and heavily dependent on the Kaiser's favour. The rising militarism under Wilhelm II caused many Germans to emigrate to the U.S. and the British colonies to escape mandatory military service.\nDuring World War I, the Kaiser increasingly devolved his powers to the leaders of the German High Command, particularly future German president, Field Marshal Paul von Hindenburg and \"Generalquartiermeister\" Erich Ludendorff. Hindenburg took over the role of commander\u2013in\u2013chief from the Kaiser, while Ludendorff became de facto general chief of staff. By 1916, Germany was effectively a military dictatorship run by Hindenburg and Ludendorff, with the Kaiser reduced to a mere figurehead.\nForeign affairs.\nColonialism.\nWilhelm II wanted Germany to have her \"place in the sun\", like Britain, which he constantly wished to emulate or rival. With German traders and merchants already active worldwide, he encouraged colonial efforts in Africa and the Pacific (\"new imperialism\"), causing the German Empire to vie with other European powers for remaining \"unclaimed\" territories. With the encouragement or at least the acquiescence of Britain, which at this stage saw Germany as a counterweight to her old rival France, Germany acquired German Southwest Africa (modern Namibia), German Kamerun (modern Cameroon), Togoland (modern Togo) and German East Africa (modern Rwanda, Burundi, and the mainland part of current Tanzania). Islands were gained in the Pacific through purchase and treaties and also a 99-year lease for the territory of Jiaozhou in northeast China. But of these German colonies only Togoland and German Samoa (after 1908) became self-sufficient and profitable; all the others required subsidies from the Berlin treasury for building infrastructure, school systems, hospitals and other institutions.\nBismarck had originally dismissed the agitation for colonies with contempt; he favoured a Eurocentric foreign policy, as the treaty arrangements made during his tenure in office show. As a latecomer to colonization, Germany repeatedly came into conflict with the established colonial powers and also with the United States, which opposed German attempts at colonial expansion in both the Caribbean and the Pacific. Native insurrections in German territories received prominent coverage in other countries, especially in Britain; the established powers had dealt with such uprisings decades earlier, often brutally, and had secured firm control of their colonies by then. The Boxer Rising in China, which the Chinese government eventually sponsored, began in the Shandong province, in part because Germany, as colonizer at Jiaozhou, was an untested power and had only been active there for two years. Seven western nations, including the United States, and Japan mounted a joint relief force to rescue westerners caught up in the rebellion. During the departure ceremonies for the German contingent, Wilhelm II urged them to behave like the Hun invaders of continental Europe \u2013 an unfortunate remark that would later be resurrected by British propagandists to paint Germans as barbarians during World War I and World War II. On two occasions, a French-German conflict over the fate of Morocco seemed inevitable.\nUpon acquiring Southwest Africa, German settlers were encouraged to cultivate land held by the Herero and Nama. Herero and Nama tribal lands were used for a variety of exploitative goals (much as the British did before in Rhodesia), including farming, ranching, and mining for minerals and diamonds. In 1904, the Herero and the Nama revolted against the colonists in Southwest Africa, killing farm families, their laborers and servants. In response to the attacks, troops were dispatched to quell the uprising which then resulted in the Herero and Nama genocide. In total, some 65,000 Herero (80% of the total Herero population), and 10,000 Nama (50% of the total Nama population) perished. The commander of the punitive expedition, General Lothar von Trotha, was eventually relieved and reprimanded for his usurpation of orders and the cruelties he inflicted. These occurrences were sometimes referred to as \"the first genocide of the 20th century\" and officially condemned by the United Nations in 1985. In 2004 a formal apology by a government minister of the Federal Republic of Germany followed.\nMiddle East.\nBismarck and Wilhelm II after him sought closer economic ties with the Ottoman Empire. Under Wilhelm II, with the financial backing of the Deutsche Bank, the Baghdad Railway was begun in 1900, although by 1914 it was still short of its destination in Baghdad. In an interview with Wilhelm in 1899, Cecil Rhodes had tried \"to convince the Kaiser that the future of the German empire abroad lay in the Middle East\" and not in Africa; with a grand Middle-Eastern empire, Germany could afford to allow Britain the unhindered completion of the Cape-to-Cairo railway that Rhodes favoured. Britain initially supported the Baghdad Railway; but by 1911 British statesmen came to fear it might be extended to Basra on the Persian Gulf, threatening Britain's naval supremacy in the Indian Ocean. Accordingly, they asked to have construction halted, to which Germany and the Ottoman Empire acquiesced.\nSouth America.\nIn South America, Germany's primary interest was in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Uruguay and viewed the countries of northern South America\u2014Ecuador, Colombia, and Venezuela\u2014as a buffer to protect its interest from the growing influence of the United States. Policymakers in Germany analysed the possibility of establishing bases in Margarita Island and showed interest in the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands but soon abandoned any such designs given that far-flung bases in northern South America would be very vulnerable. Germany attempted to promote Chile, a country that was heavily influenced by Germany, into a regional counterweight to the United States. Germany and Britain managed through Chile to have Ecuador deny the United States a naval base in the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands.\nClaims that German communities in South America acted as extensions of the German Empire were ubiquitous by 1900 but it has never been proved that these communities acted in such way to any significant degree. German political, cultural and scientific influence was particularly intense in Chile in the decades before World War I, and the prestige of Germany and German things in Chile remained high after the war but did not recover to its pre-war levels.\nPre-war Europe.\nBerlin was deeply suspicious of a supposed conspiracy of its enemies: that year-by-year in the early 20th century it was systematically encircled by enemies. There was a growing fear that the supposed enemy coalition of Russia, France and Britain was getting stronger militarily every year, especially Russia. The longer Berlin waited the less likely it would prevail in a war. According to American historian Gordon A. Craig, it was after the set-back in Morocco in 1905 that the fear of encirclement began to be a potent factor in German politics.\" Few outside observers agreed with the notion of Germany as a victim of deliberate encirclement. English historian G. M. Trevelyan expressed the British viewpoint:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The encirclement, such as it was, was of Germany's own making. She had encircled herself by alienating France over Alsace-Lorraine, Russia by her support of Austria-Hungary's anti-Slav policy in the Balkans, England by building her rival fleet. She had created with Austria-Hungary a military bloc in the heart of Europe so powerful and yet so restless that her neighbors on each side had no choice but either to become her vassals or to stand together for protection...They used their central position to create fear in all sides, in order to gain their diplomatic ends. And then they complained that on all sides they had been encircled.\nWilhelm II, under pressure from his new advisors after Bismarck left, committed a fatal error when he decided to allow the \"Reinsurance Treaty\" that Bismarck had negotiated with Tsarist Russia to lapse. It allowed Russia to make a new alliance with France. Germany was left with no firm ally but Austria-Hungary, and her support for action in annexing Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1908 further soured relations with Russia. Berlin missed the opportunity to secure an alliance with Britain in the 1890s when it was involved in colonial rivalries with France, and it alienated British statesmen further by openly supporting the Boers in the South African War and building a navy to rival Britain's. By 1911, Wilhelm had completely picked apart the careful power balance established by Bismarck and Britain turned to France in the Entente Cordiale. Germany's only other ally besides Austria was the Kingdom of Italy, but it remained an ally only \"pro forma\". When war came, Italy saw more benefit in an alliance with Britain, France, and Russia, which, in the secret Treaty of London in 1915 promised it the frontier districts of Austria and also colonial concessions. Germany did acquire a second ally in 1914 when the Ottoman Empire entered the war on its side, but in the long run, supporting the Ottoman war effort only drained away German resources from the main fronts.\nWorld War I.\nOrigins.\nFollowing the assassination of the Austro-Hungarian Archduke Franz Ferdinand by Gavrilo Princip, the Kaiser offered Emperor Franz Joseph full support for Austro-Hungarian plans to invade the Kingdom of Serbia, which Austria-Hungary blamed for the assassination. This unconditional support for Austria-Hungary was called a \"blank cheque\" by historians, including German Fritz Fischer. Subsequent interpretation \u2013 for example at the Versailles Peace Conference \u2013 was that this \"blank cheque\" licensed Austro-Hungarian aggression regardless of the diplomatic consequences, and thus Germany bore responsibility for starting the war, or at least provoking a wider conflict.\nGermany began the war by targeting its chief rival, France. Germany saw the French Republic as its principal danger on the European continent as it could mobilize much faster than Russia and bordered Germany's industrial core in the Rhineland. Unlike Britain and Russia, the French entered the war mainly for revenge against Germany, in particular for France's loss of Alsace-Lorraine to Germany in 1871. The German high command knew that France would muster its forces to go into Alsace-Lorraine. Aside from the very unofficial Septemberprogramm, the Germans never stated a clear list of goals that they wanted out of the war.\nWestern Front.\nGermany did not want to risk lengthy battles along the Franco-German border and instead adopted the Schlieffen Plan, a military strategy designed to cripple France by invading Belgium and Luxembourg, sweeping down to encircle and crush both Paris and the French forces along the Franco-German border in a quick victory. After defeating France, Germany would turn to attack Russia. The plan required violating the official neutrality of Belgium and Luxembourg, which Britain had guaranteed by treaty. However, the Germans had calculated that Britain would enter the war regardless of whether they had formal justification to do so. At first the attack was successful: the German Army swept down from Belgium and Luxembourg and advanced on Paris, at the nearby river Marne. However, the evolution of weapons over the last century heavily favored defense over offense, especially thanks to the machine gun, so that it took proportionally more offensive force to overcome a defensive position. This resulted in the German lines on the offense contracting to keep up the offensive timetable while correspondingly the French lines were extending. In addition, some German units that were originally slotted for the German far-right were transferred to the Eastern Front in reaction to Russia mobilizing far faster than anticipated. The combined effect had the German right flank sweeping down in front of Paris instead of behind it, exposing the German Right flank to the extending French lines and attack from strategic French reserves stationed in Paris. Attacking the exposed German right flank, the French Army and the British Army put up a strong resistance to the defense of Paris at the First Battle of the Marne, resulting in the German Army retreating to defensive positions along the river Aisne. A subsequent Race to the Sea resulted in a long-held stalemate between the German Army and the Allies in dug-in trench warfare positions from Alsace to Flanders.\nGerman attempts to break through failed at the two battles of Ypres (1st/2nd) with huge casualties. A series of allied offensives in 1915 against German positions in Artois and Champagne resulted in huge allied casualties and little territorial change. German Chief of Staff Erich von Falkenhayn decided to exploit the defensive advantages that had shown themselves in the 1915 Allied offensives by attempting to goad France into attacking strong defensive positions near the ancient city of Verdun. Verdun had been one of the last cities to hold out against the German Army in 1870, and Falkenhayn predicted that as a matter of national pride the French would do anything to ensure that it was not taken. He expected that he could take strong defensive positions in the hills overlooking Verdun on the east bank of the river Meuse to threaten the city and the French would launch desperate attacks against these positions. He predicted that French losses would be greater than those of the Germans and that continued French commitment of troops to Verdun would \"bleed the French Army white.\" In February 1916, the Battle of Verdun began, with the French positions under constant shelling and poison gas attack and taking large casualties under the assault of overwhelmingly large German forces. However, Falkenhayn's prediction of a greater ratio of French killed proved to be wrong as both sides took heavy casualties. Falkenhayn was replaced by Erich Ludendorff, and with no success in sight, the German Army pulled out of Verdun in December 1916 and the battle ended.\nEastern Front.\nWhile the Western Front was a stalemate for the German Army, the Eastern Front eventually proved to be a great success. Despite initial setbacks due to the unexpectedly rapid mobilisation of the Russian army, which resulted in a Russian invasion of East Prussia and Austrian Galicia, the badly organised and supplied Russian Army faltered and the German and Austro-Hungarian armies thereafter steadily advanced eastward. The Germans benefited from political instability in Russia and its population's desire to end the war. In 1917 the German government allowed Russia's communist Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin to travel through Germany from Switzerland into Russia. Germany believed that if Lenin could create further political unrest, Russia would no longer be able to continue its war with Germany, allowing the German Army to focus on the Western Front.\nIn March 1917, the Tsar was ousted from the Russian throne, and in November a Bolshevik government came to power under the leadership of Lenin. Facing political opposition, he decided to end Russia's campaign against Germany, Austria-Hungary, the Ottoman Empire and Bulgaria to redirect Bolshevik energy to eliminating internal dissent. In March 1918, by the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, the Bolshevik government gave Germany and the Ottoman Empire enormous territorial and economic concessions in exchange for an end to war on the Eastern Front. All of present-day Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania was given over to the German occupation authority \"Ober Ost\", along with Belarus and Ukraine. Thus Germany had at last achieved its long-wanted dominance of \"Mitteleuropa\" (Central Europe) and could now focus fully on defeating the Allies on the Western Front. In practice, however, the forces that were needed to garrison and secure the new territories were a drain on the German war effort.\nColonies.\nGermany quickly lost almost all its colonies. However, in German East Africa, a guerrilla campaign was waged by the colonial army leader there, General Paul Emil von Lettow-Vorbeck. Using Germans and native Askaris, Lettow-Vorbeck launched multiple guerrilla raids against British forces in Kenya and Rhodesia. He also invaded Portuguese Mozambique to gain his forces supplies and to pick up more Askari recruits. His force was still active at war's end.\n1918.\nThe defeat of Russia in 1917 enabled Germany to transfer hundreds of thousands of troops from the Eastern to the Western Front, giving it a numerical advantage over the Allies. By retraining the soldiers in new infiltration tactics, the Germans expected to unfreeze the battlefield and win a decisive victory before the army of the United States, which had now entered the war on the side of the Allies, arrived in strength. In what was known as the \"Kaiserschlacht\", Germany converged their troops and delivered multiple blows that pushed back the allies. However, the repeated German offensives in the spring of 1918 all failed, as the Allies fell back and regrouped and the Germans lacked the reserves needed to consolidate their gains. Meanwhile, soldiers had become radicalised by the Russian Revolution and were less willing to continue fighting. The war effort sparked civil unrest in Germany, while the troops, who had been constantly in the field without relief, grew exhausted and lost all hope of victory. In the summer of 1918, the British Army was at its peak strength with as many as 4.5\u00a0million men on the western front and 4,000 tanks for the Hundred Days Offensive, the Americans arriving at the rate of 10,000 a day, Germany's allies facing collapse and the German Empire's manpower exhausted, it was only a matter of time before multiple Allied offensives destroyed the German army.\nThe concept of \"total war\" meant that supplies had to be redirected towards the armed forces and, with German commerce being stopped by the Allied naval blockade, German civilians were forced to live in increasingly meagre conditions. First food prices were controlled, then rationing was introduced. During the war about 750,000 German civilians died from malnutrition.\nTowards the end of the war, conditions deteriorated rapidly on the home front, with severe food shortages reported in all urban areas. The causes included the transfer of many farmers and food workers into the military, combined with the overburdened railway system, shortages of coal, and the British blockade. The winter of 1916\u20131917 was known as the \"turnip winter\" because the people had to survive on a vegetable more commonly reserved for livestock as a substitute for potatoes and meat, which were increasingly scarce. Thousands of soup kitchens were opened to feed the hungry, who grumbled that the farmers were keeping the food for themselves. Even the army had to cut the soldiers' rations. The morale of both civilians and soldiers continued to sink. The population of Germany was already suffering from outbreaks of disease due to malnutrition due to Allied blockade preventing food imports. Spanish flu arrived in Germany with returning troops. Around 287,000 people died of Spanish flu in Germany between 1918 and 1920 with 50,000 deaths in Berlin alone.\nRevolt and demise.\nMany Germans wanted an end to the war and increasing numbers began to associate with the political left, such as the Social Democratic Party (SPD) and the more radical Independent Social Democratic Party (USPD), which demanded an end to the war. The entry of the U.S. into the war in April 1917 tipped the long-run balance of power even more in favour of the Allies.\nThe end of October 1918, in Kiel, in northern Germany, saw the beginning of the German Revolution of 1918\u20131919. Units of the German Navy refused to set sail for a last, large-scale operation in a war which they saw as good as lost, initiating the uprising. On 3 November, the revolt spread to other cities and states of the country, in many of which workers' and soldiers' councils were established. Meanwhile, Hindenburg and the senior generals lost confidence in the Kaiser and his government.\nBulgaria signed the Armistice of Salonica on 29 September 1918. The Ottoman Empire signed the Armistice of Mudros on 30 October 1918. Between 24 October and 3 November 1918, Italy defeated Austria-Hungary in the battle of Vittorio Veneto, which forced Austria-Hungary to sign the Armistice of Villa Giusti on 3 November 1918. So, in November 1918, with internal revolution, the Allies advancing toward Germany on the Western Front, Austria-Hungary falling apart from multiple ethnic tensions, its other allies out of the war and pressure from the German high command, the Kaiser and all German ruling kings, dukes, and princes abdicated, and German nobility was abolished. On 9 November, the Social Democrat Philipp Scheidemann proclaimed a republic. The new government led by the German Social Democrats called for and received an armistice on 11 November. It was succeeded by the Weimar Republic. Those opposed, including disaffected veterans, joined a diverse set of paramilitary and underground political groups such as the Freikorps, the Organisation Consul, and the Communists.\nConstitution.\nThe Empire was a federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy.\nThe Federal Council () held sovereignty over the Empire and served as its highest authority. The was a legislative body that possessed the right of legislative initiative (Article VII Nr. 1) and, because all laws required its consent, could effectively veto any bill coming from the \"Reichstag\" (Article V). The was able to set guidelines and make organisational changes within the executive branch, act as supreme arbitrator in administrative disputes between states, and serve as constitutional court for states that did not have a constitutional court (Article LXXVI). It was composed of representatives who were appointed by and reported to the state governments.\nThe Imperial Diet (\"Reichstag\") was a legislative body elected by universal male suffrage that effectively served as parliament. It had the right to propose bills and, with the concurrence of the , approve the state budget annually and the military budget for periods of seven years until 1893, then after that for five years. All laws required the \"Reichstag's\" approval to pass. After the constitutional reforms of October 1918, the Reich chancellor, through a change to Article XV, became dependent on the confidence of the \"Reichstag\" rather than the emperor.\nThe emperor (\"Kaiser\") was head of state of the Empire \u2013 he was not a ruler. He appointed the chancellor, usually the person able to command the confidence of the \"Reichstag\". The chancellor, in consultation with the emperor, determined the government's broad policy guidelines and presented them to the \"Reichstag.\" On the advice of the chancellor, the emperor appointed the ministers and \u2013 at least formally \u2013 all other imperial officers. All acts of the emperor except for military directives required the countersignature of the chancellor (Article XVII). The emperor was also responsible for signing bills into law, declaring war (which required the consent of the \"Bundesrat\"), negotiating peace, making treaties, and calling and adjourning sessions of the and the \"Reichstag\" (Articles XI and XII). The emperor was commander-in-chief of the Empire's Army (Article LXIII) and Navy (Article LIII); when exercising his military authority he had plenary power.\nThe chancellor was head of government and chaired the and the Imperial Government, led the lawmaking process and countersigned all acts of the emperor (except for military directives).\nConstituent states.\nBefore unification, German territory (excluding Austria and Switzerland) was made up of 27 constituent states. These states consisted of kingdoms, grand duchies, duchies, principalities, free Hanseatic cities and one imperial territory. The free cities had a republican form of government on the state level, even though the Empire at large was constituted as a monarchy, and so were most of the states. Prussia was the largest of the constituent states, covering two-thirds of the empire's territory.\nSeveral of these states had gained sovereignty following the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire and had been \"de facto\" sovereign from the mid-1600s onward. Others were created as sovereign states after the Congress of Vienna in 1815. Territories were not necessarily contiguous\u2014many existed in several parts, as a result of historical acquisitions, or, in several cases, divisions of the ruling families. Some of the initially existing states, in particular Hanover, were abolished and annexed by Prussia as a result of the war of 1866.\nEach component of the German Empire sent representatives to the Federal Council (\"Bundesrat\") and, via single-member districts, the Imperial Diet (\"Reichstag\"). Relations between the Imperial centre and the Empire's components were somewhat fluid and were developed on an ongoing basis. The extent to which the German Emperor could, for example, intervene on occasions of disputed or unclear succession was much debated on occasion\u2014for example in the inheritance crisis in Lippe-Detmold.\nUnusually for a federation or a nation-state, the German states maintained limited autonomy over foreign affairs and continued to exchange ambassadors and other diplomats (both with each other and directly with foreign nations) for the Empire's entire existence. Shortly after the Empire was proclaimed, Bismarck implemented a convention in which his sovereign would only send and receive envoys to and from other German states as the King of Prussia, while envoys from Berlin sent to foreign nations always received credentials from the monarch in his capacity as German Emperor. In this way, the Prussian foreign ministry was largely tasked with managing relations with the other German states while the Imperial foreign ministry managed Germany's external relations.\nDemographics.\nAbout 92% of the population spoke German as their first language. The only minority language with a significant number of speakers (5.4%) was Polish (a figure that rises to over 6% when including the related Kashubian and Masurian languages).\nThe non-German Germanic languages (0.5%), like Danish, Dutch and Frisian, were located in the north and northwest of the empire, near the borders with Denmark, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg. Low German was spoken throughout northern Germany and, though linguistically as distinct from High German (\"Hochdeutsch\") as from Dutch and English, was considered \"German\", hence also its name. Danish and Frisian were spoken predominantly in the north of the Prussian province of Schleswig-Holstein and Dutch in the western border areas of Prussia (Hanover, Westphalia, and the Rhine Province).\nPolish and other West Slavic languages (6.28%) were spoken chiefly in the east.\nA few (0.5%) spoke French, the vast majority of these in the Reichsland Elsass-Lothringen where francophones formed 11.6% of the total population.\nImmigration.\nIn the 1860s, Russia removed privileges for German emigrants and placed pressure on German immigrants to assimilate. The majority of German emigrants left Russia after the turn of the century. Many of these ethnic Germans immigrated back to Germany.\nReligion.\nGenerally, religious demographics of the early modern period hardly changed. Still, there were almost entirely Catholic areas (Lower and Upper Bavaria, northern Westphalia, Upper Silesia, etc.) and almost entirely Protestant areas (Schleswig-Holstein, Pomerania, Saxony, etc.). Confessional prejudices, especially towards mixed marriages, were still common. Bit by bit, through internal migration, religious blending was more and more common. In eastern territories, confession was almost uniquely perceived to be connected to one's ethnicity and the equation \"Protestant = German, Catholic = Polish\" was held to be valid. In areas affected by immigration in the Ruhr area and Westphalia, as well as in some large cities, the religious landscape changed substantially. This was especially true in largely Catholic areas of Westphalia, which changed through Protestant immigration from the eastern provinces.\nPolitically, the confessional division of Germany had considerable consequences. In Catholic areas, the Centre Party had a big electorate. On the other hand, Social Democrats and Free Trade Unions usually received hardly any votes in the Catholic areas of the Ruhr. This began to change with the secularization arising in the last decades of the German Empire.\nIn Germany's overseas colonial empire, millions of subjects practiced various indigenous religions in addition to Christianity. Over two million Muslims also lived under German colonial rule, primarily in German East Africa.\nLegacy.\nThe defeat and aftermath of the First World War and the penalties imposed by the Treaty of Versailles shaped the positive memory of the Empire, especially among Germans who distrusted and despised the Weimar Republic. Conservatives, liberals, socialists, nationalists, Catholics and Protestants all had their own interpretations, which led to a fractious political and social climate in Germany in the aftermath of the empire's collapse.\nUnder Bismarck, a united German state had finally been achieved, but it remained a Prussian-dominated state and did not include German Austria as Pan-German nationalists had desired. The influence of Prussian militarism, the Empire's colonial efforts and its vigorous, competitive industrial prowess all gained it the dislike and envy of other nations. The German Empire enacted a number of progressive reforms, such as Europe's first social welfare system and freedom of press. There was also a modern system for electing the federal parliament, the Reichstag, in which every adult man had one vote. This enabled the Social Democrats and the Catholic Centre Party to play considerable roles in the empire's political life despite the continued hostility of Prussian aristocrats.\nThe era of the German Empire is well remembered in Germany as one of great cultural and intellectual vigour. Thomas Mann published his novel \"Buddenbrooks\" in 1901. Theodor Mommsen received the Nobel prize for literature a year later for his Roman history. Painters like the groups Der Blaue Reiter and Die Br\u00fccke made a significant contribution to modern art. The AEG turbine factory in Berlin by Peter Behrens from 1909 was a milestone in classic modern architecture and an outstanding example of emerging functionalism. The social, economic, and scientific successes of this , or founding epoch, have sometimes led the Wilhelmine era to be regarded as a golden age.\nIn the field of economics, the \"Kaiserzeit\" laid the foundation of Germany's status as one of the world's leading economic powers. The iron and coal industries of the Ruhr, the Saar and Upper Silesia especially contributed to that process. The first motorcar was built by Karl Benz in 1886. The enormous growth of industrial production and industrial potential also led to a rapid urbanisation of Germany, which turned the Germans into a nation of city dwellers. More than 5\u00a0million people left Germany for the United States during the 19th century.\nSonderweg.\nMany historians have emphasized the central importance of a German or \"special path\" (or \"exceptionalism\") as the root of Nazism and the German catastrophe in the 20th century. According to the 1988 historiography by J\u00fcrgen Kocka, the process of nation-building from above had very grievous long-term implications. In terms of parliamentary democracy, Parliament was kept weak, the parties were fragmented, and there was a high level of mutual distrust. The Nazis built on the illiberal, anti-pluralist elements of Weimar's political culture. The Junker elites (the large landowners in the east) and senior civil servants used their great power and influence well into the twentieth century to frustrate any movement toward democracy. They played an especially negative role in the crisis of 1930\u20131933. Bismarck's emphasis on military force amplified the voice of the officer corps, which combined advanced modernisation of military technology with reactionary politics. The rising upper-middle-class elites, in the business, financial and professional worlds, tended to accept the values of the old traditional elites. The German Empire was for Hans-Ulrich Wehler a strange mixture of highly successful capitalist industrialisation and socio-economic modernisation on the one hand, and of surviving pre-industrial institutions, power relations and traditional cultures on the other. Wehler argues that it produced a high degree of internal tension, which led on the one hand to the suppression of socialists, Catholics and reformers, and on the other hand to a highly aggressive foreign policy. For these reasons Fritz Fischer and his students emphasised Germany's primary guilt for causing the First World War.\nWehler, a leader of the Bielefeld School of social history, places the origins of Germany's path to disaster in the 1860s\u20131870s, when economic modernisation took place, but political modernisation did not happen, and the old Prussian rural elite remained in firm control of the army, diplomacy and the civil service. Traditional, aristocratic, premodern society battled an emerging capitalist, bourgeois, modernising society. Recognising the importance of modernising forces in industry and the economy and in the cultural realm, Wehler argues that reactionary traditionalism dominated the political hierarchy of power in Germany, as well as social mentalities and in class relations (). The catastrophic German politics between 1914 and 1945 are interpreted in terms of a delayed modernisation of its political structures. At the core of Wehler's interpretation is his treatment of \"the middle class\" and \"revolution\", each of which was instrumental in shaping the 20th century. Wehler's examination of Nazi rule is shaped by his concept of \"charismatic domination\", which focuses heavily on Hitler.\nThe historiographical concept of a German has had a turbulent history. 19th-century scholars who emphasised a separate German path to modernity saw it as a positive factor that differentiated Germany from the \"western path\" typified by Great Britain. They stressed the strong bureaucratic state, reforms initiated by Bismarck and other strong leaders, the Prussian service ethos, the high culture of philosophy and music, and Germany's pioneering of a social welfare state. In the 1950s, historians in West Germany argued that the led Germany to the disaster of 1933\u20131945. The special circumstances of German historical structures and experiences, were interpreted as preconditions that, while not directly causing National Socialism, did hamper the development of a liberal democracy and facilitate the rise of fascism. The paradigm has provided the impetus for at least three strands of research in German historiography: the \"long 19th century\", the history of the bourgeoisie, and comparisons with the West. After 1990, increased attention to cultural dimensions and to comparative and relational history moved German historiography to different topics, with much less attention paid to the . While some historians have abandoned the thesis, they have not provided a generally accepted alternative interpretation.\nMilitary.\nThe Empire of Germany had two armed forces:\nTerritorial legacy.\nIn addition to present-day Germany, large parts of what comprised the German Empire now belong to several other modern European countries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Denotes territories lost in World War I\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Denotes territories lost in both World Wars\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Denotes territories lost in World War II\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistoriography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12677", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12677", "title": "Gallienus", "text": "Roman emperor from 253 to 268\nPublius Licinius Egnatius Gallienus (; c.\u2009218 \u2013 September 268) was Roman emperor with his father Valerian from 253 to 260 and alone from 260 to 268. He ruled during the Crisis of the Third Century that nearly caused the collapse of the empire. He won numerous military victories against usurpers and Germanic tribes, but was unable to prevent the secession of important provinces. His 15-year reign was the longest in half a century.\nBorn into a wealthy and traditional senatorial family, Gallienus was the son of Valerian and Mariniana. Valerian became Emperor in September 253 and had the Roman Senate elevate Gallienus to the rank of \"Augustus\". Valerian divided the empire between him and his son, with Valerian ruling the east and his son the west. Gallienus defeated the usurper Ingenuus in 258 and destroyed an Alemanni army at Mediolanum in 259.\nThe defeat and capture of Valerian at Edessa in 260 by the Sasanian Empire threw the Roman Empire into the chaos of civil war. Control of the whole empire passed to Gallienus. He defeated the eastern usurpers Macrianus Major and Lucius Mussius Aemilianus in 261\u2013262 but failed to stop the formation of the breakaway Gallic Empire under general Postumus. Aureolus, another usurper, proclaimed himself emperor in Mediolanum in 268 but was defeated outside the city by Gallienus and besieged inside. While the siege was ongoing, Gallienus was assassinated, stabbed to death by the officer Cecropius, as part of a conspiracy.\nEarly life.\nYouth and family.\nThe exact birth date of Gallienus is unknown. The 6th-century Greek chronicler John Malalas and the \"Epitome de Caesaribus\" report that he was about 50 years old at the time of his death, meaning he was born around 218. He was the son of Emperor Valerian and Mariniana, who may have been of senatorial rank, possibly the daughter of Egnatius Victor Marinianus, and his brother was Valerianus Minor. Inscriptions on coins connect him with Falerii in Etruria, which may have been his birthplace; it has yielded many inscriptions relating to his mother's family, the Egnatii. Gallienus married Cornelia Salonina about ten years before his accession to the throne. She was the mother of three princes: Valerian II, who died in 258; Saloninus, who was named co-emperor but was murdered in 260 by the army of general Postumus; and Marinianus, who was killed in 268, shortly after his father was assassinated.\nRule.\nWhen Valerian was proclaimed emperor in September 253, he asked the Senate to ratify the elevation of Gallienus to \"Augustus\". He was also designated consul ordinarius for 254. As Marcus Aurelius and his adopted brother Lucius Verus had done a century earlier, Gallienus and his father divided the Empire. Valerian left for the East to stem the Persian threat, and Gallienus remained in Italy to repel the Germanic tribes on the Rhine and Danube. Division of the empire had become necessary due to its sheer size and the numerous threats it faced, and it facilitated negotiations with enemies who demanded to communicate directly with the emperor.\nEarly reign.\nGallienus spent most of his time in the provinces of the Rhine area (Germania Inferior, Germania Superior, Raetia, and Noricum), though he almost certainly visited the Danube area and Illyricum in the years from 253 to 258. According to Eutropius and Aurelius Victor, he was particularly energetic and successful in preventing invaders from attacking the German provinces and Gaul, despite the weakness caused by Valerian's march on Italy against Aemilianus in 253. According to numismatic evidence, he seems to have won many victories there, and a victory in Roman Dacia might also be dated to that period. Even the hostile Latin tradition attributes success to him at this time.\nIn 255 or 257, Gallienus was made consul again, suggesting that he briefly visited Rome on those occasions, although no record survives. During his Danube sojourn (Drinkwater suggests in 255 or 256), he proclaimed his elder son Valerian II Caesar and thus official heir to himself and Valerian I; the boy probably joined Gallienus on campaign at that time, and when Gallienus moved west to the Rhine provinces in 257, he remained behind on the Danube as the personification of Imperial authority.\nRevolts and usurpers.\nIngenuus revolt.\nSometime between 258 and 260 (the exact date is unclear), while Valerian was distracted with the ongoing invasion of Shapur I in the East, and Gallienus was preoccupied with his problems in the West, Ingenuus, governor of at least one of the Pannonian provinces, took advantage and declared himself emperor. Valerian II had apparently died on the Danube, most likely in 258. Ingenuus may have been responsible for Valerian II's death. Alternatively, the defeat and capture of Valerian at the battle of Edessa may have been the trigger for the subsequent revolts of Ingenuus, Regalian, and Postumus. In any case, Gallienus reacted with great speed. He left his son Saloninus as Caesar at Cologne, under the supervision of Albanus (or Silvanus) and the military leadership of Postumus. He then hastily crossed the Balkans, taking with him the new cavalry corps (\"comitatus\") under the command of Aureolus and defeated Ingenuus at Mursa or Sirmium. Ingenuus was killed by his own guards or committed suicide by drowning himself after the fall of his capital, Sirmium.\nAlemanni invasion.\nA major invasion by the Alemanni and other Germanic tribes occurred between 258 and 260 (it is hard to fix the precise date of these events), probably due to the vacuum left by the withdrawal of troops supporting Gallienus in the campaign against Ingenuus. Franks broke through the lower Rhine, invading Gaul, some reaching as far as southern Spain, sacking Tarraco (modern Tarragona). The Alemanni invaded, probably through Agri Decumates (an area between the upper Rhine and the upper Danube), likely followed by the Juthungi. After devastating Germania Superior and Raetia (parts of southern France and Switzerland), they entered Italy, the first invasion of the Italian peninsula, aside from its most remote northern regions, since Hannibal 500 years before. When invaders reached the outskirts of Rome, they were repelled by an improvised army assembled by the Senate, consisting of local troops (probably praetorian guards) and the strongest of the civilian population. On their retreat through northern Italy, they were intercepted and defeated in the battle of Mediolanum (near present-day Milan) by Gallienus's army, which had advanced from Gaul, or from the Balkans after dealing with the Franks. The battle of Mediolanum was decisive, and the Alemanni did not bother the empire for the next ten years. The Juthungi managed to cross the Alps with their valuables and captives from Italy. A historian in the 19th century suggested that the initiative of the Senate gave rise to jealousy and suspicion by Gallienus, thus contributing to his exclusion of senators from military commands.\nRegalian's revolt.\nAround the same time, Regalian, who held some command in the Balkans, was proclaimed emperor. The reasons for this are unclear, and the \"Historia Augusta\" (almost the sole resource for these events) does not provide a credible story. It is possible the seizure can be attributed to the discontent of the civilian and military provincials, who felt the defense of the province was being neglected.\nRegalian held power for some six months and issued coins bearing his image. After some success against the Sarmatians, his revolt ended when the Roxolani invaded Pannonia and killed Regalian in taking the city of Sirmium. There is a suggestion that Gallienus invited the Roxolani to attack Regalian, but other historians dismiss the accusation. It is also suggested that the invasion was finally checked by Gallienus near Verona and that he directed the restoration of the province, probably in person.\nCapture of Valerian.\nIn the East, Valerian was confronted with serious troubles. Bands of \"Scythai\" began a naval raid of Pontus, in the northern part of Asia Minor. After ravaging the province, they moved south into Cappadocia. A Roman army from Antioch, under Valerian, tried to intercept them but failed. According to Zosimus, this army was infected by a plague that gravely weakened it. In that condition, this army had to repel a new invasion of the province of Mesopotamia by Shapur I, ruler of the Sassanid Empire. The invasion occurred probably in the early spring of 260. The Roman army was defeated at the Battle of Edessa, and Valerian was taken prisoner. Shapur's army raided Cilicia and Cappadocia (in present-day Turkey), sacking, as Shapur's inscriptions claim, 36 cities.\nMacrianus revolt.\nIt took a rally by an officer named Callistus (Balista), a fiscal official named Fulvius Macrianus, the remnants of the Roman army in the east, and Odenathus and his Palmyrene horsemen to turn the tide against Shapur. The Sassanids were driven back, but Macrianus proclaimed his two sons Quietus and Macrianus (sometimes misspelled Macrinus) as emperors. Coins struck for them in major cities of the East indicate acknowledgement of the usurpation. The two Macriani left Quietus, Ballista, and, presumably, Odenathus to deal with the Persians while they invaded Europe with an army of 30,000 men, according to the \"Historia Augusta\". At first they met no opposition.\nThe Pannonian legions joined the invaders, being resentful of the absence of Gallienus. He sent his successful commander Aureolus against the rebels, however, and the decisive battle was fought in the spring or early summer of 261, most likely in Illyricum, although Zonaras locates it in Pannonia. In any case, the army of the usurpers was defeated and surrendered, and their two leaders were killed.\nIn the aftermath of the battle, the rebellion of Postumus had already started, so Gallienus had no time to deal with the rest of the usurpers, namely Balista and Quietus. He came to an agreement with Odenathus, who had just returned from his victorious Persian expedition. Odenathus received the title of \"dux Romanorum\" and besieged the usurpers, who were based at Emesa. Eventually, the people of Emesa killed Quietus, and Odenathus arrested and executed Balista about November 261.\nPostumus revolt.\nAfter the defeat at Edessa, Gallienus lost control over the provinces of Britain, Spain, parts of Germania, and a large part of Gaul when another general, Postumus, declared his own realm (usually known today as the Gallic Empire). The revolt partially coincided with that of Macrianus in the East. Gallienus had installed his son Saloninus and his guardian, Silvanus, in Cologne in 258. Postumus, a general in command of troops on the banks of the Rhine, defeated some raiders and took possession of their spoils. Instead of returning it to the original owners, he preferred to distribute it amongst his soldiers. When news of this reached Silvanus, he demanded the spoils be sent to him. Postumus made a show of submission, but his soldiers mutinied and proclaimed him emperor. Under his command, they besieged Cologne, and after some weeks the defenders of the city opened the gates and handed Saloninus and Silvanus to Postumus, who had them killed. The dating of these events was long uncertain, but an inscription discovered in 1992 at Augsburg indicates that Postumus had been proclaimed emperor by September 260. Postumus claimed the consulship for himself and one of his associates, Honoratianus, but according to D.S. Potter, he never tried to unseat Gallienus or invade Italy.\nUpon receiving news of the murder of his son, Gallienus began gathering forces to face Postumus. The invasion of the Macriani forced him to dispatch Aureolus with a large force to oppose them, however, leaving him with insufficient troops to battle Postumus. After some initial defeats, the army of Aureolus, having defeated the Macriani, rejoined him, and Postumus was expelled. Aureolus was entrusted with the pursuit and deliberately allowed Postumus to escape and gather new forces. Gallienus returned in 263 or 265 and surrounded Postumus in an unnamed Gallic city. During the siege, Gallienus was severely wounded by an arrow and had to flee. The standstill persisted until his later death, and the Gallic Empire remained independent until 274.\nAemilianus revolt.\nIn 262, the mint in Alexandria started to again issue coins for Gallienus, demonstrating that Egypt had returned to his control after suppressing the revolt of the Macriani. In spring of 262, the city was wrenched by civil unrest as a result of a new revolt. The rebel this time was the prefect of Egypt, Lucius Mussius Aemilianus, who had already given support to the revolt of the Macriani. The correspondence of bishop Dionysius of Alexandria provides a commentary on the background of invasion, civil war, plague, and famine that characterized this age.\nKnowing he could not afford to lose control of the vital Egyptian granaries, Gallienus sent his general Theodotus against Aemilianus, probably by a naval expedition. The decisive battle probably took place near Thebes, and the result was a clear defeat of Aemilianus. In the aftermath, Gallienus became Consul three more times in 262, 264, and 266.\nHerulian invasions.\nIn the years 267\u2013269, Goths and other barbarians invaded the empire in great numbers. Sources are extremely confused on the dating of these invasions, the participants, and their targets. Modern historians are not even able to discern with certainty whether there were two or more of these invasions or a single prolonged one. It seems that, at first, a major naval expedition was led by the Heruli starting from north of the Black Sea and leading to the ravaging of many cities of Greece (among them, Athens and Sparta). Then another, even more numerous army of invaders started a second naval invasion of the empire. The Romans defeated the barbarians on sea first. Gallienus's army then won a battle in Thrace, and the emperor pursued the invaders. According to some historians, he was the leader of the army who won the great Battle of Naissus, while the majority believes that the victory must be attributed to his successor, Claudius II.\nAureolus revolt.\nIn 268, at some time before or soon after the battle of Naissus, the authority of Gallienus was challenged by Aureolus, commander of the cavalry stationed in Mediolanum (Milan), who was supposed to keep an eye on Postumus. Instead, he acted as deputy to Postumus until the very last days of his revolt, when he seems to have claimed the throne for himself. The decisive battle took place at what is now Pontirolo Nuovo near Milan; Aureolus was clearly defeated and driven back to Milan. Gallienus laid siege to the city but was murdered during the siege. There are differing accounts of the murder, but the sources agree that most of Gallienus's officials wanted him dead. According to the Historia Augusta, an unreliable source compiled long after the events it describes, a conspiracy was led by the commander of the guard Aurelius Heraclianus and Lucius Aurelius Marcianus. Marcianus's role in the conspiracy is not confirmed by any other ancient source.\nAssassination.\nCecropius, commander of the Dalmatians, spread the word that the forces of Aureolus were leaving the city, and Gallienus left his tent without his bodyguard, only to be struck down by Cecropius. One version has Claudius selected as emperor by the conspirators, another chosen by Gallienus on his death bed; the \"Historia Augusta\" was concerned to substantiate the descent of the Constantinian dynasty from Claudius, and this may explain its accounts, which do not involve Claudius in the murder. The other sources (Zosimus i.40 and Zonaras xii.25) report that the conspiracy was organized by Heraclianus, Claudius, and Aurelian.\nAccording to Aurelius Victor and Zonaras, on hearing the news that Gallienus was dead, the Senate in Rome ordered the execution of his family (including his brother Valerianus and son Marinianus) and their supporters, just before receiving a message from Claudius to spare their lives and deify his predecessor. The tomb of Gallienus is thought to be located to the south of Rome, at the IXth mile of the Via Appia.\nLegacy.\nHistoriography.\nGallienus was not treated favorably by ancient historians. The biased and largely fictional account of that reign in the Historia Augusta describes him as a lover of luxury, who dressed in purple, sprinkled gold dust in his hair, and built castles of apples. Emperor Julian's \"The Caesars\" presents Gallienus \"with the dress and languishing gait of a woman\", which is possibly connected with coins portraying the emperor with unusual iconography and bearing the legend \"Gallienae Augustae\". This animosity within the sources was partly due to the secession of Gaul and Palmyra and his inability to win them back; at the time of Gallienus's death, Palmyra was still nominally loyal to Rome, but, under the leadership of Odaenathus, was independent in nearly every other respect. Palmyra would formally secede after Odaenathus's death and the ascension of his widow Zenobia. It was not until the reign of Aurelian several years later that the breakaway provinces were truly brought back into the Roman fold. According to modern scholar Pat Southern, some historians now see Gallienus in a more positive light. Gallienus produced some useful reforms.\nCoins.\nAbout 40 rare gold coins of Gallienus have been discovered as part of the Lava Treasure in Corsica, France, in the 1980s.\nMilitary reforms.\nHe contributed to military history as the first to commission primarily cavalry units, the Comitatenses, that could be dispatched anywhere in the Empire in short order. This reform arguably created a precedent for the future emperors Diocletian and Constantine I. The biographer Aurelius Victor reports that Gallienus forbade senators from becoming military commanders. This policy undermined senatorial power, as more reliable equestrian commanders rose to prominence. In Southern's view, these reforms and the decline in senatorial influence not only helped Aurelian to salvage the Empire, but they also make Gallienus one of the emperors most responsible for the creation of the Dominate, along with Septimius Severus, Diocletian, and Constantine I.\nDecree of Toleration.\nThe capture of Valerian in the year 259 forced Gallienus to issue the first official declaration of tolerance with regard to the Christians, restoring their places of worship and cemeteries, therefore implying a recognition of the property of the Church. However, the edict did not turn Christianity into an official religion.\nIn popular culture.\nFilms.\nGallienus was played by Franco Cobianchi in the 1964 film \"The Magnificent Gladiator\".\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12678", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12678", "title": "Gnostic", "text": ""}
{"id": "12679", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12679", "title": "Gambeson", "text": "Medieval defensive jacket\nA gambeson (also known as, or similar to where historic or modern distinctions are made, the acton, aketon, padded jack, pourpoint, paltock, haustement, or arming doublet) is a padded defensive jacket, worn as armour separately, or combined with mail or plate armour. Gambesons were produced with a sewing technique called quilting or pourpointing that produced a padded cloth. They were usually constructed of linen or wool; the stuffing varied, and could be, for example, scrap cloth or horse hair. \nAn arming doublet worn under armour, particularly plate armour of fifteenth- and sixteenth-century Europe, contains arming points for attaching plates. Fifteenth-century examples may include mail goussets sewn into the elbows and armpits, to protect the wearer in locations not covered by plate. German gothic armour arming doublets were generally shorter than Italian white armour doublets, which could extend to the upper thigh. In late fifteenth-century Italy, this also became a civilian fashion. Men who were not knights wore arming doublets, probably because the garment suggested status and chivalry.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"gambeson\" is a loan from the Old French , , originally , formed after the Middle High German term , 'doublet', in turn from Old High German , 'stomach' (cognate to \"womb\").\nThe term \"aketon\", originally the medieval French , might be a loan from Arabic , meaning 'cotton' (definite article \u2013 \"the cotton\").\nIn medieval Norse, the garment was known as , literally 'weapon shirt', or . is a loan from (Middle) Low German. is probably also a loan from Middle Low German, though the word has its likely origin in Italian, and is related to the Latin , meaning 'abdomen', cognate with English \"paunch\".\nHistory.\nOpen, quilted leather jackets and trousers were worn by Scythian horsemen before the 4th century BC, as can be seen on Scythian gold ornaments crafted by Greek goldsmiths. As stand-alone cloth armour, the European gambeson can be traced at least to the late tenth century, but it is likely to have been used in various forms for longer. In the Middle Ages, its use became widespread in the thirteenth century and resembled a tunic. Eventually, it made way for the pourpoint (jack or paltock) in the 14th century and had surplanted the gambeson in Henry III's Assize of Arms (1242).\nThe gambeson was used both as a complete armour unto itself and underneath mail and plate to cushion the body and prevent chafing. Evidence for its use under armour does not appear in iconography until the mid-twelfth century. \nAlthough they are thought to have been used in Europe much earlier, gambesons underwent a revolution from their first proven use (in the late eleventh and early twelfth centuries) as an independent item of armour to one that facilitated the wearing of mail. They remained popular amongst infantry as cloth armour. Although quilted armour survived into the English Civil War in England as a \"poor man's cuirass\" and as an item to be worn beneath the few remaining suits of full plate, it was increasingly replaced by the buff coat\u2014a leather jacket of rough suede.\nThere are two distinctive designs of gambeson: those designed to be worn beneath armour, and those designed to be worn as independent armour. The latter tend to be thicker and higher in the collar and faced with other materials, such as leather or heavy canvas. This variant is usually referred to as \"padded jack\" and made of several (some say around 18, some even 30) layers of cotton, linen or wool. These jacks were known to stop even heavy arrows, and their design of multiple layers bears a striking resemblance to modern-day body armour, which used at first silk, then ballistic nylon, and later, Kevlar as its fabric.\nFor common soldiers who could not afford mail or plate armour, the gambeson, combined with a helmet as the only additional protection, remained a common sight on European battlefields during the entire Middle Ages. Its decline\u2014paralleling that of plate armour\u2014came only with the Renaissance, as the use of firearms became more widespread. By the eighteenth century, it was no longer in military use.\nWhile the use of linen in these jackets has been proven by archaeological evidence, the use of cotton\u2014and cotton-based canvas\u2014is disputed since large amounts of cotton cloth were not widely available in Northern Europe. It is probable that Egypt (and Asia Minor generally) still produced cotton well after the 7th and 8th centuries, and knowledge (and samples) of this cloth was brought to Europe by the returning Crusaders; however, the logistics and expense of equipping a town militia or army with large numbers of cotton-based garments make its usage doubtful when flax-based textiles (linen) were in widespread use.\nLinothorax was a type of armour similar to gambeson, used by ancient Greeks. Meanwhile, the Mesoamericans were known to have used a kind of quilted textile armour called ichcahuipilli before the arrival of the conquistadors, who loaned this word as . Another example is the bullet-resistant Myeonje baegab created during Joseon Korea to confront the effects of Western rifles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12680", "revid": "327589", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12680", "title": "Galinder", "text": ""}
{"id": "12681", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12681", "title": "Geography of Afghanistan", "text": " \nAfghanistan is a landlocked mountainous country located on the Iranian Plateau, at the crossroads of Central Asia and South Asia. The country is the 40th largest in the world in size. Kabul is the capital and largest city of Afghanistan, located in the Kabul Province. With a location at the intersection of major trade routes, Afghanistan has attracted a succession of invaders since the sixth century BC.\nAfghanistan contains most of the Hindu Kush. There are a number of major rivers in the country, including Amu Darya, Arghandab, Farah, Hari, Helmand, Kabul, Kokcha, and Kunar. The country also possesses many smaller rivers as well as streams, canals, lakes, ponds, and springs. Most of its fresh water historically flowed into neighboring countries.\n*total: \n**\"country rank in the world:\" 40th\n*land: \n*water: \n* Australia comparative: approximately the size of South Australia\n* Canada comparative: approximately the size of Saskatchewan\n* United Kingdom comparative: approximately times the size of the United Kingdom\n* United States comparative: slightly more than three times the size of Idaho\n* EU comparative: slightly larger than France\n*total: \n**border countries: Pakistan , Tajikistan , Iran , Turkmenistan , Uzbekistan , China \n*0\u00a0km\nMountain systems.\nThe Hindu Kush mountain range reaches a height of at Noshaq, Afghanistan's highest peak. Of the ranges extending southwestward from the Hindu Kush, the Foladi peak (\"Shah Foladi\") of the Baba mountain range (\"Koh-i-Baba\") reaches the greatest height: . The Safed Koh range, which includes the Tora Bora area, dominates the border area southeast of Kabul.\nImportant passes include the Unai Pass across the Safed Koh, the Kushan and Salang Passes through the Hindu Kush, and the Khyber Pass that connects Afghanistan with Pakistan. The summit of the Khyber Pass at at Landi Kotal, Pakistan is 5\u00a0km (3\u00a0mi) east of the border town of Torkham. Other key passages through the mountainous Pakistan border include two from Paktika Province into Pakistan's Waziristan region: one at Angoor Ada, and one further south at the Gumal River crossing, plus the Charkai River passage south of Khost, Afghanistan, at Pakistan's Ghulam Khan village into North Waziristan. The busy Pak-Afghan border crossing at Wesh, Afghanistan is in a flat and dry area, though this route involves Pakistan's Khojak Pass at just from the border. The border connects Kandahar and Spin Boldak in Afghanistan with Quetta in Pakistan.\nThe Wakhan Corridor in the northeast lies eastward of the province of Panjshir, between the Hindu Kush and the Pamir Mountains, which leads to the Wakhjir Pass into Xinjiang in China. In Kabul, and over all the northern part of the country to the descent at Gandamak, winter is rigorous, especially so on the high Arachosian plateau. \nAlthough Herat is approximately lower than Kandahar, the summer climate there is more temperate along with the yearly climate. From May to September, the wind blows from the northwest with great force, and this extends across the country to Kandahar. The winter is mild; snow melts as it falls, and even on the mountains does not lie long. Three years out of four at Herat it does not freeze hard enough for the people to store ice. Yet, it was not very far from Herat, in Rafir Kala, in 1750, where Ahmad Shah's army, retreating from Persia, is said to have lost 18,000 men from cold in a single night. In the northern Herat districts records of the coldest month (February) show the mean minimum as and the maximum as . The eastern reaches of the Hari River, including the rapids, are frozen hard in the winter, and people travel on it as on a road.\nClimate.\nRainfall in Afghanistan is very scarce, and mainly only affects the northern highlands, arriving in March and April. Rainfall in the more arid lowlands is rare, and can be very unpredictable. Marked characteristics are the great differences of summer and winter temperature and of day and night temperature, as well as the extent to which change of climate can be attained by slight change of place. The Afghan climate is a dry one. The sun shines for three-fourths of the year, and the nights are clearer than the days.Taking the highlands of the country as a whole, there is no great difference between the mean temperature of Afghanistan and that of the lower Himalaya. However, a remarkable feature of the Afghan climate is its extreme temperature range within limited periods. The smallest daily range in the north is when the weather is cold; the greatest is when it is hot. For seven months of the year (from May to November) this range exceeds 17\u00a0\u00b0C (31\u00a0\u00b0F) daily. Waves of intense cold occur, lasting for several days, and one may have to endure temperatures of , rising to a maximum of . At Ghazni the snow has been known to stay long beyond the vernal equinox; the temperatures sink as low as . Oral tradition tells of the destruction of the entire population of Ghazni by snowstorms on more than one occasion. On the other hand, the summer temperature is exceedingly high, especially in the Oxus regions, where a shade maximum of is not uncommon.\nThe summer heat is strong in the Sistan Basin, Jalalabad and Turkestan. The simoom wind occurs in Kandahar province during the summer. The hot season is rendered more intense by frequent dust storms and strong winds; whilst the bare rocky ridges that traverse the country, absorbing heat by day and radiating it by night, render the summer nights most oppressive. In Kabul the heat is tempered occasionally by cool breezes from the Hindu Kush, and the nights are usually cool. In Kandahar snow seldom falls on the plains or lower hills; when it does, it melts at once.\nThe combination of hot summers and bitterly cold winters has been noted comparable to the U.S. state of Wyoming.\nThe summer rains that accompany the southwest monsoon in India, beat along the southern slopes of the Himalaya, and travel up the Kabul valley as far as Laghman, though they are more clearly felt in Bajour and Panjkora, under the Hindu Kush, and in the eastern branches of Safed Koh. Rain also falls at this season at the head of Kurram valley. South of this the Suliman mountains may be taken as the western limit of the monsoon's action. It is not felt in the rest of Afghanistan, in which, as in the rest of western Asia, the winter rains and snow are the most considerable. The spring rain, though less copious, is more important to agriculture than the winter rain, unless where the latter falls in the form of snow. In the absence of monsoon influences there are steadier weather indications than in India. The north-west blizzards which occur in winter and spring are the most noticeable feature, and their influence is clearly felt on the Indian frontier.\nRivers, streams and lakes.\nAfghanistan receives snow between November and March, which gradually melts into numerous rivers, streams, canals, lakes, ponds, and springs, but most of the country's fresh water continues to flow into neighboring countries. It loses about two-thirds of its water to neighboring Pakistan, Iran, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan.\nThe nation's drainage system is largely landlocked.\nVegetation.\nThe characteristic distribution of vegetation on the mountains of Afghanistan is worthy of attention. The great mass of it is confined to the main ranges and their immediate offshoots, whilst on the more distant and terminal prolongations it is almost entirely absent; in fact, these are naked rock and stone. On the Safed Koh alpine range itself and its immediate branches, at a height of there is abundant growth of large forest trees, among which conifers are the most noble and prominent, such as \"Cedrus deodara\", \"Abies excelsa\", \"Pinus longifolia\", \"Pinus pinaster\", Stone pine (the edible pine, although this species is probably introduced, since it is original to Spain and Portugal) and the larch. There is also the yew, the hazel, juniper, walnut, wild peach and almond. Growing under the shade of these are several varieties of rose, honeysuckle, currant, gooseberry, hawthorn, rhododendron and a luxuriant herbage, among which the ranunculus family is important for frequency and number of genera. The lemon and wild vine are also here met with, but are more common on the northern mountains. The walnut and oak (evergreen, holly-leaved and kermes) descend to the secondary heights, where they become mixed with alder, ash, khinjak, Arbor-vitae, juniper, with species of Astragalus. Here also are Indigoferae rind dwarf laburnum.\nIn Afghanistan forest cover is around 2% of the total land area, equivalent to 1,208,440 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, which was unchanged from 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 1,208,440 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 0% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 0% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 100% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership.\nDown to there are wild olive, species of rock-rose, wild privet, acacias and mimosas, barberry and \"Zizyphus\"; and in the eastern ramifications of the chain, \"Nannerops ritchiana\" (which is applied to a variety of useful purposes), \"Bignonia\" or trumpet flower, sissu, \"Salvadora persica\", verbena, acanthus, varieties of Gesnerae.\nThe lowest terminal ridges, especially towards the west, are, as it has been said, naked in aspect. Their scanty vegetation is almost wholly herbal; shrubs are only occasional; trees almost non-existent. Labiate, composite and umbelliferous plants are most common. Ferns and mosses are almost confined to the higher ranges.\nIn the low brushwood scattered over portions of the dreary plains of the Kandahar tablelands, it is possible to find leguminous thorny plants of the papilionaceous suborder, such as camel-thorn (\"Hedysarum alhagi\"), \"Astragalus\" in several varieties, spiny rest-harrow (\"Ononis spinosa\"), the fibrous roots of which often serve as a tooth-brush; plants of the sub-order Mimosae, as the sensitive mimosa; a plant of the rue family, called by the natives \"lipad\"; the common wormwood; also certain orchids, and several species of Salsola. The rue and wormwood are in general use as domestic medicines\u2014the former for rheumatism and neuralgia; the latter in fever, debility and dyspepsia, as well as for a vermifuge. The lipad, owing to its heavy nauseous odour, is believed to keep off evil spirits. In some places, occupying the sides and hollows of ravines, it is found the Rose Bay, called in Persian \"khar-zarah\", or ass-bane, the wild laburnum and various Indigoferae.\nIn the last several decades, 90% of forests in Afghanistan have been destroyed and much of the timber has been exported to neighboring Pakistan. As a result, large percent of Afghanistan's land could be subject to soil erosion and desertification. On the positive note, the Karzai administration and international organizations are helping counter this problem by often planting millions of saplings. Afghanistan had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 8.85/10, ranking it 15th globally out of 172 countries.\nLand cover of Afghanistan.\nAmong the various types of land cover, rangeland covers a significant portion of Afghanistan's northern and eastern regions, accounting for 44.58% of the country's total area in 2018. It has decreased slightly from 47.97% in 2000. Barren land, primarily found in the central and southern regions, accounted for 34.82% of the country's land area in 2018. Its size has remained fairly consistent over the years. In contrast, irrigated agriculture has steadily increased from 2.81% in 2000 to 3.30% in 2018. Irrigated agriculture is primarily concentrated in the southern and southwestern regions, particularly along river valleys and in areas with a consistent water supply. The development of new irrigation systems, as well as the demand for food crops, will undoubtedly have an impact on distribution.\nAccording to an ICIMOD study from 2000, the total forest area was 18,548 km2. Between 2000 and 2018, the forest area remained relatively stable at 18,134 km2. This indicates that there was a balance of deforestation and afforestation during this time. Approximately 1,291 km2 of forest land was gained from rangeland, implying that some rangeland was converted to forest. In 2000, the total snow area was 9,496 km2. Between 2000 and 2018, the snow area decreased to 7,485\u00a0km\u00b2. This implies a loss of 2,011 km2 of snow cover over the 18 years. The extents of Rangeland and Grassland vary depending on how snow-covered areas are classified.\nThe Forest land cover category had the largest patch area, slightly increasing from 7883 ha to 8045 ha in 2018. The core area of the forest has also increased somewhat, from 12841 ha in 2000 to 13510 ha in 2018.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12683", "revid": "96647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12683", "title": "Gauntlet", "text": "Gauntlet or the gauntlet may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12684", "revid": "27577755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12684", "title": "Grand jury", "text": "Jury that screens potential prosecutions\nA grand jury is a jury empowered by law to conduct legal proceedings, investigate potential criminal conduct, and determine whether criminal charges should be brought. A grand jury may subpoena physical evidence or a person to testify. A grand jury is separate from the courts, which do not preside over its functioning.\nOriginating in England during the Middle Ages, modern examples include grand juries in the United States, and to a lesser extent, Liberia. In Japan, there are citizen Prosecutorial Review Commissions which review cases that have been dropped by the prosecution, but they are not required for an indictment like in the previous two. \nGrand juries perform both accusatory and investigatory functions. The investigatory functions of grand juries include obtaining and reviewing documents and other evidence, and hearing sworn testimonies of witnesses who appear before it; the accusatory function determines whether there is probable cause to believe that one or more persons committed a particular offense within the jurisdiction of a court. While most grand juries focus on criminal matters, some civil grand juries serve an independent watchdog function. Around the 18th and 19th-century in Ireland and the U.S., grand juries were occasionally formed to pass or approve public policy.\nThe grand jury (from the French word \"grand\" meaning \"large\") is so named because traditionally it has more jurors than a trial jury, sometimes called a petty or petit jury (from the French word \"petit\" meaning \"small\"). \nA grand jury in the United States usually has 16 to 23 members, though in Virginia it has fewer members for regular or special grand juries.\nPurpose.\nThe grand jury has been described as a \"shield and sword\" that has both an offensive purpose and defensive purpose. It has been called the shield of the people against the power of the crown; though Green says this is a myth. It has been described as the \"sword of the people\" and as a sword of the crown.\nCriminal.\nThe function of a grand jury is to accuse persons who may be guilty of a crime, but the institution is also a shield against unfounded and oppressive prosecution. It is a means for lay citizens, representative of the community, to participate in the administration of justice. It can also make presentments on crime and maladministration in its area. Traditionally, a grand jury consists of 23 members.\nThe mode of accusation is by a written statement of two types:\nNo indictment or presentment can be made except by concurrence of at least twelve of the jurors. The grand jury may accuse upon their own knowledge, but it is generally done upon the testimony of witnesses under oath and other evidence heard before them. Grand jury proceedings are, in the first instance, held at the instigation of the government or other prosecutors, and are done and in secret deliberation. The accused has no knowledge of nor right to interfere with their proceedings.\nIf they find the accusation credible, which is usually drawn up in form by the prosecutor or an officer of the court, they write upon the indictment the words \"a true bill\" which is signed by the foreperson of the grand jury and presented to the court publicly in the presence of all the jurors. If the indictment is not proven to the satisfaction of the grand jury, the word \"\" or \"not a true bill\" is written upon it by the grand jury, or by their foreman and then said to be ignored, and the accusation is dismissed as unfounded; the potential defendant is said to have been \"no-billed\" by the grand jury. If the grand jury returns an indictment as a true bill (\"billa vera\"), the indictment is said to be founded and the party to stand indicted and required to be put on trial.\nWatchdog.\nIn Japan, the Prosecutorial Review Commission is made up of 11 randomly selected citizens, is appointed to a six-month term, and its primary purpose is examining cases prosecutors have chosen not to continue prosecuting. It has therefore been perceived as a way to combat misfeasance in public officials. This is similar to civil grand juries in U.S. states like California.\nSimilarly, in 2011, there was a private member's bill in Ontario, Canada which would create citizen grand juries to oversee government institutions. The bill did not make any progress and was not passed.\nLegislative.\nMany early grand juries in the U.S. had quasi-legislative functions like passing legislation or approving taxes or expenditures.\nFrom the 17th century until 1898 in Ireland, Grand Juries also functioned as local government authorities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They fixed the salaries of public officers; they regulated prisons and houses of correction; they levied funds for the support of hospitals; they made and repaired roads and bridges, and they framed accounts of the expenses incurred in these matters... They determined what public works should be undertaken \u2014 what price should be paid for them, and who were the individuals that should undertake them, and be responsible for their completion. They settled the amount of the local taxation of the county, and, under their direction, it was levied from the actual occupiers of the land.\nPresent-day use.\nUnited States.\nAt the time of the founding of the United States, a grand jury indictment was required for almost all prosecutions, and juries rendered the final verdict of almost all criminal and civil cases. The Fifth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States reads, \"No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand jury...\"\nIn the early decades of the United States, grand juries played a major role in public matters. During that period counties followed the traditional practice of requiring all decisions be made by at least 12 of the grand jurors, (e.g., for a 23-person grand jury, 12 people would constitute a bare majority). Most criminal prosecutions were conducted by private parties, either a law enforcement officer, a lawyer hired by a crime victim or his family, or even by laymen. A layman could bring a bill of indictment to the grand jury; if the grand jury found that there was sufficient evidence for a trial, that the act was a crime under law, and that the court had jurisdiction, it would return the indictment to the complainant. The grand jury would then appoint the complaining party to exercise essentially the same authority as a state attorney general has, that is, a general power of attorney to represent the state in the case.\nThe grand jury served to screen out incompetent or malicious prosecutions. The advent of official public prosecutors in the later decades of the 19th century largely displaced private prosecutions.\nIn 1974, the second Watergate grand jury indicted seven White House aides, including former Attorney General John Mitchell, and named President Nixon as a \"secret, un-indicted, co-conspirator\". Despite evading impeachment by resigning from office, Nixon was still required to testify before a grand jury. In 1998, President Bill Clinton became the first sitting president required to testify before a grand jury as the subject of an investigation by the Office of Independent Counsel.\nWhile all states have provisions for grand juries as of 2003, today approximately half of the states employ them and 22 states have provision to prevent the abolition of grand juries by legislatures or courts as of 2003. Six states (Oklahoma, Nebraska, New Mexico, North Dakota, Nevada, and Kansas) allow citizens to circulate a petition in order to impanel a grand jury.\nAn American federal grand jury has from 16 to 23 jurors, with twelve votes usually required to return an indictment. All grand jury proceedings are conducted behind closed doors, without a presiding judge. The prosecutors are tasked with arranging for the appearance of witnesses, as well as drafting the order in which they are called, and take part in the questioning of witnesses. The targets of the grand jury or their lawyers have no right to appear before a grand jury unless they are invited, nor do they have a right to present exculpatory evidence.\nJapan.\nAfter World War II, under the influence of the Allies, Japan passed the Prosecutorial Review Commission Law on July 12, 1948, which created the \"Kensatsu Shinsakai\" (or Prosecutorial Review Commission (PRC) system), analogous to the grand jury system in the United States. Until 2009, the PRC's recommendations were not binding, and were only regarded as advisory. A survey conducted by the Japanese Cabinet Office in October 1990 showed that 68.8% of surveyed Japanese citizens were not familiar with the PRC system. On May 21, 2009, the Japanese government introduced new legislation which would make the PRC's decisions binding. A PRC is made up of 11 randomly selected citizens, is appointed to a six-month term, and its primary purpose is examining cases prosecutors have chosen not to continue prosecuting. It has therefore been perceived as a way to combat misfeasance in public officials. This an inverse of American grand juries, as they investigate if a case should be reinstated after being dropped by the prosecution, as opposed to if there is probable cause for changes to be laid in the first place. In this sense, a Japanese PRC functions for the benefit of the one pressing charges, as opposed to being a check on prosecutorial power.\nFrom 1945 to 1972, Okinawa was under American administration. Grand jury proceedings were held in the territory from 1963 until 1972. By an ordinance of the civil administration of the Ryukyu Islands promulgated in 1963, grand jury indictment and petit jury trial were assured for criminal defendants in the civil administration courts. This ordinance reflected the concern of the U.S. Supreme Court that U.S. civilians tried for crimes abroad under tribunals of U.S. provenance should not be shorn of the protections of the U.S. Bill of Rights. Indeed, the District Court in Washington twice held that the absence of the jury system in the civil administration courts in Okinawa invalidated criminal convictions.\nLiberia.\nGrand juries in Liberia were included in section 7 of article 1 of the constitution of 1847. By article 21 of the Constitution of Liberia, 'No person shall be held to answer for a capital or infamous crime except in cases of impeachment, cases arising in the Armed Forces and petty offenses, unless upon indictment by a Grand Jury\". For example, the national Port Authority's managing director was indicted by the Monteserrado County Grand Jury in July 2015, on charges of economic sabotage, theft of property and criminal conspiracy. It is one of the only remaining countries using a grand jury in this manner.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nRichard Helmholz traces the Grand Jury's origins to the Assize of Clarendon in 1166, an Act of Henry II of England, though others note that the trial jury was brought to England by the Normans, and a form of grand jury may have been used during the reign of \u00c6thelred the Unready. Henry's chief impact on the development of the English monarchy was to increase the jurisdiction of the royal courts at the expense of the feudal courts. Itinerant justices on regular circuits were sent out once each year to enforce the \"King's Peace\". To make this system of royal criminal justice more effective, Henry employed the method of inquest used by William the Conqueror in the Domesday Book. In each shire, a body of important men were sworn (\"jur\u00e9\") to report to the sheriff all crimes committed since the last session of the circuit court. Thus originated the more recent grand jury that presents information for an indictment. The grand jury was later recognized by King John in Magna Carta in 1215 on demand of the nobility.\nEngland and Wales.\nThe sheriff of every county was required to return to every quarter sessions and assizes (or more precisely the commission of \"oyer and terminer\" and of gaol delivery), 24 men of the county \"to inquire into, present, do and execute all those things which, on the part of our Lord the King (\"or\" our Lady the Queen), shall then be commanded them\". Grand jurors at the assizes or at the borough quarter sessions did not have property qualifications; but, at the county quarter sessions, they had the same property qualification as petty jurors. However, at the assizes, the grand jury generally consisted of gentlemen of high standing in the county.\nAfter the court was opened by the crier making proclamation, the names of those summoned to the grand jury were called and they were sworn. They numbered at least 14 and not more than 23. The person presiding (the judge at the assizes, the chairman at the county sessions, the recorder at the borough sessions) gave the charge to the grand jury, i.e. he directed their attention to points in the various cases about to be considered which required explanation.\nThe charge having been delivered, the grand jury withdrew to their own room, having received the bills of indictment. The witnesses whose names were endorsed on each bill were sworn as they came to be examined, in the grand jury room, the oath being administered by the foreman, who wrote his initials against the name of the witness on the back of the bill. Only the witnesses for the prosecution were examined, as the function of the grand jury was merely to inquire whether there was sufficient ground to put the accused on trial. If the majority of them (and at least 12) thought that the evidence so adduced made out a sufficient case, the words \"a true bill\" were endorsed on the back of the bill. If they were of the opposite opinion, the phrase \"not a true bill\", or the single Latin word (\"we do not know\" or \"we are ignorant (of)\"), was endorsed instead and the bill was said to be \"ignored\" or thrown out. They could find a true bill as to the charge in one count, and ignore that in another; or as to one defendant and not as to another; but they could not, like a petty jury, return a special or conditional finding, or select part of a count as true and reject the other part. When some bills were \"found\", some of the jurors came out and handed the bills to the clerk of arraigns (in assizes) or clerk of the peace, who announced to the court the name of the prisoner, the charge, and the endorsements of the grand jury. They then retired and considered other bills until all were disposed of; after which they were discharged by the judge, chairman, or recorder.\nIf a bill was thrown out, although it could not again be referred to the grand jury during the same assizes or sessions, it could be preferred at subsequent assizes or sessions, but not in respect of the same offense if a petty jury had returned a verdict.\nOrdinarily, bills of indictment were preferred after there had been an examination before the magistrates. But this need not always take place. With certain exceptions, any person would prefer a bill of indictment against another before the grand jury without any previous inquiry into the truth of the accusation before a magistrate. This right was at one time universal and was often abused. A substantial check was put on this abuse by the Vexatious Indictments Act 1859. This Act provided that for certain offences which it listed (perjury, libel, etc.), the person presenting such an indictment must be bound by recognizance to prosecute or give evidence against the accused, or alternatively had judicial permission (as specified) so to do.\nIf an indictment was found in the absence of the accused, and he/she was not in custody and had not been bound over to appear at assizes or sessions, then process was issued to bring that person into court, as it is contrary to the English law to \"try\" an indictment in the absence of the accused.\nThe grand jury's functions were gradually made redundant by the development of committal proceedings in magistrates' courts from 1848 onward when the (three) Jervis Acts, such as the Justices Protection Act 1848, codified and greatly expanded the functions of magistrates in pre-trial proceedings; these proceedings developed into almost a repeat of the trial itself. In 1933, the grand jury ceased to function in England, under the Administration of Justice (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1933 and was entirely abolished in 1948, when a clause from 1933 saving grand juries for offences relating to officials abroad was repealed by the Criminal Justice Act 1948.\nScotland.\nThe grand jury was introduced in Scotland, solely for high treason, a year after the union with England, by the Treason Act 1708, an Act of the Parliament of Great Britain. Section III of the Act required the Scottish courts to try cases of treason and misprision of treason according to English rules of procedure and evidence. This rule was repealed in 1945.\nThe first Scottish grand jury under this Act met at Edinburgh on 10 October 1748 to take cognisance of the charges against such rebels as had not surrendered, following the Jacobite rising of 1745.\nAn account of its first use in Scotland illustrates the institution's characteristics. It consisted of 23 good and lawful men, chosen out of 48 who were summoned: 24 from the county of Edinburgh (Midlothian), 12 from Haddington (East Lothian) and 12 from Linlithgow (West Lothian). The court consisted of three judges from the High Court of Justiciary (Scotland's highest criminal court), of whom Tinwald (Justice Clerk) was elected \"preses\" (presiding member). Subpoenas under the seal of the court and signed by the clerk were executed on a great number of persons in different shires, requiring them to appear as witnesses under the penalty of \u00a3100 each. The \"preses\" named Sir John Inglis of Cramond as Foreman of the Grand Jury, who was sworn first in the English manner by kissing the book; the others followed three at a time; after which Lord Tinwald, addressing the jurors, informed them that the power His Majesty's advocate possessed before the union, of prosecuting any person for high treason, who appeared guilty on a precognition taken of the facts, being now done away, power was lodged with them, a grand jury, 12 of whom behoved to concur before a true bill could be found. An indictment was then preferred in court and the witnesses endorsed on it were called over and sworn; on which the jury retired to the exchequer chambers and the witnesses were conducted to a room near it, whence they were called to be examined separately. Two solicitors for the crown were present at the examination but no one else; and after they had finished and the sense of the jury was collected, the indictment was returned a \"true bill\", if the charges were found proved, or \"ignoramus\" if doubtful. The proceedings continued for a week, in which time, out of 55 bills, 42 were sustained and 13 dismissed.\nIreland.\nIn Ireland, grand juries were active from the Middle Ages during the Lordship of Ireland in parts of the island under the control of the English government (The Pale), that was followed by the Kingdom of Ireland in 1542. They mainly functioned as local government authorities at the county level. The system was so-called as the grand jurors had to present their public works proposals and budgets in court for official sanction by a judge. Grand jurors were usually the largest local payers of rates, and therefore tended to be the larger landlords, and on retiring they selected new members from the same background.\nDistinct from their public works function, as property owners they also were qualified to sit on criminal juries hearing trials by jury, as well as having a pre-trial judicial function for serious criminal cases. Many of them also sat as magistrates judging the less serious cases.\nThey were usually wealthy \"country gentlemen\" (i.e. landowners, landed gentry, farmers and merchants):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A country gentleman as a member of a Grand Jury... levied the local taxes, appointed the nephews of his old friends to collect them, and spent them when they were gathered in. He controlled the boards of guardians and appointed the dispensary doctors, regulated the diet of paupers, inflicted fines and administered the law at petty sessions.\nFrom 1691 to 1793, Catholics and Protestants who were not members of Church of Ireland were excluded from membership. The concentration of power and wealth in a few families caused resentment over time. The system of local government started to become more representative from the passing of the Municipal Corporations (Ireland) Act 1840. A divergence of opinions can be seen in the House of Commons debate on 8 March 1861 led by Isaac Butt. Grand juries were eventually replaced by democratically elected county councils by the Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898, as regards their administrative functions.\nAfter the formation of Irish Free State, grand juries were abolished by section 27 of the Courts of Justice Act 1924, but they persisted in Northern Ireland until abolished by the Grand Jury (Abolition) Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 of the Parliament of Northern Ireland in 1969.\nCanada.\nGrand juries were once common across Canada. The institution of British civil government in 1749 at Nova Scotia brought the judicature system peculiar to that form, and the grand jury was inherent to it. A similar form derived in Quebec from the promise of the Royal Proclamation of 1763 that a faithful copy of Laws of England would be instituted in the North American possessions of the Crown. Archival records are found that document the presentments of a grand jury in Quebec as early as 16 October 1764. One of the chief complaints was related to the jury trial, and the use of language. The desire for English law was a driver for the division in 1791 of Quebec, as it was then known, at the Ottawa river into Upper Canada and Lower Canada, as each of the two groups (French and English) desired to maintain their traditions. In point of fact, the second law passed in Upper Canada relates to (petit) jury trial. This was continued so that Chapter 31 of the 1859 Consolidated Statutes of Upper Canada specifies the constitution of Grand and Petit Juries in the province (now known as Ontario). The colony at St. John's Island, ceded by France in 1763, and separated on 30 May 1769 from Nova Scotia, became Prince Edward Island on 29 November 1798. Prince Edward Island derived its grand jury from its administrative parent between 1763 and 1769, Nova Scotia, as did Sunbury County when it was split off in 1784 to become the Colony of New Brunswick. The Colony of British Columbia, when it was formed on 2 August 1858, instituted a grand jury, along with the Colony of the Queen Charlotte Islands (1853\u20131863) and the Colony of Vancouver Island (1848\u20131866) when the latter were absorbed by the former.\nOld courthouses with the two jury boxes necessary to accommodate the 24 jurors of a grand jury can still be seen. The grand jury would evaluate charges and return what was called a \"true bill (of indictment)\" if the charges were to proceed. or a verdict of \"nolle prosequi\" if not. The practice gradually disappeared in Canada over the course of the twentieth century, after being the subject of extended discussions late in the 19th. Quebec abolished grand juries in 1933. It was ultimately abolished in 1984 when the Nova Scotia courts formally ended the practice. \nIn the present day, probable cause is determined by a judge in the preliminary hearing. In many circumstances, the attorney general can skip the preliminary hearing and have the case go directly to trial if it is in the interests of public safety.\nAustralia.\nThe grand jury existed in New South Wales for a short period in the 1820s. The New South Wales Act 1823 (UK) enabled the establishment of quarter sessions, as a subsidiary court structure below that of the Supreme Court. Francis Forbes, Chief Justice, reasoned that this entailed the creation of quarter sessions as they existed in England. Thus, inadvertently, trial by jury and indictment by grand jury were introduced, but only for these subsidiary courts. Grand juries met in Sydney, Parramatta, Windsor and other places. This democratic method of trial proved very popular, but was resented by conservatives. Eventually, conservative elements in the colony were successful in having these innovations suppressed by the Australian Courts Act 1828 (UK). George Forbes, a member of the Legislative Council, unsuccessfully moved for the reintroduction of grand juries in 1858, but this was thwarted by the Attorney-General and the Chief Justice.\nIn South Australia and Western Australia, grand juries existed for longer periods of time. In South Australia, the first grand jury sat on 13 May 1837, but they were abolished in 1852. In Western Australia, by the Grand Jury Abolition Act Amendment Act 1883 (WA), grand juries were abolished (section 4: A Grand Jury shall not be summoned for the Supreme Court of Western Australia, nor for any General Quarter Sessions for the said Colony). This 1883 abolition Act was itself abolished by the Criminal Procedure and Appeals (Consequential and Other Provisions) Act 2004 (section 5: The Grand Jury Abolition Act Amendment Act 1883 is repealed).\nThe Australian state of Victoria maintained, until 2009, provisions for a grand jury in the Crimes Act 1958 under section 354 indictments, which had been used on rare occasions by individuals to bring other persons to court seeking them to be committed for trial on indictable offences. Grand juries were introduced by the Judicature Act 1874 and have been used on a very limited number of occasions. Their function in Victoria particularly relates to alleged offences either by bodies corporate or where magistrates have aborted the prosecution.\nNew Zealand.\nThe grand jury was established in New Zealand in 1844. Its function was to consider bills of indictment preferred against persons committed for trial and to decide whether the evidence against them justified their standing trial. At first the grand jury retained the theoretical power to present an indictment of its own motion, a relic of mediaeval times when the grand jury's purpose was to accuse rather than protect from trial. This power has disappeared in 1893. Grand juries were later abolished in 1961 and followed by special juries in 1981.\nCape Colony.\nTrial by jury was introduced in the Cape Colony by Richard Bourke, Lieutenant Governor and acting Governor of the colony between 1826 and 1828. The acting Governor, who was later influential in the establishment of jury trial in New South Wales, obtained the consent of the Secretary of State for the Colonies in August 1827 and the first Charter of Justice was issued on 24 August 1827.\nJury trial was brought into practical operation in 1828 and the 1831 Ordinance 84 laid down that criminal cases would be heard by a panel of nine, selected from males aged between 21 and 60, owning or renting property to a value of \u00a31.17s (37 shillings) per annum or having liability for taxes of 30 shillings in Cape Town and 20 shillings outside the town. Black (i.e. non-white) jurors were not entirely excluded and sat occasionally. This is not to imply, however, that juries did not operate in an oppressive manner towards the Black African and Asian residents of the Cape, whose participation in the jury lists was, in any event, severely limited by the property qualification. The property qualification was amended in 1831 and 1861 and, experimentally, a grand jury came into operation.\nThe grand jury was established for Cape Town alone. It met quarterly. In 1842 it was recorded that it served a district of 50,000 inhabitants and in one quarterly session there were six presentments (1 homicide, 2 assaults, 1 robbery, 1 theft, 1 fraud).\nAs elsewhere, the judge could use his charge to the grand jury to bring matters of concern to him to the attention of the public and the government. In May 1879 Mr. Justice Fitzpatrick, returning from circuit in the northern and western parts of Cape Colony, gave a charge to the grand jury at the Criminal Sessions at Cape Town, in which, after congratulating them upon the lightness of the calendar, he observed there were indications in the country of a growing mutual bad feeling between the races, etc. This was reported in the \"Cape Argus\" and was a subject of a question to the government in the House of Commons in London.\nThe grand jury continued in operation until 1885, by which time the Cape was under responsible government, when it was abolished by Act 17 of 1885 of the Cape Parliament.\nFrance.\nGrand juries were established in France in 1791 under the name \"jury d'accusation\", but they were abolished with the introduction of the Code of Criminal Instruction in 1808.\nThe jury law of 1791 created an eight-man \"jury d'accusation\" in each \"arrondissement\" (a subdivision of the \"departement\") and a 12-man \"jury de jugement\" in each \"departement\". In each \"arrondissement\" the \"procureur-syndic\" drew up a list of 30 jurors from the electoral roll every three months for the \"jury d'accusation\". There was no public prosecutor or \"juge d'instruction\". Instead the police or private citizens could bring a complaint to the Justice of the Peace established in each canton (a subdivision of the arrondissement). This magistrate interrogated the accused to determine whether grounds for prosecution existed and if so sent the case to the \"directeur du jury\" (the director of the \"jury d'accusation\"), who was one of the \"arrondissement's\" civil court judges, and who served in the post for six months on a rotating basis. He decided whether to dismiss the charges or, if not, whether the case was a \"d\u00e9lit\" (misdemeanour) or a crime (felony, i.e. imprisonable for 2 years or more). \"D\u00e9lits\" went to the \"tribunal de police correctionnelle\" of the \"arrondissement\", while for \"crimes\" the \"directeur de jury\" convoked the \"jury d'accusation\" of the \"arrondissement\", in order to get an indictment. The \"directeur du jury\" drew up the bill of indictment (\"acte d'accusation\") summarising the charges to be presented to the \"jury d'accusation\". The \"directeur\" made a presentation to the jury in the absence of the accused and the jury heard the witnesses. The jury then decided by majority vote whether there were sufficient grounds for the case to go to the \"tribunal criminel\" of the \"departement\". Between 1792 and 1795 there was no property qualification for jurors.\nThe functions of the \"jury d\u2019accusation\" were prescribed in the law of 1791 passed by the Constituent Assembly and were maintained and re-enacted in the \"Code des D\u00e9lits et des Peines\" of 3 Brumaire, Year 4 (25 October 1795) and this was the operative law until it was abolished in 1808. Special juries and special grand juries were originally defined in law, for cases thought to require more qualified jurors, but these were abolished in Year 8 (1799).\nSierra Leone.\nUnder the administration of the Sierra Leone Company, which began in 1792, the Governor and Council or any two members thereof, being also justices of the peace, held quarter sessions for the trial of offences committed within the colony. The process for indictment etc. was the same as the practice in England or as near as possible thereto. To effect this, they were empowered to issue their warrant or precept to the Sheriff, commanding him to summon a grand jury to sit at the court of quarter sessions. Grand juries continued in operation after the transfer to the colony to the Crown in 1807.\nGovernor Kennedy (1852\u20131854) was concerned that jurors were frustrating government policy by being biased in certain cases; in particular he felt that liberated Africans on the grand jury would never convict another liberated African on charges of owning or importing slaves. He promulgated the Ordinance of 29 November 1853 which abolished the grand jury. Opposition was immediately mounted in Freetown. A public meeting launched a petition with 550 names to the Colonial Secretary in London, and the opposition declared that the Kennedy ordinance was a reproach upon the loyalty of the community. Grand juries have been considered one colonial body representative of local opinion and the Colonial Secretary's support for Kennedy upholding the abolition inspired a round of agitation for a local voice in government decision-making.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12685", "revid": "157530", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12685", "title": "Gdanzk", "text": ""}
{"id": "12686", "revid": "2003421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12686", "title": "Overview of gun laws by nation", "text": "Regulations on arms and ammunition\nGun laws and policies, collectively referred to as firearms regulation or gun control, regulate the manufacture, sale, transfer, possession, modification, and use of small arms by civilians. Laws of some countries may afford civilians a right to keep and bear arms, and have more liberal gun laws than neighboring jurisdictions. Gun control typically restricts access to certain categories of firearms and limits the categories of persons who may be granted permission to access firearms. There may be separate licenses for hunting, sport shooting, self-defense, collecting, and concealed carry, each with different sets of requirements, privileges, and responsibilities.\nGun laws are usually justified by a legislature's intent to curb the usage of small arms in crime, and to this end they frequently target types of arms identified in crimes and shootings, such as handguns and other types of concealable firearms. Semi-automatic rifle designs which are derived from service rifles, sometimes colloquially referred to as assault rifles, often face additional scrutiny from lawmakers. Persons restricted from legal access to firearms may include those below a certain age or those with a criminal record. Firearms licenses to purchase or possess may be denied to those defined as most at risk of harming or murdering themselves or others, persons with a history of domestic violence, alcohol use disorder or substance use disorder, mental illness, depression, or those who have attempted suicide. Those applying for a firearm license may need to demonstrate competence by completing a gun safety course and/or show provisions for a secure location to store weapons.\nThe legislation which restricts small arms may also restrict other weapons, such as explosives, crossbows, swords, electroshock weapons, air guns, and pepper spray. It may also restrict firearm accessories, notably high-capacity magazines, sound suppressors, and devices such as auto sears, which enable fully automatic fire. There may be restrictions on the quantity or types of ammunition purchased, with certain types prohibited. Due to the global scope of this article, detailed coverage cannot be provided on all these matters; the article will instead attempt to briefly summarize each country's weapon laws in regard to small arms use and ownership by civilians.\nVocabulary and terminology.\nFirearms are not defined the same way in each country.\nSome terms are used in several countries in the context of gun laws. These include the following:\nGun laws might be classified by countries according to some specific common characteristics:\nFirearms license.\nA firearms license (also known as a gun license; or licence in British English) is a license or permit issued by a government authority (typically by the police) of a jurisdiction, that allows the licensee to buy, own, possess, or carry a firearm, often subject to a number of conditions or restrictions, especially with regard to storage requirements or the completion of a firearms safety course, as well as background checks, etc. Firearms licenses are not required in all jurisdictions. Additionally, some countries or states may require by law a \"permit-to-purchase\" in order to buy handguns or firearms. A licence may also be required to buy ammunition.\nThe permit or license scope varies according to what firearm(s) or activity(s) it allows the holder to legally do with the firearm. Some jurisdictions may require a firearm license to own a firearm, to engage in hunting, target shooting or collecting, or to carry a concealed firearm, or operate a business (such as being a gun dealer or a gunsmith). Some jurisdictions may require separate licenses for rifles, shotguns or handguns.\nThe requirement to have a firearm license is usually in addition to a requirement for firearm registration. For example, gun laws in Australia require firearms to be registered by serial number to the owner, who holds a firearm licence.\nComparison.\nThis section uses the expressions \"shall issue\" and \"may issue\" which are partly specific to and defined by the US system of firearm regulations.\nTable.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAfrica.\nThe Bamako Declaration on an African Common Position on the Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small Arms and Light Weapons was adopted in Bamako, Mali, on 1 December 2000 by the representatives of the 51 member states of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU). The provisions of this declaration recommend that the signatories establish the illegal possession of small arms and light weapons as a criminal offence under national law in their respective countries.\nBotswana.\nBotswana's law allows possession of shotguns and rifles only. The government has put a limit on the number of licenses issued every year \u2013 only 50 people can receive them, no matter how many apply, meaning that the acceptance rate is usually below 1%.\nCurrently there are 34,550 (or 1.5 per 100 people) registered firearms.\nCentral African Republic.\nOfficially only 143 people have a permit to own firearms in Central African Republic, mostly members of parliament. They are entitled to possess one 12-gauge shotgun and one 9mm automatic pistol. Regardless, illegal possession and carry of firearms is widespread in Central African Republic, large parts of which are under control of different armed groups. Anti-balaka and ex-S\u00e9l\u00e9ka militias possess and carry home-made shotguns, automatic rifles and rocket launchers.\nChad.\nA law on firearms passed in 1968 requires a permit to own a firearm in Chad which must be renewed annually. This law does not specify any conditions that must be met to obtain a license except for a tax stamp which must be paid, between 500 and 3000 CFA francs depending on the type of firearm. Considering that in 2017 the Chadian government raised 5 million francs from issuing firearm licenses it would mean that there are between 1,666 and 10,000 active firearm licenses in Chad or between 0.01 and 0.06 per 100 people.\nDjibouti.\nPossession of firearms in Djibouti is generally prohibited except when special permits are granted in exceptional circumstances by the Head of State.\nEritrea.\nFirearms in Eritrea are completely prohibited for civilian use without exceptions.\nEswatini.\nPermitted types of firearms in Eswatini are shotguns, revolvers, pistols and rifles. To obtain a license one must get approval from the Local Chief's council, Local Station Commander, Regional Administrator, Director of Crimes at Police Headquarters, Licensing Officer/Registrar of Firearms Registry, Licensing Board and lastly the Police Station Commander. Requirements include general standing in the community. The application acceptance rate is around 57% as of 2002.[ [update]]\nGambia.\nCurrent law states that firearm licenses are a privilege in Gambia and authorities have full discretion in issuing them.\nGhana.\nThe firearms law in Ghana allows acquisition of shotguns and handguns (pistols and revolvers). It requires that every firearm must be reregistered every year; however, this is widely ignored. Out of 1,230,000 people who legally bought a gun only 40,000 are reregistering their weapons every year. Unlike other African countries, handguns are popular in Ghana. For example, in Greater Accra Region 74.4% of people who legally acquired guns in 2020 chose revolvers, while 21% chose shotguns. In the Ashanti region 45.5% chose shotguns, while 21.5% chose revolvers.\nKenya.\nGun regulation in Kenya is established by the Firearms Act (Cap. 114) of Kenya. The Act states: \"No person under the age of twelve years shall have in his possession any firearm or ammunition to which Part II applies, and no person under the age of fourteen years shall have in his possession any firearm or ammunition to which Part II applies other than a miniature rifle not exceeding 0.22 calibre or a shotgun the bore of which is not larger than 20 gauge, and ammunition suitable therefor, except in circumstances where he is entitled to have possession thereof without holding a firearm certificate by virtue of subsection (8), subsection (9) or subsection (10) of section 7; and no person shall part with the possession of any such firearm or ammunition to any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be under the age of twelve or fourteen years, as the case may be, except in circumstances where that other person is entitled to have possession thereof.\"\nThe Chief Licensing Officer (CLO) has discretion to award, deny, or revoke firearm licenses. Applicants must be 21 years of age or older, pass a stringent background check for criminal activity, mental health and domestic violence, and state genuine reason(s) for their need to privately own and carry a firearm. Checks are regularly repeated, with failure to pass resulting in immediate revocation of the license. Once licensed to own a gun, no additional permit is required to carry a concealed firearm.\nLesotho.\nApplicants for firearm possession must obtain a reference letter from the village chief or headman and the Principal Chief. It is later sent to local police stations for scrutiny, then to district police for their assessment, then to the National Security Service or Criminal Intelligence for vetting of the applicant. The application then goes to the Regional Police Commissioner who will in turn pass it to the Police Headquarters for approval by the Commissioner of Police (Firearms and Explosives Licensing Board).\nLiberia.\nLiberia allows only possession of single-shot shotguns and black powder long guns for hunting purposes. Private security agencies are banned from arming their employees. However, some criminals have automatic firearms, particularly AK-styled rifles. These are believed to be leftovers from the country's decade-long intermittent civil war. Automatic firearms are also likely coming across the country's porous borders with Guinea, Ivory Coast, and Sierra Leone. These countries have more liberal gun-ownership laws. All of Liberia's neighbors have experienced some form of armed conflict in the last two decades leaving them awash with illegal automatic weapons. The Emergency Response Unit (ERU), the only armed unit within the Liberia National Police, responds to armed incidents, particularly armed robbery.\nLiberia Firearms and Ammunition Control Act of 2015 regulates the possession and use of small arms and light weapons in the country. The illegal possession of small arms and light weapons constitutes a first-degree misdemeanor and is punishable by a term of imprisonment of not more than a year and seizure of the illegally possessed arm or ammunition.\nMozambique.\nThere are no licensed firearm dealers in Mozambique, therefore any person wanting to obtain one must travel to a different country (usually South Africa), purchase guns, then return, surrender them for authorities and ask them to allow them to obtain them.\nNamibia.\nNamibia permits firearm ownership under license, which is issued on a may-issue basis. In 2017 Namibian police issued 7,647 firearm licenses from 9,239 applications, the acceptance rate therefore being around 83%. Overall there are currently 200,100 registered firearms in Namibia or 9 per 100 people. Most popular types of firearms owned by civilians are pistols (46%), rifles (34%) and shotguns (24%). Carrying unloaded concealed firearms in public is allowed.\nRwanda.\nIn 2019 Rwanda passed a new law dealing with firearm possession. It states that authorities have total discretion when determining whether persons can own firearms and can therefore deny applications without reason, even if someone met all requirements.\nSenegal.\nSenegal has a strict gun legislation. Applications for firearm licenses do not need to specify a reason. An application requires: copy of identity card, criminal record, medical check-up, four photos, tax stamp and personality test. Decisions should be made after a few months.\nGun ownership is very rare, however numbers are on the rise. In 2016 Senegal police issued 1000 licenses, while rejecting 250 (80% acceptance rate), compared to 456 in 2011. In 2017 it was estimated that police issued more than 7,000 total licenses (0.04 per 100 people).\nSierra Leone.\nIn 2012, Sierra Leone legalized gun ownership after 16 years of a total ban being enforced. According to the act, authorities have discretion in determining whether persons have good reasons to own firearms. The Arms Act of 2021 repealed the Arms Act of 2012, with little change to licensing procedures.\nSomalia.\nFrom 1992 until 2023, a UN embargo had prohibited importation of any firearms into Somalia except for security forces.\nSomaliland.\nAccording to 2010 gun control law residents of Somaliland are allowed to possess firearms for the purpose of defense of life and property. The law specifies pistols and AK automatic rifles as permissible while also mentioning that others can be allowed. Only one weapon of each type can be registered. Possession of more than one weapon of each type require justification and is granted only for legal persons. Permits to register a weapon are provided to people over 18 without criminal background. Permit must be renewed every year. Both citizens and residents can register firearms and they can be inherited. Sale of firearms is limited to government and licensed dealers. Weapons of war such as mortars, bombs, chemical weapons as well as suppressors are prohibited. Openly carrying firearms is prohibited. As the arms embargo on Somalia was lifted, the Somaliland government opposed the measure.\nSouth Africa.\nTo apply for a firearm license in South Africa applicants must pass a competency test covering the specific type of firearm that is being applied for, and a test on the South African firearm laws. Once these tests are passed one needs to apply for a competency certificate, where the South African Police Service performs a background check. After both tests are passed and the respective certificates are awarded, one can then apply for a firearm license in categories ranging from self-defence to professional hunting. Different license categories have different restrictions, for example the amount of ammunition owners may hold. Using guns to hunt is permitted.\nAmericas.\nArgentina.\nFirearms in Argentina are restricted, being regulated by ANMaC (Agencia Nacional de Materiales Controlados) since October 2015. Said agency replaced RENAR (Registro Nacional de Armas de la Republica Argentina), both being a branch of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights. To own a firearm in Argentina, one must be a legitimate user. Applicants must: be 18 years of age or older, provide a medical certificate that certifies they are physically and mentally fit, complete a safety course, provide a legitimate means of income, and undergo and pass a background check. A successful applicant is fingerprinted and issued a license which has to be renewed every five years. One may not legally discharge a firearm in Argentina if they are not a legitimate user, even if that gun belongs to someone else. Once a legitimate user wants to purchase a firearm, they must provide a secure location to store the firearm(s), and give an acceptable reason for wanting a firearm \u2013 such as collecting, target shooting, hunting, business, or self-defense in the home.\nFirearms must be purchased through a licensed registry registered with the ANMaC. If a firearm is inherited, a re-registering form must be filed. There is no limit on the number of firearms owned so long as they are properly stored. Ammunition sales are recorded but unlimited. Carry permits for licensed handgun owners are extremely difficult to obtain, and require appearing before the ANMaC board to make their case. Carry permits are renewed yearly to re-examine their \"clear and present\" danger, and the permit is usually revoked immediately if this danger is removed. Those dealing in money or valuables or in private security may be issued a business carry permit.\nHandguns above .32 calibre are conditional-use; fully automatic handguns are prohibited to civilians. Bolt-action rifles above .22, long rifles and semi-automatic rifles above .22, and long rifles with a non-detachable magazine are conditional-use; fully automatic rifles and semi-automatic rifles above .22, and long rifles with detachable magazines are prohibited. Semi-automatic shotguns and shotguns with barrels between long are conditional-use; fully automatic shotguns and shotguns with barrels under are prohibited.\nBelize.\nPermanent residents or citizens of Belize are allowed to own a gun after a background check. The maximum caliber is 9mm, and one may have only 100 rounds at any given time. Licenses are available to farmers to have shotguns to protect livestock, as well as for hunting and personal protection. Firearms may be imported but must be declared before arrival. Imported guns will be impounded by the police and registered before a license is granted.\nBrazil.\nAll firearms in Brazil are required to be registered. The minimum age for ownership is 25, and certificates of aptitude and mental health are required prior to the acquisition of a firearm and every ten years thereafter.\nIt is generally illegal to carry a firearm outside one's residence, commerce/store or farm.\nExecutive Order No.\u00a05.123, of 1 July 2004 allows the Federal Police to confiscate firearms which are not possessed for a valid reason;\nThe total number of firearms in Brazil is thought to be between 14 million and 17 million with an estimated 9 million being unregistered. In a 2005 referendum, Brazilians voted against a government proposal for a total ban on the sales of firearms to private citizens.\nIn January 2019, President Bolsonaro signed an executive order which loosened Brazil's gun laws by removing the police's discretionary power to reject license applications.\nCurrently there are more than one million guns legally registered by civilians.\nOn 5 September the Minister of Supreme Court, Luiz Edson Fachin, did invalidate some decrees signed by President Bolsonaro. Those decisions, are named as ADI 6119, ADI 6139 and ADI 6466. The immediate action of those ADIs were the ban to purchase any firearm for home protection and the purchase of ammunition for any civilian in the country. Those ADIs also affected shooting sports in some degree, by forbidding the acquisition of firearms of restricted calibers.\nCanada.\nCanada's firearm laws are stated in the Firearms Act. The possession and acquisition licence (PAL) is distributed by the Canadian Firearms Program (a program operated within the RCMP) and requires taking firearms safety courses (for non-restricted and restricted classifications) and passing a written and practical test with 80% or higher, an enhanced background check, and interviews with conjugal partner and references. The Non-restricted PAL allows purchase of most common sporting rifles and shotguns. A Restricted-PAL (RPAL) has an additional course for restricted firearms (mostly handguns), which have additional storage and transport requirements as well as required registration.\nThe two main reasons for owning firearms are target shooting and hunting. Only Non-restricted firearms can be used for hunting.\nCarrying firearms for self-defense against human threats is prohibited without a permit. These permits are typically only issued to police, and those in a profession that involves carrying valuable goods, such as armoured car personnel. The RCMP is also able to issue an Authorization to Carry permit to private individuals on the basis that a person's life is in imminent danger and police protection is inadequate. These permits are seldom issued. In the 1990s, Toronto City Councillor Norm Gardner was revealed to hold such a permit when he shot a man who was committing a robbery. As of \u00a02018,[ [update]] only two permits for protection of life were actively issued in the country.\nAn Authorization to Carry permit can be obtained for protection against wild animals. However these are only issued to a licensed professional trapper, or to people in a profession that exposes them to dangerous animals in remote areas. However, the applicant must prove why carrying a rifle or shotgun is not possible, and they must choose a firearm that is appropriate for the circumstances.\nIn Canada, firearms fall into one of three categories:\nRestricted and Prohibited firearms can only be used at an approved shooting range, must be registered, and cannot be used for hunting. Transportation of firearms that meet these classifications are restricted by an Authorization to Transport (ATT) permit, and they can only be transported to and from approved ranges in a locked case.\nNon-citizens may obtain a non-resident firearms declaration from a customs officer, for a temporary 60-day authorization to bring a non-restricted firearm into Canada.\nChile.\nIn Chile, the 103rd article of the Constitution declares gun ownership as a privilege granted in accordance to a special law. Firearms are regulated by the police. Civilian gun ownership is allowed by law but discouraged by authorities, with regular press statements and campaigns denouncing the dangers of possessing firearms.\nPolice-issued firearm permits require applicants to be 18 years of age, provide a mental health certificate issued by a psychiatrist, have a clean criminal record with no domestic violence accusations, and pass a written test on firearm safety and knowledge. Final approval lies in a district police commander, who can deny the permit in \"justified cases\" not detailed by the law. There are five types of permits:\nEach of these permits has limits on types of firearms used, and allows for a police-issued permit to buy a specified quantity of appropriate ammunition from a specific gun shop. Transport permits are required to take firearms from the permit-holder's residence to a specified shooting range or hunting ground, and are valid for two years. Transported firearms must be unloaded and not attached to the body.\nA self-defense permit allows carrying a firearm for protection against specific human threats. Such permits are valid for one year, but as the police commander can deny applications without stating a reason, they are very rarely issued. Automatic firearms are forbidden for civilian use.\nCuba.\nGun control law enacted in 2008 in Cuba divides firearm licenses in to six categories:\nColombia.\nArticle 3 of Colombia's firearm law states that civilians may possess firearms only via permit issued at discretion of the competent authority.\nIn 1993, Colombia legislated gun ownership, effectively establishing a government licensing monopoly. In 2016, president of Colombia Juan Manuel Santos signed an executive order suspending civilians from carrying firearms, with some exceptions including security details, hunting, private defense and collection. It was extended in 2018 by newly elected president Ivan Duque, albeit with the added stipulation: \"for reasons of emergency or security ... taking into consideration among other factors, the particular circumstances of each application\". A legal challenge to this modification has been prepared.\nCosta Rica.\nOnly citizens and permanent residents of Costa Rica are allowed to possess firearms: handguns (up to three), rifles (up to three for sporting use; hunting is illegal in Costa Rica), and semi-automatic weapons between the calibers of 5.6 to 18.5 millimeters.\nForeigners wishing to bring guns into the country must apply with the Ministry of Public Security and declare it when they arrive to the customs department, who will hold it until they go through the registration process. Firearms can be purchased from a licensed gun shop or private individual. Gun owners must have a clean criminal record in Costa Rica and must pass a psychological exam.\nEl Salvador.\nEl Salvador's laws aim to allow and regulate civilian possession of firearms. In order to get a firearm license one must have no criminal record, be at least 21 years of age(24 for a carry license), pay for a tax stamp, and undergo a written test. In 2017 there were 344,587 registered firearms in El Salvador, or 5.6 per 100 people.\nGreenland.\nPossession of most long guns is allowed without a permit in Greenland, while semi- and fully-automatic firearms and handguns require a permit. In 2018, proposed amendment to firearm law would raise the minimum age to purchase guns to 16.\nHaiti.\nThe constitution of Haiti provides citizens with the constitutional right to possess firearms at home. Only police and military can possess rifles. Handguns are allowed to be carried open or concealed with the correct license issued by the Haitian National Police assigned to the serial number of the firearm and with the name of the individual or organization responsible for the firearm.\nHonduras.\nGun laws in Honduras are stated in the Act on the Control of Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Material of 2000.\nIn April 2002, the National Arms Registry was formed, requiring all citizens to register their firearms with the Ministry of Defense.\nIn 2003, a ban on certain \"assault rifles\" was passed, restricting citizens from possessing military-style rifles such as the AK-47 and the M-16.\nIn 2007, an additional decree suspended the right to openly carry and conceal carry a firearm in public, and limited the number of firearms a person can possess.\nJamaica.\nGun laws in Jamaica are stated in the Firearms Act and regulated by the Firearms Licensing Authority.\nApplicants must pass a police background check and complete a certification process to obtain a firearms license for shotguns, handguns and rifles. Shotguns and rifles for hunting or sport-shooting purposes are easier to obtain than handguns. Fully automatic weapons are prohibited. Handguns are limited to those under .45\u00a0calibre for revolvers or 10\u00a0mm for pistols. Ammunition purchases are limited to 250 rounds per year for shotguns and 50 for handguns, with applications for additional ammunition generally granted during the hunting season. A gun safe is required for storage of all firearms and ammunition. Once licensed, no additional permit is required to carry a firearm open or concealed, unless the carrying of firearms has been temporarily prohibited under section 22 of the Act.\nMexico.\nUnder the Mexican Constitution, Article 10, citizens and legal residents have the right to own and carry arms, but may only carry them in accordance with police regulations, i.e. Article 32 of the \"Ley Federal de Armas de Fuego y Explosivos\".\nApplicants must: have a clear criminal record; proven income and residence (i.e.: cannot be homeless); undergone compulsory military service; a clean bill of health (including drug tests); justified the weapon's use; be employed.\nNew firearms are purchased through the Ministry of Defense. Prohibited weapons include: large-calibre handguns; shotguns with barrels shorter than or bore greater than 12 gauge; and rifles which are fully automatic or of large calibre. One handgun is permitted for home defense, but it must be registered within 30 days of purchase. For hunting and sport shooting, up to nine long guns and one handgun is permitted, requiring membership in a hunting or shooting club. Collectors may be authorized to possess additional and prohibited weapons.\nA carry license may be issued to those employed by private security firms, and certain weapons are exclusive to the armed forces. Licenses must be renewed biennially.\nPanama.\nObtaining firearms in Panama requires a Firearms Possession Certificate (FPC), which requires: criminal background check, drugs test, psychological test and firearms training. The minimum age to own a firearm is 18. The FPC allows the owner to move the firearms, unloaded and stowed, to and from a gun range. At least 6 hours of annual gun range practice is mandatory. There are no firearm caliber nor magazine capacity restrictions and all kinds of semiautomatic weapons are allowed for civilian ownership. Automatic weapons may only be owned by the state. Ammunition is restricted by type. Tracer, incendiary, armor-piercing and explosive ammunition is prohibited to civilians. An FPC is valid for 10 years.\nConcealed carry of firearms is allowed through a Firearms Carry License (FCL). An FCL has the same requirements as an FPC, but carrier must be at least 21 years of age. Only handguns, such as pistols and revolvers, are permitted for concealed carry; however, up to two handguns may be carried loaded simultaneously. An FCL is valid for 4 years.\nThe Public Security Ministry handles all firearm matters. All legally owned firearms must be registered to their owners and appear on their permits. Direct or private handover of firearms is prohibited. A buyer must submit an application to the Security Ministry which, if approved, will deliver the updated permits and the firearms directly to the owner. No private owner may take out a firearm directly from a dealer. A shall-issue permit policy apply for all permits; the state must issue a permit if applicant meets all requirements. Firearm applications must be resolved in 30 business days or less.\nImportation of firearms is only allowed to authorized local dealers. An individual may not privately import his/her own firearms while immigrating from another country. Firearms may temporarily be taken out of the country for sport events or repairs.\nFirearms are regulated by Article 312 of the Panamanian Constitution of 1972 and the General Firearms, Ammunition and Related Materials Act (Law 57 of 2011).\nParaguay.\nIn order to get a firearm possession license one must have no criminal records, be at least 22 years of age, and obtain certificate of safely handling a firearm. Carry permit requires a good reason. Automatic weapons are prohibited. As of 2014,[ [update]] there are 392,000 registered firearms and 1,961 carry permits issued to civilians.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, firearms are regulated by both federal and individual state statutes. Federal firearms laws are enforced by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF). State and local firearms laws, which vary greatly, are enforced by state and local authorities. The right to keep and bear arms has been protected by the Second Amendment to the Constitution since 1791, and the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that it protects any individual's right to keep and bear arms unconnected with service in a militia for traditionally lawful purposes, such as self-defense within the home and in public, in \"District of Columbia v. Heller\" (2008) and \"New York State Rifle &amp; Pistol Association, Inc. v. Bruen\" (2022). The Supreme Court affirmed in \"McDonald v. City of Chicago\" (2010) that the Second Amendment is incorporated by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and thereby applies to state and local laws as well as federal laws. Most state constitutions also guarantee this right, although there is some variance across the country as both federal and state laws apply to firearm possession and ownership.\nFirearm ownership in the United States is by right and does not require licensure or proof of need. Federally, there is a minimum age of 18 to possess a handgun, with no minimum age for long guns. To purchase from a licensed dealer, one must be 18 for long guns and 21 for handguns. The respective age requirements apply to purchasing ammunition from a dealer, retail store or online.\nFederally, new firearms must be transferred by a federally licensed dealer (FFL) with form 4473 and background check. Used firearms transferred interstate must also go through an FFL. Intrastate private party sales are not required to use an FFL under federal law, but many states require FFLs to conduct private party transfers.\nFederal law does not limit the number of firearms or quantity of ammunition and reloading supplies a private citizen may keep.\nAir guns, antique ignition (muzzle loading) guns and guns made prior to 1899 are not firearms under U.S. law, although they are still considered deadly weapons.\nFederal law designates two classes of firearms in the United States:\nTitle I, GCA firearms: This includes all handguns, rifles with at least 16\" barrel and 26\" overall length, Shotguns with at least 18\" barrel and 26\" overall length, other firearms with an overall length of 26\" or more which are neither handgun nor long gun. Sporting arms over .50 caliber are title I; non-sporting arms over .50 caliber fall into the Title II category below.\nTitle II, NFA Firearms. NFA firearms include:\nNon-prohibited persons over 21 years of age may own NFA firearms in most states, though some states prohibit some or all of this class. NFA firearms must be registered and go through a manufacturing or transfer approval by ATF before the individual may make or take possession of the weapon. This process can take months, sometimes even years. It requires fingerprinting, photo ID and a tax of $200 per application (per weapon).\nFully-automatic firearms (machine guns) are heavily restricted and can only be owned by private citizens if manufactured and registered before 18 May 1986. unless an individual is to obtain status as an SOT \"Special Occupational Taxpayer\" as a FFL \"Federal Firearms License\" holder. Since civilians without SOT status are only allowed to own machine guns manufactured before 1986, the finite supply has caused the market value of pre-1986 transferable automatic weapons to be 20 to 50 times that of their semiautomatic counterparts (2022 ex.,$500\u2013$800 for a basic AR-15, $20,000-$25,000 for an M-16)\nLaw varies greatly from state to state, both in its scope and in its range.\nPursuant to \u00a0https:// \u2013 Unlawful Acts, persons are prohibited from possessing firearms or ammunition if:\nThe carrying of weapons, either openly or concealed, is regulated by the states, and these laws have changed rapidly beginning in the latter part of the 20th century. Some states allow residents to carry without a permit, while others only allow the public carry of firearms upon issuance of a permit or license. Under the Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act, current and former law enforcement officers can carry anywhere (except private property where they are subject to the rules of the owner and gun-free public places like schools) as long as they carry a photo identification from their agency and have completed yearly training from said agency.\nFederal law provides protection for travellers who may find themselves going through states with more restrictive gun laws than their origin or destination. As long as the weapons are transported in accordance with FOPA and the weapon(s) are legally owned and not prohibited in the origin or destination(s), the travellers are immune from prosecution.\nBeing engaged in the business of importing firearms, dealing firearms, gunsmithing or manufacturing arms requires licensure in the United States. There are multiple license types, depending on the nature of the business, and some licenses have additional requirements, such as registration with Directorate of Defense Trade Controls.\nPrivate citizens in the United States may manufacture weapons for personal use without government approval or registration for Title I GCA firearms (NFA rules still apply to home made weapons). It becomes unlawful to manufacture without a license if the intent is to distribute.\nThe United States federal government is prohibited by law from maintaining a registry of firearms owners, although the NFA registry which predated this prohibition has been exempted. Some states do have registration.\nUruguay.\nUruguayan law allows for firearm possession on a shall-issue basis. These firearms must be of a caliber smaller than .50 BMG. Carry permits are issued on a may-issue basis, which in practice is no-issue except for people working as private security guards. Policemen and military can carry their firearms while off-duty without the need for a licence. The legal carrying of firearms must always be in a concealed manner, no open carry is allowed. In recent times, politicians from the governing coalition have expressed their intentions of allowing the issuing of concealed carry permits to civilians. With approximately 35 civilian firearms per 100 people, Uruguay is the eighth most armed country in the world and most armed in Latin America.\nVenezuela.\nDuring the dictatorship of Juan Vicente G\u00f3mez, in 1914, a disarmament decree in the Federal District was enacted, and later in 1919, a disarmament law was decreed, ordering every weapon owner to give them away to the authorities; the only exceptions were machetes and hunting shotguns. The official justification offered was to diminish crime, but the law was ultimately used to disarm the population and to prevent possible uprisings. Historian Manuel Caballero argued that while G\u00f3mez's final intention was to prevent his enemies from obtaining weapons, the law contributed to avoid civil wars in Venezuela for the next century.\nIn 2012 Venezuela banned private sales of firearms and ammunition hoping to lower crime rates. The Army, police, and certain groups trusted by the government (colectivos) are exempted from the ban and can buy firearms from state-owned manufacturers. In 2013 Venezuela stopped issuing new firearm licenses. In 2017 government banned carrying firearms in public places.\nAsia.\nAfghanistan.\nAutomatic rifles are restricted to government forces and security companies in Afghanistan. Handguns, while allowed, are mostly issued for important people. Non-automatic rifles can be obtained for sports and hunting. Rules regarding shotguns and antique firearms are most permissive with no good reason required. Shotguns including pump-action shotguns are popular in some regions as self-defense weapons.\nBangladesh.\nGun laws are very restrictive in Bangladesh. Only people over the age of 25 (30 for handguns) and under 60 who pay taxes can apply for firearm licence. Self-defence is only accepted reason and requires proving danger to life. Legal owners can only own one long gun (shotgun or rifle) and one handgun (pistol or revolver). They cannot work as security guards.\nBrunei.\nFirearms are prohibited for citizens. Military and police personnel may apply for a licence to keep a private firearm by establishing a genuine reason, such as sport shooting or gun collecting.\nCambodia.\nFirearms are completely prohibited for civilian use without exceptions since 1999.\nChina.\nGun ownership in the People's Republic of China (PRC) is regulated by law. Generally, private citizens are not allowed to possess guns. Civilian ownership of guns is largely restricted to authorized, non-individual entities, including sporting organizations, authorized hunting reserves, and wildlife protection, management and research organizations. The chief exception to the general ban on individual firearm ownership is for the purpose of hunting.\nIllegal possession or sale of firearms may result in a minimum punishment of three years in prison, and penalties for the trafficking of \"arms and ammunition or other military materials to an enemy during war time\" include life imprisonment.\nHong Kong and Macau.\nIn Hong Kong and Macau, gun ownership is tightly controlled and possession is mainly in the hands of law enforcement, military, and private security firms (providing protection for jewelers and banks). Under Section 13 of Cap 238 Firearms and Ammunition Ordinance of Hong Kong, a license is required for unrestricted firearms and ammunition. A license may be issued after a rigorous process to check for criminal records or a history of mental illness. License holders may store other firearms at home in a locked box, but ammunition must be kept at different premises. Only fully automatic firearms appear prohibited; those found in possession without a license could be fined at level 6 of the standard scale (\"Maximum fine of HKD $100,000\") and face imprisonment for up to 14 years.\nIndia.\nGuns in India are regulated by law. The Arms Act, 1959 and the Arms Rules 1962 prohibit the sale, manufacture, possession, acquisition, import, export, and transport of firearms and ammunition unless under a license, which is difficult to obtain. The Indian Government has a monopoly over the production and sale of firearms, with the exception of some breech-loading smooth-bore shotguns, of which a limited number may be produced and imported. The Arms Act classifies firearms into two categories: Prohibited Bore (PB) and Non-Prohibited Bore (NPB), where all semi-automatic and fully automatic firearms fall under the Prohibited Bore category. The Arms Act of 1962 added to the Prohibited bore category, any firearm which can chamber and fire ammunition of calibers .303, 7.62\u00a0mm, .410, .380, .455, .45 rimless, or 9\u00a0mm. Smooth-bore guns having barrels shorter than 20 Inches (508\u00a0mm) are also specified as Prohibited guns.\nLicenses for acquisition and possession of both PB and NPB firearms could be given by a state government or district magistrate before 1987. Since that year, issuing of licenses for PB firearms became the responsibility of the central government. Licenses are valid for five years and may be renewed after the term. The sale of firearms requires both the selling and purchasing party to possess a permit.\nThe criteria considered during issuing of NPB firearm permits are whether the applicant faces a threat to their life. PB firearms criteria are more stringent, often for persons in government positions who face immediate danger or threats, those whose occupations involve open threats and danger, and their immediate family members. PB licenses were tightened since 2014, when otherwise-eligible persons started to be frequently rejected on basis of national security grounds. Exceptions are made for defense officers, who are allowed to keep firearms without licenses under the Defence Service rule, and a handful of professional shooters.\nFirearm licenses are issued on a may-issue basis and approximately half of applications are accepted. For example, between April 2015 and March 2016 authorities in Mumbai rejected 169 out of 342 firearm applications.\nIndonesia.\nIn Indonesia, gun licenses are only issued to civilians employed in a profession that involves using firearms, such as in the military and law enforcement, with an exception made for politicians and businessmen.\nApplicants must be over the age of 21 to obtain a firearms license, and go through a background check and mental evaluation. They must also state a genuine reason for wanting to own a firearm, which can include hunting, target shooting, collecting, security, and self-defense. All firearms must be registered. Gun permits are valid for five years and may be renewed. Illegal gun ownership can be punished from a maximum of 20 years in prison to life in prison and death as per the provisions of Emergency Act no. 12, 1951.\nCivilians cannot possess military weapons, but may possess long rifles chambered in 22 regardless of cartridge length or whether it is a centerfire or rimfire bullet. In 2012 however, it was claimed that police had been issuing permits to regular citizens.\nIran.\nThere are 200.,00 rifles registered with nomads.\nIranian law had changed in 2021\u201322 with military, security and police having permit to access firearms use them preemptively. Airguns, airsoft guns and hunting rifles were criminalized in September 2023.\nIraq.\nIn 2012, Iraq relaxed its gun laws. The \"possession of one rifle or pistol per home\" was allowed via simple registration at local police stations.\nIn 2017, the law was relaxed once again. The possession and carrying of handguns, semi-automatic and fully automatic firearms and other weapons for self-defense, hunting and sport shooting purposes was allowed. Firearm licenses require official authorization and identity cards.\nIsrael.\nGun laws in Israel are comprehensive despite soldiers being allowed to carry their service weapons on or off duty. Civilians must obtain a firearms license to lawfully acquire, possess, sell or transfer firearms and ammunition. In 2018, Israel loosened firearms restrictions, allowing all citizens who had undergone combat training and qualified in Advanced Infantry Training ('Rifleman \"07\"') to apply for a private handgun license.\nPrior to 2018, only a small group of people had been eligible for firearms licenses: certain retired military personnel, police officers or prison guards; Israeli residents of the occupied West Bank or those who often work there; and licensed hunters and animal-control officers. Age requirements vary: 21 for those who completed military service or civil service equivalent, 27 otherwise, and 45 for non-citizens. Firearm license applicants must have been a resident of Israel for at least three consecutive years, pass a background check (criminal, health, and mental history), establish a so-called \"genuine reason\" for possessing a firearm (such as self-defense, hunting, or sport), and pass a weapons-training course. As many as 40% of applications for firearms permits were rejected.\nThose holding firearms licenses must renew them and pass a shooting course every three years. Security guards must pass these tests to renew their license to carry firearms belonging to their employers. Applicants must demonstrate that they have a safe at their residence in which to keep the firearm. Permits are given only for personal use, and holders for self-defense purposes may own only one handgun and purchase an annual supply of 50 cartridges (although more may be purchased to replace rounds used at a firing range).\nMost individuals who are licensed to possess handguns may carry them loaded in public, concealed or openly.\nIn 2005, there were 237,000 private citizens and 154,000 security guards licensed to carry firearms. Another 34,000 Israelis own guns illegally due to their failure to renew their firearms license. In 2007, there were estimated to be 500,000 licensed small arms held by civilians, in addition to 1,757,500 by the military, and 26,040 by the police.\n2023 Israel\u2013Gaza war.\nFollowing the outbreak of the Gaza war on 7 October 2023, Israel almost immediately reacted strongly in favor of loosening gun restrictions in favor of a more liberal access for Israeli civilians to have firearms to defend themselves and their communities. The Israeli government also called on civilians that did find a way to arm themselves to band together and form protective groups in light of the attack initiated out of Gaza. \"The Times of Israel\" reported, \"The reform was unveiled by Public Security Minister Gilad Erdan, who has pushed for allowing more Israelis to arm themselves as a response to terror attacks.\" Left-wing party Meretz opposed the changes, with party member Tamar Zandberg saying in a statement, \"...[guns] are a death machine whose civilian use needs to be reduced as much as possible...\", Erdan in turn argued that, \"Qualified citizens carrying firearms in public contribute to the sense of security, are an important line of defense from 'lone-wolf' attacks and thus strengthen public security.\", and \"Many citizens have saved lives during terror attacks, and in the era of 'lone-wolf' attacks, the more qualified gun-carrying citizens there are \u2014 the better the chance to thwart terror attacks without casualties and reduce the number of casualties.\"\nNational Security Minister Itamar Ben-Gvir was quoted in a report from Fox News as saying:When civilians have guns, they can defend themselves.Ben-Gvir issued an emergency directive after the attack to loosen gun restrictions for Israeli civilians in several ways, however, reportedly the comments section on the social media site X (formerly Twitter) had many people saying that this was, \"too little too late.\"\nAmerican and international media outlets reacted largely critical of Israel's historically strict gun laws that potentially served to endanger Israelis by leaving them defenseless in many cases as the surprise attack unfolded. Only 2% of Israeli civilians were armed prior to the attack according to a report from the BBC, compared to as little as 30% of American civilians (though that number may be much higher due to gunowners that do not report accurately).\nA rabbi in Israel named Raz Blizovsky was quoted as saying:People are changing their opinion [after the attack], and now there is more awareness. I have been involved with groups that have been talking about this issue [loosening gun restrictions for civilians] for years. During calm times, people don't do anything.Israel citizens also petitioned their government by the tens of thousands to further loosen gun laws for Israeli and Jewish civilians in light of the prior laws that made it very difficult to acquire guns and possess the means for Israeli civilians to defend themselves. One petition gathered as many as 22,000 signatures in less than 24 hours seeking to loosen restrictions on Israeli civilians buying and carrying firearms.\nJapan.\nThe weapons law of Japan begins by stating \"No one shall possess a firearm or firearms or a sword or swords\", and very few exceptions are allowed.\nCitizens are permitted to possess firearms for hunting and sport shooting, but only after submitting to a lengthy licensing procedure. As part of the procedure, a shooting-range test must be passed with a \"mark of at least 95%\". A mental-health evaluation taking place at a hospital, and a thorough background check where one's family and friends are interviewed, are also part of the procedure.\nA gun license expires after three years, after which license tests must be repeated. After ten years of shotgun ownership, a license-holder may apply to obtain a rifle.\nJapan has been described as the country with \"perhaps the first ever gun buyback initiative\" in 1685, and is the first nation to have imposed gun laws in the world; as such, gun ownership is very rare: 0.6 guns per 100 people in 2007. When mass killings occur, they are often perpetrated by assailants wielding knives or other means, not guns. In 2014, Japan saw six gun deaths.\nEach prefecture in the country can operate a total of three gun shops. New cartridges can only be purchased after turning in expended cartridges. In turn, new magazines can be bought only by trading in old ones. If a gun owner dies, their relatives must surrender their firearms. Police officers are expected to be proficient in judo to subdue suspects without firearms; police are often armed, but rarely fire their weapons in the course of duty and are not allowed to carry weapons when off-duty.\nJordan.\nAccording to Jordanian law on gun control passed in 1952 Jordanian residents are allowed to keep rifles and handguns at their home with amount of ammunition necessary for self-defense provided they obtain a permit. Permits are denied for people under 21 and convicted of any crimes. Possession and carrying of automatic firearms require special permit.\nIn 2019 a law was proposed that would ban both semi- and fully-automatic firearms in Jordan.\nKuwait.\nFirearms may be licensed to a citizen (or foreigner recommended by the Minister of Interior) who is at least 25 years old and fully capable of handling a weapon, with no criminal record, who is not a suspect or under police surveillance, and who has a source of income. Hunting shotguns are the most commonly licensed weapons. Rifles chambered for .22 long rifle are also common, with hunting rifles being more difficult to obtain. Handguns are only allowed for VIPs. Machine guns are not legally permitted for civilian possession.\nLebanon.\nIn the Lebanese Republic, ownership of any firearm other than handguns, hunting arms or antiques is illegal and only the latter two are permitted to leave the owner's home. Disregard for this law is prevalent. Lebanon does not officially grant the right to bear arms, but it is a firmly held cultural belief in the country. Firearm licenses are granted to certain individuals, but the test is not open to the public and requires a particular need to be demonstrated.\nGun control has been largely unsuccessful in Lebanon due to a historic context of gun availability and usage, a lack of effective central government control or authority over many parts of the country, and the tumultuous nature of the region. Although gunsmithing was once prominent in the region, it has all but ceased since the mid-1930s, yet it remains legal with a permit. Lebanon has come to be one of the largest arms markets in the Middle East.\nLebanon ranks 58th worldwide for privately owned firearms per capita.\nMalaysia.\nFirearm ownership is highly restricted in Malaysia. The Arms Act (1960) requires Malaysian citizens to have a license for the manufacture, import, export, repair, or ownership of firearms. A firearm license can only be granted by the Chief Police Officer of a state. Discharging a firearm in crimes such as extortion, robbery, resisting arrest and house-breaking is punished by the death penalty. Exhibiting a firearm for any of the scheduled offences (without discharging) carries a penalty of life imprisonment and caning of not less than six strokes. Possession of unlawful firearms carries a sentence of up to fourteen years in prison and caning.\nMongolia.\nMongolia currently observes a law on firearms passed in 2001 which allows anyone to apply for a firearm license, which may be issued after 21 days.\nThere are 46,982 (or 1.6 per 100 people) registered firearms in Mongolia including 44,306 for hunting, 1,598 for security and ward use, 619 for sports training, 260 as \"art\" firearms and 199 for collection purposes.\nMyanmar.\nThe right to firearm ownership, which is primarily governed by the Weapons Act of 1878, is generally restricted in Myanmar. The law has been amended several times, and generally provides citizens with a right to own firearms for self-defence. Since the 1962 Burmese coup d'\u00e9tat, successive military regimes have restricted legal gun ownership to individuals closely connected with the regimes, including army veterans. After the 1962 coup, the government confiscated all citizen-owned firearms, which were re-distributed to Burma Socialist Programme Party members, retired civil servants, and army veterans.\nAfter the 2021 Myanmar coup d'\u00e9tat and ensuing Myanmar civil war (2021\u2013present), the military regime has revisited existing gun laws as part of an effort to combat pro-democracy forces. On 31 January 2023, the Ministry of Home Affairs issued a directive enabling organisations and citizens deemed \"loyal to the state,\" including civilians, civil servants, and army personnel, to obtain firearm licences and permits. The directive stipulates that firearm applicants must be at least 18 years old, and must demonstrate a need for firearms for \"personal security.\" The regulatory shift has enabled the military junta to arm pro-regime paramilitary groups like the Pyusawhti militias and to suppress pro-democracy forces in the country, in light of waning military recruitment and their challenges in concurrently operating in multiple war theatres throughout the country.\nNepal.\nNepal allows firearm ownership if an applicant can provide sufficient reason, for example hunting or self-defense.\nThere are 34,315 (or 0.1 per 100 people) registered firearms in Nepal including 13,892 shotguns, 312 pistols and 118 revolvers.\nNorth Korea.\nAccording to 2009 law civilian possession of firearms is prohibited in North Korea.\nPakistan.\nPakistan has permissive firearm laws compared to the rest of South Asia, and has the sixth-highest number of privately owned guns in the world. Laws regulate the carrying of weapons in public in most urban areas. Private guns are prohibited in educational institutions, hostels, boarding and lodging houses, fairs, gatherings or processions of a political, religious, ceremonial, or sectarian character, and on the premises of courts of law or public offices. The law in Pakistan does not stipulate whether gun licenses should be denied or revoked, and a license permits ownership of any number of weapons including handguns of any size and fully automatic weapons. Firearms are a traditionally important part of rural life in its North-Western areas where it is not uncommon to see people legally carrying RPGs and fully automatic weapons.\nPhilippines.\nCurrent gun laws in the Philippines are outlined in Republic Act 10591 or the \"Comprehensive Firearms and Ammunition Regulation Act\", signed in 2013. In order to own a firearm, a citizen must acquire a License to Own and Possess Firearms (LTOPF). Applicants must meet the following requirements: (a) has not been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude; (b) has passed the psychiatric test administered by a PNP-accredited psychologist or psychiatrist; (c) has passed the drug test conducted by an accredited and authorized drug testing laboratory or clinic; (d) has passed a gun safety seminar which is administered by the PNP or a registered and authorized gun club; (e) has filed in writing the application to possess a registered firearm which shall state the personal circumstances of the applicant; (f) must present a police clearance from the city or municipality police office; and (g) has not been convicted or is currently an accused in a pending criminal case before any court of law for a crime that is punishable with a penalty of more than two (2) years.\nLicense holders may carry concealed handguns in public with the acquisition of a separate Permit to Carry Firearms Outside of Residence (PTCFOR), which is granted on a may-issue basis. Generally, applicants must demonstrate an imminent threat of danger and secure a Threat Assessment Certificate from the police in order to be issued a PTCFOR. Exempted from this requirement are members of the national bar (lawyers, prosecutors, judges), accountants, accredited media practitioners, cashiers, bank tellers, clergymen (priests, ministers, rabbis, imams), physicians, nurses, engineers, high-risk businessmen, elected incumbent and former officials, and active and retired military and law enforcement personnel, as they are deemed to be in imminent danger due to the nature of their profession, occupation or business.\nMany Filipinos own firearms for self-protection and target-shooting, which require licenses: around 2,000,000 people out of 100,000,000 have a registered firearm.\nSingapore.\nSingaporean citizens must obtain a license to lawfully possess firearms or ammunition; applicants must provide justification for the license, which is often restricted to the military, police, and private security companies. Target-shooting licenses permit ownership of a gun, provided it is securely stored in an approved and protected firing range, and is not taken out of the firing range without special permission. Self-defense permits are not allowed, unless there is an 'imminent threat' to their lives that can be justified to the government. There is no restriction on types of small arms one may own after obtaining a license. Illegal firearms and firearm-related crimes are grounds for the death penalty in Singapore.\nOwing to its mandatory national service, nearly half the civilian population have the experience and are well-trained in operating firearms, most notably the M16 and the SAR 21.\nSouth Korea.\nSimilar to Singapore, the majority of South Korean men are well-trained in the use of firearms, due to mandatory military service. Guns are also notably absent in South Korean society outside of the military, and gun ownership and gun-related deaths rank among the lowest in the world.\nSouth Korea has strict gun policies. Hunting and sporting licenses are issued, but any firearm used in these circumstances must be stored at a local police station. Air rifles also have to be stored at police stations; crossbows and electric shock devices are also classified as firearms but their private retention is permitted. Tasers are prohibited, and possessing a toy gun without an orange tip is strictly prohibited. Violation of firearms laws can result in a US$18,000 fine and up to 10 years in prison.\nSyria.\nAccording to 2001 law Syrian citizens and foreign Arabs can own one revolver and two shotguns under license issued for people who can provide genuine reason such as protection of business.\nIdlib.\nAll types of firearms including pistols, rifles and grenades are reportedly sold in rebel-held Idlib district without any license in shops which are mostly run by militia groups. In October 2020 Idlib's Salvation Government reportedly stated it will start licensing firearms. Many other rebel groups expressed opposition to this and some doubted possibility of registering firearms in Idlib.\nTaiwan.\nTaiwan has extremely strict gun control for all persons in the country, though some carveouts used to be made for indigenous Taiwanese persons. Some argue that the strict policy endangers the homeland to potential invasion by mainland China. An unusual feature of Taiwan's gun control scheme was a specific provision for indigenous people, allowing black powder muzzleloader-type single shot rifles for hunting, though in the pursuit of a total gun control policy, even indigenous persons of Taiwan have lost their right to use and own even these guns as of 2021. There is an absolute \"zero tolerance policy\" for owning guns in Taiwan. The indigenous people that were allowed a carve out to the absolute-no-guns policy though are increasingly antagonistic against the mainly Han Chinese that are seen as foreign occupiers that restrict the natural right of indigenous peoples of Taiwan to own and use guns for hunting and other purposes.\nThailand.\nA firearm license in Thailand is only granted for the following uses: self-defense, property protection, hunting, or sporting. Applicants for a firearms license must be at least 20 years of age (the age of majority under the Civil and Commercial Code), have a record of good behavior, have an occupation and receive income, and have a permanent address in Thailand with a name \"listed in the house registration specifically in the area where you are applying for a license, for at least six months\". A license may not be issued to anyone who is a repeat criminal offender or mentally unstable. The application fee for most firearms licenses is 1,000 Baht for each license or unit; a license for possession and use of air rifles is 200 Baht per license/unit.; carry licenses are also 1,000 Baht per license. Since October 2017 citizenship is required to purchase and use firearms. A person is also not allowed to carry his gun without an additional permit for concealed carry. Fully automatic firearms and explosive devices are prohibited.\nThe amended 2017 law will cover weapon suppressors, electric darts, and new types of fireworks including \"bang fai\" (locally made rockets) and \"talai\" (\"rocket-like fireworks with a circular wing\"). The amendment further provides that anyone who creates a bomb scare may be subject to convictions of up to three years of imprisonment and/or fined up to 60,000 Baht. Another significant change is that only Thais will be permitted to register a gun with the authorities. Formerly, foreigners residing in Thailand could also apply for weapons permits. The Act already prohibits the manufacture, purchase, ownership, use, ordering, or import of firearms or ammunition, except by persons who have been granted a license from the local registrar. Violation of this provision is punishable with convictions including imprisonment for a period of between one and ten years and/or fines of between 2,000 and 20,000 Baht.\nTimor-Leste.\nUnder East Timorese law, only the military and police forces may possess, carry and use firearms, with few exceptions.\nIn late June 2008, the Prime Minister, Xanana Gusm\u00e3o, introduced a proposed gun law to Parliament for \"urgent debate\", pushing back scheduled budgetary discussions. The new law, which would allow civilians to own guns, sparked heated debates in the East Timorese parliament. The United Nations, which has a peacekeeping force deployed in the nation, also expressed concerns over the new law. The law was defeated in the Parliament.\nTurkey.\nTurkey is semi-restrictive in terms of gun control statutes. Civilians in Turkey need to get a license from the police or gendarmerie to own and use firearms, and these licenses last for 5 years. Licenses are available for shotguns (including semi-automatic ones), rifles (bolt-action, lever-action, and some semi-automatics), and handguns. To get a license, you must:\nAs of 2024, fully automatic and short-barreled shotguns are banned. There are no restrictions on magazine size, caliber, or optics for handguns. Some semi-automatic rifles can be owned with a rifle permit, but they are uncommon in the market. Semi-auto rifles typically come in .22LR or 9mm calibers with magazines holding up to 15 rounds. Fully automatic rifles are not allowed for civilians, with very rare exceptions.\nShotgun licenses automatically include a permit to carry or transport the shotgun, but it must be unloaded and covered. Handgun concealed carry permits and rifle carry licenses are harder to get and require a valid reason, like personal protection or hunting. Applicants must show proof of this reason, such as a life threat (approved by the governor) or belonging to specific professions like:\nGetting a handgun concealed carry permit is expensive, and each firearm requires a separate carry license. Handgun carry licenses are legally unlimited, but obtaining multiple permits is rare. Rifles can only be carried with a hunting license and for hunting purposes; hunting with semi-automatic rifles is not allowed. Carry licenses usually need renewal every 5 years.\nHigh-powered and tactical semi-automatic rifles are mostly banned for civilians, with very few exceptions. Spare parts for these weapons, especially barrels, are hard to find and replace.\nIn Turkey, most shooting ranges are indoors and only allow handguns. People with possession licenses need to get a transportation permit from the local police for each trip to the range. However, those with concealed carry licenses do not need such permits.\nShotguns and rifles (for carry license holders) can be used for target shooting outside urban and residential areas. This must be done at least 500 meters away from homes and only with the landowner's permission. To hunt with shotguns or rifles, a hunting license is required.\nLicensed armed security personnel, such as those protecting valuable assets, VIPs, critical infrastructure, airports, banks, or high-risk events, can carry semi-automatic and fully automatic weapons, including submachine guns, but only while on duty.\nIn rural areas, over 50,000 civilians are authorized as \"Security Guards\" or \"Village Guards\" to protect against terrorists and looters. This role allows them to carry selective-fire firearms for this specific purpose. These weapons and equipment are usually provided by the military and remain government property.\nPublic servants, including police officers, military personnel, judges, public prosecutors, and senior politicians, have a lifelong right to apply for free handgun and rifle carry licenses. These licenses are issued on a guaranteed basis.\nAll police officers can carry an unlimited number of handguns and rifles with a carry license. Military officers are allowed up to five handguns and two rifles, while generals are not limited by these rules. Mayors, deputies, ministers, and presidents automatically receive lifetime carry licenses without paying any fees. Some other government employees, such as forest rangers, village headmen, customs officers, judges, and prosecutors, also have lifetime carry licenses. Unlike civilians, public servants (active or retired) do not need to renew their medical certificates every five years.\nTurkey has a large shotgun industry, and shotguns are widely available and easy to purchase. Getting a shotgun license is simpler and cheaper compared to handgun or rifle licenses. It requires a clean bill of health, a clear criminal record, and no outstanding tax debt. One shotgun license allows ownership of up to five shotguns. Spare parts are widely available, and rebarreling is both easy and legal. Shotguns are much more affordable due to open market conditions and competition among numerous national and international brands, unlike rifles and handguns, which are sold exclusively through the government-controlled monopoly, MKEK.\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nIn 2019, the government of the United Arab Emirates relaxed its gun laws. The minimum age to possess firearms was lowered from 25 to 21, while legal owners can now have up to three guns. People from other countries are not allowed to apply for licenses. Most popular purposes to own them include hunting and trap shooting.\nWeapons can be purchased during a yearly gun show called Adihex. In 2018, more than 1,764 legal weapons were sold.\nFirearm licenses are issued after 60 days of applications to the relevant authority. If there is no response that means that the license has been rejected.\nUzbekistan.\nIn 2019, the president of Uzbekistan signed a new gun law. It allows citizens to own smooth-bore firearms and firearms with rifled barrels for hunting and sport shooting purposes. Carrying in public places is prohibited and the minimum age is 21 years. Only gas and electric weapons can be used for self-defense purposes. The maximum magazine capacity is ten rounds.\nVietnam.\nFirearms in Vietnam are restricted to the military and law enforcement agencies, with possession of firearms prohibited to civilians. The chief exception to this is for hunting and sporting purposes, requiring users to undergo mandatory background checks to be licensed.\nYemen.\nYemen has a permissive gun policy and does not require permits for firearm ownership. The 1992 Law \"On Regulating Carrying Firearms and Ammunitions and Their Trade\", established the right to own firearms (rifles, machine guns, revolvers and hunting rifles) for the purpose of legitimate defense. Licenses are required to carry firearms in cities, which are issued on a may-issue basis with varying restrictions depending on the city. Open and concealed carry is unrestricted in rural areas. Since the breakout of the civil war in 2011 there has been barely any state gun control, and fully-automatic rifles/assault rifles, anti-tank guided missiles or armored vehicles are available over the counter for various militias and individuals willing to buy them.\nAccording to the Small Arms Survey of 2018 titled \"Estimating Global Civilian-Held Firearms Numbers\", there are roughly 14.9 million civilian-held firearms in Yemen (52.8 firearms held per 100 residents), making Yemen the second most armed country in the world after the United States.\nEurope.\nBosnia and Herzegovina.\nIn Bosnia and Herzegovina, its two autonomous entities, the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska have relatively strict weapon laws compared to the rest of Europe. Weapons are regulated by the Weapons and Ammunition Law. People over 21 may apply for a permit. Those with a history of criminal activity, mental disorders, alcohol or substance use will be denied a permit. There is also a thorough background check, interviewing neighbors and family, and the applicant must complete a course and pass a multiple-choice exam. Police have the last word on the matter, with an appeal possible to a police captain. Firearms must be kept in a \"safe place\" within a residence, and may be confiscated by police if the owner is found to be \"irresponsible\". Concealed carry is allowed with a permit. Pepper spray may be carried by females if registered with police.\nEuropean Union.\nGun laws in the European Union vary greatly from one country to another. Nevertheless, two main strains may be recognized: Most EU countries treat firearms primarily as sporting instruments, while a select group of countries consider them to be primarily tools of individual or collective safety (i.e. Switzerland, Austria, the Czech Republic, Poland, Baltic states, Finland). This difference in primary understanding of firearms' main purpose leads to different treatment in national legislations.\nAll EU and EFTA countries are bound to implement Directive (EU) 2021/555 into their own legal systems. The Directive sets certain gun control standards that the countries must meet; at the same time national legislators may chose to adopt more stringent rules.\nUnder the directive, firearms are defined as \"any portable barrelled weapon that expels, is designed to expel or may be converted to expel a shot, bullet or projectile by the action of a combustible propellant\".\nSince 2017 EU directive amendment, arms are classified in three EU categories:\nUnder article 5 of the directive:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Without prejudice to Article 3, Member States shall permit the acquisition and possession of firearms only by persons who have good cause and who:\nAustria.\nAustria is the only country in the European Union where firearms are only partially licensed; the \"Waffengesetz\" (Weapons Act) provides the legal terms for all types of weapons, including firearms. \u00a7 1 of the law defines \"Weapons\" as objects that are designed to directly eliminate or reduce the ability of people to attack or defend themselves (e.g. knives, pepper spray, gas pistols, etc.) or for firing projectiles during hunting or sport shooting (e.g. crossbows, bows, etc.). \u00a7 2 further defines \"Firearms\" as weapons where projectiles can be fired from a barrel in a predefined direction. Most common firearms and some other weapons fall into three different categories, which come with different restrictions:\nCategory A is divided into two subcategories \"war material\" and \"restricted weapons\". \"War material\" includes for example tanks, fully automatic weapons and armour-piercing weapons; \"restricted weapons\" includes weapons disguised as other objects, firearms which can be disassembled in a faster than usual fashion for hunting and sport, shotguns with an overall length of less than 90\u00a0cm (35\u00a0in) or barrel length shorter than 45\u00a0cm (18\u00a0in), pump action shotguns, suppressors and firearms with suppressors, knuckledusters, blackjacks, steel rods. Category B covers all handguns, repeating shotguns and semi-automatic weapons which are not category A (e.g. pistols, revolvers, semi-automatic rifles and semi-automatic shotguns). Category C includes most other firearms that are not category A or B (e.g. repeating rifles, revolving rifles, break-action rifles and break-action shotguns).\nAll firearms of category A, B, and C are registered in the central weapon register (Zentrales Waffenregister, or short ZWR). Firearms of category C are the least restricted; all citizens over 18 may purchase them at licensed sellers, even without a firearms licence (barring a 3-day waiting period to check for a weapon ban on the buyer). Category B weapons have further restrictions; buyers must have a firearms license or a carry permit, and be 21, unless granted an exception for the age of 18. Category A weapons typically require further exceptions to be granted for holders, except in the case of suppressors and suppressed weapons, which may be held by those with valid hunting licences without an additional permit. \"War material\" requires a further special federal permit, which is in practice only granted to approved collectors and experts. In general, ammunition sales are unrestricted, though handgun ammunition and some rifle ammunition requires a permit. Antique firearms made before 1871, many black powder firearms and some other \"less effective weapons\" also require no licence or registration.\nIn addition, \u00a7 11a defines further restrictions on the purchase, possession and carrying of all weapons and ammunition for asylum seekers and many third-country nationals. Owning weapons without a permit for them is strictly prohibited and controlled by the police.\nCarrying firearms in public generally requires a carry permit (or \"Waffenpass\"). Carry permits are issued by the authorities on a shall issue or may issue basis, depending on reason and applicant. Austrian law makes no distinction between concealed or open carry; with a carry permit, the holder may carry their weapon(s) freely throughout the whole country and even in certain \"weapon free zones\". However, holders must carry their weapons in a way that does not constitute a public nuisance; for example, openly displaying a handgun in one's belt at the cinema while wearing civil clothing would be considered unusual and could be considered a public nuisance if the police were called.\nBelgium.\nPossessing or carrying firearms is generally illegal in Belgium with very limited exemptions. Gun laws in Belgium are among the strictest in the world. An exception is made for people who have a valid firearms license. Since 2006, after a shooting incident in Antwerp, there are very strict conditions and rules for gun owners to obtain such a licence. The legal reasons to get a license include sport shooting, hunting, collecting and self-defense, although self-defense licenses are almost never approved. The granting of gun permits is the responsibility of the governor of the province in which the applicant resides. Applicants must always pass a theoretical and practical exam, have a clean criminal record and be able to present a medical certificate proving that they are competent to handle weapons.\nWhen purchasing a gun, in most cases a permit called 'Model 4' has to be requested first, even when you already have a license, in order to register the firearm. The requisition of such a permit has a cost of around \u20ac140 (as of February 2025) and is increased every year, as well as a waiting period of up to 4 months. There are exceptions to this rule however, but these are different depending on the reason for the possession of the firearm. I.e.: a .22LR semi automatic pistol is exempt from a model 4 permit for sport shooters, but not for hunters. All revolvers, centerfire pistols, semi-automatic rifles and pump action shotguns always require a Model 4 permit. When requesting a Model 4 you have to be able to prove that you passed the forementioned theoretical and practical exam, have a clean criminal record, present a medical certificate, provide proof that you are a member of a licensed shooting range, and get written permission by every adult person whom you share a house with that they do not object to you having the firearms.\nHowever, the laws and regulations concerning the carrying and possession of firearms for hunters, sport shooters, collectors and also for the import and export of guns, differs slightly from area to area in Belgium; a valid licence is almost always required. Airsoft guns, paintball guns and some blank guns do not need a permit or licence and are free to purchase. Deactivated guns also need a license as of 2019. The only firearms that can be bought without a license in Belgium are those which are manufactured before 1890, or those that only use black powder and were patented before 1895 and manufactured before 1945. The possession of ammunition is always restricted to people who have a valid license. Belgium is the only country in the EU where magazines are also subject to license and registration.\nGun laws in Belgium do not apply (or at least applies differently) for the military and law enforcement services such as the police. Until its abolition in 2019, the security units of Belgian courts and prison transport (\"Corps de securit\u00e9 Justice/Veiligheidskorps Justitie\") were also permitted to carry handguns.\nBecause of the very strict laws, and the long and expensive process of obtaining licenses, Belgian law allows for people over the age of 18 without a license to shoot once per year and only under strict supervision in a licensed shooting range.\nCroatia.\nCroatia issues firearms permits for self-defense, hunting, sport shooting:\nEvery permit also requires an applicant to be at least 18 years old, not be convicted of crimes, there being no other circumstances indicating that the weapon may be abused (for example by a history of alcoholism) and passing medical examinations.\nAs of \u00a02020[ [update]] there 99,829 legal gun owners in Croatia. 14,711 people can own and carry firearms for the purpose of personal safety.\nCyprus.\nThe Republic of Cyprus has strict gun control. Private citizens are completely forbidden from owning handguns and rifles in any calibre, including .22 rimfire ammunition. Shotguns limited to two rounds are allowed with a license, issued by provincial police. Shotguns must be for hunting purposes, and a licensed citizen may own up to ten shotguns, typically double-barrelled. A firearm license is required to buy ammunition, of up to 250 shells per purchase, with sales being recorded. Cyprus also controls airguns, and airgun owners require a license. Even though purchasing automatic weapons is illegal, the military issues their reserves an automatic weapon, therefore the majority of the male population has one due to military conscription.\nCzech Republic.\nGun laws in the Czech Republic adhere to the European Firearms Directive. Legal accessibility is comparable to those EU countries which consider firearms to be primarily tools of individual or collective safety (i.e. Switzerland, Austria, Poland, Baltic states, Finland) and not just sporting instruments \"(see Gun laws in the European Union)\".\nRight to keep and bear arms is considered to be an attribute of liberty in the country. It is explicitly recognized in the first Article of the Firearms Act. At the constitutional level, the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms protects the \"right to defend one's own life or life of another person also with arms under conditions stipulated by law\" (see \"Self-defence law in the Czech Republic\").\nFirearms are available to any resident subject to acquiring a firearms license. Firearm licenses may be obtained in a way similar to a driving license; by passing a proficiency exam (in Czech language only), medical examination and having no criminal record. Unlike in most other European countries, Czech firearms legislation also permits citizens to carry concealed weapons for self-defense; 260,027 out of 316,859 gun license holders have a concealed carry license (31 December 2023). The most common reason for firearm possession by Czech gun owners is protection, with hunting and sport shooting being less common. Additionally, people can join government endorsed advanced shooting training courses with their privately owned firearms and become members of the militia-style Designated Reserves.\nThe beginnings of Czech civilian firearms possession date back to 1421, with the first use of firearms as the primary weapons of Hussite militia \"(see History of Czech civilian firearms possession)\". Firearms became indispensable tools for the mostly-commoner militia in a war for religious freedom and political independence. Firearms possession became common throughout and after the Hussite wars. The universal right to keep arms for \"all people of all standing\" was formally affirmed in the 1517 St. Wenceslaus Agreement. Throughout its 600-year history, Czech firearms legislation remained permissive, with the exception of the periods of German Nazi occupation and of the Communist regime.\nThe English term \"pistol\" originated in 15th-century Czech language. \"Mari\u00e1nsk\u00e1 sk\u00e1la\" in \u00dast\u00ed nad Labem is Europe's oldest continually-open shooting range, established in 1617.\nDenmark.\nCivilians in Denmark aged 16 and above can acquire gun licenses for hunting or sport shooting. This requires passing a written multiple-choice test and a practical test, after which a certified hunting license instructor determines if the applicant is suitable to own a weapon. A license is usually provided if the applicant has no or only minor marks on their criminal record.\nA hunting license permits the over-the-counter-purchase and ownership of an unlimited number of shotguns of up to 12 gauge and two-round capacity. From there, the police has to be notified of new weapon purchases through an online form. Bolt-action rifles can also be bought over-the-counter, although they require a rifle license which is obtained through the police. The allowed calibers range from the smallest possible, up to .50 BMG, with .50 BMG not included. Semi-automatic rifles are allowed if the rifle is limited to two rounds (hunting in Denmark), or without limitation on capacity (hunting outside of Denmark). Currently, only larger calibers (.308, 6.5\u00d755, .300wm etc.) are issued as semi-auto rifles for hunting abroad. .223/5.56\u00d745 and similar caliber rifles are generally not approved. The hunter must pass a shotgun or rifle shooting test before being allowed to hunt.\nFor sport-shooting purposes, shotguns can also be used, as can bolt-action rifles of almost any caliber (.50 BMG as one of the exceptions). Sporting rifles are often chambered in .22 LR and 6.5\u00d755\u00a0mm.\nSemi-automatic rifles are not allowed for sports shooting.\nHandguns: After two years of active membership in a shooting club, one can apply for a handgun permit which is then subject to background checks and approval by the police, and one has to be 21 years old.\nApproved calibers: All calibers under 9mm (9\u00d719, .38 special, .357 magnum, .32 ACP, etc.), plus a limited number of larger calibers; .40 S&amp;W, .45 ACP, .44 special. The maximum number of handguns are six in .22 caliber. When applying for a third gun, a special permit from the department of justice is required. Large caliber guns, i.e. bigger than .22 caliber, are restricted to a maximum of two in the same caliber. Therefore, one can only own two handguns in 9\u00a0mm at any given time. However, it is legal to own an additional two handguns in 9\u00a0mm, if these are revolvers. For all handguns, the overall length must be at least , regardless of caliber, measured without orthopedic grips or removal parts.\nA weapon permit for sporting purposes (both long and short firearms) has to be renewed every five years. Rifle permits for hunting rifles have to be renewed every 10 years. Shotguns are not held on individual permits; holders are allowed to own these as long as they have a valid hunting license \u2013 and they can keep it for up to 10 years after the hunting license expires \u2013 albeit they are not allowed to keep ammunition without a valid license.\nCarrying a firearm in public is strictly prohibited, however, a notion of proportional self-defense exists. This means that if someone is attacked with a firearm, they are legally allowed to defend themselves proportionally \u2013 e.g. with a firearm of their own.\nFully automatic weapons are prohibited for civilian use, unless a special permit is issued by the Ministry of Justice. These permits are extremely rare, and are normally only issued to people or companies working for, or supplying the police or military.\nIllegal possession of a firearm may be punished with imprisonment of no less than one year. Civilians may keep privately owned weapons including pistols, revolvers, shotguns and rifles at their residences. These, together with its ammunition have to be stored in an approved gun cabinet (EN1143-1 grade 0 or better). The police may inspect a shooting club's weapons at their discretion, but require a court order to inspect privately held firearms.\nEstonia.\nEstonia is a shall-issue nation. Background checks, doctor's approval, written and practical exam and a firearms course are required. The courses are only offered by private parties (not law enforcement) and must be performed in Estonian as must be the national exam given by law enforcement. Earlier, a translator was permitted, but it was changed as a consequence of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine due to the large number of ethnic Russians applying for licenses. After the national exam is passed, the taking of which already requires passing the previous requisites, a license must be issued on request with law enforcement having no final say afterwards unless a later cause (like committing a felony) invalidates a license.\nFinland.\nThe ownership and use of firearms in Finland is regulated by the country's Firearms Act of 1998. Weapons are individually licensed by local police, with no limit on the number of licenses an individual may hold. Licenses are granted for recreational uses, exhibition or (under certain circumstances) professional use. No type of weapon is explicitly prohibited, but licenses are granted only for a reason. Self-defense is not accepted as a valid reason for licensing. In general, this excludes all but hunting and sports guns from non-professional use. Fully automatic weapons are generally not permitted. With the exception of law enforcement, only specially trained security guards may carry loaded weapons in public.\nIn 2007, Finland had the third largest gun-ownership rate globally (behind the US and Yemen), and the first in Europe. Finns practices hunting, and as of 2007,[ [update]] there were 1.6 million registered weapons and 650,000 people with firearm permits in the country, i.e. 12% of the population. In November that year, Finland updated their gun laws after two school shootings that left 20 people dead, and to comply with an EU directive by removing the ability of 15-18-year-olds to have their own permit. The possibility of creating a dual-license for an already licensed weapon with permission of the license holder was allowed (e.g. parental permission). In 2011, a constitutional law committee concluded that people over the age of 20 can receive a permit for semi-automatic handguns; individuals must demonstrate continuous activity in handgun sporting group for two years prior.\nFrance.\nIn 1563, Charles IX of France had an address to the Rouen parliament about forbidding firearms in which he made the following statement:\nIn France, a hunting license or a sport-shooting license is needed to purchase any smokeless powder firearm. In September 2015, firearms were divided into four categories that determine the regulations that apply to their possession and use. Category D arms include black powder firearms designed before 1900 and compressed air arms developing between 2 and 20 joules, they can be purchased by any citizen over the age of 18. Category C firearms can be obtained with a hunting license, or sport-shooting license with a medical certificate. Category C includes mainly single-shot-per-barrel shotguns and single-shot or manual repeating rifles (including centre-fire rifles, for hunting or target shooting). Once legally purchased these category C arms may be kept, without using them, even when no longer licensed for hunting or sport-shooting.\nCategory B firearms are only available to sport-shooters licensed for at least 6 months, with a medical certificate, without any felony convictions, and additionally requires at least three shooting sessions with an instructor each separated by 2 months. Specific authorisations for purchase and possession may then be sought from a local police administration, are valid for 5 years, and are renewable. Such weapons may then only be used for sport-shooting at shooting ranges, never for hunting. Category B includes all assault type rifles, such as AK-47/AKM, AK-74 or AR-15/M16/M4, and any look-alike weapons even when chambered for rimfire cartridges (.22 LR). These must be semi-automatic only. All handguns, including those using rimfire ammunition, are classed as category B. It is illegal to possess these category B weapons after expiry of a non-renewed specific authorisation: the arms must be disposed of (sold to a gun shop or else destroyed, for example). Authorisations can also be revoked at any time by any of the parties involved in the authorisations delivery (Government, Prefecture, Police).\nAir-guns including pistols are freely available to adults, as category D arms, provided that their energy level does not exceed 20 J (previously 10 J). Typical energy levels are 6 J for a target pistol and 7.5 J for a target rifle. A scoped Field Target rifle might produce 15 or 16 J (maximum authorised in FT competition). Air-soft arms, firing non-metallic pellets and not exceeding 2 J energy, are considered to be toys, rather than weapons, and so are excluded from firearm regulations.\nAlso freely available are category D defensive pepper sprays up to a maximum 75 g capacity. Bigger capacity sprays are considered offensive weapons, not defensive, and so are classed in category B, and require specific authorisation.\nA person cannot own more than 12 centerfire firearms, and cannot own more than 10 magazines and 1,000 rounds of ammunition per firearm. A one-year carry license may be issued for persons \"exposed to exceptional risks to their life\" allowing them to carry a handgun with a maximum of 50 rounds. Such authorizations are extremely rare, however, as the state would normally insist on providing police protection in such cases. Since November 2015, police officers are authorised to carry their service weapons whilst off-duty.\nGermany.\nGun ownership in Germany is restrictive, being regulated by the Federal Weapons Act (German: Waffengesetz) of 1972.\nThe laws apply to weapons with a fire energy exceeding 7.5 J. A firearms license may be granted to those over the age of 18 who have no criminal convictions or mental disability, who are deemed reliable and can justify a reason for owning a firearm. A separate license is required for each firearm owned. Target-shooters must have been a member of a shooting club with 18 recorded visits in the previous 12 months. A firearms carry permit is a second-tier license which allows concealed carrying in public, and is only issued to those with a particular need.\nSeveral weapons and special ammunitions are completely prohibited, such as automatic firearms. Buying, possessing, lending, using, carrying, crafting, altering and the trading of these weapons is illegal and punishable by up to five years imprisonment, confiscation of the weapon and a fine of up to \u20ac10,000. Using an illegal weapon for crimes of any kind is punishable by 1\u201310 years imprisonment.\nGermany's National Gun Registry, introduced at the end of 2012, counted 5.5 million firearms legally owned by 1.4 million people.\nGreece.\nGreece has gun regulations in place. Shotguns (limited to a 3-round capacity), rifles and handguns require a license issued by Police Headquarters. A license may be issued to a Greek citizen over the age of 18 if: a) there are serious fears about his or her personal security along with a positive recommendation by the Prosecutor and b) it is required for the safety of shops, banks, other financial institutions, etc. To purchase handguns and rifles, citizens must either have a concealed-carry permit or a target-shooting permit (for rifles and pistols). Semi auto rifles are not prohibited since the beginning of 2023. Hunters can own up to 10 shotguns and rifles (with no gun barrel rifling) and sport shooters can own up to 8 guns. There is no license-check or record kept for ammunition purchases for shotguns but target shooters can only own 1000 rounds per weapon, 3500 in total.\nHungary.\nGun laws in Hungary are relatively strict, regulated by Code 24/2004, governmental decision 253/2004. (VIII. 31.) and directive of the Minister of Internal Affairs 49/2004. The law defines a firearm as having muzzle energy that exceeds . A firearms license may be granted to those over the age of 18 who have no criminal convictions or mental disability, and have passed a basic firearms theory/practical examination. Three categories of firearms ownership are allowed: Hunting (Firearms restricted to bolt action rifles and double barrel shotguns), Sports shooting (only restriction is no fully automatic firearms), Self defense (special permission from the Police, very rarely granted in special cases e.g. gun shop owners). Sports shooting has in recent years gained popularity with the number of sports category licenses being issued steadily climbing. Government initiatives to popularize shooting sports such as building shooting ranges and introducing shooting as a sport in the schooling system has slowly begun. It is generally expected that obtaining (and keeping) a firearms permit is a slow and somewhat costly process, but once a permit is granted and the necessary yearly memberships are paid, yearly doctors certificates are obtained and the mandatory 2\u20133 sporting events are attended (for sports shooter) ownership is fairly liberal as to the type of firearm one can own.\nIn 2010, there were 129,000 registered gun owners (1.3% of the population) in Hungary with 235,000 firearms. The majority of these were hunting rifles. Gun violence is very rare in Hungary. Crime with firearms is very rare and this statistic usually includes crimes committed with non-lethal \"pepper spray\" guns. Police use lethal force with a firearm less than 10 times per year, on average.\nIreland.\nGun laws in Ireland are strict, requiring all firearms to be licensed individually through the Garda\u00ed (police). Applicants must be 16 years of age and have a good reason for ownership, a secure location to store firearms, proof of competency with the firearm or arrangements to achieve such, provide access to medical records and two character references, and be of sound mind and temperate habits. Applicants convicted of certain specified offenses will be denied a firearms certificate. Personal protection is not a valid reason for ownership.\nIrish firearms law is based on the Firearms Act 1925, which was amended by several following acts in 1964, 1968, 1971, 1990, 1998 and 2000. The cumulative effect of these modifications, along with modifications in other acts and confusion over which amendments applied, resulted in a 2006 Irish Law Reform Commission recommendation that all extant legislation be restated (written in a single document with all prior Acts repealed). However, the Criminal Justice Act 2006, contained a rewriting almost 80% of the Firearms Act. It was quickly followed by amendments in 2007 and further major amendments in 2009, exacerbating the legislative confusion. As of 2014,[ [update]] the Law Reform Commission recommendation has not as yet been fully enacted; the Firearms Act consists of the initial 1925 Act amended by approximately twenty separate Acts and is well understood by only a handful of those directly involved in its drafting, amendment or usage. Extensive complaints have arisen over the application of the legislation, with several hundred judicial review cases won in the High Court and Supreme Court by firearms owners, all relating to licensing decisions which had not adhered to the Firearms Act.\nItaly.\nIn Italy, national police issues gun licenses to those over the age of 18 without criminal record, who are not mentally ill or known to use illicit substances, and who can prove competence with firearm safety. A shooting sports license allows to transport unloaded firearms and firing them in designated shooting ranges. A hunting license allows holders to engage in hunting with firearms. A concealed carry license allows a person to carry a loaded firearm in public, and requires proving a \"valid reason\" to do so (e.g. a security guard or a jeweller at risk of robbery). All weapons must be registered within 72 hours from the moment of purchase. The number of firearms an individual may own and retain at the place declared during registration is limited to:\nThe last two can be purchased in an authorized firearm shop by anyone who can prove to be at least 18 years old, without the need for a license. The carrying of such weapons is forbidden without a licence and no registration is required (Art. 7 c.4 DM 362/2001). These limits can be exceeded with a collector license.\nAmmunition: any licence allows the owner to keep 200 rounds of handgun and 1500 rounds of hunting ammunition or up to 5 kg of gunpowder (smokeless or black) to handload cartridges. Registration is required within 72 hours from acquisition for all ammunition and powder. Registration is not to be repeated if ammunition and powder are used and then bought again, unless the original quantity registered is being exceeded with the new purchase. Smoothbore cartridges not loaded with slugs but instead with shot (regardless of its size) can be owned without registration if the number possessed is inferior to one thousand.\nLuxembourg.\nIn Luxembourg, anyone wishing to purchase, possess or use a firearm must hold a permit issued by the Minister of Justice in person.\nThe most common reasons for applying for a permit are hunting, recreational shooting, weapons collecting, and inheriting a firearm. Anyone who inherits a firearm must have a permit even if they have no intention to ever touch or use the gun.\nSelf-defence is not a valid reason for owning a firearm. However, the Ministry of Justice is concerned that some permit holders falsely cite another reason (such as recreational shooting) as a justification for acquiring their permit when their sole actual motivation is self-defence.\nMalta.\nFirearms are allowed in Malta for sport shooting, collection and hunting purposes. To get firearm license one must join a shooting or collectors club for training, which will issue a recommendation letter for the police, after which applicant must pass knowledge of firearm safety and the Arms Act. After successfully completing every step one will get license.\nThere are 102,610 registered firearms (or 22 per 100 people), including 56,000 shotguns, 10,553 pistols, 7,856 rifles, 5,369 revolvers, 501 machine guns, 477 sub-machine guns, 633 combat shotguns, 22 cannons, 7 humane killers and 2 rocket launchers.\nLaw allow carrying firearms while hunting, with 10,544 licensed to do so on land and 247 on sea. Carrying loaded firearms outside of hunting grounds or shooting range is illegal. Automatic firearms are allowed only if they were produced before 1946.\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, gun ownership is restricted to hunters, collectors and target shooters. People with felonies, drug addictions, and mental illnesses may not possess firearms. To be a collector one has to limit oneself to a specific area of expertise and demonstrate a serious and thorough knowledge of that area, for instance through publications or lectures.\nOnce obtained, firearms must be stored in a safe and are inspected annually by the police (every 3 years when over 25). Legally owned firearms may only be used in self-defence as a last resort.\nPoland.\nGun ownership in Poland is regulated by the Weapons and Munitions Act of 1999 as further amended. A permit is required to own or possess firearms. Permits are granted for specific purposes, such as self-defense, sport, hunting, collecting etc. and are shall issue except the ones for self-defense, which are may issue. Institutional permits allow for firearm ownership by private security companies, shooting ranges, sport clubs etc.\nPermits are issued to permanent residents over 21, not addicted to alcohol or other substances, having no criminal record, being in good physical and mental health, who passed an exam before sporting association, hunting association or the Police. Permits specify the purposes, categories and quantities of allowed guns; categories depend on permit purpose while quantities are assigned at the discretion of the Police, based on documentation provided. Quantities can be increased when one uses up all available slots.\nCarrying loaded guns is allowed on all types of permits except permits for collecting and memorial purposes. Hunters can carry loaded only on hunting grounds. Guns shall be carried concealed in a holster close to the body. Carrying in public transport is limited only to self-defense permit holders. It is prohibited to carry while intoxicated, and when attending public gatherings or mass events.\nEveryone, including foreigners, is allowed to use legal guns at registered shooting ranges, regardless of actual gun's ownership, e.g. rented from the range or shared by a legal owner present. Discharging a firearm for training or leisure out of a registered shooting range (even on a large private property) is prohibited.\nFull-auto or select-fire firearms are permitted only on institutional and training permits. Since 2020 the Police can issue permits for firearms with suppressors for hunting, but only to be used for sanitary shootings, see main article for details. Armor-piercing, incendiary, tracer and other special ammunition is banned. Only valid permit holders are allowed to buy or possess live ammunition, and only of the types exactly matching the guns they legally own. The quantity of matching ammunition in possession is not limited. Hunters, collectors and sport shooters are allowed to manufacture (reload) ammunition, but strictly for their own use. There are further limits regarding allowed types and calibers depending on the purpose of the permit \u2013 see main article for details. There are no limits of magazine capacity, except when hunting.\nReplicas of cartridgeless black powder firearms designed before 1885 require no permit to own. However, a separate bill of law allows businesses to sell black powder to licensed customers only. This is often circumvented by obtaining a European Firearms Pass for a black powder firearm, asking a licensed colleague (there are no restrictions of private sale or just giving out of black powder) or by buying powder in neighboring countries, mostly the Czech Republic.\nAir guns up to 17 Joules of muzzle energy are unregulated. Air guns above that limit are considered pneumatic weapons, no permit is required but the owner has to be 18 and has to pass medical and psychological evaluation as for firearms permit; guns must be registered with the Police and may be used only on registered shooting ranges. Use of pneumatic weapons outside of shooting range is considered the same kind of offense as using firearms.\nSome other weapons are restricted and require a permit, such as electroshock weapons with mean current greater than 10 mA, large pepper spray dispensers, crossbows, specific kinds of batons, brass knuckles and nunchakus, however ban on nuchakus is not enforced.\nRomania.\nGun ownership in Romania is regulated by Law 295/2004. Romania has one of the toughest gun ownership laws in the world. In order for citizens to obtain a weapon, they must obtain a permit from the police, and must register their weapon once they purchase it. There are several categories of permits, with different requirements and rights, including hunting permits, self-defense permits, sports shooting permits and collectors permits. The only categories of people who are legally entitled to carry a weapon are owners of self-defense permits, magistrates, MPs, military forces and certain categories of diplomats. A psychological evaluation is required beforehand in all cases.\nFurthermore, knives and daggers may in certain conditions (blade longer than 15\u00a0cm and at least 0.4\u00a0cm in width, double edge along the whole blade, etc.) be considered weapons and have a similar regime to those of firearms.\nIn order for a hunter to obtain a hunting/gun ownership license, he must spend a certain \"practice time\" with a professional hunter. To obtain a self-defense permit, one must be under witness protection. Sporting and collectors licenses require membership in a sport shooting club or collectors' association, respectively.\nThe amount of ammunition that can be owned is regulated by permit type. Sporting permits allow the ownership of 1,000 matching cartridges per gun; hunting permits allow 300 matching cartridges per gun; self-defense permits allow 50 bullet cartridges and 50 blanks per gun; Collectors permits do not allow for private ownership of ammunition.\nExplosive weapons and ammunitions, fully automatic weapons, weapons camouflaged in the shape of another object, armor-piercing ammunition and lethal weapons that do not fit in any category defined by the law are prohibited.\nThe type of gun is also regulated by permit. Below is a shortened version of the table detailing the restrictions by type of lethal weapon and permit, for civilian owners. Note that for collectors, short weapons designed after 1945 are forbidden, while only non-lethal weapons are allowed for self-defense permits.\nIt is illegal to use or carry weapons with a muzzle velocity of over 10 kJ if \"the barrel is fitted with devices conceived or adapted to reduce recoil\"\nNote that there are other restrictions for obtaining weapons under a sports-shooting license.\nMinors (14 and older) may also use a weapon, provided that they are under the supervision of someone who has a gun license. However, they cannot own or carry one until the age of 18.\nThe use of guns for self-defense is only allowed if the gun is a last resort option.\nSlovakia.\nGun ownership in Slovakia is regulated principally by law 190/2003 (law of weapons and ammunition).\nA firearms license may be issued to an applicant at least 21 years of age (18 years for category D if they own a valid hunting permit, 15 years for state representative in sport-shooting), with no criminal history, and of sound health and mind, who has a valid reason for owning a gun, passes an oral exam covering aspects of gun law, safe handling, and first aid.\nLicenses are issued in 6 categories:\nA concealed carry license is only issued if the police deem a sufficient justification. Because of that issue of this license is may-issue in practice, and vary across Slovakia by stance of individual police department issuing licence. It is kind of similar to California, some department is almost shall-issue, another need true sufficient reason (like a constant more than average threat, previous assaults on applicant, transports of money, former service in army or law enforcement, legal awareness of applicant, clientelism). Only about 2% of the adult population holds this license.\nThere is an exception for non-repeating muzzle-loaded firearms, which may be purchased without a license.\nSlovenia.\nGun ownership in Slovenia is regulated under the \"Weapons Law\" (Zakon o oro\u017eju) which is harmonised with the directives of the EU. Gun permits are issued to applicants at least 18 years old, reliable, without criminal history and who has not been a conscientious objector, who passes a medical exam and a test on firearm safety. A specific reason must be given for gun ownership: for hunting or target shooting, the applicant must provide proof of membership in a hunting or sports shooting organization; for collection, the applicant must arrange safe storage with a level of security dependent on the type of weapons; for self-defense, the applicant must prove a risk to personal safety to such an extent that a weapon is needed.\nAs in most EU member states, the ownership of Category A firearms is prohibited; however these can be owned by weapon collectors, providing that requirements are met. Suppressors are legal and unregulated since 2021. Firearms must be stored in a locked cabinet with ammunition stored separately. Concealed carry is allowed in special circumstances. A gun permit is also required for airguns with muzzle velocity greater than or energy of .\nSpain.\nFirearm regulation in Spain is restrictive, enacted in Citizen Security Protection Organic Act of 2015 and the Weapons Regulation (Royal Decree 137/1993). Both laws are covered by article 149.1.26.\u00aa of the Spanish Constitution, which attributes to the State the exclusive competence in terms of the \"regime of production, trade, possession and use of weapons and explosives\".\nA firearm license may be obtained from the Guardia Civil after passing a police background check, a physiological and medical test, and a practical and theoretical exam. Shotgun, rifle and sporting licenses must be renewed after 5 years, subject to firearm inspection. Sporting licence requires to present proof of sporting activity of at least one competition each year. A minimum score may be required for some categories. Police may inspect firearms at any time. A self-defense and concealed carry license must be renewed every year, and is only available under special conditions.\nA license-holder may own up to 6 shotguns, and unlimited rifles. With a sporting license, valid for 5 years, 1 to 10 handguns may be owned, depending on sports-shooting level. Magazine capacity for semi-automatic centerfire rifles and semi-automatic shotguns is limited to 10 rounds for sports shooting and 2 rounds for hunting. Handgun magazines are limited to 20 round capacity. Rimfire rifles, regardless of type have no magazine limit. Rifles chambered for certain cartridges with military origins are prohibited, such as .223/5.56 NATO and .50 BMG. The .308 Winchester and 7.62x39 mm (AK round) cartridges are only permitted in bolt-action, repetition or single-shot firearms. Proof of ownership of an approved safe is required for all centerfire rifles and handguns, and the owner is responsible for firearm thefts. Ammunition must be stored separately. Rifle and handgun ammunition may only be possessed for legally owned firearms, and purchases and possession is limited to 200 rounds rifle and 100 rounds for handguns. In addition, there are yearly limits in quantity (1000 for rifles,100 for handguns); however additional quantities can be petitioned, mainly for sporting use. For shotgun Ammunition, adults with a valid ID can purchase/possess up to 5,000 shells and there are no yearly limits in quantity. License-holders are only allowed to transport their unloaded firearms from their residence to the shooting range or hunting field and back, with no detours. Firearms may only be discharged at approved shooting ranges or hunting grounds (in season).\nThere are firearm license for private security for handguns and rifles. These cannot be used outside of work and must be stored in the workplace premises (with approved safe).\nIn addition there are handgun license for self-defense in concealed carry. However, this is granted on a \"may issue\" basis with several standards of necessity to be met and very few are granted. This license must be renewed annually and is not automatic.\nMembers of police forces and officers and non-commissioned officers of the armed forces have a special firearms license which encompasses all of the others. There are additional licenses for collectors and muzzle-loading firearms.\nSweden.\nGun ownership in Sweden is regulated by Vapenlagen 1996:67 (literally, The Weapon Law),\nmodified by weapon decree Vapenf\u00f6rordningen 1996:70 and FAP 551-3 / RPSFS 2009:13. The police issue licenses to persons older than 18 years in good standing on the \"need to have\" basis, which generally implies either hunting or sport shooting. Passing a hunting examination or membership in an approved sport shooting club for six months is required. Sport shooting licenses must be renewed every 5 years, whereas hunting licenses are valid for the lifetime of the holder. License-holders may lend a weapon to a person at least 15 years of age for supervised use.\nA separate license is required for each particular firearm or caliber conversion kit. There's no codified limit on the number of licenses a person can hold, but in practice a license-holder may own up to six hunting rifles, ten handguns, or a mix of eight rifles and handguns. Firearms must be stored in an approved safe. A firearm registered for hunting may be used for sport shooting, but not vice versa. In 2023, previous restrictions on hunting licenses for semi-automatic firearms based on appearance or military origin were lifted, and as a result the only remaining restrictions specific to hunting are a minimum total weapon length exceeding 60 cm and magazine size on semi-automatic rifles and magazine-fed shotguns. Licenses for fully automatic weapons are not generally issued, with limited exceptions for collection and sport shooting using the WWII era m/45 submachine gun.\nStarting 1 July 2022, suppressors no longer require a separate license and can be freely acquired by anyone with a valid gun license and can be legally used both for hunting and target shooting.\nSelf-defense with firearms, as well as carry, is generally prohibited. Carry permits can be issued by the police under very special circumstances like an immediate and demonstrable threat to life. Transportation of unloaded firearms is allowed to and from approved shooting ranges or hunting grounds. Sweden is notorious for having even pepper spray and other nonlethal self-defence methods under its weapons law with similar legal punishments for misuse.\nFirearm collectors must have a clearly stated demarcation of their interest in collecting (e.g.: pre-World War II British handguns). The police may demand security measures on keeping the collection. Collectors may request a time-limited permit to discharge their weapons. Firearms manufactured before 1890 and not using sealed cartridges are exempt from the weapon law.\nGeorgia.\nIn Georgia, civilians above 18 years of age may obtain a firearm permit from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, allowing them to purchase and keep firearms for hunting and sports (pump-action shotguns, hunting rifles, carbines, combined hunting firearms), self-defense (handguns, air guns, sprays, electric tranquilizers) or collections. Permits are denied to persons who are mentally ill, use illicit substances or alcohol recreationally, and those who have criminal records.\nIceland.\nIn Iceland, a license is required to own or possess firearms. A national government safety course must be passed before applying for a license. A special license is required to own a handgun, which may only be used for target shooting at a licensed range. Semi-automatic firearms have caliber restrictions, while fully automatic firearms are only permitted for collectors.\nApplicants must sit through a mandatory four-hour lecture on the \"history and physics of the firearm\". Paperwork must be filed in the police, magistrate, and the Environment Agency of Iceland. Applicants need to prove clean criminal records, need to be evaluated by a doctor to prove they \"are of sound mind\" and have \"good enough eyesight\". Two books referring to guns must be bought and read, a three-day course must be attended, and the applicant should score at least 75% on exams concerning gun safety, management, \"what animals are allowed to be hunted and when. Finally, a practical exam must be taken. After Icelanders have their license, they need to own a gun safe to store the weapons in, plus a separate place to store the ammunition\".\nApproximately one gun is owned for every three people in the country, being used mostly for hunting and competitive shooting. From January to July 2019, 394 shotguns, 785 rifles, and 208 handguns were registered in Iceland. In total, police counts for guns in Iceland include about 40,000 shotguns, 25,000 rifles, and 3,600 handguns as of July that year.\nKazakhstan.\nKazakhstan has strict gun laws, heavily regulating civilian firearm ownership. Only shotguns and hunting rifles are generally permitted for civilians, while handguns and automatic weapons are prohibited. To own a firearm, individuals must be at least 18 years old (21 for some weapons), pass a background check, undergo medical and psychological evaluations, and complete firearm safety training. Guns must be stored securely, and carrying them in public is restricted. Self-defense firearms, such as non-lethal weapons (e.g., rubber-bullet guns), are allowed under specific conditions. The government maintains strict oversight, with periodic license renewals and inspections.\nAs of 2016, there were about 284,000 (or 1.6 per 100 people) registered firearms in Kazakhstan according to the government data.\nMonaco.\nLaw in Monaco divides firearms into two categories:\nNorth Macedonia.\nTo obtain a firearm license in North Macedonia one must be at least 18 years old, able-bodied, healthy, not representing danger to public order, have permanent residency, possess technical knowledge of weapons and regulations related to them and have a justified reason for acquiring the weapon. Justified reasons include:\nFully automatic firearms are prohibited. Carrying firearms in public places is prohibited.\nNorth Macedonia has its own defense industry with ATS Group, Eurokompozit Prilep\nNorway.\nFirearm ownership in Norway is controlled by laws passed by the Norwegian Parlament, with further regulations passed by the Ministry of Justice and Public Security. The National Police Directorate can issue government circulars with further in depth definition of how the firearm regulations should be interpreted (by the police).\nThe Norwegian police can issue firearms licenses to those with a hunting license or members of a sports shooting club. They can also issue licenses to \"Norwegian historical weapons society\" collectors, museums, \"international ship and port facility security\" and more.\nHunters can own up to 8 firearms, and sports shooters can own up to two firearms per approved shooting disciplines as defined by The National Police Directorate. The purchase of ammunition is restricted to those with a valid firearms license for any given calibre.\nLong guns must have a minimum barrel length of 40 centimetres and an overall length of 84 centimetres when operable. Rifles are restricted to 10-round magazines, shotguns to 5 rounds, and pistols to 20 rounds per default. Detachable box magazines for semi-automatic shotguns are prohibited.\nHunters can own semi-automatic and manually loaded rifles and shotguns. Semi-automatic rifles for hunting shall only accept detachable 10-round magazines or smaller ones. They must also have the visual appearance of a \"hunting rifle\" (i.e. no detachable pistol-grip, or handguard that covers the top half of the barrel).\nSports shooters can own semi-automatic and manually loaded rifles, shotguns and pistols. Sports shooters can apply for unrestricted magazine capacity for each firearm used in an approved sports shooting discipline. However, in practice, it is only approved for rifles and pistols.\nCivilians are not permitted to transport/carry firearms loaded or in a manner that allows for easy access in public places, effectively prohibiting any form of concealed or open-carrying of firearms. Moreover, self-defence is not a valid reason for having a firearms licence issued. Firearms licences are only issued for hunting and sporting (or other speciality purposes not generally applicable to ordinary civilians).\nRussia.\nRussian citizens over 21 years of age can obtain a firearms license after attending gun safety classes and passing a federal test and background check. Firearms may be acquired for self-defense, hunting, or sports activities. Carry permits may be issued for hunting firearms licensed for hunting purposes. Initially, purchases are limited to long smooth-bore firearms and pneumatic weapons with a muzzle energy of up to . After five years of shotgun ownership, rifles may be purchased. Handguns are generally not allowed (except traumatic handguns which are allowed for self-defense but can fire only cartridges with rubber bullets), but with the growing popularity of practical shooting events and competitions in Russia in recent years (e.g. IPSC), handgun ownership has now been allowed and the handguns have to be stored at a shooting club. Rifles and shotguns with barrels shorter than are prohibited, as are firearms which shoot in bursts or have more than a 10-cartridge capacity. Suppressors are prohibited.\nSerbia.\nSerbia has weapon laws and ranks third in guns per capita with a strong gun culture, especially in rural areas, with about one million guns in legal circulation. Weapons are regulated by the Weapons and Ammunition Law (\"Zakon o oru\u017eju i municiji\").\nPeople over age 18 may own firearms with a permit, which is denied to those with a criminal history, mental disorder, or history of alcohol or illegal substance use. There is a thorough background check with police having the final decision. Firearms must be stored in a designated gun cabinet, and may be confiscated by police if the owner is found irresponsible.\nRifles, shotguns and handguns may be owned with an appropriate permit. Having a permit to own a firearm does not itself allow the bearer to carry the firearm anywhere outside the home, regardless of whether it is concealed or not. The owner may transport their firearms at any time provided they are unloaded. Concealed carry permits for handguns require proving an imminent threat, with the police making a final decision. Therefore, concealed carry permits are hard to obtain. There is no limit on the number of firearms one may own, though every gun transaction is recorded by the police. There is no caliber restriction. Fully automatic firearms and suppressors are prohibited for civilians. Automatic long firearms are allowed to be obtained and used by legal entities under special circumstances. People over 18 years of age can buy and carry stun guns and electric tranquilizers with no permit needed. People over 16 can carry OC sprays. There is no restriction regarding the number of rounds that may be purchased. Ammunition may be bought only for the caliber in which an owned firearm is chambered. Reloading is allowed only to those who have passed an exam in handling explosive materials. Old firearms (produced before 1900), historically significant firearms, as well as black powder firearms (all category C items) may be bought without any permit.\nSerbia has its own civilian gun and ammunition industry: Zastava Arms, Prvi Partizan, and Kru\u0161ik.\nSwitzerland.\nFirearm regulations in Switzerland are comparatively liberal. Swiss gun laws are primarily about the acquisition of arms, and not ownership. As such a license is not required to own a gun by itself, but a shall-issue permit is required to purchase most types of firearms. Bolt-action rifles do not require an acquisition permit, and can be acquired with just a background check.\nThe Swiss have male conscription for military service. A 2011 referendum to force military weapons to be kept at military sites was defeated. Weapons may voluntarily be kept in the local armory and there is no longer an obligation to keep the weapon at home.\nThe Swiss \"Federal Law on Arms, Arms Accessories and Ammunitions\" (WG, LArm) of 20 June 1997 has as its objectives (Article\u00a01) to combat the wrongful use of arms, their accessories, parts and ammunition. It governs the acquisition of arms, their introduction into Swiss territory, export, storage, possession, carrying, transport, and brokerage. It regulates the manufacture and trade in arms, and seeks to prevent the wrongful carrying of ammunition and dangerous objects. Article 3 states that \"The right to acquire, possess and carry arms is guaranteed in the framework of this law\".\nTurkey.\nTurkey is semi-restrictive in terms of gun control statutes. Civilians in Turkey need to get a license from the police or gendarmerie to own and use firearms, and these licenses last for 5 years. Licenses are available for shotguns (including semi-automatic ones), rifles (bolt-action, lever-action, and some semi-automatics), and handguns. To get a license, you must:\nAs of 2024, fully automatic and short-barreled shotguns are banned. There are no restrictions on magazine size, caliber, or optics for handguns. Some semi-automatic rifles can be owned with a rifle permit, but they are uncommon in the market. Semi-auto rifles typically come in .22LR or 9mm calibers with magazines holding up to 15 rounds. Fully automatic rifles are not allowed for civilians, with very rare exceptions.\nShotgun licenses automatically include a permit to carry or transport the shotgun, but it must be unloaded and covered. Handgun concealed carry permits and rifle carry licenses are harder to get and require a valid reason, like personal protection or hunting. Applicants must show proof of this reason, such as a life threat (approved by the governor) or belonging to specific professions like:\nGetting a handgun concealed carry permit is expensive, and each firearm requires a separate carry license. Handgun carry licenses are legally unlimited, but obtaining multiple permits is rare. Rifles can only be carried with a hunting license and for hunting purposes; hunting with semi-automatic rifles is not allowed. Carry licenses usually need renewal every 5 years.\nHigh-powered and tactical semi-automatic rifles are mostly banned for civilians, with very few exceptions. Spare parts for these weapons, especially barrels, are hard to find and replace.\nIn Turkey, most shooting ranges are indoors and only allow handguns. People with possession licenses need to get a transportation permit from the local police for each trip to the range. However, those with concealed carry licenses do not need such permits.\nShotguns and rifles (for carry license holders) can be used for target shooting outside urban and residential areas. This must be done at least 500 meters away from homes and only with the landowner's permission. To hunt with shotguns or rifles, a hunting license is required.\nLicensed armed security personnel, such as those protecting valuable assets, VIPs, critical infrastructure, airports, banks, or high-risk events, can carry semi-automatic and fully automatic weapons, including submachine guns, but only while on duty.\nIn rural areas, over 50,000 civilians are authorized as \"Security Guards\" or \"Village Guards\" to protect against terrorists and looters. This role allows them to carry selective-fire firearms for this specific purpose. These weapons and equipment are usually provided by the military and remain government property.\nPublic servants, including police officers, military personnel, judges, public prosecutors, and senior politicians, have a lifelong right to apply for free handgun and rifle carry licenses. These licenses are issued on a guaranteed basis.\nAll police officers can carry an unlimited number of handguns and rifles with a carry license. Military officers are allowed up to five handguns and two rifles, while generals are not limited by these rules. Mayors, deputies, ministers, and presidents automatically receive lifetime carry licenses without paying any fees. Some other government employees, such as forest rangers, village headmen, customs officers, judges, and prosecutors, also have lifetime carry licenses. Unlike civilians, public servants (active or retired) do not need to renew their medical certificates every five years.\nTurkey has a large shotgun industry, and shotguns are widely available and easy to purchase. Getting a shotgun license is simpler and cheaper compared to handgun or rifle licenses. It requires a clean bill of health, a clear criminal record, and no outstanding tax debt. One shotgun license allows ownership of up to five shotguns. Spare parts are widely available, and rebarreling is both easy and legal. Shotguns are much more affordable due to open market conditions and competition among numerous national and international brands, unlike rifles and handguns, which are sold exclusively through the government-controlled monopoly, MKEK.\nUkraine.\nAs of 2022[ [update]] there are no restrictions on ownership of any types of weapons, in fact the Ukrainian government has given out thousands of military grade weapons to its populace. This is due to the ongoing Russo-Ukrainian war.\nUkraine is the only European country without firearms legislation. Regulation is by executive fiat; specifically, Order No.\u00a0622 of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. A firearm license may be issued to citizens who meet an age requirement (21 for shotguns, 18 for shotguns for hunting purposes, and 25 for rifles), have no criminal record or history of domestic violence or mental illness and have a specific reason such as target shooting, hunting or collecting. Handguns of .22, 9\u00a0mm, .357\u00a0magnum and .38 caliber are permitted only for target shooting and those who can prove a threat against their lives (who are typically also given concealed carry permits). All firearms must be stored unloaded in a safe.\nCitizens wishing to purchase weapons must complete courses on the fundamentals of Ukrainian legislation on weapons, their technical design and rules for the safe handling of weapons, as well as practical shooting. The organization of relevant courses is assigned to the internal affairs bodies. In order to obtain a weapon permit, citizens submit an application in the prescribed form, a certificate of completion of relevant courses, undergo a medical examination, an inspection of the internal affairs agencies and pass a test on the fundamentals of current legislation and rules for handling weapons and their application skills.\nArticle 263 of the Ukrainian Criminal Code says that for illegal carrying, storing and selling firearms, explosives and ammunition a person faces from 3 to 7 years in prison.\nWeapon permits are not issued, and issued ones are canceled if there are:\nThe list of diseases and physical defects, in the presence of which a weapon permit is not issued, is approved by the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine.\nForeigners have the right to purchase civilian weapons of ammunition and ammunition for permits issued by the internal affairs bodies on the basis of petitions from diplomatic missions or consular offices of the states of which they are citizens, as well as ministries and other central executive authorities of Ukraine, subject to the export of such weapons from Ukraine later than 5 days after purchase. Foreigners who have received certificates of permanent residence in Ukraine have the right to purchase weapons in the manner established for citizens of Ukraine. Hunting and sporting weapons can be imported by foreigners into Ukraine with the appropriate permission of the internal affairs bodies and hunting agreements made with hunting farms or inviting ministries and other central executive authorities to participate in sports competitions.\nUnited Kingdom (Except Northern Ireland).\nThe UK increased firearm regulation through several Firearms Acts, leading to an outright ban on automatic firearms and many semi-automatic firearms. Breech-loading handguns are also tightly controlled.\nThere are three main types of firearm that require different licences:\nAn SGC allows the holder to purchase and own any number of shotguns, so long as they can be securely stored, and does not restrict purchase or storage of ammunition; additionally they may legally give shotgun ammunition to non-licence holders. Section 1 and 5 firearms require individual permission for each firearm or accessory, and there are restrictions as to the type and quantity of ammunition held. Aside from Northern Ireland, private ownership of most handguns was banned in 1997, with exception for section 5 firearms licences, which are only generally issued to maritime security personnel, and those under police protection. In the run up to the 2012 Olympic Games, British Shooting reached agreement with the Home Office to nominate a small number of elite athletes who could keep and train with Section 5 pistols in the UK at designated ranges.\nThere are several factors that may disqualify applicants. A custodial sentence of between three months and three years disqualifies applicants for five years from release; three years or greater disqualifies applicants for life. \"Intemperate habits\", such as substance use, may disqualify applicants. Being of \"unsound mind\", meaning a history of mental illness, or other relevant medical conditions may disqualify applicants, however there are no conditions that \"make them automatically unsuitable to possess a firearm\", and police will contact the applicant's general practitioner, who place a flag on the records of all licence holders. Applicants must also have suitable measures for storing firearms and ammunition, such as a gun safe. The FAC additionally requires demonstrating a good reason for each firearm the applicant wishes to own (such as hunting, pest control, collecting, or target shooting). Self-defence is only accepted as a good reason in Northern Ireland.\nOceania.\nFirearms are completely prohibited for civilian use without exceptions in Nauru, Palau and Marshall Islands. Fiji suspended all firearm licenses in 2000, Cook Islands and Solomon Islands did the same respectively in 1999 and 1992. Papua New Guinea does not issue new licenses since 2000, but former are still valid. Kiribati effectively made it impossible to obtain new firearms by banning import of them.\nAustralia.\nGun laws in Australia are under the jurisdiction of the state governments, with the importation of guns regulated by the federal government. Gun laws were largely aligned in 1996 by the National Firearms Agreement. In two federally funded gun buybacks and voluntary surrenders and state governments' gun amnesties before and after the Port Arthur Massacre, more than a million firearms were collected and destroyed, possibly one third of the national stock.\nA person must have a firearm licence to possess or use a firearm. Licence holders must be able to demonstrate at least one \"genuine reason\" (which explicitly excludes self-defence) for holding a firearm licence and must not be a \"prohibited person\". All firearms must be registered by serial number to the owner, who must also hold a firearms licence.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand's gun laws focus mainly on vetting firearm owners. A firearms licence may be issued by police to applicants who attend a safety lecture, pass a written test on safety and the Arms Code, and have secure storage for firearms and ammunition; the police will also interview the applicant and two references to be certain the applicant is \"fit and proper\" to own a firearm. Having criminal associations, a history of domestic violence, mental instability, or alcohol or drug use almost always result in the application being denied. Misbehavior involving firearms commonly leads to a firearms licence being revoked by police. Even when licensed, a person may only be in possession of a firearm for a particular lawful, proper and sufficient purpose,\nfor which the NZ Police policy is to exclude self-defense, however this is not written in the Arms Act or supporting regulations.\nMachine carbines, sub-machine guns, and firearms capable of full automatic fire are all classified as restricted weapons, requiring a special procurement permit issued by the Police. Additionally, pistols intended for use outside of Commissioner-approved shooting ranges are subject to specific regulations and may require special permits beyond those for shooting club use.\nAfter the Christchurch mosque shootings in 2019, legislation to restrict semi-automatic firearms and magazines with a capacity of more than 10 rounds, and provide an amnesty and buyback of such weapons was introduced and passed by the New Zealand parliament.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRelevant legislation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
