{"id": "13645", "revid": "38751670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13645", "title": "Horse", "text": "Domesticated equine\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe horse (Equus ferus caballus) is a domesticated, one-toed, hoofed mammal. It belongs to the taxonomic family Equidae and is one of two extant subspecies of \"Equus ferus\". The horse has evolved over the past 45 to 55\u00a0million years from a small multi-toed creature, \"Eohippus\", into the large single-toed animal of today, originally in North America. Humans began domesticating horses around 4000 BCE in Central Asia, and their domestication is believed to have been widespread by 3000 BCE. Horses in the subspecies \"caballus\" are domesticated, although some domesticated populations live in the wild as feral horses. These feral populations are not true wild horses, which are horses that have never been domesticated. There is an extensive, specialized vocabulary used to describe equine-related concepts, covering everything from anatomy to life stages, size, colors, markings, breeds, locomotion, and behavior.\nHorses are adapted to run, allowing them to quickly escape predators, and possess a good sense of balance and a strong fight-or-flight response. Related to this need to flee from predators in the wild is an unusual trait: horses are able to sleep both standing up and lying down, with younger horses tending to sleep significantly more than adults. Female horses, called mares, carry their young for approximately 11\u00a0months and a young horse, called a foal, can stand and run shortly following birth. Most domesticated horses begin training under a saddle or in a harness between the ages of two and four. They reach full adult development by age five, and have an average lifespan of between 25 and 30\u00a0years.\nHorse breeds are loosely divided into three categories based on general temperament: spirited \"hot bloods\" with speed and endurance; \"cold bloods\", such as draft horses and some ponies, suitable for slow, heavy work; and \"warmbloods\", developed from crosses between hot bloods and cold bloods, often focusing on creating breeds for specific riding purposes, particularly in Europe. There are more than 300\u00a0breeds of horse in the world today, developed for many different uses.\nHorses and humans interact in a wide variety of sport competitions and non-competitive recreational pursuits as well as in working activities such as police work, agriculture, entertainment, and therapy. Horses were historically used in warfare, from which a wide variety of riding and driving techniques developed, using many different styles of equipment and methods of control. Many products are derived from horses, including meat, milk, hide, hair, bone, and pharmaceuticals extracted from the urine of pregnant mares. \nLifespan and life stages.\nDepending on breed, management and environment, the modern domestic horse has a life expectancy of 25 to 30\u00a0years. Uncommonly, a few animals live into their 40s and, occasionally, beyond. The oldest verifiable record was \"Old Billy\", a 19th-century horse that lived to the age of 62. In modern times, Sugar Puff, who had been listed in \"Guinness World Records\" as the world's oldest living pony, died in 2007 at age 56.\nRegardless of a horse or pony's actual birth date, for most competition purposes a year is added to its age each January\u00a01 of each year in the Northern Hemisphere and each August\u00a01 in the Southern Hemisphere. The exception is in endurance riding, where the minimum age to compete is based on the animal's actual calendar age.\nThe following terminology is used to describe horses of various ages:\n A horse of either sex less than one year old. A nursing foal is sometimes called a \"suckling\", and a foal that has been weaned is called a \"weanling\". Most domesticated foals are weaned at five to seven months of age, although foals can be weaned at four months with no adverse physical effects.\n A horse of either sex that is between one and two years old.\n A male horse under the age of four. A common terminology error is to call any young horse a \"colt\", when the term actually only refers to young male horses.\n A female horse under the age of four.\n A female horse four years old and older.\n A non-castrated male horse four years old and older. The term \"horse\" is sometimes used colloquially to refer specifically to a stallion.\n A castrated male horse of any age.\nIn horse racing, these definitions may differ: For example, in the British Isles, Thoroughbred horse racing defines colts and fillies as less than five years old. However, Australian Thoroughbred racing defines colts and fillies as less than four years old.\nSize and measurement.\nThe height of horses is measured at the highest point of the withers, where the neck meets the back. This point is used because it is a stable point of the anatomy, unlike the head or neck, which move up and down in relation to the body of the horse.\nIn English-speaking countries, the height of horses is often stated in units of hands and inches: one hand is equal to . The height is expressed as the number of full hands, followed by a point, then the number of additional inches, and ending with the abbreviation \"h\" or \"hh\" (for \"hands high\"). Thus, a horse described as \"15.2 h\" is 15 hands plus 2\u00a0inches, for a total of in height.\nThe size of horses varies by breed, but also is influenced by nutrition. Light-riding horses usually range in height from 14 to 16\u00a0hands ( to \u00a0inches, to \u00a0cm) and can weigh from . Larger-riding horses usually start at about \u00a0hands and often are as tall as \u00a0hands , weighing from . Heavy or draft horses are usually at least \u00a0hands high and can be as tall as \u00a0hands high. They can weigh from about .\nThe largest horse in recorded history was probably a Shire horse named Mammoth, who was born in 1848. He stood \u00a0hands high and his peak weight was estimated at . The record holder for the smallest horse ever is Thumbelina, a fully mature miniature horse affected by dwarfism. She was tall and weighed .\nPonies.\nPonies are taxonomically the same animals as horses. The distinction between a horse and pony is commonly drawn on the basis of height, especially for competition purposes. However, height alone is not dispositive; the difference between horses and ponies may also include aspects of phenotype, including conformation and temperament.\nThe traditional standard for height of a horse or a pony at maturity is \u00a0hands . An animal \u00a0hands or over is usually considered to be a horse and one less than \u00a0hands a pony,12 but there are many exceptions to the traditional standard. In Australia, ponies are considered to be those under \u00a0hands . For competition in the Western division of the United States Equestrian Federation, the cutoff is \u00a0hands . The International Federation for Equestrian Sports, the world governing body for horse sport, uses metric measurements and defines a pony as being any horse measuring less than at the withers without shoes, which is just over \u00a0hands , and , with shoes.\nHeight is not the sole criterion for distinguishing horses from ponies. Breed registries for horses that typically produce individuals both under and over \u00a0hands consider all animals of that breed to be horses regardless of their height. Conversely, some pony breeds may have features in common with horses, and individual animals may occasionally mature at over \u00a0hands , but are still considered to be ponies.\nPonies often exhibit thicker manes, tails, and coats. They also have proportionally shorter legs, wider barrels, heavier &lt;dfn id=\"&gt;bone&lt;/dfn&gt;, shorter and thicker necks, and short heads with broad foreheads. They may have calmer temperaments than horses and also a high level of intelligence that may or may not be used to cooperate with human handlers. Small size, by itself, is not an exclusive determinant. For example, the Shetland pony which averages \u00a0hands , is considered a pony.12Conversely, breeds such as the Falabella and other miniature horses, which can be no taller than , are classified by their registries as very small horses, not ponies.\nGenetics.\nHorses have 64 chromosomes. The horse genome was sequenced in 2007. It contains 2.7 billion DNA base pairs, which is larger than the dog genome, but smaller than the human genome or the bovine genome. The map is available to researchers.\nColors and markings.\nHorses exhibit a diverse array of coat colors and distinctive markings, described by a specialized vocabulary. Often, a horse is classified first by its coat color, before breed or sex. Horses of the same color may be distinguished from one another by white markings, which, along with various spotting patterns, are inherited separately from coat color.\nMany genes that create horse coat colors and patterns have been identified. Current genetic tests can identify at least 13 different alleles influencing coat color, and research continues to discover new genes linked to specific traits. The basic coat colors of chestnut and black are determined by the gene controlled by the Melanocortin 1 receptor, also known as the \"extension gene\" or \"red factor\". Its recessive form is \"red\" (chestnut) and its dominant form is black. Additional genes control suppression of black color to point coloration that results in a bay, spotting patterns such as pinto or leopard, dilution genes such as palomino or dun, as well as greying, and all the other factors that create the many possible coat colors found in horses.\nHorses that have a white coat color are often mislabeled; a horse that looks \"white\" is usually a middle-aged or older gray. Grays are born a darker shade, get lighter as they age, but usually keep black skin underneath their white hair coat (with the exception of pink skin under white markings). The only horses properly called white are born with a predominantly white hair coat and pink skin, a fairly rare occurrence. Different and unrelated genetic factors can produce white coat colors in horses, including several different alleles of dominant white and the sabino-1 gene. However, there are no \"albino\" horses, defined as having both pink skin and red eyes.\nReproduction and development.\nGestation lasts approximately 340\u00a0days, with an average range 320\u2013370 days, and usually results in one foal; twins are rare. Horses are a precocial species, and foals are capable of standing and running within a short time following birth. Foals are usually born in the spring. The estrous cycle of a mare occurs roughly every 19\u201322 days and occurs from early spring into autumn. Most mares enter an \"anestrus\" period during the winter and thus do not cycle in this period. Foals are generally weaned from their mothers between four and six months of age.\nHorses, particularly colts, are sometimes physically capable of reproduction at about 18\u00a0months, but domesticated horses are rarely allowed to breed before the age of three, especially females.129 Horses four years old are considered mature, although the skeleton normally continues to develop until the age of six; maturation also depends on the horse's size, breed, sex, and quality of care. Larger horses have larger bones; therefore, not only do the bones take longer to form bone tissue, but the epiphyseal plates are larger and take longer to convert from cartilage to bone. These plates convert after the other parts of the bones, and are crucial to development.\nDepending on maturity, breed, and work expected, horses are usually put under saddle and trained to be ridden between the ages of two and four. Although Thoroughbred race horses are put on the track as young as the age of two in some countries, horses specifically bred for sports such as dressage are generally not put under saddle until they are three or four years old, because their bones and muscles are not solidly developed. For endurance riding competition, horses are not deemed mature enough to compete until they are a full 60\u00a0calendar months (five years) old.\nAnatomy.\nSkeletal system.\nThe horse skeleton averages 205 bones. A significant difference between the horse skeleton and that of a human is the lack of a collarbone\u2014the horse's forelimbs are attached to the spinal column by a powerful set of muscles, tendons, and ligaments that attach the shoulder blade to the torso. The horse's four legs and hooves are also unique structures. Their leg bones are proportioned differently from those of a human. For example, the body part that is called a horse's \"knee\" is actually made up of the carpal bones that correspond to the human wrist. Similarly, the hock contains bones equivalent to those in the human ankle and heel.\nThe lower leg bones of a horse correspond to the bones of the human hand or foot. The fetlock, incorrectly called the \"ankle\", is actually the proximal sesamoid bones between the cannon bones (a single equivalent to the human metacarpal or metatarsal bones) and the proximal phalanges, located where one finds the \"knuckles\" of a human. A horse has no muscles in its legs below the knees and hocks, only skin, hair, bone, tendons, ligaments, cartilage, and the assorted specialized tissues that make up the hoof.\nHooves.\nThe critical importance of the feet and legs is summed up by the traditional adage, \"no foot, no horse\". The horse hoof begins with the distal phalanges, the equivalent of the human fingertip or tip of the toe, surrounded by cartilage and other specialized, blood-rich soft tissues such as the laminae. The exterior hoof wall and horn of the sole is made of keratin, the same material as a human fingernail. \nThe result is that a horse, weighing on average , travels on the same bones as would a human on tiptoe. For the protection of the hoof under certain conditions, some horses have horseshoes placed on their feet by a professional farrier. The hoof continually grows, and in most domesticated horses needs to be trimmed (and horseshoes reset, if used) every five to eight weeks, though the hooves of horses in the wild wear down and regrow at a rate suitable for their terrain.\nTeeth.\nHorses are adapted to grazing. In an adult horse, there are 12\u00a0incisors at the front of the mouth, adapted to biting off the grass or other vegetation. There are 24\u00a0teeth adapted for chewing, the premolars and molars, at the back of the mouth. Stallions and geldings have four additional teeth just behind the incisors, a type of canine teeth called \"tushes\". Some horses, both male and female, will also develop one to four very small vestigial teeth in front of the molars, known as \"wolf\" teeth, which are generally removed because they can interfere with the bit. There is an empty interdental space between the incisors and the molars where the bit rests directly on the gums, or \"bars\" of the horse's mouth when the horse is bridled.\nAn estimate of a horse's age can be made from looking at its teeth. The teeth continue to erupt throughout life and are worn down by grazing. Therefore, the incisors show changes as the horse ages; they develop a distinct wear pattern, changes in tooth shape, and changes in the angle at which the chewing surfaces meet. This allows a very rough estimate of a horse's age, although diet and veterinary care can also affect the rate of tooth wear.\nDigestion.\nHorses are herbivores with a digestive system adapted to a forage diet of grasses and other plant material, consumed steadily throughout the day. Therefore, compared to humans, they have a relatively small stomach but very long intestines to facilitate a steady flow of nutrients. A horse will eat of food per day and, under normal use, drink of water.\nHorses are not ruminants, having only one stomach, like humans. But unlike humans, they can digest cellulose, a major component of grass, through the process of hindgut fermentation. Cellulose fermentation by symbiotic bacteria and other microbes occurs in the cecum and the large intestine. Horses cannot vomit, so digestion problems can quickly cause colic, a leading cause of death. Although horses do not have a gallbladder, they tolerate high amounts of fat in their diet.\nSenses.\nThe horses' senses are based on their status as prey animals, where they must be aware of their surroundings at all times. The equine eye is one of the largest of any land mammal. Horses are lateral-eyed, meaning that their eyes are positioned on the sides of their heads. This means that horses have a range of vision of more than 350\u00b0, with approximately 65\u00b0 of this being binocular vision and the remaining 285\u00b0 monocular vision. Horses have excellent day and night vision, but they have two-color, or dichromatic vision; their color vision is somewhat like red-green color blindness in humans, where certain colors, especially red and related colors, appear as a shade of green.\nTheir sense of smell, while much better than that of humans, is not quite as good as that of a dog. It is believed to play a key role in the social interactions of horses as well as detecting other key scents in the environment. Horses have two olfactory centers. The first system is in the nostrils and nasal cavity, which analyze a wide range of odors. The second, located under the nasal cavity, is the vomeronasal organs, also called Jacobson's organs. These have a separate nerve pathway to the brain and appear to primarily analyze pheromones.\nA horse's hearing is good, and the pinna of each ear can rotate up to 180\u00b0, giving the potential for 360\u00b0 hearing without having to move the head. Noise affects the behavior of horses and certain kinds of noise may contribute to stress\u2014a 2013 study in the UK indicated that stabled horses were calmest in a quiet setting, or if listening to country or classical music, but displayed signs of nervousness when listening to jazz or rock music. This study also recommended keeping music under a volume of 21 decibels. An Australian study found that stabled racehorses listening to talk radio had a higher rate of gastric ulcers than horses listening to music, and racehorses stabled where a radio was played had a higher overall rate of ulceration than horses stabled where there was no radio playing.\nHorses have a great sense of balance, due partly to their ability to feel their footing and partly to highly developed proprioception\u2014the unconscious sense of where the body and limbs are at all times. A horse's sense of touch is well-developed. The most sensitive areas are around the eyes, ears, and nose. Horses are able to sense contact as subtle as an insect landing anywhere on the body.\nHorses have an advanced sense of taste, which allows them to sort through fodder and choose what they would most like to eat, and their prehensile lips can easily sort even small grains. Horses generally will not eat poisonous plants; however, there are exceptions. Horses will occasionally eat toxic amounts of poisonous plants even when there is adequate healthy food.\nMovement.\nAll horses move naturally with four basic gaits:\nBesides these basic gaits, some horses perform a two-beat pace, instead of the trot. There also are several four-beat 'ambling' gaits that are approximately the speed of a trot or pace, though smoother to ride. These include the lateral rack, running walk, and t\u00f6lt as well as the diagonal fox trot. Ambling gaits are often genetic in some breeds, known collectively as gaited horses. These horses replace the trot with one of the ambling gaits.\nBehavior.\nHorses are prey animals with a strong fight-or-flight response. Their first reaction to a threat is to startle and usually flee, although they will stand their ground and defend themselves when flight is impossible or if their young are threatened. They also tend to be curious; when startled, they will often hesitate an instant to ascertain the cause of their fright, and may not always flee from something that they perceive as non-threatening. Most light horse riding breeds were developed for speed, agility, alertness, and endurance, natural qualities that extend from their wild ancestors. However, through selective breeding, some breeds of horses are quite docile, particularly certain draft horses.\nHorses are herd animals, with a clear hierarchy of rank, led by a dominant individual, usually a mare. They are also social creatures that are able to form companionship attachments to their own species and to other animals, including humans. They communicate in various ways, including vocalizations such as nickering or whinnying, mutual grooming, and body language. Many horses will become difficult to manage if they are isolated, but with training, horses can learn to accept a human as a companion, and thus be comfortable away from other horses. However, when confined with insufficient companionship, exercise, or stimulation, individuals may develop stable vices, an assortment of bad habits, mostly stereotypies of psychological origin, that include wood chewing, wall kicking, \"weaving\" (rocking back and forth), and other problems.\nIntelligence and learning.\nStudies have indicated that horses perform a number of cognitive tasks on a daily basis, meeting mental challenges that include food procurement and identification of individuals within a social system. They also have good spatial discrimination abilities. They are naturally curious and apt to investigate things they have not seen before. Studies have assessed equine intelligence in areas such as problem solving, speed of learning, and memory. Horses excel at simple learning, but also are able to use more advanced cognitive abilities that involve categorization and concept learning. They can learn using habituation, desensitization, classical conditioning, operant conditioning, and positive and negative reinforcement. One study has indicated that horses can differentiate between \"more or less\" if the quantity involved is less than four.\nDomesticated horses may face greater mental challenges than wild horses, because they live in artificial environments that prevent instinctive behavior whilst also learning tasks that are not natural. Horses are animals of habit that respond well to regimentation, and respond best when the same routines and techniques are used consistently. One trainer believes that \"intelligent\" horses are reflections of intelligent trainers who effectively use response conditioning techniques and positive reinforcement to train in the style that best fits with an individual animal's natural inclinations.\nTemperament.\nHorses are mammals. As such, they are warm-blooded, or endothermic creatures, as opposed to cold-blooded, or poikilothermic animals. However, these words have developed a separate meaning in the context of equine terminology, used to describe temperament, not body temperature. For example, the \"hot-bloods\", such as many race horses, exhibit more sensitivity and energy, while the \"cold-bloods\", such as most draft breeds, are quieter and calmer. Sometimes \"hot-bloods\" are classified as \"light horses\" or \"riding horses\", with the \"cold-bloods\" classified as \"draft horses\" or \"work horses\".\n\"Hot blooded\" breeds include \"oriental horses\" such as the Akhal-Teke, Arabian horse, Barb, and now-extinct Turkoman horse, as well as the Thoroughbred, a breed developed in England from the older oriental breeds. Hot bloods tend to be spirited, bold, and learn quickly. They are bred for agility and speed. They tend to be physically refined\u2014thin-skinned, slim, and long-legged. The original oriental breeds were brought to Europe from the Middle East and North Africa when European breeders wished to infuse these traits into racing and light cavalry horses.\nMuscular, heavy draft horses are known as \"cold bloods\", as they are bred not only for strength, but also to have the calm, patient temperament needed to pull a plow or a heavy carriage full of people. They are sometimes nicknamed \"gentle giants\". Well-known draft breeds include the Belgian and the Clydesdale. Some, like the Percheron, are lighter and livelier, developed to pull carriages or to plow large fields in drier climates. Others, such as the Shire, are slower and more powerful, bred to plow fields with heavy, clay-based soils. The cold-blooded group also includes some pony breeds.\n\"Warmblood\" breeds, such as the Trakehner or Hanoverian, developed when European carriage and war horses were crossed with Arabians or Thoroughbreds, producing a riding horse with more refinement than a draft horse, but greater size and milder temperament than a lighter breed. Certain pony breeds with warmblood characteristics have been developed for smaller riders. Warmbloods are considered a \"light horse\" or \"riding horse\".\nToday, the term \"Warmblood\" refers to a specific subset of sport horse breeds that are used for competition in dressage and show jumping. Strictly speaking, the term \"warm blood\" refers to any cross between cold-blooded and hot-blooded breeds. Examples include breeds such as the Irish Draught or the Cleveland Bay. The term was once used to refer to breeds of light riding horse other than Thoroughbreds or Arabians, such as the Morgan horse.\nSleep patterns.\nHorses are able to sleep both standing up and lying down. In an adaptation from life in the wild, horses are able to enter light sleep by using a \"stay apparatus\" in their legs, allowing them to doze without collapsing. Horses sleep better when in groups because some animals will sleep while others stand guard to watch for predators. A horse kept alone will not sleep well because its instinct is to keep a constant eye out for danger.\nUnlike humans, horses do not sleep in a solid, unbroken period of time, but take many short periods of rest. Horses spend four to fifteen hours a day in standing rest, and from a few minutes to several hours lying down. Total sleep time in a 24-hour period may range from several minutes to a couple of hours, mostly in short intervals of about 15\u00a0minutes each. The average sleep time of a domestic horse is said to be 2.9 hours per day.\nHorses must lie down to reach REM sleep. They only have to lie down for an hour or two every few days to meet their minimum REM sleep requirements. However, if a horse is never allowed to lie down, after several days it will become sleep-deprived, and in rare cases may suddenly collapse because it slips, involuntarily, into REM sleep while still standing. This condition differs from narcolepsy, although horses may also suffer from that disorder.\nTaxonomy and evolution.\nThe horse adapted to survive in areas of wide-open terrain with sparse vegetation, surviving in an ecosystem where other large grazing animals, especially ruminants, could not. Horses and other equids are odd-toed ungulates of the order Perissodactyla, a group of mammals dominant during the Tertiary. In the past, this order contained 14\u00a0families, but only three\u2014Equidae (the horse and related species), Tapiridae (the tapir), and Rhinocerotidae (the rhinoceroses)\u2014have survived to the present day.\nThe earliest known member of the family Equidae was the \"Hyracotherium\", which lived between 45 and 55\u00a0million years ago, during the Eocene period. It had 4\u00a0toes on each front foot, and 3\u00a0toes on each back foot. The extra toe on the front feet soon disappeared with the \"Mesohippus\", which lived 32 to 37\u00a0million years ago. Over time, the extra side toes shrank in size until they vanished. All that remains of them in modern horses is a set of small vestigial bones on the leg below the knee, known informally as splint bones. \nTheir legs lengthened as their toes disappeared until they were a hooved animal capable of running at great speed. By about 5\u00a0million years ago, the modern \"Equus\" had evolved, and it spread to the Old World from North America during the Pleistocene. Equid teeth also evolved from browsing on soft, tropical plants to adapt to browsing of drier plant material, then to grazing of tougher plains grasses. Thus, proto-horses changed from leaf-eating forest-dwellers to grass-eating inhabitants of semi-arid regions worldwide, including the steppes of Eurasia and the Great Plains of North America.\nBy about 15,000 years ago, \"Equus ferus\" was a widespread holarctic species. Horse bones from this time period, the late Pleistocene, are found in Europe, Eurasia, Beringia, and North America. Yet between 10,000 and 7,600 years ago, the horse became extinct in North America. The reasons for this extinction are not fully known, but one theory notes that extinction in North America paralleled human arrival. Another theory points to climate change, noting that approximately 12,500 years ago, the grasses characteristic of a steppe ecosystem gave way to shrub tundra, which was covered with unpalatable plants.\nWild species surviving into modern times.\nA truly wild horse is a species or subspecies with no ancestors that were ever successfully domesticated. Therefore, most \"wild\" horses today are actually feral horses, animals that escaped or were turned loose from domestic herds and the descendants of those animals. Only two wild subspecies, the tarpan and the Przewalski's horse, survived into recorded history and only the latter survives today.\nThe Przewalski's horse (\"Equus ferus przewalskii\"), named after the Russian explorer Nikolai Przhevalsky, is a rare Asian animal. It is also known as the Mongolian wild horse; Mongolian people know it as the \"taki\", and the Kyrgyz people call it a \"kirtag\". The subspecies was presumed extinct in the wild between 1969 and 1992, while a small breeding population survived in zoos around the world. In 1992, it was reestablished in the wild by the conservation efforts of numerous zoos. Today, a small wild breeding population exists in Mongolia. There are additional animals still maintained at zoos throughout the world.\nTheir status as a truly wild horse was called into question when domestic horses of the 5,000-year-old Botai culture of Central Asia were found to be more closely related to Przewalski's horses than to \"E. f. caballus\". The study raised the possibility that modern Przewalski's horses could be the feral descendants of the domestic Botai horses. The study concluded that the Botai animals appear to have been an independent domestication attempt that was unsuccessful in terms of genetic markers being carried through to modern domesticated equines. However, the question of whether all Przewalski's horses descend from this population is also unresolved, as only one of seven modern Przewalski's horses in the study shared this ancestry. It may also be that both the Botai horses and the modern Przewalski's horses descend separately from the same ancient wild Przewalski's horse population.\nThe tarpan or European wild horse (\"Equus ferus ferus\") was found in Europe and much of Asia. It survived into the historical era, but became extinct in 1909, when the last captive died in a Russian zoo. Thus, the genetic line was lost. Attempts have been made to recreate the tarpan, which resulted in horses with outward physical similarities, but nonetheless descended from domesticated ancestors and not true wild horses.\nPeriodically, populations of horses in isolated areas are speculated to be relict populations of wild horses, but generally have been proven to be feral or domestic. For example, the Riwoche horse of Tibet was proposed as such, but testing did not reveal genetic differences from domesticated horses. Similarly, the Sorraia of Portugal was proposed as a direct descendant of the Tarpan on the basis of shared characteristics, but genetic studies have shown that the Sorraia is more closely related to other horse breeds, and that the outward similarity is an unreliable measure of relatedness.\nOther modern equids.\nBesides the horse, there are six other species of genus \"Equus\" in the Equidae family. These are the ass or donkey, \"Equus asinus\"; the mountain zebra, \"Equus zebra\"; plains zebra, \"Equus quagga\"; Gr\u00e9vy's zebra, \"Equus grevyi\"; the kiang, \"Equus kiang\"; and the onager, \"Equus hemionus\".\nHorses can crossbreed with other members of their genus. The most common hybrid is the mule, a cross between a \"jack\" (male donkey) and a mare. A related hybrid, a hinny, is a cross between a stallion and a \"jenny\" (female donkey). Other hybrids include the zorse, a cross between a zebra and a horse. With rare exceptions, most hybrids are sterile and cannot reproduce.\nDomestication and history.\nDomestication of the horse most likely took place in central Asia prior to 3500 BCE. Two major sources of information are used to determine where and when the horse was first domesticated and how the domesticated horse spread around the world. The first source is based on palaeological and archaeological discoveries; the second source is a comparison of DNA obtained from modern horses to that from bones and teeth of ancient horse remains.\nThe earliest archaeological evidence for attempted domestication of the horse comes from sites in the Western Eurasian Steppes, particularly the lower Volga-Don region, dating to approximately 4000\u20133500 BCE. However the horses domesticated at the Botai culture in Kazakhstan were Przewalski's horses and not the ancestors of modern horses.\nBy 3000 BCE, the horse was completely domesticated, and by 2000 BCE, there was a sharp increase in the number of horse bones found in human settlements in northwestern Europe, indicating the spread of domesticated horses throughout the continent. The most recent, but most irrefutable evidence of domestication comes from sites where horse remains were interred with chariots in graves of the Indo-European Sintashta and Petrovka cultures c. 2100 BCE.\nThe genetic makeup of modern domesticated horses all carry the DOM2 gene, which first emerged in West Eurasia towards the end of the 3rd millennium BCE. However, the DOM2 had limited genetic influence of wild type genes during this period. The rapid spread of DOM2 occurred around 2200 BCE, coinciding with the Sintashta culture and development of spoke-wheeled chariots. This demonstrates that certain adaptations were strongly selected due to riding, and that equestrian material culture that spread with the horse itself.\nDomestication is also studied by using the genetic material of present-day horses and comparing it with the genetic material present in the bones and teeth of horse remains found in archaeological and palaeological excavations. The variation in the genetic material shows that very few wild stallions contributed to the domestic horse, while many mares were part of early domesticated herds. This is reflected in the difference in genetic variation between the DNA that is passed on along the paternal, or sire line (Y-chromosome) versus that passed on along the maternal, or dam line (mitochondrial DNA). There are very low levels of Y-chromosome variability, but a great deal of genetic variation in mitochondrial DNA. There is also regional variation in mitochondrial DNA due to the inclusion of wild mares in domestic herds. Another characteristic of domestication is an increase in coat color variation. In horses, this increased dramatically between 5000 and 3000 BCE.\nBefore the availability of DNA techniques to resolve the questions related to the domestication of the horse, various hypotheses were proposed. One classification was based on body types and conformation, suggesting the presence of four basic prototypes that had adapted to their environment prior to domestication. Another hypothesis held that the four prototypes originated from a single wild species and that all different body types were entirely a result of selective breeding after domestication. However, the lack of a detectable substructure in the horse has resulted in a rejection of both hypotheses.\nFeral populations.\nFeral horses are born and live in the wild, but are descended from domesticated animals. Many populations of feral horses exist throughout the world. Studies of feral herds have provided useful insights into the behavior of prehistoric horses, as well as greater understanding of the instincts and behaviors that drive horses that live in domesticated conditions.\nThere are also semi-feral horses in many parts of the world, such as Dartmoor and the New Forest in the UK, where the animals are all privately owned but live for significant amounts of time in \"wild\" conditions on undeveloped, often public, lands. Owners of such animals often pay a fee for grazing rights.\nBreeds.\nThe concept of purebred bloodstock and a controlled, written breed registry has come to be particularly significant and important in modern times. Sometimes purebred horses are incorrectly or inaccurately called \"thoroughbreds\". Thoroughbred is a specific breed of horse, while a \"purebred\" is a horse (or any other animal) with a defined pedigree recognized by a breed registry. Horse breeds are groups of horses with distinctive characteristics that are transmitted consistently to their offspring, such as conformation, color, performance ability, or disposition.\nThese inherited traits result from a combination of natural crosses and artificial selection methods. Horses have been selectively bred since their domestication. An early example of people who practiced selective horse breeding was the Bedouin, who had a reputation for careful practices, keeping extensive pedigrees of their Arabian horses and placing great value upon pure bloodlines. These pedigrees were originally transmitted via an oral tradition.\nBreeds developed due to a need for \"form to function\", the necessity to develop certain characteristics in order to perform a particular type of work. Thus, a powerful but refined breed such as the Andalusian developed as riding horses with an aptitude for dressage. Heavy draft horses were developed out of a need to perform demanding farm work and pull heavy wagons. Other horse breeds had been developed specifically for light agricultural work, carriage and road work, various sport disciplines, or simply as pets. \nSome breeds developed through centuries of crossing other breeds, while others descended from a single foundation sire, or other limited or restricted foundation bloodstock. One of the earliest formal registries was General Stud Book for Thoroughbreds, which began in 1791 and traced back to the foundation bloodstock for the breed. There are more than 300\u00a0horse breeds in the world today.\nInteraction with humans.\nWorldwide, horses play a role within human cultures and have done so for millennia. Horses are used for leisure activities, sports, and working purposes. The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) estimates that in 2008, there were almost 59,000,000 horses in the world, with around 33,500,000 in the Americas, 13,800,000 in Asia, and 6,300,000 in Europe and smaller portions in Africa and Oceania. There are estimated to be 9,500,000 horses in the United States alone. \nThe American Horse Council estimates that horse-related activities have a direct impact on the economy of the United States of over $39 billion, and when indirect spending is considered, the impact is over $102 billion. In a 2004 \"poll\" conducted by Animal Planet, more than 50,000 viewers from 73 countries voted for the horse as the world's 4th favorite animal.\nCommunication between human and horse is paramount in any equestrian activity; to aid this process, horses are usually ridden with a saddle on their backs to assist the rider with balance and positioning, and a bridle or related headgear to assist the rider in maintaining control. Sometimes horses are ridden without a saddle, and occasionally, horses are trained to perform without a bridle or other headgear. Many horses are also driven, which requires a harness, bridle, and some type of vehicle.\nSport.\nHistorically, equestrians honed their skills through games and races. Equestrian sports provided entertainment for crowds and honed the excellent horsemanship that was needed in battle. Many sports, such as dressage, eventing, and show jumping, have origins in military training, which were focused on control and balance of both horse and rider. Other sports, such as rodeo, developed from practical skills such as those needed on working ranches and stations. Sport hunting from horseback evolved from earlier practical hunting techniques. \nHorse racing of all types evolved from impromptu competitions between riders or drivers. All forms of competition, requiring demanding and specialized skills from both horse and rider, resulted in the systematic development of specialized breeds and equipment for each sport. The popularity of equestrian sports through the centuries has resulted in the preservation of skills that would otherwise have disappeared after horses stopped being used in combat.\nHorses are trained to be ridden or driven in a variety of sporting competitions. Examples include show jumping, dressage, three-day eventing, competitive driving, endurance riding, gymkhana, rodeos, and fox hunting. Horse shows, which have their origins in medieval European fairs, are held around the world. They host a huge range of classes, covering all of the mounted and harness disciplines, as well as \"In-hand\" classes where the horses are led, rather than ridden, to be evaluated on their conformation. The method of judging varies with the discipline, but winning usually depends on style and ability of both horse and rider.\nSports such as polo do not judge the horse itself, but rather use the horse as a partner for human competitors as a necessary part of the game. Although the horse requires specialized training to participate, the details of its performance are not judged, only the result of the rider's actions\u2014be it getting a ball through a goal or some other task. Examples of these sports of partnership between human and horse include jousting, in which the main goal is for one rider to unseat the other, and buzkashi, a team game played throughout Central Asia, the aim being to capture a goat carcass while on horseback.\nHorse racing is an equestrian sport and major international industry, watched in almost every nation of the world. There are three types: \"flat\" racing; steeplechasing, i.e. racing over jumps; and harness racing, where horses trot or pace while pulling a driver in a small, light cart known as a sulky. A major part of horse racing's economic importance lies in the gambling associated with it.\nWork.\nThere are certain jobs that horses do very well, and no technology has yet developed to fully replace them. For example, mounted police horses are still effective for certain types of patrol duties and crowd control. Cattle ranches still require riders on horseback to round up cattle that are scattered across remote, rugged terrain. Search and rescue organizations in some countries depend upon mounted teams to locate people, particularly hikers and children, and to provide disaster relief assistance. \nHorses can also be used in areas where it is necessary to avoid vehicular disruption to delicate soil, such as nature reserves. They may also be the only form of transport allowed in wilderness areas. Horses are quieter than motorized vehicles. Law enforcement officers such as park rangers or game wardens may use horses for patrols, and horses or mules may also be used for clearing trails or other work in areas of rough terrain where vehicles are less effective.\nAlthough machinery has replaced horses in many parts of the world, an estimated 100\u00a0million horses, donkeys and mules are still used for agriculture and transportation in less developed areas. This number includes around 27\u00a0million working animals in Africa alone. Some land management practices, such as cultivating and logging, can be efficiently performed with horses. In agriculture, less fossil fuel is used, and increased environmental conservation occurs over time with the use of draft animals such as horses. Logging with horses can result in reduced damage to soil structure and less damage to trees due to more selective logging.\nWarfare.\nHorses have been used in warfare for most of recorded history. The first archaeological evidence of horses used in warfare dates to between 4000 and 3000 BCE, and the use of horses in warfare was widespread by the end of the Bronze Age. Although mechanization has largely replaced the horse as a weapon of war, horses are still seen today in limited military uses, mostly for ceremonial purposes, or for reconnaissance and transport activities in areas of rough terrain where motorized vehicles are ineffective. Horses have been used in the 21st century by the Janjaweed militias in the War in Darfur.\nEntertainment and culture.\nModern horses are often used to reenact many of their historical work purposes. Horses are used, complete with equipment that is authentic or a meticulously recreated replica, in various live action historical reenactments of specific periods of history, especially recreations of famous battles. Horses are also used to preserve cultural traditions and for ceremonial purposes. Countries such as the United Kingdom still use horse-drawn carriages to convey royalty and other VIPs to and from certain culturally significant events. Public exhibitions are another example, such as the Budweiser Clydesdales, seen in parades and other public settings, a team of draft horses that pull a beer wagon similar to that used before the invention of the modern motorized truck.\nHorses are frequently used in television, films and literature. They are sometimes featured as a major character in films about particular animals, but also used as visual elements that assure the accuracy of historical stories. Both live horses and iconic images of horses are used in advertising to promote a variety of products. The horse frequently appears in coats of arms in heraldry, in a variety of poses and equipment. The mythologies of many cultures, including Greco-Roman, Hindu, Islamic, and Germanic, include references to both normal horses and those with wings or additional limbs, and multiple myths also call upon the horse to draw the chariots of the Moon and Sun. The horse also appears in the 12-year cycle of animals in the Chinese zodiac related to the Chinese calendar.\nHorses serve as the inspiration for many modern automobile names and logos, including the Ford Pinto, Ford Bronco, Ford Mustang, Hyundai Equus, Hyundai Pony, Mitsubishi Starion, Subaru Brumby, Mitsubishi Colt/Dodge Colt, Pinzgauer, Steyr-Puch Haflinger, Pegaso, Porsche, Rolls-Royce Camargue, Ferrari, Carlsson, Kamaz, Corre La Licorne, Iran Khodro, Eicher, and Baojun. Indian TVS Motor Company also uses a horse on their motorcycles &amp; scooters.\nTherapeutic use.\nPeople of all ages with physical and mental disabilities obtain beneficial results from an association with horses. Therapeutic riding is used to mentally and physically stimulate disabled persons and help them improve their lives through improved balance and coordination, increased self-confidence, and a greater feeling of freedom and independence. The benefits of equestrian activity for people with disabilities has also been recognized with the addition of equestrian events to the Paralympic Games and recognition of para-equestrian events by the International Federation for Equestrian Sports (FEI). Hippotherapy and therapeutic horseback riding are names for different physical, occupational, and speech therapy treatment strategies that use equine movement. In hippotherapy, a therapist uses the horse's movement to improve their patient's cognitive, coordination, balance, and fine motor skills, whereas therapeutic horseback riding uses specific riding skills.\nHorses also provide psychological benefits to people whether they actually ride or not. \"Equine-assisted\" or \"equine-facilitated\" therapy is a form of experiential psychotherapy that uses horses as companion animals to assist people with mental illness, including anxiety disorders, psychotic disorders, mood disorders, behavioral difficulties, and those who are going through major life changes. There are also experimental programs using horses in prison settings. Exposure to horses appears to improve the behavior of inmates and help reduce recidivism when they leave.\nProducts.\nHorses are raw material for many products made by humans throughout history, including byproducts from the slaughter of horses as well as materials collected from living horses.\nProducts collected from living horses include mare's milk, used by people with large horse herds, such as the Mongols, who let it ferment to produce kumis. Horse blood was once used as food by the Mongols and other nomadic tribes, who found it a convenient source of nutrition when traveling. Drinking their own horses' blood allowed the Mongols to ride for extended periods of time without stopping to eat. The drug Premarin is a mixture of estrogens extracted from the urine of pregnant mares (pregnant mares' urine), and was previously a widely used drug for hormone replacement therapy. The tail hair of horses can be used for making bows for string instruments such as the violin, viola, cello, and double bass.\nHorse meat has been used as food for humans and carnivorous animals throughout the ages. Approximately 5 million horses are slaughtered each year for meat worldwide. It is eaten in many parts of the world, though consumption is taboo in some cultures, and a subject of political controversy in others. Horsehide leather has been used for boots, gloves, jackets, baseballs, and baseball gloves. Horse hooves can also be used to produce animal glue. Horse bones can be used to make implements. Specifically, in Italian cuisine, the horse tibia is sharpened into a probe called a \"spinto\", which is used to test the readiness of a (pig) ham as it cures. In Asia, the \"saba\" is a horsehide vessel used in the production of kumis.\nCare.\nHorses are grazing animals, and their major source of nutrients is good-quality forage from hay or pasture. They can consume approximately 2% to 2.5% of their body weight in dry feed each day. Therefore, a adult horse could eat up to of food. Sometimes, concentrated feed such as grain is fed in addition to pasture or hay, especially when the animal is very active. When grain is fed, equine nutritionists recommend that 50% or more of the animal's diet by weight should still be forage.\nHorses require a plentiful supply of clean water, a minimum of per day. Although horses are adapted to live outside, they require shelter from the wind and precipitation, which can range from a simple shed or shelter to an elaborate stable.\nHorses require routine hoof care from a farrier, as well as vaccinations to protect against various diseases, and dental examinations from a veterinarian or a specialized equine dentist. If horses are kept inside in a barn, they require regular daily exercise for their physical health and mental well-being. When turned outside, they require well-maintained, sturdy fences to be safely contained. Regular grooming is also helpful to help the horse maintain good health of the hair coat and underlying skin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13646", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13646", "title": "Hobbes", "text": ""}
{"id": "13647", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13647", "title": "Hermann Ebbinghaus", "text": "German psychologist (1850\u20131909)\nHermann Ebbinghaus (24 January 1850 \u2013 26 February 1909) was a German psychologist who pioneered the experimental study of memory. Ebbinghaus discovered the forgetting curve and the spacing effect. He was the first person to describe the learning curve. He was the father of the neo-Kantian philosopher Julius Ebbinghaus.\nEarly life.\nEbbinghaus was born in Barmen, in the Rhine Province of the Kingdom of Prussia, as the son of a wealthy merchant, Carl Ebbinghaus. Little is known about his infancy except that he was brought up in the Lutheran faith and was a pupil at the town Gymnasium. At the age of 17 (1867), he began attending the University of Bonn, where he had planned to study history and philology. However, during his time there he developed an interest in philosophy. In 1870, his studies were interrupted when he served with the Prussian Army in the Franco-Prussian War. Following this short stint in the military, Ebbinghaus finished his dissertation on Eduard von Hartmann's \"\" (philosophy of the unconscious) and received his doctorate on 16 August 1873, when he was 23 years old. During the next three years, he spent time at Halle and Berlin.\nProfessional career.\nAfter acquiring his PhD, Ebbinghaus moved around England and France, tutoring students to support himself. In England, he may have taught in two small schools in the south of the country (Gorfein, 1885). In London, in a used bookstore, he came across Gustav Fechner's book \"Elemente der Psychophysik\" (\"Elements of Psychophysics\"), which spurred him to conduct memory experiments. After beginning his studies at the University of Berlin, he founded the third psychological testing lab in Germany (third to Wilhelm Wundt and Georg Elias M\u00fcller). He began his memory studies here in 1879. In 1885 \u2014 the same year that he published his monumental work, \"\u00dcber das Ged\u00e4chtnis. Untersuchungen zur experimentellen Psychologie\", later published in English under the title \"Memory: A Contribution to Experimental Psychology\" \u2014 he was made a professor at the University of Berlin, most likely in recognition of this publication. In 1890, along with Arthur K\u00f6nig, he founded the psychological journal \"Zeitschrift f\u00fcr Physiologie und Psychologie der Sinnesorgane\" (\"The Psychology and Physiology of the Sense Organs'\").\nIn 1894, he was passed over for promotion to head of the philosophy department at Berlin, most likely due to his lack of publications. Instead, Carl Stumpf received the promotion. As a result of this, Ebbinghaus left to join the University of Breslau (now Wroc\u0142aw, Poland), in a chair left open by Theodor Lipps (who took over Stumpf's position when he moved to Berlin). While in Breslau, he worked on a commission that studied how children's mental ability declined during the school day. While the specifics on how these mental abilities were measured have been lost, the successes achieved by the commission laid the groundwork for future intelligence testing. At Breslau, he again founded a psychological testing laboratory.\nIn 1902, Ebbinghaus published his next piece of writing entitled \"Die Grundz\u00fcge der Psychologie\" (\"Fundamentals of Psychology\"). It was an instant success and continued to be long after his death. In 1904, he moved to Halle where he spent the last few years of his life. His last published work, \"Abriss der Psychologie\" (\"Outline of Psychology\") was published six years later, in 1908. This, too, continued to be a success, being re-released in eight different editions. Shortly after this publication, on 26 February 1909, Ebbinghaus died from pneumonia at the age of 59.\nResearch on memory.\nEbbinghaus was determined to show that higher mental processes could actually be studied using experimentation, which was in opposition to the popularly held thought of the time. To control for most potentially confounding variables, Ebbinghaus wanted to use simple acoustic encoding and maintenance rehearsal for which a list of words could have been used. As learning would be affected by prior knowledge and understanding, he needed something that could be easily memorized but which had no prior cognitive associations. Easily formable associations with regular words would interfere with his results, so he used items that would later be called \"nonsense syllables\" (also known as the CVC trigram). A nonsense syllable is a consonant-vowel-consonant combination, where the consonant does not repeat and the syllable does not have prior meaning. BOL (sounds like \"Ball\") and DOT (already a word) would then not be allowed. However, syllables such as DAX, BOK, and YAT would all be acceptable (though Ebbinghaus left no examples). After eliminating the meaning-laden syllables, Ebbinghaus ended up with 2,300 resultant syllables. Once he had created his collection of syllables, he would pull out a number of random syllables from a box and then write them down in a notebook. Then, to the regular sound of a metronome, and with the same voice inflection, he would read out the syllables, and attempt to recall them at the end of the procedure. One investigation alone required 15,000 recitations.\nIt was later determined that humans impose meaning even on nonsense syllables to make them more meaningful. The nonsense syllable PED (which is the first three letters of the word \"pedal\") turns out to be less nonsensical than a syllable such as KOJ; the syllables are said to differ in association value. It appears that Ebbinghaus recognized this, and only referred to the strings of syllables as \"nonsense\" in that the syllables might be less likely to have a specific meaning and he should make no attempt to make associations with them for easier retrieval.\nLimitations.\nThere are several limitations to his work on memory. The most important one was that Ebbinghaus was the only subject in his study. This limited the study's generalizability to the population. Although he attempted to regulate his daily routine to maintain more control over his results, his decision to avoid the use of participants sacrificed the external validity of the study despite sound internal validity. In addition, although he tried to account for his personal influences, there is an inherent bias when someone serves as researcher as well as participant. Also, Ebbinghaus's memory research halted research in other, more complex matters of memory such as semantic and procedural memory and mnemonics.\nContributions.\nIn 1885, he published his groundbreaking \"\u00dcber das Ged\u00e4chtnis\" (\"On Memory\", later translated to English as \"Memory. A Contribution to Experimental Psychology\") in which he described experiments he conducted on himself to describe the processes of learning and forgetting.\nEbbinghaus made several findings that are still relevant and supported to this day. First, Ebbinghaus made a set of 2,300 three letter syllables to measure mental associations that helped him find that memory is orderly. Second, and arguably his most famous finding, was the forgetting curve. The forgetting curve describes the exponential loss of information that one has learned. The sharpest decline occurs in the first twenty minutes and the decay is significant through the first hour. The curve levels off after about one day.\nThe learning curve described by Ebbinghaus refers to how fast one learns information. The sharpest increase occurs after the first try and then gradually evens out, meaning that less and less new information is retained after each repetition. Like the forgetting curve, the learning curve is exponential. Ebbinghaus had also documented the serial position effect, which describes how the position of an item affects recall. The two main concepts in the serial position effect are recency and primacy. The recency effect describes the increased recall of the most recent information because it is still in the short-term memory. The primacy effect causes better memory of the first items in a list due to increased rehearsal and commitment to long-term memory.\nAnother important discovery is that of savings. This refers to the amount of information retained in the subconscious even after this information cannot be consciously accessed. Ebbinghaus would memorize a list of items until perfect recall and then would not access the list until he could no longer recall any of its items. He then would relearn the list, and compare the new learning curve to the learning curve of his previous memorization of the list. The second list was generally memorized faster, and this difference between the two learning curves is what Ebbinghaus called \"savings\". Ebbinghaus also described the difference between involuntary and voluntary memory, the former occurring \"with apparent spontaneity and without any act of the will\" and the latter being brought \"into consciousness by an exertion of the will\".\nPrior to Ebbinghaus, most contributions to the study of memory were undertaken by philosophers and centered on observational description and speculation. For example, Immanuel Kant simply described recognition and its components. On the other hand, Sir Francis Bacon claimed that the simple observation of the rote recollection of a previously learned list wasn't useful to understanding memory. This dichotomy between descriptive and experimental study of memory would resonate later in Ebbinghaus's life, particularly in his public argument with former colleague Wilhelm Dilthey. However, more than a century before Ebbinghaus, Johann Andreas Segner invented the \"Segner-wheel\" and would use both by seeing how fast a wheel with a hot coal attached had to move for the red ember circle from the coal to appear complete (see iconic memory). He proceeded to view the length of the after images. \nEbbinghaus's effect on memory research was almost immediate. With very few works published on memory in the previous two millennia, Ebbinghaus's works spurred memory research in the United States in the 1890s, with 32 papers published in 1894 alone. This research was coupled with the growing development of mechanized mnemometers (an outdated mechanical device used for presenting a series of stimuli to be memorized).\nThe reaction to his work in his day was mostly positive. Psychologist William James called the studies \"heroic\" and said that they were \"the single most brilliant investigation in the history of psychology\". Edward B. Titchener also mentioned that the studies were the greatest undertaking in the topic of memory since Aristotle.\nResearch on cramming.\nEbbinghaus is the first person to compare distributed learning to cramming and one of the first people to carry out research on cramming.\nSentence completion, illusion and research report standardization.\nEbbinghaus pioneered sentence completion exercises, which he developed in studying the abilities of schoolchildren. Alfred Binet borrowed and incorporated them into the Binet-Simon intelligence scale. Sentence completion was used extensively in memory research, especially in measuring implicit memory, and in psychotherapy to help find patients' motivations. He influenced Charlotte B\u00fchler, who studied language meaning and society.\nEbbinghaus discovered an optical illusion now known as the Ebbinghaus illusion, based on relative size perception. Despite the large amount of research done on this and similar illusions, little is known about why it occurs, but many speculate. During the illusion, two circles of identical size are placed near each other. One is surrounded by large circles while the other is surrounded by small circles, making the first appear smaller. Factors such as the different illustrations around the circles are called inducers and targets. Many theorists and scholars believe one of the main reasons for the illusions occurring are the geometrical features surrounding the spheres. This illusion is now used extensively in cognitive psychology research, to help map perception pathways in the human brain.\nEbbinghaus drafted the first standard research report. He arranged his paper on memory into four sections: the introduction, the methods, the results, and the discussion. The clear organization of this format so impressed his contemporaries that it became standard in the discipline.\nDiscourse on the nature of psychology.\nIn addition to pioneering experimental psychology, Ebbinghaus was also a strong defender of this direction of the new science, as is illustrated by his public dispute with University of Berlin colleague, Wilhelm Dilthey. Shortly after Ebbinghaus left Berlin in 1893, Dilthey published a paper extolling the virtues of descriptive psychology, and condemning experimental psychology as boring, claiming that the mind was too complex, and that introspection was the desired method of studying the mind. The debate at the time had been primarily whether psychology should aim to explain or understand the mind and whether it belonged to the natural or human sciences. Many had seen Dilthey's work as an outright attack on experimental psychology, Ebbinghaus included, and he responded to Dilthey with a personal letter and also a long scathing public article. Amongst his counterarguments against Dilthey he mentioned that it is inevitable for psychology to do hypothetical work and that the kind of psychology that Dilthey was attacking was the one that existed before Ebbinghaus's \"experimental revolution\". Charlotte B\u00fchler echoed his words some forty years later, stating that people like Ebbinghaus \"buried the old psychology in the 1890s\". Ebbinghaus explained his scathing review by saying that he could not believe that Dilthey was advocating the status quo of structuralists like Wilhelm Wundt and Titchener and attempting to stifle psychology's progress.\nInfluences.\nThere has been some speculation as to what influenced Ebbinghaus in his undertakings. None of his professors seem to have influenced him, nor are there suggestions that his colleagues affected him. Von Hartmann's work, on which Ebbinghaus based his doctorate, did suggest that higher mental processes were hidden from view, which may have spurred Ebbinghaus to attempt to prove otherwise. The one influence that has always been cited as having inspired Ebbinghaus was Gustav Fechner's two-volume \"Elemente der Psychophysik.\" (\"Elements of Psychophysics\", 1860), a book which he purchased second-hand in England. It is said that the meticulous mathematical procedures impressed Ebbinghaus so much that he wanted to do for psychology what Fechner had done for psychophysics. This inspiration is also evident in that Ebbinghaus dedicated his second work \"Principles of Psychology\" to Fechner, signing it \"I owe everything to you.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13648", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13648", "title": "Hilbert (disambiguation)", "text": "David Hilbert (1862\u20131943) was a German mathematician.\nHilbert may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "13652", "revid": "46176178", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13652", "title": "Hindi", "text": "Indo-Aryan language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nModern Standard Hindi (, Hunterian: ), commonly referred to as Hindi, is an Indo-Aryan language written in the Devanagari script. It is an official language of the Government of India, and is the \"lingua franca\" of most of the country. It is also an official language in the Pacific nation of Fiji.\nHindi is an official language in ten states (Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand), and six union territories (Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Delhi, Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu, Ladakh and Jammu and Kashmir) and an additional official language in the state of West Bengal. Hindi is also one of the 22 scheduled languages of the Republic of India.\nApart from the script and formal vocabulary, Modern Standard Hindi is mutually intelligible with standard Urdu. The common base of the two languages is sometimes referred to as the Hindi\u2013Urdu or Hindustani language, and Hindi is considered a Sanskritised register of the Hindustani language. Hindi is also spoken, to a lesser extent, in other parts of India (usually in a simplified or pidginised variety such as Bazaar Hindustani or Haflong Hindi). Outside India, several other languages are recognised officially as \"Hindi\" but do not refer to the Standard Hindi language described here and instead descend from other nearby languages, such as Awadhi and Bhojpuri. Examples of this are the Bhojpuri-Hindustani spoken in South Africa, Mauritius, Fiji Hindi, spoken in Fiji, and Caribbean Hindustani, which is spoken in Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, and Guyana.\nHindi is the fourth most-spoken first language in the world, after Mandarin, Spanish, and English. When counted together with the mutually intelligible Urdu, it is the third most-spoken language in the world, after Mandarin and English. According to reports of \"Ethnologue\" (2025), Hindi is the third most-spoken language in the world when including first and second language speakers.\nHindi is the fastest-growing language of India, followed by Kashmiri, Meitei, Gujarati and Bengali, according to the 2011 census of India.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"Hind\u012b\" was originally used to refer to inhabitants of the Indo-Gangetic Plain. It was borrowed from Classical Persian \"Hind\u012b\" (Iranian Persian pronunciation: \"Hendi\"), meaning 'of or belonging to \"Hind\" (India)' (hence, 'Indian').\nAnother name \"Hindav\u012b\" (\u06c1\u0646\u062f\u0648\u06cc/) (from fa \" \u0647\u0646\u062f\u0648\u06cc\"\u00a0'of or belonging to the Indian people') was often used in the past, for example, by Amir Khusrau in his poetry.\nThe terms \"Hindi\" and \"Hindu\" trace back to Old Persian, which derived these names from the Sanskrit name \"Sindhu\" (), referring to the Indus River. The Greek cognates of the same terms are \"Indus\" (for the river) and \"India\" (for the land of the river).\nThe term \"Modern Standard Hindi\" is commonly used to specifically refer to the modern literary Hindi language, as opposed to colloquial and regional varieties that are also referred to as \"Hindi\" in a wider sense.\nHistory.\nMiddle Indo-Aryan to Hindi.\nLike other Indo-Aryan languages, Hindi is a direct descendant of an early form of Vedic Sanskrit (not to be confused with the later variety of Classical Sanskrit). This early variety transitioned in medieval India into Shauraseni Prakrit and \u015aauraseni Apabhra\u1e43\u015ba (from Sanskrit \"apabhra\u1e43\u015ba\" \"corrupt\"), which emerged in the 7th century CE.\nThe sound changes that characterised the transition from Middle Indo-Aryan to Hindi are:\nHindustani.\nDuring the period of Delhi Sultanate in medieval India, which covered most of today's north India, eastern Pakistan, southern Nepal and Bangladesh and which resulted in the contact of Hindu and Muslim cultures, the Sanskrit and Prakrit base of Old Hindi became enriched with loanwords from Persian, evolving into the present form of Hindustani. Hindi achieved prominence in India after it became the official language of the imperial court during the reign of Shah Jahan. It is recorded that Emperor Aurangzeb spoke in Hindvi. The Hindustani vernacular became an expression of Indian national unity during the Indian Independence movement, and continues to be spoken as the common language of the people of the northern Indian subcontinent, which is reflected in the Hindustani vocabulary of Bollywood films and songs.\nStandard Hindi is based on the Khariboli dialect, spoken in the Ganges-Yamuna Doab (Delhi, Meerut, and Saharanpur); the vernacular of Delhi and the surrounding region gradually replaced earlier prestige languages such as Awadhi and Braj. Standard Hindi was developed by supplanting foreign loanwords from the Hindustani language and replacing them with Sanskrit words, though Standard Hindi does continue to possess several Persian loanwords. Modern Hindi became a literary language in the 19th century. Earliest examples could be found as \"Pr\u0113m S\u0101gar\" by Lallu Lal, \"Batiy\u0101l Pach\u012bs\u012b\" of Sadal Misra, and \"R\u0101n\u012b K\u0113tak\u012b K\u012b Kah\u0101n\u012b\" of Insha Allah Khan which were published in Devanagari script during the early 19th century.\nJohn Gilchrist was principally known for his study of the Hindustani language, which was adopted as the lingua franca of northern India (including what is now present-day Pakistan) by Britons and Indians alike. He compiled and authored \"An English-Hindustani Dictionary\", \"A Grammar of the Hindoostanee Language\", \"The Oriental Linguist\", and many more. His lexicon of Hindustani was published in the Perso-Arabic script, N\u0101gar\u012b script, and in Roman transliteration. In the late 19th century, a movement to further develop Hindi as a standardised form of Hindustani separate from Urdu took form. In 1881, Bihar accepted Hindi as its sole official language, replacing Urdu, and thus became the first state of India to adopt Hindi. However, in 2014, Urdu was accorded second official language status in the state.\nIndependent India.\nOn 14 September 1949, the Constituent Assembly of India adopted Hindi written in the Devanagari script as the official language of the Republic of India replacing the previous usage of Hindustani in the Perso-Arabic script in the British Indian Empire. To this end, several stalwarts rallied and lobbied pan-India in favour of Hindi, most notably along with Hazari Prasad Dwivedi, Kaka Kalelkar, Maithili Sharan Gupt and Seth Govind Das who even debated in Parliament on this issue. As such, on the 50th birthday of Beohar Rajendra Simha on 14 September 1949, the efforts came to fruition following the adoption of Hindi as the official language. Now, it is celebrated as Hindi Day.\nOfficial status.\nIndia.\nPart XVII of the Indian Constitution deals with the official language of the Indian Union. Under Article 343, the official languages of the Union have been prescribed, which includes Hindi in Devanagari script and English:\n(1) The official language of the Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari script. The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union shall be the international form of Indian numerals.\n(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), for a period of fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution, the English language shall continue to be used for all the official purposes of the Union for which it was being used immediately before such commencement: Provided that the President may, during the said period, by order authorise the use of the Hindi language in addition to the English language and of the Devanagari form of numerals in addition to the international form of Indian numerals for any of the official purposes of the Union.\nIt was envisioned that Hindi would become the sole working language of the Union Government by 1965 (per directives in Article 344 (2) and Article 351), with state governments being free to function in the language of their own choice. However, widespread resistance to the imposition of Hindi on non-native speakers, especially in South India (such as those in Tamil Nadu) led to the passage of the Official Languages Act of 1963, which provided for the continued use of English indefinitely for all official purposes, although the constitutional directive for the Union Government to encourage the spread of Hindi was retained and has strongly influenced its policies.\n stipulates that the official language commission shall be constituted every ten years to recommend steps for the progressive use of Hindi language and impose restrictions on the use of the English language by the union government. In practice, the official language commissions are constantly endeavouring to promote Hindi but not imposing restrictions on English in official use by the union government.\nAt the state level, Hindi is the official language of the following Indian states: Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand. Hindi is an official language of Gujarat, along with Gujarati. It acts as an additional official language of West Bengal in blocks and sub-divisions with more than 10% of the population speaking Hindi. Similarly, Hindi is accorded the status of official language in the following Union Territories: Delhi, Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu.\nAlthough there is no specification of a national language in the constitution, it is a widely held belief that Hindi is the national language of India. This is often a source of friction and contentious debate. In 2010, the Gujarat High Court clarified that Hindi is not the national language of India because the constitution does not mention it as such.\nFiji.\nHindi is an official language in Fiji as per the 1997, 2012 and 2013 constitution's of Fiji. Two dialects of Hindi are spoken in Fiji, Standard Hindi and Fiji Hindi. The latter dialect traces its origins to Awadhi, an eastern Hindi dialect. However, Standard Hindi is the official variant of Hindi recognized by the constitution and used in all official purposes, education, media and businesses due to Fiji Hindi's lack of standardisation. Hindi is spoken by 380,000 people in Fiji.\nNepal.\nHindi is spoken as a first language by about 77,569 people in Nepal according to the 2011 Nepal census, and further by 1,225,950 people as a second language. A Hindi proponent, Indian-born Paramananda Jha, was elected vice-president of Nepal. He took his oath of office in Hindi in July 2008. This created protests in the streets for 5 days; students burnt his effigies, and there was a general strike in 22 districts. Nepal Supreme Court ruled in 2009 that his oath in Hindi was invalid and he was kept \"inactive\" as vice-president. An \"angry\" Jha said, \"I cannot be compelled to take the oath now in Nepali. I might rather take it in English.\"\nSouth Africa.\nHindi is a protected language in South Africa. According to the Constitution of South Africa, the Pan South African Language Board must promote and ensure respect for Hindi along with other languages. According to a doctoral dissertation by Rajend Mesthrie in 1985, although Hindi and other Indian languages have existed in South Africa for the last 125 years, there are no academic studies of any of them \u2013 of their use in South Africa, their evolution and current decline.\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nHindi is adopted as the third official court language in the Emirate of Abu Dhabi. As a result of this status, the Indian workforce in UAE can file their complaints to the labour courts in the country in their own mother-tongue.\nGeographical distribution.\nHindi is the lingua franca of northern India (which contains the Hindi Belt), as well as an official language of the Government of India, along with English.\nIn Northeast India a pidgin known as Haflong Hindi has developed as a \"lingua franca\" for the people living in Haflong, Assam who speak other languages natively. In Arunachal Pradesh, Hindi emerged as a lingua franca among locals who speak over 50 dialects natively.\nHindi is quite easy to understand for many Pakistanis, who speak Urdu, which, like Hindi, is a standard register of the Hindustani language; additionally, Indian media are widely viewed in Pakistan.\nA sizeable population in Afghanistan, especially in Kabul, can also speak and understand Hindi-Urdu due to the popularity and influence of Bollywood films, songs and actors in the region.\nHindi is also spoken by a large population of Madheshis (people having roots in north-India but having migrated to Nepal over hundreds of years) of Nepal. Apart from this, Hindi is spoken by the large Indian diaspora which hails from, or has its origin from the \"Hindi Belt\" of India. A substantially large North Indian diaspora lives in countries like the United States of America, the United Kingdom, the United Arab Emirates, Trinidad and Tobago, Guyana, Suriname, South Africa, Fiji and Mauritius, where it is natively spoken at home and among their own Hindustani-speaking communities.\nOutside India, Hindi speakers are 8\u00a0million in Nepal; 863,077 in the United States of America; 450,170 in Mauritius; 380,000 in Fiji; 250,292 in South Africa; 150,000 in Suriname; 100,000 in Uganda; 45,800 in the United Kingdom; 20,000 in New Zealand; 20,000 in Germany; 26,000 in Trinidad and Tobago; 3,000 in Singapore.\nComparison with Standard Urdu.\nLinguistically, Hindi and Urdu are two registers of the same language and are mutually intelligible. Both Hindi and Urdu share a core vocabulary of native Prakrit and Sanskrit-derived words. However, Hindi is written in the Devanagari script and contains more direct \"tatsama\" Sanskrit-derived words than Urdu, whereas Urdu is written in the Perso-Arabic script and uses more Arabic and Persian loanwords compared to Hindi. Because of this, as well as the fact that the two registers share an identical grammar, a consensus of linguists consider them to be two standardised forms of the same language, Hindustani or Hindi-Urdu. Hindi is the most commonly used scheduled language in India and is one of the two official languages of the union, the other being English. Urdu is the national language and \"lingua franca\" of Pakistan and is one of 22 scheduled languages of India, also having official status in Uttar Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Delhi, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and Bihar.\nScript.\nHindi is written in the Devanagari script, an abugida. Devanagari consists of 11 vowels and 33 consonants and is written from left to right. Unlike Sanskrit, Devanagari is not entirely phonetic for Hindi, especially failing to mark schwa deletion in spoken Standard Hindi.\nRomanisation.\nThe Government of India uses Hunterian transliteration as its official system of writing Hindi in the Latin script. Various other systems also exist, such as IAST, ITRANS and ISO 15919.\nRomanised Hindi, also called Hinglish, is the dominant form of Hindi online. In an analysis of YouTube comments, Palakodety et al., identified that 52% of comments were in Romanised Hindi, 46% in English, and 1% in Devanagari Hindi.\nVocabulary.\nTraditionally, Hindi words are divided into five principal categories according to their etymology:\nPrakrit.\nHindi has naturally inherited a large portion of its vocabulary from Shauraseni Prakrit, in the form of \"tadbhava\" words. This process usually involves compensatory lengthening of vowels preceding consonant clusters in Prakrit, e.g. Sanskrit \"t\u012bk\u1e63\u1e47a\" &gt; Prakrit \"tikkha\" &gt; Hindi \"t\u012bkh\u0101\".\nSanskrit.\nMuch of Standard Hindi's vocabulary is borrowed from Sanskrit as \"tatsam\" borrowings, especially in technical and academic fields. The formal Hindi standard, from which much of the Persian, Arabic and English vocabulary has been replaced by neologisms compounding \"tatsam\" words, is called \"\u015auddh Hindi\" (pure Hindi), and is viewed as a more prestigious dialect over other more colloquial forms of Hindi.\nExcessive use of \"tatsam\" words sometimes creates problems for native speakers. They may have Sanskrit consonant clusters which do not exist in Hindustani, causing difficulties in pronunciation.\nAs a part of the process of Sanskritisation, new words are coined using Sanskrit components to be used as replacements for supposedly foreign vocabulary. Usually these neologisms are calques of English words already adopted into spoken Hindi. Some terms such as \"d\u016brbh\u0101\u1e63\" \"telephone\", literally \"far-speech\" and \"d\u016brdar\u015ban\" \"television\", literally \"far-sight\" have even gained some currency in formal Hindi in the place of the English borrowings \"(\u1e6deli)fon\" and \"\u1e6d\u012bv\u012b\".\nPersian.\nHindi also features significant Persian influence, standardised from spoken Hindustani. Early borrowings, beginning in the mid-12th century, were specific to Islam (e.g. \"Muhammad\", \"Isl\u0101m\") and so Persian was simply an intermediary for Arabic. Later, under the Delhi Sultanate and Mughal Empire, Persian became the primary administrative language in the Hindi heartland. Persian borrowings reached a heyday in the 17th century, pervading all aspects of life. Even grammatical constructs, namely the izafat, were assimilated into Hindi.\nThe status of Persian language then and thus its influence, is also visible in Hindi proverbs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse transliteration-translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe emergence of Modern Standard Hindi in the 19th century went along with the Sanskritisation of its vocabulary, leading to a marginalisation of Persian vocabulary in Hindi, which continued after Partition when the Indian government co-opted the policy of Sanskritisation. However, many Persian words (e.g. \"bas\" \"enough\", \"khud\" \"self\") have remained entrenched in Standard Hindi, and a larger amount are still used in Urdu poetry written in the Devanagari script. Many words borrowed from Persian in turn were loanwords from Arabic (e.g. \"mu\u015bkil\" \"difficult\", \"hav\u0101\" \"air\", \"x(a)y\u0101l\" \"thought\", \"kit\u0101b\" \"book\").\nEnglish.\nHindi also makes extensive use of loan translation (calqueing) and occasionally phono-semantic matching of English.\nPortuguese.\nMany Hindustani words were derived from Portuguese due to interaction with colonists and missionaries:\nMedia.\nLiterature.\nHindi literature is broadly divided into four prominent forms or styles, being \"Bhakti\" (devotional \u2013 Kabir, Raskhan); \"\u015a\u1e5b\u1e47g\u0101r\" (beauty \u2013 Keshav, Bihari); \"V\u012bg\u0101th\u0101\" (epic); and \"\u0100dhunik\" (modern).\nMedieval Hindi literature is marked by the influence of Bhakti movement and the composition of long, epic poems. It was primarily written in other varieties of Hindi, particularly Avadhi and Braj Bhasha, but to a degree also in Delhavi, the basis for Standard Hindi. During the British Raj, Hindustani became the prestige dialect.\n\"Chandrakanta\", written by Devaki Nandan Khatri in 1888, is considered the first authentic work of prose in modern Hindi. The person who brought realism in Hindi prose literature was Munshi Premchand, who is considered the most revered figure in the world of Hindi fiction and progressive movement. Literary, or \"S\u0101hityik\", Hindi was popularised by the writings of Swami Dayananda Saraswati, Bhartendu Harishchandra and others. The rising numbers of newspapers and magazines made Hindustani popular with educated people.\nThe \"Dvived\u012b Yug\" (\"Age of Dwivedi\") in Hindi literature lasted from 1900 to 1918. It is named after Mahavir Prasad Dwivedi, who played a major role in establishing Standard Hindi in poetry and broadening the acceptable subjects of Hindi poetry from the traditional ones of religion and romantic love.\nIn the 20th century, Hindi literature saw a romantic upsurge. This is known as \"Ch\u0101y\u0101v\u0101d\" (\"shadow-ism\") and the literary figures belonging to this school are known as \"Ch\u0101y\u0101v\u0101d\u012b\". Jaishankar Prasad, Suryakant Tripathi 'Nirala', Mahadevi Varma and Sumitranandan Pant, are the four major \"Ch\u0101y\u0101v\u0101d\u012b\" poets.\n\"Uttar \u0100dhunik\" is the post-modernist period of Hindi literature, marked by a questioning of early trends that copied the West as well as the excessive ornamentation of the \"Ch\u0101y\u0101v\u0101d\u012b\" movement, and by a return to simple language and natural themes.\nInternet.\nHindi literature, music, and film have all been disseminated via the internet. In 2015, Google reported a 94% increase in Hindi-content consumption year-on-year, adding that 21% of users in India prefer content in Hindi. Many Hindi newspapers also offer digital editions.\nSample text.\nThe following is a sample text in High Hindi, of Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (by the United Nations):\n\nArticle 1 (one) \"\u2013\" All humans birth from independent and dignity and rights in equal are. They logic and conscience from endowed are and they fraternity in the spirit of each other towards work should.\nArticle 1 \"\u2013\" All humans are born independent and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with logic and conscience and they should work towards each other in the spirit of fraternity.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13653", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13653", "title": "Huginn and Muninn", "text": "Pair of ravens in Norse mythology that serve Odin\nIn Norse mythology, Huginn and Muninn (sometimes anglicized as Hugin and Munin; or ; roughly \"mind and will\" \u2013 \"see \") are a pair of ravens that serve under the god Odin, flying around the world (Midgard) and bringing him information. Huginn and Muninn are attested in the \"Poetic Edda\", compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources: the \"Prose Edda\" and \"Heimskringla\"; in the \"Third Grammatical Treatise\", compiled in the 13th century by \u00d3l\u00e1fr \u00de\u00f3r\u00f0arson; and in the poetry of skalds.\nIn the \"Poetic Edda\", a disguised Odin expresses that he fears the ravens may not return from their daily flights. The \"Prose Edda\" explains that Odin is referred to as \"Hrafnagu\u00f0\" (O.N.: ; \"raven-god\") due to his association with Huginn and Muninn. In the \"Prose Edda\" and the \"Third Grammatical Treatise\", the two ravens are described as perching on Odin's shoulders. \"Heimskringla\" details that Odin gave Huginn and Muninn the ability to speak.\nExamples of artifacts that may depict Odin with one of the ravens include Migration Period golden bracteates, Vendel era helmet plates, a pair of identical Germanic Iron Age bird-shaped brooches, Viking Age objects depicting a moustached man wearing a helmet, and a portion of the 10th or 11th century . Huginn and Muninn's role as Odin's messengers has been linked to shamanic practices, the Norse raven banner, general raven symbolism among the Germanic peoples, and the Norse concepts of the fylgja and the hamingja.\nEtymology.\nOn the surface, the names \"Huginn\" and \"Muninn\" represent Odin's sense and mind. Their names are definitive singular forms of words which encompass various related but abstract senses. As an example, the English word \"mind\" is based on the same root word as \"Muninn\", but encompasses the sense of \"Huginn\" when used as a noun, yet with the sense of \"Muninn\" when used as a verb. The exact clear definitions and intentions behind these names are hard to extrapolate, but they were probably close to synonyms with several shared and bordering senses.\n\"Huginn\" is the definite accusative singular of (see Hug (folklore); modern , \"hu\"; ; ; Old Swedish: \"hugher\", \"hogher\"; modern ). It encompasses the complex meaning of mind and sense, such as \"thought, perception, comprehension, awareness, mood, sentiment, desire, choice etc\". Cognates include (with variants: \"hu\u021de\", \"hui\u021de\", \"hi\u021de\", \"huie\", \"hi\u021d\", \"hie\"), , \"hi\u0121e\"; ; ; ; ; , \"hugi\"; with the same meaning.\n\"Muninn\" is the definite accusative singular of (modern ; ; ; Old Swedish: \"mon\", \"mun\"; modern ). It encompasses the complex meaning of affection, intent and will, such as \"care, urge, yern, strive, wonder, curiosity, interest, memory, prediction etc\". Cognates include ; ; ; with the same meaning, as well as and (\"memory, mind\").\nAttestations.\nIn the \"Poetic Edda\" poem \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\", the god Odin (disguised as \"Gr\u00edmnir\") provides the young Agnarr with information about Odin's companions. He tells the prince about Odin's wolves Geri and Freki, and, in the next stanza of the poem, states that Huginn and Muninn fly daily across the entire world, Midgard. Gr\u00edmnir says that he worries Huginn may not come back, yet more does he fear for Muninn:\nIn the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Gylfaginning\" (chapter 38), the enthroned figure of High tells Gangleri (king Gylfi in disguise) that two ravens named Huginn and Muninn sit on Odin's shoulders. The ravens tell Odin everything they see and hear. Odin sends Huginn and Muninn out at dawn, and the birds fly all over the world before returning at dinner-time. As a result, Odin is kept informed of many events. High adds that it is from this association that Odin is referred to as \"raven-god\". The above-mentioned stanza from \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" is then quoted.\nIn the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\" (chapter 60), Huginn and Muninn appear in a list of poetic names for ravens. In the same chapter, excerpts from a work by the skald Einarr Sk\u00falason are provided. In these excerpts Muninn is referenced in a common noun for 'raven' and Huginn is referenced in a kenning for 'carrion'.\nIn the \"Heimskringla\" book \"Ynglinga saga\", a euhemerized account of the life of Odin is provided. Chapter 7 describes that Odin had two ravens, and upon these ravens he bestowed the gift of speech. These ravens flew all over the land and brought him information, causing Odin to become \"very wise in his lore.\"\nIn the \"Third Grammatical Treatise\" an anonymous verse is recorded that mentions the ravens flying from Odin's shoulders; Huginn seeking hanged men, and Muninn slain bodies. The verse reads:\nTwo ravens flew from Hnikar\u2019s [\u00d3\u00f0inn\u2019s]\nshoulders; Huginn to the hanged and\nMuninn to the slain [lit. corpses].\nArchaeological record.\nMigration Period (5th and 6th centuries CE) gold bracteates (types A, B, and C) feature a depiction of a human figure above a horse, holding a spear and flanked by one or more often two birds. The presence of the birds has led to the iconographic identification of the human figure as the god Odin, flanked by Huginn and Muninn. Like Snorri's \"Prose Edda\" description of the ravens, a bird is sometimes depicted at the ear of the human, or at the ear of the horse. Bracteates have been found in Denmark, Sweden, Norway and, in smaller numbers, England and areas south of Denmark. Austrian Germanist Rudolf Simek states that these bracteates may depict Odin and his ravens healing a horse and may indicate that the birds were originally not simply his battlefield companions but also \"Odin's helpers in his veterinary function.\"\nVendel era helmet plates (from the 6th or 7th century) found in a grave in Sweden depict a helmeted figure holding a spear and a shield while riding a horse, flanked by two birds. The plate has been interpreted as Odin accompanied by two birds: his ravens.\nA pair of identical Germanic Iron Age bird-shaped brooches from Bejsebakke in northern Denmark may be depictions of Huginn and Muninn. The back of each bird features a mask motif, and the feet of the birds are shaped like the heads of animals. The feathers of the birds are also composed of animal heads. Together, the animal heads on the feathers form a mask on the back of the bird. The birds have powerful beaks and fan-shaped tails, indicating that they are ravens. The brooches were intended to be worn on each shoulder, after Germanic Iron Age fashion. Archaeologist Peter Vang Petersen comments that while the symbolism of the brooches is open to debate, the shape of the beaks and tail-feathers confirm that the brooch depictions are ravens. Petersen notes that \"raven-shaped ornaments worn as a pair, after the fashion of the day, one on each shoulder, make one's thoughts turn toward Odin's ravens and the cult of Odin in the Germanic Iron Age\". Petersen says that Odin is associated with disguise and that the masks on the ravens may be portraits of Odin.\nThe Oseberg tapestry fragments, discovered within the Viking Age Oseberg ship burial in Norway, feature a scene containing two black birds hovering over a horse, possibly originally leading a wagon (as a part of a procession of horse-led wagons on the tapestry). In her examination of the tapestry, scholar Anne Stine Ingstad interprets these birds as Huginn and Muninn flying over a covered cart containing an image of Odin, drawing comparison with the images of Nerthus attested by Tacitus in 1 CE.\nExcavations in Ribe in Denmark have recovered a Viking Age lead metal-caster's mould and 11 identical casting-moulds. These objects depict a moustached man wearing a helmet that features two head-ornaments. Archaeologist Stig Jensen proposes that these ornaments should be interpreted as Huginn and Muninn, and the wearer as Odin. He notes that \"similar depictions occur everywhere the Vikings went\u2014from eastern England to Russia and naturally also in the rest of Scandinavia.\"\nA portion of (a partly surviving runestone erected at Kirk Andreas on the Isle of Man) depicts a bearded human holding a spear downward at a wolf, his right foot in its mouth, and a large bird on his shoulder. Andy Orchard comments that this bird may be either Huginn or Muninn. The Scandinavian Runic-text Database dates the cross to 940, while Pluskowski dates it to the 11th century. This depiction has been interpreted as Odin, with a raven or eagle at his shoulder, being consumed by the monstrous wolf Fenrir during the events of Ragnar\u00f6k.\nIn November 2009, the Roskilde Museum announced the discovery and subsequent display of a niello-inlaid silver figurine found in Lejre, Denmark, which they dubbed \"Odin from Lejre\". The silver object depicts a person sitting on a throne. The throne features the heads of animals and is flanked by two birds. The Roskilde Museum identifies the figure as Odin sitting on his throne Hli\u00f0skj\u00e1lf, flanked by the ravens Huginn and Muninn.\nInterpretations.\nScholars have linked Odin's relation to Huginn and Muninn to shamanic practice. John Lindow relates Odin's ability to send his \"thought\" (Huginn) and \"mind\" (Muninn) to the trance-state journey of shamans. Lindow says the \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" stanza where Odin worries about the return of Huginn and Muninn \"would be consistent with the danger that the shaman faces on the trance-state journey.\"\nRudolf Simek is critical of the approach, stating that \"attempts have been made to interpret Odin's ravens as a personification of the god's intellectual powers, but this can only be assumed from the names Huginn and Muninn themselves which were unlikely to have been invented much before the 9th or 10th centuries\" yet that the two ravens, as Odin's companions, appear to derive from much earlier times. Instead, Simek connects Huginn and Muninn with wider raven symbolism in the Germanic world, including the raven banner (described in English chronicles and Scandinavian sagas), a banner which was woven in a method that allowed it, when fluttering in the wind, to appear as if the raven depicted upon it was beating its wings.\nAnthony Winterbourne connects Huginn and Muninn to the Norse concepts of the fylgja, a concept with three characteristics: shape-shifting abilities, good fortune, and the guardian spirit; and to the hamingja, the ghostly double of a person that may appear in the form of an animal. Winterbourne states that \"The shaman's journey through the different parts of the cosmos is symbolized by the \"hamingja\" concept of the shape-shifting soul, and gains another symbolic dimension for the Norse soul in the account of O\u00f0in's ravens, Huginn and Muninn\". In response to Simek's criticism of attempts to interpret the ravens \"philosophically\", Winterbourne says that \"such speculations [...] simply strengthen the conceptual significance made plausible by other features of the mythology\" and that the names \"Huginn\" and \"Muninn\" \"demand more explanation than is usually provided\".\nThe \"Heliand\", an Old Saxon adaptation of the New Testament from the 9th century, differs from the New Testament in that an explicit reference is made to a dove sitting on the shoulder of Christ. Regarding this, G. Ronald Murphy says \"In placing the powerful white dove not just above Christ, but right on his shoulder, the \"Heliand\" author has portrayed Christ, not only as the Son of the All-Ruler, but also as a new Woden. This deliberate image of Christ triumphantly astride the land with the magnificent bird on his shoulders (the author is perhaps a bit embarrassed that the bird is an unwarlike dove!) is an image intended to calm the fears and longings of those who mourn the loss of Woden and who want to return to the old religion's symbols and ways. With this image, Christ becomes a Germanic god, one into whose ears the Spirit of the Almighty whispers\".\nBernd Heinrich theorizes that Huginn and Muninn, along with Odin and his wolves Geri and Freki, reflect a symbiosis observed in the natural world among ravens, wolves, and humans on the hunt:\nIn a biological symbiosis one organism typically shores up some weakness or deficiency of the other(s). As in such a symbiosis, Odin the father of all humans and gods, though in human form was imperfect by himself. As a separate entity he lacked depth perception (being one-eyed) and he was apparently also uninformed and forgetful. But his weaknesses were compensated by his ravens, Hugin (mind) and Munin (memory) who were part of him. They perched on his shoulders and reconnoitered to the ends of the earth each day to return in the evening and tell him the news. He also had two wolves at his side, and the man/god-raven-wolf association was like one single organism in which the ravens were the eyes, mind, and memory, and the wolves the providers of meat and nourishment. As god, Odin was the ethereal part\u2014he only drank wine and spoke only in poetry. I wondered if the Odin myth was a metaphor that playfully and poetically encapsulates ancient knowledge of our prehistoric past as hunters in association with two allies to produce a powerful hunting alliance. It would reflect a past that we have long forgotten and whose meaning has been obscured and badly frayed as we abandoned our hunting cultures to become herders and agriculturists, to whom ravens act as competitors.\nOther uses.\n\"Huginn\" and \"Muninn\" were the names for the missions of European Space Agency astronauts \u2013 respectively of Andreas Mogensen of Denmark, and Marcus Wandt of Sweden \u2013 aboard the International Space Station in January 2024.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13654", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13654", "title": "Heat engine", "text": "System that converts heat or thermal energy to mechanical work\nA heat engine is a system that transfers thermal energy to do mechanical or electrical work. While originally conceived in the context of mechanical energy, the concept of the heat engine has been applied to various other kinds of energy, particularly electrical, since at least the late 19th century. The heat engine does this by bringing a working substance from a higher state temperature to a lower state temperature. A heat source generates thermal energy that brings the working substance to the higher temperature state. The working substance generates work in the working body of the engine while transferring heat to the colder sink until it reaches a lower temperature state. During this process some of the thermal energy is converted into work by exploiting the properties of the working substance. The working substance can be any system with a non-zero heat capacity, but it usually is a gas or liquid. During this process, some heat is normally lost to the surroundings and is not converted to work. Also, some energy is unusable because of friction and drag.\nIn general, an engine is any machine that converts energy to mechanical work. Heat engines distinguish themselves from other types of engines by the fact that their efficiency is fundamentally limited by Carnot's theorem of thermodynamics. Although this efficiency limitation can be a drawback, an advantage of heat engines is that most forms of energy can be easily converted to heat by processes like exothermic reactions (such as combustion), nuclear fission, absorption of light or energetic particles, friction, dissipation and resistance. Since the heat source that supplies thermal energy to the engine can thus be powered by virtually any kind of energy, heat engines cover a wide range of applications.\nHeat engines are often confused with the cycles they attempt to implement. Typically, the term \"engine\" is used for a physical device and \"cycle\" for the models.\nOverview.\nIn thermodynamics, heat engines are often modeled using a standard engineering model such as the Otto cycle. The theoretical model can be refined and augmented with actual data from an operating engine, using tools such as an indicator diagram. Since very few actual implementations of heat engines exactly match their underlying thermodynamic cycles, one could say that a thermodynamic cycle is an ideal case of a mechanical engine. In any case, fully understanding an engine and its efficiency requires a good understanding of the (possibly simplified or idealised) theoretical model, the practical nuances of an actual mechanical engine and the discrepancies between the two.\nIn general terms, the larger the difference in temperature between the hot source and the cold sink, the larger is the potential thermal efficiency of the cycle. On Earth, the cold side of any heat engine is limited to being close to the ambient temperature of the environment, or not much lower than 300 kelvin, so most efforts to improve the thermodynamic efficiencies of various heat engines focus on increasing the temperature of the source, within material limits. The maximum theoretical efficiency of a heat engine (which no engine ever attains) is equal to the temperature difference between the hot and cold ends divided by the temperature at the hot end, each expressed in absolute temperature.\nThe efficiency of various heat engines proposed or used today has a large range:\nThe efficiency of these processes is roughly proportional to the temperature drop across them. Significant energy may be consumed by auxiliary equipment, such as pumps, which effectively reduces efficiency.\nExamples.\nAlthough some cycles have a typical combustion location (internal or external), they can often be implemented with the other. For example, John Ericsson developed an external heated engine running on a cycle very much like the earlier Diesel cycle. In addition, externally heated engines can often be implemented in open or closed cycles. In a closed cycle the working fluid is retained within the engine at the completion of the cycle whereas is an open cycle the working fluid is either exchanged with the environment together with the products of combustion in the case of the internal combustion engine or simply vented to the environment in the case of external combustion engines like steam engines and turbines.\nEveryday examples.\nEveryday examples of heat engines include the thermal power station, internal combustion engine, firearms, refrigerators and heat pumps. Power stations are examples of heat engines run in a forward direction in which heat flows from a hot reservoir and flows into a cool reservoir to produce work as the desired product. Refrigerators, air conditioners and heat pumps are examples of heat engines that are run in reverse, i.e. they use work to take heat energy at a low temperature and raise its temperature in a more efficient way than the simple conversion of work into heat (either through friction or electrical resistance). Refrigerators remove heat from within a thermally sealed chamber at low temperature and vent waste heat at a higher temperature to the environment and heat pumps take heat from the low temperature environment and 'vent' it into a thermally sealed chamber (a house) at higher temperature.\nIn general heat engines exploit the thermal properties associated with the expansion and compression of gases according to the gas laws or the properties associated with phase changes between gas and liquid states.\nEarth's heat engine.\nEarth's atmosphere and hydrosphere\u2014Earth's heat engine\u2014are coupled processes that constantly even out solar heating imbalances through evaporation of surface water, convection, rainfall, winds and ocean circulation, when distributing heat around the globe.\nA Hadley cell is an example of a heat engine. It involves the rising of warm and moist air in the earth's equatorial region and the descent of colder air in the subtropics creating a thermally driven direct circulation, with consequent net production of kinetic energy.\nPhase-change cycles.\nIn phase change cycles and engines, the working fluids are gases and liquids. The engine converts the working fluid from a gas to a liquid, from liquid to gas, or both, generating work from the fluid expansion or compression.\nGas-only cycles.\nIn these cycles and engines the working fluid is always a gas (i.e., there is no phase change):\nLiquid-only cycles.\nIn these cycles and engines the working fluid are always like liquid:\nCycles used for refrigeration.\nA domestic refrigerator is an example of a heat pump: a heat engine in reverse. Work is used to create a heat differential. Many cycles can run in reverse to move heat from the cold side to the hot side, making the cold side cooler and the hot side hotter. Internal combustion engine versions of these cycles are, by their nature, not reversible.\nRefrigeration cycles include:\nEvaporative heat engines.\nThe Barton evaporation engine is a heat engine based on a cycle producing power and cooled moist air from the evaporation of water into hot dry air.\nMesoscopic heat engines.\nMesoscopic heat engines are nanoscale devices that may serve the goal of processing heat fluxes and perform useful work at small scales. Potential applications include e.g. electric cooling devices. In such mesoscopic heat engines, work per cycle of operation fluctuates due to thermal noise. There is exact equality that relates average of exponents of work performed by any heat engine and the heat transfer from the hotter heat bath. This relation transforms the Carnot's inequality into exact equality. This relation is also a Carnot cycle equality\nEfficiency.\nThe efficiency of a heat engine relates how much useful work is output for a given amount of heat energy input.\nFrom the laws of thermodynamics, after a completed cycle:\nformula_1\nand therefore\nformula_2\nwhere\nformula_3 is the net work extracted from the engine in one cycle. (It is negative, in the IUPAC convention, since work is \"done by\" the engine.)\nformula_4 is the heat energy taken from the high temperature heat source in the surroundings in one cycle. (It is positive since heat energy is \"added\" to the engine.)\nformula_5 is the waste heat given off by the engine to the cold temperature heat sink. (It is negative since heat is \"lost\" by the engine to the sink.)\nIn other words, a heat engine absorbs heat energy from the high temperature heat source, converting part of it to useful work and giving off the rest as waste heat to the cold temperature heat sink.\nIn general, the efficiency of a given heat transfer process is defined by the ratio of \"what is taken out\" to \"what is put in\". (For a refrigerator or heat pump, which can be considered as a heat engine run in reverse, this is the coefficient of performance and it is \u2265 1.) In the case of an engine, one desires to extract work and has to put in heat formula_6, for instance from combustion of a fuel, so the engine efficiency is reasonably defined as\nformula_7\nThe efficiency is less than 100% because of the waste heat formula_8 unavoidably lost to the cold sink (and corresponding compression work put in) during the required recompression at the cold temperature before the power stroke of the engine can occur again.\nThe \"theoretical\" maximum efficiency of any heat engine depends only on the temperatures it operates between. This efficiency is usually derived using an ideal imaginary heat engine such as the Carnot heat engine, although other engines using different cycles can also attain maximum efficiency. Mathematically, after a full cycle, the overall change of entropy is zero:\nformula_9\nNote that formula_10 is positive because isothermal expansion in the power stroke increases the multiplicity of the working fluid while formula_11 is negative since recompression decreases the multiplicity. If the engine is ideal and runs reversibly, formula_12 and formula_13, and thus\nformula_14,\nwhich gives formula_15 and thus the Carnot limit for heat-engine efficiency,\nformula_16\nwhere formula_17 is the absolute temperature of the hot source and formula_18 that of the cold sink, usually measured in kelvins.\nThe reasoning behind this being the maximal efficiency goes as follows. It is first assumed that if a more efficient heat engine than a Carnot engine is possible, then it could be driven in reverse as a heat pump. Mathematical analysis can be used to show that this assumed combination would result in a net decrease in entropy. Since, by the second law of thermodynamics, this is statistically improbable to the point of exclusion, the Carnot efficiency is a theoretical upper bound on the reliable efficiency of \"any\" thermodynamic cycle.\nEmpirically, no heat engine has ever been shown to run at a greater efficiency than a Carnot cycle heat engine.\nFigure 2 and Figure 3 show variations on Carnot cycle efficiency with temperature. Figure 2 indicates how efficiency changes with an increase in the heat addition temperature for a constant compressor inlet temperature. Figure 3 indicates how the efficiency changes with an increase in the heat rejection temperature for a constant turbine inlet temperature.\nEndo-reversible heat-engines.\nBy its nature, any maximally efficient Carnot cycle must operate at an infinitesimal temperature gradient; this is because any transfer of heat between two bodies of differing temperatures is irreversible, therefore the Carnot efficiency expression applies only to the infinitesimal limit. The major problem is that the objective of most heat-engines is to output power, and infinitesimal power is seldom desired.\nA different measure of ideal heat-engine efficiency is given by considerations of endoreversible thermodynamics, where the system is broken into reversible subsystems, but with non reversible interactions between them. A classical example is the Curzon\u2013Ahlborn engine, very similar to a Carnot engine, but where the thermal reservoirs at temperature formula_17 and formula_18 are allowed to be different from the temperatures of the substance going through the reversible Carnot cycle: formula_21 and formula_22. The heat transfers between the reservoirs and the substance are considered as conductive (and irreversible) in the form formula_23. In this case, a tradeoff has to be made between power output and efficiency. If the engine is operated very slowly, the heat flux is low, formula_24 and the classical Carnot result is found\nformula_25,\nbut at the price of a vanishing power output. If instead one chooses to operate the engine at its maximum output power, the efficiency becomes\nformula_26 (Note: \"T\" in units of K or \u00b0R)\nThis model does a better job of predicting how well real-world heat-engines can do (Callen 1985, see also endoreversible thermodynamics):\nAs shown, the Curzon\u2013Ahlborn efficiency much more closely models that observed.\nHistory.\nHeat engines have been known since antiquity but were only made into useful devices at the time of the industrial revolution in the 18th century. They continue to be developed today.\nEnhancements.\nEngineers have studied the various heat-engine cycles to improve the amount of usable work they could extract from a given power source. The Carnot cycle limit cannot be reached with any gas-based cycle, but engineers have found at least two ways to bypass that limit and one way to get better efficiency without bending any rules:\nHeat engine processes.\nEach process is one of the following:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13655", "revid": "45364314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13655", "title": "Heimdall", "text": "Norse deity\nIn Norse mythology, Heimdall (from Old Norse Heimdallr; modern Icelandic Heimdallur) is a god. He is the son of Odin and nine sisters. Heimdall keeps watch for invaders and the onset of Ragnar\u00f6k from his dwelling Himinbj\u00f6rg, where the burning rainbow bridge Bifr\u00f6st meets the sky. He is attested as possessing foreknowledge and keen senses, particularly eyesight and hearing. The god and his possessions are described in enigmatic manners. For example, Heimdall is golden-toothed, \"the head is called his sword,\" and he is \"the whitest of the gods.\"\nHeimdall possesses the resounding horn Gjallarhorn and the golden-maned horse Gulltoppr, along with a store of mead at his dwelling. He is the son of nine mothers, and he is said to be the originator of social classes among humanity. Other notable stories include the recovery of Freyja's treasured possession Br\u00edsingamen while doing battle in the shape of a seal with Loki. The antagonistic relationship between Heimdall and Loki is notable, as they are foretold to kill one another during the events of Ragnar\u00f6k. Heimdallr is also known as Rig, Hallinski\u00f0i, Gullintanni, and Vindl\u00e9r or Vindhl\u00e9r.\nHeimdall is attested in the \"Poetic Edda\", compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional material; in the \"Prose Edda\" and \"Heimskringla\", both written in the 13th century; in the poetry of skalds; and likely in a runic inscription on the Saltfleetby spindle-whorl found in England. Two lines of an otherwise lost poem about the god, \"Heimdalargaldr\", survive. Due to the enigmatic nature of these attestations, scholars have produced various theories about the nature of the god, including his relation to sheep, borders, and waves.\nNames and etymology.\nThe etymology of the name is obscure, but 'the one who illuminates the world' has been proposed. \"Heimdallr\" may be connected to \"Mard\u00f6ll\", one of Freyja's names. \"Heimdallr\" and its variants are usually anglicized as \"Heimdall\" (; with the nominative \"-r\" dropped).\nHeimdall is attested as having three other names; \"Hallinski\u00f0i\", \"Gullintanni\", and \"Vindl\u00e9r\" or \"Vindhl\u00e9r\". The name \"Hallinski\u00f0i\" is obscure, but has resulted in a series of attempts at deciphering it. \"Gullintanni\" literally means 'the one with the golden teeth'. \"Vindl\u00e9r\" (or \"Vindhl\u00e9r\") translates as either 'the one protecting against the wind' or 'wind-sea'. All three have resulted in numerous theories about the god.\nAttestations.\nSaltfleetby spindle-whorl inscription.\nHeimdallr is likely mentioned on the Saltfleetby spindle-whorl, a lead spindle whorl bearing an Old Norse Younger Fu\u00feark inscription that was discovered in Saltfleetby in eastern England in 2010. The spindle-whorl itself is dated from the 10th to 12th centuries CE, with the writing possibly being added significantly after the object was made. Whilst there are difficulties in interpreting the inscription, it likely records a charm asking for help from Odin, Heimdallr and , a figure whose name closely resembles that of \u00dej\u00e1lfi, one of Thor's servants. The religion of the writer is debated, with the invoking of Germanic gods not procluding adherence to Christianity, but also possibly attesting to the continuing of Old Nordic religion in some English communities significantly after the establishment of Christianity in the region.\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nIn the \"Poetic Edda\", Heimdall is attested in six poems; \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\", \"Lokasenna\", \"\u00derymskvi\u00f0a\", \"R\u00edgs\u00feula\", and \"Hrafnagaldr \u00d3\u00f0ins\".\nHeimdall is mentioned three times in \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\". In the first stanza of the poem, the undead v\u00f6lva reciting the poem calls out for listeners to be silent and refers to the Norse god:\nThis stanza has led to various scholarly interpretations. The \"holy races\" have been considered variously as either humanity or the gods. The notion of humanity as \"Heimdall's sons\" is otherwise unattested and has also resulted in various interpretations. Some scholars have pointed to the prose introduction to the poem \"R\u00edgs\u00feula\", where Heimdall is said to have once gone about people, slept between couples, and so doled out classes among them (see \"R\u00edgsthula\" section below).\nLater in \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", the v\u00f6lva foresees the events of Ragnar\u00f6k and the role in which Heimdall and Gjallarhorn will play at its onset; Heimdall will raise his horn and blow loudly. Due to manuscript differences, translations of the stanza vary:\nRegarding this stanza, scholar Andy Orchard comments that the name \"Gjallarhorn\" may here mean \"horn of the river Gj\u00f6ll\" as \"Gj\u00f6ll is the name of one of the rivers of the Underworld, whence much wisdom is held to derive\", but notes that in the poem \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" Heimdall is said to drink fine mead in his heavenly home Himinbj\u00f6rg.\nEarlier in the same poem, the v\u00f6lva mentions a scenario involving the hearing or horn (depending on translation of the Old Norse noun \"hlj\u00f3\u00f0\"\u2014translations bolded below for the purpose of illustration) of the god Heimdall:\nScholar Paul Schach comments that the stanzas in this section of \" V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\" are \"all very mysterious and obscure, as it was perhaps meant to be\". Schach details that \"\"Heimdallar hlj\u00f3\u00f0\" has aroused much speculation. Snorri [in the \"Prose Edda\"] seems to have confused this word with \"gjallarhorn\", but there is otherwise no attestation of the use of \"hlj\u00f3\u00f0\" in the sense of 'horn' in Icelandic. Various scholars have read this as \"hearing\" rather than \"horn\".\nScholar Carolyne Larrington comments that if \"hearing\" rather than \"horn\" is understood to appear in this stanza, the stanza indicates that Heimdall, like Odin, has left a body part in the well; his ear. Larrington says that \"Odin exchanged one of his eyes for wisdom from Mimir, guardian of the well, while Heimdall seems to have forfeited his ear.\"\nIn the poem \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\", Odin (disguised as \"Gr\u00edmnir\"), tortured, starved and thirsty, tells the young Agnar of a number of mythological locations. The eighth location he mentions is Himinbj\u00f6rg, where he says that Heimdall drinks fine mead:\nRegarding the above stanza, Henry Adams Bellows comments that \"in this stanza the two functions of Heimdall\u2014as father of humanity [ . . . ] and as warder of the gods\u2014seem both to be mentioned, but the second line in the manuscripts is apparently in bad shape, and in the editions it is more or less conjecture\".\nIn the poem \"Lokasenna\", Loki flyts with various gods who have met together to feast. At one point during the exchanges, the god Heimdall says that Loki is drunk and witless, and asks Loki why he won't stop speaking. Loki tells Heimdall to be silent, that he was fated a \"hateful life\", that Heimdall must always have a muddy back, and that he must serve as watchman of the gods. The goddess Ska\u00f0i interjects and the flyting continues in turn.\nThe poem \"\u00derymskvi\u00f0a\" tells of Thor's loss of his hammer, Mj\u00f6llnir, to the j\u00f6tnar and quest to get it back. At one point in the tale, the gods gather at the thing and debate how to get Thor's hammer back from the j\u00f6tnar, who demand the beautiful goddess Freyja in return for it. Heimdall advises that they simply dress Thor up as Freyja, during which he is described as \"hv\u00edtastr \u00e1sa\" (translations of the phrase vary below) and is said to have foresight like the Vanir, a group of gods:\nRegarding Heimdall's status as \"hv\u00edtastr \u00e1sa\" (variously translated above as \"brightest\" (Thorpe), \"whitest\" (Bellows), and \"most glittering\" (Dodds)) and the comparison to the Vanir, scholar John Lindow comments that there are no other indications of Heimdall being considered among the Vanir (on Heimdall's status as \"hv\u00edtastr \u00e1sa \", see \"scholarly reception\" below).\nThe introductory prose to the poem \"R\u00edgs\u00feula\" says that \"people say in the old stories\" that Heimdall, described as a god among the \u00c6sir, once fared on a journey. Heimdall wandered along a seashore, and referred to himself as \"R\u00edgr\". In the poem, R\u00edgr, who is described as a wise and powerful god, walks in the middle of roads on his way to steads, where he meets a variety of couples and dines with them, giving them advice and spending three nights at a time between them in their bed. The wives of the couples become pregnant, and from them come the various classes of humanity.\nEventually a warrior home produces a promising boy, and as the boy grows older, R\u00edgr comes out of a thicket, teaches the boy runes, gives him a name, and proclaims him to be his son. R\u00edgr tells him to strike out and get land for himself. The boy does so, and so becomes a great war leader with many estates. He marries a beautiful woman and the two have many children and are happy. One of the children eventually becomes so skilled that he is able to share in runic knowledge with Heimdall, and so earns the title of \"R\u00edgr\" himself. The poem breaks off without further mention of the god.\n\"Prose Edda\".\nIn the \"Prose Edda\", Heimdall is mentioned in the books \"Gylfaginning\", \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", and \"H\u00e1ttatal\". In \"Gylfaginning\", the enthroned figure of High tells the disguised mythical king Gangleri of various gods, and, in chapter 25, mentions Heimdall. High says that Heimdall is known as \"the white As\", is \"great and holy\", and that nine maidens, all sisters, gave birth to him. Heimdall is called \"Hallinski\u00f0i\" and \"Gullintanni\", and he has gold teeth. High continues that Heimdall lives in \"a place\" called Himinbj\u00f6rg and that it is near Bifr\u00f6st. Heimdall is the watchman of the gods, and he sits on the edge of heaven to guard the Bifr\u00f6st bridge from the berg j\u00f6tnar. Heimdall requires less sleep than a bird, can see at night just as well as if it were day, and for over a hundred leagues. Heimdall's hearing is also quite keen; he can hear grass as it grows on the earth, wool as it grows on sheep, and anything louder. Heimdall possesses a trumpet, Gjallarhorn, that, when blown, can be heard in all worlds, and \"the head is referred to as Heimdall's sword\". High then quotes the above-mentioned \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" stanza about Himinbj\u00f6rg and provides two lines from the otherwise lost poem about Heimdall, \"Heimdalargaldr\", in which he proclaims himself to be the son of Nine Mothers.\nIn chapter 49, High tells of the god Baldr's funeral procession. Various deities are mentioned as having attended, including Heimdall, who there rode his horse Gulltopr.\nIn chapter 51, High foretells the events of Ragnar\u00f6k. After the enemies of the gods will gather at the plain V\u00edgr\u00ed\u00f0r, Heimdall will stand and mightily blow into Gjallarhorn. The gods will awake and assemble together at the thing. At the end of the battle between various gods and their enemies, Heimdall will face Loki and they will kill one another. After, the world will be engulfed in flames. High then quotes the above-mentioned stanza regarding Heimdall raising his horn in \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\".\nAt the beginning of \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", Heimdall is mentioned as having attended a banquet in Asgard with various other deities. Later in the book, \"H\u00fasdr\u00e1pa\", a poem by 10th century skald \u00dalfr Uggason, is cited, during which Heimdall is described as having ridden to Baldr's funeral pyre.\nIn chapter 8, means of referring to Heimdall are provided; \"son of nine mothers\", \"guardian of the gods\", \"the white As\" (see \"Poetic Edda\" discussion regarding \"hv\u00edtastr \u00e1sa\" above), \"Loki's enemy\", and \"recoverer of Freyja's necklace\". The section adds that the poem \"Heimdalargaldr\" is about him, and that, since the poem, \"the head has been called Heimdall's doom: man's doom is an expression for sword\". Heimdallr is the owner of Gulltoppr, is also known as Vindhl\u00e9r, and is a son of Odin. Heimdall visits V\u00e1gasker and Singasteinn and there vied with Loki for Br\u00edsingamen. According to the chapter, the skald \u00dalfr Uggason composed a large section of his \"H\u00fasdr\u00e1pa\" about these events and that \"H\u00fasdr\u00e1pa\" says that the two were in the shape of seals. A few chapters later, ways of referring to Loki are provided, including \"wrangler with Heimdall and Skadi\", and section of \u00dalfr Uggason's \"H\u00fasdr\u00e1pa\" is then provided in reference:\nRenowned defender [Heimdall] of the powers' way [Bifrost], kind of counsel, competes with Farbauti's terribly sly son at Singastein. Son of eight mothers plus one, might of mood, is first to get hold of the beautiful sea-kidney [jewel, Brisingamen]. I announce it in strands of praise.\nThe chapter points out that in the above \"H\u00fasdr\u00e1pa\" section Heimdall is said to be the son of nine mothers.\nHeimdall is mentioned once in \"H\u00e1ttatal\". There, in a composition by Snorri Sturluson, a sword is referred to as \"Vindhl\u00e9r's helmet-filler\", meaning \"Heimdall's head\".\n\"Heimskringla\".\nIn \"Ynglinga saga\" compiled in \"Heimskringla\", Snorri presents a euhemerized origin of the Norse gods and rulers descending from them. In chapter 5, Snorri asserts that the \u00c6sir settled in what is now Sweden and built various temples. Snorri writes that Odin settled in Lake Logrin \"at a place which formerly was called Sigt\u00fanir. There he erected a large temple and made sacrifices according to the custom of the \u00c6sir. He took possession of the land as far as he had called it Sigt\u00fanir. He gave dwelling places to the temple priests.\" Snorri adds that, after this, Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r dwelt in N\u00f3at\u00fan, Freyr dwelt in Uppsala, Heimdall at Himinbj\u00f6rg, Thor at \u00der\u00fa\u00f0vangr, Baldr at Brei\u00f0ablik and that to everyone Odin gave fine estates.\nVisual depictions.\nA figure holding a large horn to his lips and clasping a sword on his hip appears on a stone cross from the Isle of Man. Some scholars have theorized that this figure is a depiction of Heimdall with Gjallarhorn.\nA 9th or 10th century Gosforth Cross in Cumbria, England depicts a figure holding a horn and a sword standing defiantly before two open-mouthed beasts. This figure has been often theorized as depicting Heimdall with Gjallarhorn.\nScholarly reception.\nHeimdall's attestations have proven troublesome and enigmatic to interpret for scholars. A variety of sources describe the god as born from Nine Mothers, a puzzling description (for more in-depth discussion, see Nine Mothers of Heimdallr). Various scholars have interpreted this as a reference to the Nine Daughters of \u00c6gir and R\u00e1n, personifications of waves. This would therefore mean Heimdall is born from the waves, an example of a deity born from the sea.\nIn the textual corpus, Heimdall is frequently described as maintaining a particular association with boundaries, borders, and liminal spaces, both spatial and temporal. For example, \"Gylfaginning\" describes the god as guarding the border of the land of the gods, Heimdall meets humankind at a coast, and, if accepted as describing Heimdall, \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1 hin skamma\" describes him as born 'at the edge of the world' in 'days of yore' by the Nine Daughters of \u00c6gir and R\u00e1n, and it is Heimdall's horn that signals the transition to the events of Ragnar\u00f6k.\nAdditionally, Heimdall has a particular association with male sheep, rams. A form of the deity's name, \"Heimdali\", occurs twice as a name for 'ram' in \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", as does Heimdall's name \"Hallinsk\u00ed\u00f0i\". Heimdall's unusual physical description has also been seen by various scholars as fitting this association: As mentioned above, Heimdall is described as gold-toothed (by way of his name \"Gullintanni\"), as having the ability to hear grass grow and the growth of wool on sheep, and as owning a sword called 'head' (rams have horns on their heads). This may mean that Heimdall was associated with the ram perhaps as a sacred and/or sacrificial animal or that the ancient Scandinavians may have conceived of him as having been a ram in appearance.\nAll of these topics\u2014Heimdall's birth, his association with borders and boundaries, and his connection to sheep\u2014have led to significant discussion among scholars. For example, influential philologist and folklorist Georges Dum\u00e9zil, comparing motifs and clusters of motifs in western Europe, proposes the following explanation for Heimdall's birth and association with rams (italics are Dum\u00e9zil's own):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Many folklores compare waves which, under a strong wind, are topped with white foam\u00a0... to different animals, especially to horses or mares, to cows or bulls, to dogs or sheep. We say in France, \"moutons, moutonner, moutannant\" (white sheep, to break into white sheep, breaking into white sheep) and the English \"white horses.\" The modern Welsh, like the Irish, speak of \"white mares (\"cesyg\")\" but the old tradition linked to the name of Gwenhidwy, as in French, Basque, and other folklores, turned these waves into sheep. Conversely, in many countries the sailors or the coast dwellers attribute to certain wave sequences particular qualities or forces, sometimes, even,\u00a0... a supernatural power: it happens that the third, or the ninth, or the tenth wave is the biggest, or the most dangerous, or the noisiest or the most powerful. But what I have found nowhere else but in the Welsh tradition concerning Gwenhidwy is a combination of these two beliefs, the final result of which is \"to make the ninth wave the ram of the simple ewes that are the eight preceding waves\".\nThis concept furnishes a satisfactory explanation of that section of Heimdall's dossier which we are considering: it allows us to combine his birth\u2014nine mothers who are waves, at the confines of the earth\u2014and his attributes of a ram. We understand that whatever his mythical value and functions were, \"the scene of his birth made him, in the sea's white frothing, the ram produced by the ninth wave\".\nIn popular culture.\nAs with many aspects of Norse mythology, Heimdall has appeared in many modern works. Heimdall appears as a character in Marvel Comics and is portrayed in the film versions by English actor Idris Elba.\nHeimdall is the namesake of a crater on Callisto, a moon of Jupiter.\nHeimdall is the protagonist of an eponymous video game released in 1991 and its 1994 sequel, \"Heimdall 2\". In the 2002 Ensemble Studios game \"Age of Mythology\", Heimdall is one of 12 gods the Norse can choose to worship. Heimdallr is one of the playable gods in the multiplayer online battle arena game \"Smite\". Heimdall also appears as an antagonist in the 2022 action-adventure video game \"God of War Ragnar\u00f6k\" and is played by the American actor Scott Porter.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13658", "revid": "50922747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13658", "title": "House of Lords", "text": "Upper house of the UK Parliament\nThe House of Lords is the upper house of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. Like the lower house, the House of Commons, it meets in the Palace of Westminster in London, England. One of the oldest extant institutions in the world, its origins lie in the early 11th century and the emergence of bicameralism in the 13th century.\nIn contrast to the House of Commons, membership of the Lords is not generally acquired by election. Most members are appointed for life, on either a political or non-political basis. Hereditary membership was limited in 1999 to 92 excepted hereditary peers: 90 elected through internal by-elections, plus the Earl Marshal and the Lord Great Chamberlain as members \"ex officio\", the sole two officers to directly inherit their seats. The House of Lords also includes up to 26 archbishops and bishops of the Church of England, known as Lords Spiritual. Since 2014, membership may be voluntarily relinquished or terminated upon expulsion.\nAs the upper house of Parliament, the House of Lords has many similar functions to the House of Commons. It scrutinises legislation, holds the government to account, and considers and reports upon public policy. Peers may also seek to introduce legislation or propose amendments to bills. While it is unable to prevent bills passing into law, except in certain limited circumstances, it may delay the enactment of bills for up to one year. In this capacity, as a body independent from the pressures of the political process, the House of Lords is said to act as a \"revising chamber\" focusing on legislative detail, while occasionally asking the House of Commons to reconsider its plans.\nWhile peers may also serve as government ministers, they are typically only selected to serve as junior ministers, except for the Leader of the House of Lords. The House of Lords does not control the term of the prime minister or of the government; only the Commons may vote to require the prime minister to resign or call an election. Unlike the House of Commons, which has a defined number of seats, the number of members in the House of Lords is not fixed. As of [ [update]], it has 825 sitting members. \nThe King's Speech is delivered in the House of Lords chamber during the State Opening of Parliament. In addition to its role as the upper house, the House of Lords, through the Law Lords, acted as the final court of appeal in the United Kingdom judicial system until the establishment of the Supreme Court in 2009. \nThe House of Lords is the only upper house of any bicameral parliament in the world to be larger than its lower house. It is the second-largest legislative chamber in the world, behind the National People's Congress of China. \nThe House of Lords also has a Church of England role, in that Church Measures must be tabled within the House by the Lords Spiritual. The United Kingdom is one of only two countries in the world to award religious figures a permanent seat in the legislature, the other being Iran.\nHistory.\nToday's Parliament of the United Kingdom largely descends, in practice, from the Parliament of England, through the Treaty of Union of 1706 and the Acts of Union that implemented and executed the Treaty in 1707 and created a new Parliament of Great Britain to replace the Parliament of England and the Parliament of Scotland. This new parliament was, in effect, the continuation of the Parliament of England with the addition of 45 Members of Parliament (MPs) and 16 Peers to represent Scotland.\nEarly history.\nThe House of Lords developed from the \"Great Council\" (\"Magnum Concilium\") that advised the king during medieval times, dating back to the early 11th century. This royal council came to be composed of ecclesiastics, noblemen, and representatives of the counties of England and Wales (afterwards, representatives of the boroughs as well). The first English Parliament is often considered to be either Simon de Montfort's Parliament (held in 1265) or the \"Model Parliament\" (held in 1295), which included archbishops, bishops, abbots, earls, barons, and representatives of the shires and boroughs.\nThe power of Parliament grew slowly, fluctuating as the strength of the monarchy grew or declined. For example, during much of the reign of Edward II (1307\u20131327), the nobility was supreme, the Crown weak, and the shire and borough representatives entirely powerless.\nDuring the reign of King Edward II's successor, Edward III (1327\u20131377), Parliament clearly separated into two distinct chambers: the House of Commons (consisting of the shire and borough representatives) and the House of Lords (consisting of the archbishops, bishops, abbots and nobility). The authority of Parliament continued to grow, and during the early 15th century both Houses exercised powers to an extent not seen before. The Lords were far more powerful than the Commons because of the great influence of the great landowners and the prelates of the realm.\nThe power of the nobility declined during the civil wars of the late 15th century, known as the Wars of the Roses. Much of the nobility was killed on the battlefield or executed for participation in the war, and many aristocratic estates were lost to the Crown. Moreover, feudalism was dying, and the feudal armies controlled by the barons became obsolete. Henry VII (1485\u20131509) clearly established the supremacy of the monarch, symbolised by the \"Crown Imperial\". The domination of the Sovereign continued to grow during the reigns of the Tudor monarchs in the 16th century. The Crown was at the height of its power during the reign of Henry VIII (1509\u20131547).\n17th\u201318th century.\nThe House of Lords remained more powerful than the House of Commons, but the lower house continued to grow in influence, reaching a zenith in relation to the House of Lords during the middle of the 17th century. Conflicts between the king and the Parliament (for the most part, the House of Commons) ultimately led to the English Civil War during the 1640s. In 1649, after the defeat and execution of King Charles I, the Commonwealth of England was declared, but the nation was effectively under the overall control of Oliver Cromwell, Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland.\nThe House of Lords was reduced to a largely powerless body, with Cromwell and his supporters in the Commons dominating the government. On 19 March 1649, the House of Lords was abolished by an act of Parliament, which declared that \"The Commons of England [find] by too long experience that the House of Lords is useless and dangerous to the people of England.\" It was briefly de facto eclipsed by Cromwell's Other House. The House of Lords did not assemble again until the Convention Parliament met in 1660 and the monarchy was restored. It returned to its former position as the more powerful chamber of Parliament\u2014a position it would occupy until the 19th century.\nAfter the Acts of Union 1707, the peerage of Scotland elected sixteen of their number, the Scottish representative peers, to sit in the House of Lords. General elections were held with each Parliament, and by-elections to fill vacancies in between. The elections ceased after the Peerage Act 1963 granted all peers of Scotland a hereditary seat in the House of Lords.\nThe first election of Scottish representative peers took place on 15 February 1707 at the Parliament House, Edinburgh, shortly before the Parliament of Scotland was adjourned for the last time on 25 March. The commissioners for the barons and the burghs chose their representatives to the British House of Commons at the same time.\n19th century.\nThe 19th century was marked by several changes to the House of Lords. The House, once a body of only about 50\u00a0members, had been greatly enlarged by the liberality of George III and his successors in creating peerages. The individual influence of a Lord of Parliament was thus diminished.\nMoreover, the power of the House as a whole decreased, whilst that of the House of Commons grew. Particularly notable in the development of the Lower House's superiority was the Reform Act 1832. The electoral system of the House of Commons was far from democratic: property qualifications greatly restricted the size of the electorate, and the boundaries of many constituencies had not been changed for centuries. Entire cities such as Manchester had not even one representative in the House of Commons, while the 11 voters of Old Sarum retained their ancient right to elect two MPs despite living elsewhere. A small borough was susceptible to bribery, and was often under the control of a patron, whose nominee was guaranteed to win an election. Some aristocrats were patrons of numerous \"pocket boroughs\", and therefore controlled a considerable part of the membership of the House of Commons.\nWhen the House of Commons passed a Reform Bill to correct some of these anomalies in 1831, the House of Lords rejected the proposal. The popular cause of reform, however, was not abandoned by the ministry, despite a second rejection of the bill in 1832. Prime Minister Charles Grey, 2nd Earl Grey advised the King to overwhelm opposition to the bill in the House of Lords by creating about 80\u00a0new pro-Reform peers. William IV originally balked at the proposal, which effectively threatened the opposition of the House of Lords, but at length relented.\nBefore the new peers were created, however, the Lords who opposed the bill admitted defeat and abstained from the vote, allowing the passage of the bill. The crisis damaged the political influence of the House of Lords but did not altogether end it. A vital reform was effected by the Lords themselves in 1868, when they changed their standing orders to abolish proxy voting, preventing Lords from voting without taking the trouble to attend. Over the course of the century the powers of the upper house were further reduced stepwise, culminating in the 20th century with the Parliament Act 1911; the Commons gradually became the stronger House of Parliament.\n20th century.\nThe status of the House of Lords returned to the forefront of debate after the election of a Liberal Government in 1906. In 1909 the Chancellor of the Exchequer, David Lloyd George, introduced into the House of Commons the \"People's Budget\", which proposed a land tax targeting wealthy landowners. The popular measure, however, was defeated in the heavily Conservative House of Lords.\nHaving made the powers of the House of Lords a primary campaign issue, the Liberals were narrowly re-elected in January 1910. The Liberals had lost most of their support in the Lords, which was routinely rejecting Liberals' bills. Prime Minister H. H. Asquith then proposed that the powers of the House of Lords be severely curtailed. After a further general election in December 1910, and with a reluctant promise by King George V to create sufficient new Liberal peers to overcome the Lords' opposition to the measure if necessary, the Asquith Government secured the passage of a bill to curtail the powers of the House of Lords. The Parliament Act 1911 effectively abolished the power of the House of Lords to reject legislation, or to amend it in a way unacceptable to the House of Commons; and most bills could be delayed for no more than three parliamentary sessions or two calendar years. It was not meant to be a permanent solution; more comprehensive reforms were planned. Neither party, however, pursued reforms with much enthusiasm, and the House of Lords remained primarily hereditary. The Parliament Act 1949 reduced the delaying power of the House of Lords further to two sessions or one year. In 1958, the predominantly hereditary nature of the House of Lords was changed by the Life Peerages Act 1958, which authorised the creation of life baronies, with no numerical limits. The number of life peers then gradually increased, though not at a constant rate.\nThe Labour Party had, for most of the 20th century, a commitment, based on the party's historic opposition to class privilege, to abolish the House of Lords, or at least expel the hereditary element. In 1968 the Labour Government of Harold Wilson attempted to reform the House of Lords by introducing a system under which hereditary peers would be allowed to remain in the House and take part in debate, but would be unable to vote. This plan, however, was defeated in the House of Commons by a coalition of traditionalist Conservatives (such as Enoch Powell), and Labour members who continued to advocate the outright abolition of the Upper House (such as Michael Foot).\nWhen Foot became leader of the Labour Party in 1980, abolition of the House of Lords became a part of the party's agenda; under his successor, Neil Kinnock, however, a reformed Upper House was proposed instead. In the meantime, the creation of new hereditary peerages (except for members of the Royal Family) has been arrested, with the exception of three that were created during the administration of Conservative PM Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s.\nWhilst some hereditary peers were at best apathetic, the Labour Party's clear commitments were not lost on Merlin Hanbury-Tracy, 7th Baron Sudeley, who for decades was considered an expert on the House of Lords. In December 1979 the Conservative Monday Club published his extensive paper entitled \"Lords Reform \u2013 Why tamper with the House of Lords?\" and in July 1980 \"The Monarchist\" carried another article by Sudeley entitled \"Why Reform or Abolish the House of Lords?\". In 1990 he wrote a further booklet for the Monday Club entitled \"The Preservation of the House of Lords\".\n21st century.\nIn 2019, a seven-month enquiry by Naomi Ellenbogen found that one in five staff of the House had experienced bullying or harassment which they did not report for fear of reprisals. This was preceded by several cases, including Liberal Democrat Anthony Lester, Lord Lester of Herne\u00a0Hill, of Lords using their position to sexually harass or abuse women.\nIn 2020, the Johnson government considered moving the House of Lords from London to a city in Northern England, likely York, or Birmingham, in the Midlands, in an attempt to \"reconnect\" the area. It was unclear how the King's Speech would be conducted in the event of a move. The idea was received negatively by many peers.\nReforms.\nWith the advent of democratic politics in the United Kingdom, beginning with the Reform Acts from 1832 to 1928, the aristocratic House of Lords was increasingly perceived as an anachronism. Many attempts to reform it have been made, and some have succeeded, most notably the removal of most hereditary peers in 1999.\nFirst admission of women.\nThere were no women sitting in the House of Lords until 1958, when a small number came into the chamber as a result of the Life Peerages Act 1958. One of these was Irene Curzon, 2nd Baroness Ravensdale, who had inherited her father's peerage in 1925 and was made a life peer to enable her to sit. After a campaign stretching back in some cases to the 1920s, another twelve women who held hereditary peerages in their own right were admitted with the passage of the Peerage Act 1963.\nNew Labour era.\nThe Labour Party included in its 1997 general election manifesto a commitment to remove the hereditary peerage from the House of Lords. Their subsequent election victory in 1997 under Tony Blair led to the denouement of the traditional House of Lords. The Labour government introduced legislation to expel all hereditary peers from the Upper House as a first step in Lords reform. As a part of a compromise, however, it agreed to permit 92 hereditary peers to remain until the reforms were complete. Thus, all but 92 hereditary peers were expelled under the House of Lords Act 1999 (see below for its provisions), making the House of Lords predominantly an appointed house.\nIn 2000, the Wakeham Commission proposed introducing a 20% elected element to the Lords, but this plan was widely criticised. A parliamentary Joint Committee was established in 2001 to resolve the issue, but it reached no conclusion and instead gave Parliament seven options to choose from (fully appointed, 20% elected, 40% elected, 50% elected, 60% elected, 80% elected, and fully elected). In a confusing series of votes in February 2003, all of these options were defeated, although the 80% elected option fell by just three votes in the Commons. Socialist MPs favouring outright abolition voted against all the options.\nIn 2005, a cross-party group of senior MPs (Kenneth Clarke, Paul Tyler, Tony Wright, George Young, and Robin Cook) published a report proposing that 70% of members of the House of Lords should be elected \u2013 each member for a single long term \u2013 by the single transferable vote system. Most of the remainder were to be appointed by a Commission to ensure a mix of \"skills, knowledge and experience\". This proposal was also not implemented. A cross-party campaign initiative called \"Elect the Lords\" was set up to make the case for a predominantly elected Upper Chamber in the run up to the 2005 general election.\nAt the 2005 election, the Labour Party proposed further reform of the Lords, but without specific details. The Conservative Party, which had, prior to 1997, opposed any tampering with the House of Lords, favoured an 80% elected Lords, while the Liberal Democrats called for a fully elected Senate. During 2006, a cross-party committee discussed Lords reform, with the aim of reaching a consensus: its findings were published in early 2007.\nOn 7 March 2007, members of the House of Commons voted ten times on a variety of alternative compositions for the Upper Chamber. Outright abolition, a wholly appointed, a 20% elected, a 40% elected, a 50% elected, and a 60% elected House of Lords were all defeated in turn. Finally, the vote for an 80% elected Lords was won by 305 votes to 267, and the vote for a wholly elected Lords was won by an even greater margin, 337 to 224. Significantly, this last vote represented an overall majority of MPs.\nFurthermore, examination of the names of MPs voting at each division shows that, of the 305 who voted for the 80% elected option, 211 went on to vote for the 100% elected option. Given that this vote took place after the vote on 80% \u2013 whose result was already known when the vote on 100% took place \u2013 this showed a clear preference for a fully elected Upper House among those who voted for the only other option that passed. But this was nevertheless only an indicative vote, and many political and legislative hurdles remained to be overcome for supporters of an elected House of Lords. Lords, soon after, rejected this proposal and voted for an entirely appointed House of Lords.\nIn July 2008, Jack Straw, the Secretary of State for Justice and Lord Chancellor, introduced a white paper to the House of Commons proposing to replace the House of Lords with an 80\u2013100% elected chamber, with one third being elected at each general election, to serve a term of approximately 12\u201315 years. The white paper stated that, as the peerage would be totally separated from membership of the Upper House, the name \"House of Lords\" would no longer be appropriate. It went on to explain that there was cross-party consensus for the Chamber to be re-titled the \"Senate of the United Kingdom\"; however, to ensure the debate remained on the role of the Upper House rather than its title, the white paper was neutral on the title issue.\nOn 30 November 2009, a \"Code of Conduct for Members of the House of Lords\" was agreed by them. Certain amendments were agreed by them on 30 March 2010 and on 12 June 2014.\nThe scandal over expenses in the Commons was at its highest pitch only six months before, and the Labourite leadership under Janet Royall, Baroness Royall of Blaisdon determined that something sympathetic should be done.\nMeg Russell stated in an article, \"Is the House of Lords already reformed?\", three essential features of a legitimate House of Lords: The first was that it must have adequate powers over legislation to make the government think twice before making a decision. The House of Lords, she argued, had enough power to make it relevant. (In his first year, Tony Blair was defeated 38 times in the Lords\u2014but that was before the major reform with the House of Lords Act 1999.) Second, as to the composition of the Lords, Meg Russell suggested that the composition must be distinct from the Commons, otherwise it would render the Lords useless. Third was the perceived legitimacy of the Lords. She stated, \"In general legitimacy comes with election.\"\nCoalition reforms.\nThe Conservative\u2013Liberal Democrat coalition agreed, after the 2010 general election, to outline clearly a provision for a wholly or mainly elected second chamber, elected by proportional representation. These proposals sparked a debate on 29 June 2010. As an interim measure, appointment of new peers would reflect the shares of the vote secured by the political parties in the last general election.\nDetailed proposals for Lords reform, including a draft House of Lords Reform Bill, were published on 17 May 2011. These included a 300-member hybrid house, of whom 80% would be elected. A further 20% would be appointed, and reserve space would be included for some Church of England archbishops and bishops. Under the proposals, members would also serve single non-renewable terms of 15\u00a0years. Former MPs would be allowed to stand for election to the Upper House, but members of the Upper House would not be immediately allowed to become MPs.\nThe details of the proposal were:\nThe proposals were considered by a Joint Committee on House of Lords Reform made up of both MPs and Peers, which issued its final report on 23 April 2012, making the following suggestions:\nDeputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg introduced the House of Lords Reform Bill 2012 on 27 June 2012 which built on proposals published on 17 May 2011. However, this Bill was abandoned by the Government on 6 August 2012, following opposition from within the Conservative Party.\nHouse of Lords Reform Act 2014.\nA private member's bill to introduce some reforms was introduced by Dan Byles in 2013. The House of Lords Reform Act 2014 received Royal Assent in 2014. Under the new law:\nHouse of Lords (Expulsion and Suspension) Act 2015.\nThe House of Lords (Expulsion and Suspension) Act 2015 authorised the House to expel or suspend members.\nLords Spiritual (Women) Act 2015.\nThis Act made provision to preferentially admit female bishops of the Church of England to the Lords Spiritual over male ones in the 10 years following its commencement (2015 to 2025, later extended to 2030). This came as a consequence of the Church of England deciding in 2014 to begin to ordain women as bishops. In 2015, Rachel Treweek, Bishop of Gloucester, became the first woman to sit as a Lord Spiritual in the House of Lords due to the Act. As of 2025, eight women bishops sit as Lords Spiritual, seven of them having been accelerated due to this Act.\nStarmer ministry.\nAs of 2024, the policy of the Labour Party is to abolish the House of Lords, and to replace it with an elected second chamber, albeit not in the first term of a Labour government. Following the 2024 general election, the House of Lords (Hereditary Peers) Bill was introduced with the aim of removing all remaining hereditary peers from the House of Lords.\nSize.\nThe size of the House of Lords has varied greatly throughout its history. The English House of Lords\u2014then comprising 168 members\u2014was joined at Westminster by 16 Scottish peers to represent the peerage of Scotland\u2014a total of 184 nobles\u2014in 1707's first Parliament of Great Britain. A further 28 Irish members to represent the peerage of Ireland were added in 1801 to the first Parliament of the United Kingdom. From about 220 peers in the eighteenth century, the house saw continued expansion. From about 850 peers in 1951/52, the numbers rose further with more life peers after the Life Peerages Act 1958 and the inclusion of all Scottish peers and the first female peers in the Peerage Act 1963. It reached a record size of 1,330 in October 1999, immediately before the major Lords reform (House of Lords Act 1999) reduced it to 669, mostly life peers, by March 2000.\nThe chamber's membership again expanded in the following decades, increasing to above eight hundred active members in 2014 and prompting further reforms in the House of Lords Reform Act 2014.\nIn April 2011, a cross-party group of former leading politicians, including many senior members of the House of Lords, called on the Prime Minister David Cameron to stop creating new peers. He had created 117 new peers between entering office in May 2010 and leaving in July 2016, a faster rate of elevation than any PM in British history; at the same time his government had tried (in vain) to reduce the House of Commons by 50, from 650 to 600 MPs.\nIn August 2014, despite there being a seating capacity for only around 230 to 400 on the benches in the Lords chamber, the House had 774 active members (plus 54 who were not entitled to attend or vote, having been suspended or granted leave of absence). This made the House of Lords the largest parliamentary chamber in any democracy. In August 2014, former Speaker of the House of Commons Betty Boothroyd requested that \"older peers should retire gracefully\" to ease the overcrowding in the House of Lords. She also criticised successive prime ministers for filling the second chamber with \"lobby fodder\" in an attempt to help their policies become law. She made her remarks days before a new batch of peers were due to be created and several months after the passage of the House of Lords Reform Act 2014, enabling life peers to retire or resign their seats in the House, which had previously only been possible for hereditary peers and bishops.\nIn August 2015, when 45 more peers were created in the Dissolution Honours, the total number of eligible members of the Lords increased to 826. In a report entitled \"Does size matter?\" the BBC said: \"Increasingly, yes. Critics argue the House of Lords is the second largest legislature after the Chinese National People's Congress and dwarfs upper houses in other bicameral democracies such as the United States (100 senators), France (348 senators), Australia (76 senators), Canada (105 appointed senators) and India (250 members). The Lords is also larger than the Supreme People's Assembly of North Korea (687 members)\", and that \"Peers grumble that there is not enough room to accommodate all of their colleagues in the Chamber, where there are only about 400 seats, and say they are constantly jostling for space \u2013 particularly during high-profile sittings\", but added, \"On the other hand, defenders of the Lords say that it does a vital job scrutinising legislation, a lot of which has come its way from the Commons in recent years\".\nIn late 2016, a Lord Speaker's committee was formed to examine the issue of overcrowding, with fears membership could swell to above 1,000, and in October 2017 the committee presented its findings. In December 2017, the Lords debated and broadly approved its report, which proposed a cap on membership at 600 peers, with a fifteen-year term limit for new peers and a \"two-out, one-in\" limit on new appointments. By October 2018, the Lord Speaker's committee commended the reduction in peers' numbers, noting that the rate of departures had been greater than expected, with the House of Commons Public Administration and Constitutional Affairs Select Committee approving the progress achieved without legislation.\nBy April 2019, with the retirement of nearly one hundred peers since the passage of the House of Lords Reform Act 2014, the number of active peers had been reduced to a total of 782, of whom 665 were life peers. This total, however, remains greater than the membership of 669 peers in March 2000, after implementation of the House of Lords Act 1999 removed the bulk of the hereditary peers from their seats; it is well above the proposed 600-member cap, and is still larger than the House of Commons's 650 members.\nFunctions.\nLegislative functions.\nAll legislation, with the exception of money bills, may be introduced in either the House of Lords or House of Commons.\nThe House of Lords debates legislation, and has the power to amend or reject bills. However, the power of the Lords to reject a bill passed by the House of Commons is severely restricted by the Parliament Acts. Under those Acts, certain types of bills may be presented for Royal Assent without the consent of the House of Lords (i.e. the Commons can override the Lords' veto). The House of Lords cannot delay a money bill (a bill that, in the view of the Speaker of the House of Commons, solely concerns national taxation or public funds) for more than one month.\nOther public bills cannot be delayed by the House of Lords for more than two parliamentary sessions, or one calendar year. These provisions, however, only apply to public bills that originate in the House of Commons, and cannot have the effect of extending a parliamentary term beyond five years. A further restriction is a constitutional convention known as the Salisbury Convention, which means that the House of Lords does not oppose legislation promised in the Government's election manifesto.\nBy a custom that prevailed even before the Parliament Acts, the House of Lords is further restrained insofar as financial bills are concerned. The House of Lords may neither originate a bill concerning taxation or Supply (supply of treasury or exchequer funds), nor amend a bill so as to insert a taxation or Supply-related provision. (The House of Commons, however, often waives its privileges and allows the Upper House to make amendments with financial implications.) Moreover, the Upper House may not amend any Supply Bill. The House of Lords formerly maintained the absolute power to reject a bill relating to revenue or Supply, but this power was curtailed by the Parliament Acts.\nRelationship with the government.\nThe House of Lords does not control the term of the prime minister or of the government. Only the lower house may force the prime minister to resign or call elections by passing a motion of no-confidence or by withdrawing supply. Therefore, the House of Lords' oversight of the government is limited.\nMost Cabinet ministers are from the House of Commons rather than the House of Lords. In particular, all prime ministers since 1902 have been members of the lower house (Alec Douglas-Home, who became prime minister in 1963 whilst still an earl, disclaimed his peerage and was elected to the Commons soon after his term began). In recent history, it has been very rare for major cabinet positions (except Lord Chancellor and Leader of the House of Lords) to have been filled by peers.\nExceptions include:\nFrom 1999 to 2010 the Attorney General for England and Wales was a member of the House of Lords; as of July 2024[ [update]], the Attorney General is once again a peer.\nThe House of Lords remains a source for junior ministers and members of government. Like the House of Commons, the Lords also has a Government Chief Whip as well as several Junior Whips. Where a government department is not represented by a minister in the Lords or one is not available, government whips will act as spokesmen for them.\nFormer judicial role.\nHistorically, the House of Lords held several judicial functions. Most notably, until 2009 the House of Lords served as the court of last resort for most instances of UK law. Since 1 October 2009 this role is now held by the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom.\nThe Lords' judicial functions originated from the ancient role of the Curia Regis as a body that addressed the petitions of the King's subjects. The functions were exercised not by the whole House, but by a committee of \"Law Lords\". The bulk of the House's judicial business was conducted by the twelve Lords of Appeal in Ordinary, who were specifically appointed for this purpose under the Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876.\nThe judicial functions could also be exercised by Lords of Appeal (other members of the House who happened to have held high judicial office). No Lord of Appeal in Ordinary or Lord of Appeal could sit judicially beyond the age of seventy-five. The judicial business of the Lords was supervised by the Senior Lord of Appeal in Ordinary and their deputy, the Second Senior Lord of Appeal in Ordinary.\nThe jurisdiction of the House of Lords extended, in civil and in criminal cases, to appeals from the courts of England and Wales, and of Northern Ireland. From Scotland, appeals were possible only in civil cases; Scotland's High Court of Justiciary is the highest court in criminal matters. The House of Lords was not the United Kingdom's only court of last resort; in some cases, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council performs such a function. The jurisdiction of the Privy Council in the United Kingdom, however, is relatively restricted; it encompasses appeals from ecclesiastical courts, disputes under the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975, and a few other minor matters. Issues related to devolution were transferred from the Privy Council to the Supreme Court in 2009.\nThe twelve Law Lords did not all hear every case; rather, after World War II cases were heard by panels known as Appellate Committees, each of which normally consisted of five members (selected by the Senior Lord). An Appellate Committee hearing an important case could consist of more than five members. Though Appellate Committees met in separate committee rooms, judgement was given in the Lords Chamber itself. No further appeal lay from the House of Lords, although the House of Lords could refer a \"preliminary question\" to the European Court of Justice in cases involving an element of European Union law, and a case could be brought at the European Court of Human Rights if the House of Lords did not provide a satisfactory remedy in cases where the European Convention on Human Rights was relevant.\nA distinct judicial function\u2014one in which the whole House used to participate\u2014is that of trying impeachments. Impeachments were brought by the House of Commons, and tried in the House of Lords; a conviction required only a majority of the Lords voting. Impeachments, however, are to all intents and purposes obsolete; the last impeachment was that of Henry Dundas, 1st Viscount Melville, in 1806.\nSimilarly, the House of Lords was once the court that tried peers charged with high treason or felony. The House would be presided over not by the Lord Chancellor, but by the Lord High Steward, an official especially appointed for the occasion of the trial. If Parliament was not in session, then peers could be tried in a separate court, known as the Lord High Steward's Court. Only peers, their wives, and their widows (unless remarried) were entitled to such trials; the Lords Spiritual were tried in ecclesiastical courts. In 1948, the right of peers to be tried in such special courts was abolished; now, they are tried in the regular courts. The last such trial in the House was of Edward Russell, 26th Baron de Clifford, in 1935. An illustrative dramatisation circa 1928 of a trial of a peer (the fictional Duke of Denver) on a charge of murder (a felony) is portrayed in the 1972 BBC Television adaption of Dorothy L. Sayers' Lord Peter Wimsey mystery \"Clouds of Witness\".\nThe Constitutional Reform Act 2005 resulted in the creation of a separate Supreme Court of the United Kingdom, to which the judicial function of the House of Lords, and some of the judicial functions of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, were transferred. In addition, the office of Lord Chancellor was reformed by the act, removing his ability to act as both a government minister and a judge. This was motivated in part by concerns about the historical admixture of legislative, judicial, and executive power. The new Supreme Court is located at Middlesex Guildhall.\nMembership.\nLords Spiritual.\nMembers of the House of Lords who sit by virtue of their ecclesiastical offices are known as Lords Spiritual. Formerly, the Lords Spiritual were the majority in the English House of Lords, comprising the church's archbishops, (diocesan) bishops, abbots, and those priors who were entitled to wear a mitre. After the English Reformation's high point in 1539, only the archbishops and bishops continued to attend, as the Dissolution of the Monasteries had just disposed of and suppressed the positions of abbot and prior. In 1642, during the few gatherings of the Lords convened during English Interregnum which saw periodic war, the Lords Spiritual were excluded altogether, but they returned under the Clergy Act 1661.\nThe number of Lords Spiritual was further restricted by the Bishopric of Manchester Act 1847, and by later Acts. The Lords Spiritual can now number no more than 26: these are the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Bishops of London, Durham and Winchester (who sit by right regardless of seniority), and the 21 longest-serving bishops from other dioceses in the Church of England (excluding the dioceses of Sodor and Man and Gibraltar in Europe, as these lie entirely outside the United Kingdom). Following a change to the law in 2014 to allow women to be ordained archbishops and bishops, the Lords Spiritual (Women) Act 2015 was passed, which provides that whenever a vacancy arises among the Lords Spiritual during the ten years following the Act coming into force, the vacancy has to be filled by a woman, if one is eligible. This does not apply to the two archbishops and the three bishops who sit by right.\nThe current Lords Spiritual represent only the Church of England. Archbishops and bishops of the Church of Scotland historically sat in the Parliament of Scotland but were finally excluded in 1689 (after a number of previous exclusions) when the Church of Scotland became permanently Presbyterian. There are no longer archbishops and bishops in the Church of Scotland in the traditional sense of the word, and that Church has never sent members to sit in the Westminster House of Lords. The Church of Ireland did obtain representation in the House of Lords after the union of Ireland and Great Britain in 1801. Of the Church of Ireland's ecclesiastics, four (one archbishop and three bishops) were to sit at any one time, with the members rotating at the end of every parliamentary session (which normally lasted about one year). The Church of Ireland, however, was disestablished in 1871, and thereafter ceased to be represented by Lords Spiritual. Bishops of Welsh sees in the Church of England originally sat in the House of Lords (after 1847, only if their seniority within the church entitled them to), but the Church in Wales ceased to be a part of the Church of England in 1920 and was simultaneously disestablished in Wales. Accordingly, the four bishops of the Church in Wales were no longer eligible to sit in the House of Lords from 1920 onwards, and their places were taken by the next four English bishops who were eligible by seniority. \nOther ecclesiastics have sat in the House of Lords as Lords Temporal in recent times: Immanuel Jakobovits, Chief Rabbi of the United Synagogue (the largest organisation of Orthodox Jewish congregations in Britain) was appointed to the House of Lords (with the consent of Queen Elizabeth II, who acted on the advice of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher), as was his successor Chief Rabbi Jonathan Sacks. Julia Neuberger is the senior rabbi to the West London Synagogue. In recognition of his work at reconciliation and in the peace process in Northern Ireland, the Archbishop of Armagh (the senior Anglican archbishop in Ireland), Robin Eames, was appointed to the Lords by John Major. Other clergy appointed include Donald Soper, Timothy Beaumont, and some Scottish clerics.\nAppointments of Catholic clergy to the Lords is unlikely, as since the promulgation of the 1983 \"Code of Canon Law\", all Catholic clergy of the Latin Church have been discouraged from holding secular public office, and all diocesan priests and bishops have been completely prohibited from it (excepting only political offices of the Vatican City State).\nFormer Archbishops of Canterbury, having reverted to the status of a regular bishop but no longer diocesans, are invariably given life peerages and sit as Lords Temporal.\nBy custom at least one of the archbishops or bishops reads prayers in each legislative day (a role taken by the chaplain in the Commons). They often speak in debates; in 2004 Rowan Williams, the Archbishop of Canterbury, opened a debate into sentencing legislation. Measures (proposed laws of the Church of England) must be put before the Lords, and the Lords Spiritual have a role in ensuring that this takes place.\nLords Temporal.\nHereditary peers.\nSince the Dissolution of the Monasteries, the Lords Temporal have been the most numerous group in the House of Lords. Unlike the Lords Spiritual, they may be publicly partisan, aligning themselves with one or another of the political parties that dominate the House of Commons. Publicly non-partisan Lords are called crossbenchers. Originally, the Lords Temporal included several hundred hereditary peers (that is, those whose peerages may be inherited), who ranked variously as dukes, marquesses, earls, viscounts, and barons (as well as Scottish Lords of Parliament). Such hereditary dignities can be created by the Crown; in modern times this is done on the advice of the Prime Minister of the day (except in the case of members of the Royal Family).\nHolders of Scottish and Irish peerages were not always permitted to sit in the Lords. When Scotland united with England to form Great Britain in 1707, it was provided that the Scottish hereditary peers would only be able to elect 16 Scottish representative peers to sit in the House of Lords; the term of a representative was to extend until the next general election. A similar provision was enacted when Ireland merged with Great Britain in 1801 to form the United Kingdom; the Irish peers were allowed to elect 28 Irish representative peers, who were to retain office for life. Elections for Irish representatives ended in 1922, when most of Ireland became an independent state known as the Irish Free State; elections for Scottish representatives ended with the passage of the Peerage Act 1963, under which all Scottish peers obtained seats in the Upper House.\nIn 1999, the Labour government brought forward the House of Lords Act removing the right of several hundred hereditary peers to sit in the House. The Act provided, as a measure intended to be temporary, that 92 people would continue to sit in the Lords by virtue of hereditary peerages, and this is still in effect.\nOf the 92, two remain in the House of Lords because they hold royal offices connected with Parliament: the Earl Marshal and the Lord Great Chamberlain. Of the remaining ninety peers sitting in the Lords by virtue of a hereditary peerage, 15 are elected by the whole House and 75 are chosen by fellow hereditary peers in the House of Lords, grouped by party. (A holder of a hereditary peerage who is given a life peerage becomes a member of the House of Lords without a need for a by-election.) The exclusion of other hereditary peers removed Charles, then Prince of Wales (who was also Earl of Chester) and all other royal peers, including Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh; the then Prince Andrew, Duke of York; Prince Edward, then Earl of Wessex; Prince Richard, Duke of Gloucester; and Prince Edward, Duke of Kent.\nThe number of hereditary peers to be chosen by a political group reflects the proportion of hereditary peers that belonged to that group (see current composition below) in 1999. When an elected hereditary peer dies, a by-election is held, with a variant of the Alternative Vote system being used. If the recently deceased hereditary peer had been elected by the whole House, then so are their replacement; a hereditary peer elected by a specific political group (including the non-aligned crossbenchers) is replaced by a vote of the hereditary peers already elected to the Lords belonging to that political group (whether elected by that group or by the whole house).\nLords of Appeal in Ordinary.\nUntil 2009, the Lords Temporal also included the Lords of Appeal in Ordinary, more commonly known as Law Lords, a group of individuals appointed to the House of Lords so that they could exercise its judicial functions. Lords of Appeal in Ordinary were first appointed under the Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876. They were selected by the Prime Minister of the day, but were formally appointed by the Sovereign. A Lord of Appeal in Ordinary had to retire at the age of 70, or, if his term was extended by the government, at the age of 75; after reaching such an age, the Law Lord could not hear any further cases in the House of Lords.\nThe number of Lords of Appeal in Ordinary (excluding those who were no longer able to hear cases because of age restrictions) was limited to twelve, but could be changed by statutory instrument. By a convention of the House, Lords of Appeal in Ordinary did not take part in debates on new legislation, so as to maintain judicial independence. Lords of Appeal in Ordinary held their seats in the House of Lords for life, remaining as members even after reaching the judicial retirement age of 70 or 75. Former Lord Chancellors and holders of other high judicial office could also sit as Law Lords under the Appellate Jurisdiction Act, although in practice this right was only rarely exercised.\nUnder the Constitutional Reform Act 2005, the Lords of Appeal in Ordinary when the Act came into effect in 2009 became judges of the new Supreme Court of the United Kingdom and were then barred from sitting or voting in the House of Lords until they had retired as judges. One of the main justifications for the new Supreme Court was to establish a separation of powers between the judiciary and the legislature. It is therefore unlikely that future appointees to the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom will be made Lords of Appeal in Ordinary.\nLife peers.\nThe largest group of Lords Temporal, and indeed of the whole House, are life peers. As of \u00a02024,[ [update]] there are 670 life peers eligible to vote in the House. Life peers rank only as barons or baronesses, and are created under the Life Peerages Act 1958. Like all other peers, life peers are created by the Sovereign, who acts on the advice of the Prime Minister or the House of Lords Appointments Commission. By convention, however, the Prime Minister allows leaders of other parties to nominate some life peers, so as to maintain a political balance in the House of Lords. Moreover, some non-party life peers (the number being determined by the Prime Minister) are nominated by the independent House of Lords Appointments Commission.\nIn 2000 the government announced that it would set up an Independent Appointments Commission, under Dennis Stevenson, Lord Stevenson of Coddenham, to select fifteen so-called \"people's peers\" for life peerages. However, when the choices were announced in April 2001, from a list of 3,000 applicants, the choices were treated with criticism in the media, as all were distinguished in their field, and none were \"ordinary people\" as some had originally hoped.\nQualifications.\nSeveral different qualifications apply for membership of the House of Lords. No person may sit in the House of Lords if under the age of 21. Furthermore, only United Kingdom, Irish and Commonwealth citizens may sit in the House of Lords. The nationality restrictions were previously more stringent: under the Act of Settlement 1701, and prior to the British Nationality Act 1948, only natural-born subjects qualified.\nAdditionally, some bankruptcy-related restrictions apply to members of the Upper House. Subjects of a Bankruptcy Restrictions Order (applicable in England and Wales only), adjudged bankrupt (in Northern Ireland), or a sequestered estate (in Scotland) are not eligible to sit in the House of Lords. Individuals convicted of high treason are prohibited from sitting in the House of Lords until completion of their full term of imprisonment. An exception applies, however, if the individual convicted of high treason receives a full pardon. An individual serving a prison sentence for an offence other than high treason is \"not\" automatically disqualified.\nWomen were excluded from the House of Lords until the Life Peerages Act 1958, passed to address the declining number of active members, made possible the creation of peerages for life (which expire on the death of the holder, as opposed to hereditary peerages). Women were immediately eligible and four were among the first life peers appointed. However, female hereditary peers continued to be excluded until the passage of the Peerage Act 1963. Since the passage of the House of Lords Act 1999, female hereditary peers remain eligible for election to the Upper House; until her resignation on 1 May 2020, there was one (Margaret of Mar, 31st Countess of Mar) among the 90 hereditary peers who continue to sit. After Barbara Wootton became one of the first four life peers appointed under the Life Peerages Act 1958, she requested that she not be referred to as \"peeress\", believing that the term failed to distinguish female peers from the mere wives of peers.\nCash for peerages.\nThe Honours (Prevention of Abuses) Act 1925 made it illegal for a peerage, or other honour, to be bought or sold. Nonetheless, there have been repeated allegations that life peerages (and thus membership of the House of Lords) have been made available to major political donors in exchange for donations. The most prominent example, the Cash for Honours scandal in 2006, saw a police investigation, with no charges being brought. A 2015 study found that of 303 people nominated for peerages in the period 2005\u20132014, a total of 211 were former senior figures within politics (including former MPs), or were non-political appointments. Of the remaining 92 political appointments from outside public life, 27 had made significant donations to political parties. The authors concluded firstly that nominees from outside public life were much more likely to have made large gifts than peers nominated after prior political or public service. They also found that significant donors to parties were far more likely to be nominated for peerages than other party members.\nRemoval from House membership.\nTraditionally there was no mechanism by which members could resign or be removed from the House of Lords (compare the situation as regards resignation from the House of Commons). The Peerage Act 1963 permitted a person to disclaim their newly inherited peerage (within certain time limits); this meant that such a person could effectively renounce their membership of the Lords. This might be done in order to remain or become qualified to sit in the House of Commons, as in the case of Tony Benn (formerly the second Viscount Stansgate), who had campaigned for such a change.\nThe House of Lords Reform Act 2014 made provision for members' resignation from the House, removal for non-attendance, and automatic expulsion upon conviction for a serious criminal offence (if resulting in a jail sentence of at least one year). In June 2015, under the House of Lords (Expulsion and Suspension) Act 2015, the House's Standing Orders may provide for the expulsion or suspension of a member upon a resolution of the House.\nIn November 2020, Nazir Ahmed, Lord Ahmed retired from the House of Lords, having seen a Lords Conduct Committee report recommending he be expelled. In December the same year, Lord Maginnis was suspended from the House for 18 months.\nOfficers.\nTraditionally the House of Lords did not elect its own speaker, unlike the House of Commons; rather, the \"ex officio\" presiding officer was the Lord Chancellor. With the passage of the Constitutional Reform Act 2005, the post of Lord Speaker was created, a position to which a peer is elected by the House and subsequently appointed by the Crown. The first Lord Speaker, elected on 4 May 2006, was Helene Hayman, Baroness Hayman, a former Labour peer. As the Speaker is expected to be an impartial presiding officer, Hayman resigned from the Labour Party. In 2011, Frances D'Souza, Baroness D'Souza was elected as the second Lord Speaker, replacing Hayman in September 2011. D'Souza was in turn succeeded by Norman Fowler, Lord Fowler in September 2016, who served as Lord Speaker until his resignation in April 2021. He was succeeded as Lord Speaker by John McFall, Lord McFall of Alcluith, who is the incumbent Lord Speaker.\nThis reform of the post of Lord Chancellor was made due to the perceived constitutional anomalies inherent in the role. The Lord Chancellor was not only the Speaker of the House of Lords, but also a member of the Cabinet, and the most senior judge in England and Wales; his or her department, formerly the Lord Chancellor's Department, is now called the Ministry of Justice. The Lord Chancellor is no longer the head of the judiciary of England and Wales. Hitherto, the Lord Chancellor was part of all three branches of government: the legislative, the executive, and the judicial. The only other person in such a position is the monarch, as the formal source of all executive authority, the King-in-Parliament who grants royal assent to laws, and appointer of judges; but whereas the monarch's actions are strictly limited by convention, the Lord Chancellor's were not, a situation which offended against the principle of separation of powers.\nThe overlap of the legislative and executive roles is a characteristic of the Westminster system, as the entire cabinet consists of members of the House of Commons or the House of Lords; however, in June 2003, the Blair Government announced its intention to abolish the post of Lord Chancellor because of the office's mixed executive and judicial responsibilities. The abolition of the office was rejected by the House of Lords, and the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 was thus amended to preserve the office of Lord Chancellor. The Act no longer guarantees that the office holder of Lord Chancellor is the presiding officer of the House of Lords, and therefore allows the House of Lords to elect a speaker of their own.\nThe lord speaker may be replaced as presiding officer by one of his or her deputies. The chairman of committees, the principal deputy chairman of committees, and several chairmen are all deputies to the lord speaker, and are all appointed by the House of Lords itself at the beginning of each session. By custom, the Crown appoints each chairman, principal deputy chairman and deputy chairman to the additional office of Deputy Speaker of the House of Lords. There was previously no legal requirement that the lord chancellor or a deputy speaker be a member of the House of Lords (though the same has long been customary).\nWhilst presiding over the House of Lords, the lord chancellor traditionally wore ceremonial black and gold robes. Robes of black and gold are now worn by the lord chancellor and Secretary of State for Justice in the House of Commons, on ceremonial occasions. This is no longer a requirement for the lord speaker except for state occasions outside of the chamber. The speaker or deputy speaker sits on the Woolsack, a large red seat stuffed with wool, at the front of the Lords Chamber.\nWhen the House of Lords resolves itself into committee (see below), the Chairman of Committees or a Deputy Chairman of Committees presides, not from the Woolsack, but from a chair at the Table of the House. The presiding officer has little power compared to the Speaker of the House of Commons. The presiding officer only acts as the mouthpiece of the House, performing duties such as announcing the results of votes. This is because, unlike in the House of Commons where all statements are directed to \"Mr/Madam Speaker\", in the House of Lords they are directed to \"My Lords\"; i.e., the entire body of the House.\nThe Lord Speaker or Deputy Speaker cannot determine which members may speak, or discipline members for violating the rules of the House; these measures may be taken only by the House itself. Unlike the politically neutral Speaker of the House of Commons, the Lord Chancellor and Deputy Speakers originally remained members of their respective parties, and were permitted to participate in debate; however, this is no longer true of the new role of Lord Speaker.\nAnother officer of the body is the Leader of the House of Lords, a peer selected by the Prime Minister. The Leader of the House is responsible for steering Government bills through the House of Lords, and is a member of the Cabinet. The Leader also advises the House on proper procedure when necessary, but such advice is merely informal, rather than official and binding. A Deputy Leader is also appointed by the Prime Minister, and takes the place of an absent or unavailable leader.\nThe Clerk of the Parliaments is the chief clerk and officer of the House of Lords (but is not a member of the House itself). The Clerk, who is appointed by the Crown, advises the presiding officer on the rules of the House, signs orders and official communications, endorses bills, and is the keeper of the official records of both Houses of Parliament. Moreover, the Clerk of the Parliaments is responsible for arranging by-elections of hereditary peers when necessary. The deputies of the Clerk of the Parliaments (the Clerk Assistant and the Reading Clerk) are appointed by the Lord Speaker, subject to the House's approval.\nThe Gentleman or Lady Usher of the Black Rod is also an officer of the House; they take their title from the symbol of their office, a black rod. Black Rod (as the Gentleman/Lady Usher is normally known) is responsible for ceremonial arrangements, is in charge of the House's doorkeepers, and may (upon the order of the House) take action to end disorder or disturbance in the Chamber. Black Rod also holds the office of Serjeant-at-Arms of the House of Lords, and in this capacity attends upon the Lord Speaker. The Gentleman or Lady Usher of the Black Rod's duties may be delegated to the Yeoman Usher of the Black Rod or to the Assistant Serjeant-at-Arms.\nProcedure.\nThe House of Lords and the House of Commons assemble in the Palace of Westminster. The Lords Chamber is lavishly decorated, in contrast with the more modestly furnished Commons Chamber. Benches in the Lords Chamber are coloured red. The Woolsack is at the front of the Chamber; the Government sit on benches on the right of the Woolsack, while members of the Opposition sit on the left. Crossbenchers sit on the benches immediately opposite the Woolsack.\nThe Lords Chamber is the site of many formal ceremonies, the most famous of which is the State Opening of Parliament, held at the beginning of each new parliamentary session. During the State Opening, the Sovereign, seated on the Throne in the Lords Chamber and in the presence of both Houses of Parliament, delivers a speech outlining the Government's agenda for the upcoming parliamentary session.\nIn the House of Lords, members need not seek the recognition of the presiding officer before speaking, as is done in the House of Commons. If two or more Lords simultaneously rise to speak, the House decides which one is to be heard by acclamation, or, if necessary, by voting on a motion. Often, however, the Leader of the House will suggest an order, which is thereafter generally followed. Speeches in the House of Lords are addressed to the House as a whole (\"My Lords\") rather than to the presiding officer alone (as is the custom in the Lower House). Members may not refer to each other in the second person (as \"you\"), but rather use third person forms such as \"the noble Duke\", \"the noble Earl\", \"the noble Lord\", \"my noble friend\", \"The most Reverend Primate\", etc.\nEach member may make no more than one speech on a motion, except that the mover of the motion may make one speech at the beginning of the debate and another at the end. Speeches are not subject to any time limits in the House; however, the House may put an end to a speech by approving a motion \"that the noble Lord be no longer heard\". It is also possible for the House to end the debate entirely, by approving a motion \"that the Question be now put\". This procedure is known as Closure, and is extremely rare. Six closure motions were passed on 4 April 2019 to significant media attention as part of consideration of a private member's bill concerning the United Kingdom's withdrawal from the European Union.\nOnce all speeches on a motion have concluded, or Closure invoked, the motion may be put to a vote. The House first votes by voice vote; the Lord Speaker or Deputy Speaker puts the question, and the Lords respond either \"content\" (in favour of the motion) or \"not content\" (against the motion). The presiding officer then announces the result of the voice vote, but if his assessment is challenged by any Lord, a recorded vote known as a division follows.\nMembers of the House enter one of two lobbies (the \"content\" lobby or the \"not-content\" lobby) on either side of the Chamber, where their names are recorded by clerks. At each lobby are two Tellers (themselves members of the House) who count the votes of the Lords. The Lord Speaker may not take part in the vote. Once the division concludes, the Tellers provide the results thereof to the presiding officer, who then announces them to the House.\nIf there is an equality of votes, the motion is decided according to the following principles: legislation may proceed in its present form, unless there is a majority in favour of amending or rejecting it; any other motions are rejected, unless there is a majority in favour of approving it. The quorum of the House of Lords is just three members for a general or procedural vote, and 30 members for a vote on legislation. If fewer than three or 30 members (as appropriate) are present, the division is invalid.\nSpecial arrangements were made during the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic to allow some duties to be carried out online.\nDisciplinary powers.\nBy contrast with the House of Commons, the House of Lords has not until recently had an established procedure for imposing sanctions on its members. When a cash for influence scandal was referred to the Committee of Privileges in January 2009, the Leader of the House of Lords also asked the Privileges Committee to report on what sanctions the House had against its members. After seeking advice from the Attorney General for England and Wales and the former Lord Chancellor James Mackay, Lord Mackay of Clashfern, the committee decided that the House \"possessed an inherent power\" to suspend errant members, although not to withhold a writ of summons nor to expel a member permanently. When the House subsequently suspended Peter Truscott, Lord Truscott and Tom Taylor, Lord Taylor of Blackburn for their role in the scandal, they were the first to meet this fate since 1642.\nRecent changes have expanded the disciplinary powers of the House. Section 3 of the House of Lords Reform Act 2014 now provides that any member of the House of Lords convicted of a crime and sentenced to imprisonment for more than one year loses their seat. The House of Lords (Expulsion and Suspension) Act 2015 allows the House to set up procedures to suspend, and to expel, its members.\nRegulation of behaviour in the chamber.\nThere are two motions which have grown up through custom and practice and which govern questionable conduct within the House. They are brought into play by a member standing up, possibly intervening on another member, and moving the motion without notice. When the debate is getting excessively heated, it is open to a member to move \"that the Standing Order on Asperity of Speech be read by the Clerk\". The motion can be debated, but if agreed by the House, the Clerk of the Parliaments will read Standing Order 32 which provides \"That all personal, sharp, or taxing speeches be forborn\". The Journals of the House of Lords record only four instances on which the House has ordered the Standing Order to be read since the procedure was invented in 1871.\nFor more serious problems with an individual Lord, the option is available to move \"That the noble Lord be no longer heard\". This motion also is debatable, and the debate which ensues has sometimes offered a chance for the member whose conduct has brought it about to come to order so that the motion can be withdrawn. If the motion is passed, its effect is to prevent the member from continuing their speech on the motion then under debate. The Journals identify eleven occasions on which this motion has been moved since 1884; four were eventually withdrawn, one was voted down, and six were passed.\nLeave of absence.\nIn 1958, to counter criticism that some peers only appeared at major decisions in the House and thereby particular votes were swayed, the Standing Orders of the House of Lords were enhanced. Peers who did not wish to attend meetings regularly or were prevented by ill health, age or further reasons, were now able to request leave of absence. During the granted time a peer is expected not to visit the House's meetings until either its expiration or termination, announced at least a month prior to their return.\nAttendance allowance.\nVia a new financial support system introduced in 2010, members of the House of Lords can opt to receive an attendance allowance per sitting day of currently \u00a3342 (as of 2023; initially it was \u00a3300 in 2010), plus limited travel expenses. Nonsalaried peers can choose to receive a reduced attendance allowance of \u00a3171 per day instead, or none at all. Peers with a residence registered outside of London can also receive reimbursement for travel expenses.\nCommittees.\nUnlike in the House of Commons, when the term committee is used to describe a stage of a bill, this committee does not take the form of a public bill committee, but what is described as Committee of the Whole House. It is made up of all members of the House of Lords, where any member is allowed to contribute to debates and provides for flexible rules of procedure. It is presided over by the Chairman of Committees.\nThe term committee is also used to describe Grand Committee, where the same rules of procedure apply as in the main chamber, except that no divisions may take place. For this reason, business that is discussed in Grand Committee is usually uncontroversial and likely to be agreed unanimously.\nPublic bills may also be committed to pre-legislative committees. A pre-legislative Committee is specifically constituted for a particular bill. These committees are established in advance of the bill being laid before either the House of Lords or the House of Commons and can take evidence from the public. Such committees are rare and do not replace any of the usual stages of a bill, including committee stage.\nThe House of Lords also has 15 Select committees. Typically, these are \"sessional committees\", meaning that their members are appointed by the House at the beginning of each session, and continue to serve until the next parliamentary session begins. In practice, these are often permanent committees, which are re-established during every session. These committees are typically empowered to make reports to the House \"from time to time\", that is, whenever they wish. Other committees are \"ad-hoc committees\", which are set up to investigate a specific issue. When they are set up by a motion in the House, the motion will set a deadline by which the Committee must report. After this date, the committee will cease to exist unless it is granted an extension. One example of this is the Committee on Public Service and Demographic Change. The House of Lords may appoint a chairman for a committee; if it does not do so, the Chairman of Committees or a Deputy Chairman of Committees may preside instead. Most of the Select Committees are also granted the power to co-opt members, such as the European Union Committee. The primary function of Select Committees is to scrutinise and investigate Government activities; to fulfil these aims, they are permitted to hold hearings and collect evidence. Bills may be referred to Select Committees, but are more often sent to the Committee of the Whole House and Grand Committees.\nThe committee system of the House of Lords also includes several Domestic Committees, which supervise or consider the House's procedures and administration. One of the Domestic Committees is the Committee of Selection, which is responsible for assigning members to many of the House's other committees.\nCurrent composition.\nThere are currently 825 sitting members of the House of Lords, of which 667 are life peers (as of 2 October 2023) and 228 are women (see:Women in the House of Lords). An additional 25 Lords are ineligible to participate, including two peers who are constitutionally disqualified as members of the Judiciary.\nThe House of Lords Act 1999 allocated 75 of the 92 hereditary peers to the parties based on the proportion of hereditary peers that belonged to that party in 1999:\nOf the initial 42 hereditary peers elected as Conservatives, one, David Verney, 21st Lord Willoughby de Broke, defected to UKIP, though he left the party in 2018.\nFifteen hereditary peers are elected by the whole House, and the remaining hereditary peers are the two royal office-holders, the Earl Marshal and the Lord Great Chamberlain.\nA report in 2007 stated that many members of the Lords (particularly the life peers) do not attend regularly; the average daily attendance was around 408.\nWhile the number of hereditary peers is limited to 92, and that of Lords spiritual to 26, there is no maximum limit to the number of life peers who may be members of the House of Lords at any time.\nGender imbalance.\nAlthough female representation in the Lords has risen each decade since 1960, the pace has slowed in recent years, with the number of women peers rising 1% since 2020. A report by the Unlock Democracy think tank found that if every woman ever made a peer was still alive and sitting in the House of Lords today, men would still outnumber women by nearly two to one. The report singled out Rishi Sunak's female appointment rates to the House of Lords, at 17% of his party's appointments as compared with 37.5% of Tory peers appointed under Truss, 20.9% by appointed under Johnson, 46.2% under May, and 30% under Cameron; the report also states that appointment rates under Labour were scarcely higher.\n* The Lord Hermer\u00a0\u2013 Attorney General for England and WalesAdvocate General for Northern Ireland (attends Cabinet)\n* The Baroness Smith of Cluny\u00a0\u2013 Advocate General for Scotland\n* The Baroness Chapman of Darlington \u2013 Minister of State for Development and Africa (attends Cabinet)\n* The Lord Coaker\u00a0\u2013 Minister of State for Defence\n* The Baroness Smith of Malvern\u00a0\u2013 Minister of State for SkillsMinister of State for Women and Equalities\n* The Lord Hanson of Flint\u00a0\u2013 Minister of State for the Home Office\n* The Lord Vallance of Balham\u00a0\u2013 Minister of State for Science, Innovation, Research and Nuclear\n* The Lord Whitehead\u00a0\u2013 Minister of State for Energy Security and Net Zero\n* The Lord Timpson\u00a0\u2013 Minister of State for Prisons, Probation and Reducing Reoffending\n* The Baroness Levitt\u00a0\u2013 Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State and Lords Minister\n* The Lord Vallance of Balham\u00a0\u2013 Minister of State for Science, Innovation, Research and Nuclear\n* The Baroness Lloyd of Effra\u00a0\u2013 Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Digital Economy\n* The Lord Livermore \u2013 Financial Secretary to the Treasury\n* The Lord Stockwood\u00a0\u2013 Minister of State for Investment\n* The Lord Hendy of Richmond Hill\u00a0\u2013 Minister of State for Rail\n* The Lord Stockwood\u00a0\u2013 Minister of State for Investment\n* The Baroness Lloyd of Effra\u00a0\u2013 Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Digital Economy\n* The Baroness Smith of Malvern\u00a0\u2013 Minister of State for SkillsMinister of State for Women and Equalities\n* The Baroness Sherlock \u2013 Minister of State for Work and Pensions\n* The Baroness Merron \u2013 Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Women's Health and Mental Health\n* The Baroness Twycross \u2013 Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Museums, Heritage and Gambling\n* The Baroness Baroness Hayman of Ullock \u2013 Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Biosecurity, Borders and Animals\n* The Baroness Taylor of Stevenage \u2013 Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Housing and Local Government\nCriticisms.\nThere are several criticisms of the House of Lords, including:\nThese criticisms have led some to question whether there is a need for a second house at all, and whether the bicameral system in British politics is still useful. Some nations such as Norway, Sweden, Portugal, New Zealand and Denmark are unicameral.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOverseas counterparts.\nDefunct.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13660", "revid": "164502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13660", "title": "Homeomorphism", "text": "Mapping which preserves all topological properties of a given space\nIn mathematics and more specifically in topology, a homeomorphism (from Greek roots meaning \"similar shape\", named by Henri Poincar\u00e9), also called topological isomorphism, or bicontinuous function, is a bijective and continuous function between topological spaces that has a continuous inverse function. Homeomorphisms are the isomorphisms in the category of topological spaces\u2014that is, they are the mappings that preserve all the topological properties of a given space. Two spaces with a homeomorphism between them are called homeomorphic, and from a topological viewpoint they are the same.\nVery roughly speaking, a topological space is a geometric object, and a homeomorphism results from a continuous deformation of the object into a new shape. Thus, a square and a circle are homeomorphic to each other, but a sphere and a torus are not. However, this description can be misleading. Some continuous deformations do not produce homeomorphisms, such as the deformation of a line into a point. Some homeomorphisms do not result from continuous deformations, such as the homeomorphism between a trefoil knot and a circle. Homotopy and isotopy are precise definitions for the informal concept of \"continuous deformation\".\nDefinition.\nA function formula_1 between two topological spaces is a homeomorphism if it has the following properties:\nA homeomorphism is sometimes called a \"bicontinuous\" function. If such a function exists, formula_6 and formula_7 are homeomorphic. A self-homeomorphism is a homeomorphism from a topological space onto itself. Being \"homeomorphic\" is an equivalence relation on topological spaces. Its equivalence classes are called homeomorphism classes.\nThe third requirement, that formula_8 be continuous, is essential. Consider for instance the function formula_9 (the unit circle in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;) defined byformula_10 This function is bijective and continuous, but not a homeomorphism (formula_11 is compact but formula_12 is not). The function formula_8 is not continuous at the point formula_14 because although formula_8 maps formula_16 to formula_17 any neighbourhood of this point also includes points that the function maps close to formula_18 but the points it maps to numbers in between lie outside the neighbourhood.\nHomeomorphisms are the isomorphisms in the category of topological spaces. As such, the composition of two homeomorphisms is again a homeomorphism, and the set of all self-homeomorphisms formula_19 forms a group, called the homeomorphism group of \"X\", often denoted formula_20 This group can be given a topology, such as the compact-open topology, which under certain assumptions makes it a topological group.\nIn some contexts, there are homeomorphic objects that cannot be continuously deformed from one to the other. Homotopy and isotopy are equivalence relations that have been introduced for dealing with such situations.\nSimilarly, as usual in category theory, given two spaces that are homeomorphic, the space of homeomorphisms between them, formula_21 is a torsor for the homeomorphism groups formula_22 and formula_23 and, given a specific homeomorphism between formula_6 and formula_25 all three sets are identified.\nInformal discussion.\nThe intuitive criterion of stretching, bending, cutting and gluing back together takes a certain amount of practice to apply correctly\u2014it may not be obvious from the description above that deforming a line segment to a point is impermissible, for instance. It is thus important to realize that it is the formal definition given above that counts. In this case, for example, the line segment possesses infinitely many points, and therefore cannot be put into a bijection with a set containing only a finite number of points, including a single point.\nThis characterization of a homeomorphism often leads to a confusion with the concept of homotopy, which is actually \"defined\" as a continuous deformation, but from one \"function\" to another, rather than one space to another. In the case of a homeomorphism, envisioning a continuous deformation is a mental tool for keeping track of which points on space \"X\" correspond to which points on \"Y\"\u2014one just follows them as \"X\" deforms. In the case of homotopy, the continuous deformation from one map to the other is of the essence, and it is also less restrictive, since none of the maps involved need to be one-to-one or onto. Homotopy does lead to a relation on spaces: homotopy equivalence.\nThere is a name for the kind of deformation involved in visualizing a homeomorphism. It is (except when cutting and regluing are required) an isotopy between the identity map on \"X\" and the homeomorphism from \"X\" to \"Y\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13661", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13661", "title": "Hvergelmir", "text": "Spring in Norse mythology\nHvergelmir (Old Norse \"bubbling boiling spring\") is an important primal wellspring in Norse mythology. Hvergelmir is attested in the \"Poetic Edda\", compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources, and the \"Prose Edda\", written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson. In the \"Poetic Edda\", Hvergelmir is mentioned in a single stanza, which details that it is the location where liquid from the antlers of the stag Eik\u00feyrnir flow, and that the spring, \"whence all waters rise\", is the source of numerous rivers. The \"Prose Edda\" repeats this information and adds that the spring is located in Niflheim, that it is one of the three major springs at the primary roots of the cosmic tree Yggdrasil (the other two are Ur\u00f0arbrunnr and M\u00edmisbrunnr), and that within the spring are a vast amount of snakes and the dragon N\u00ed\u00f0h\u00f6ggr.\nAttestations.\nHvergelmir is attested in the following works:\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nHvergelmir receives a single mention in the \"Poetic Edda\", found in the poem \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\":\nThis stanza is followed by three stanzas consisting mainly of the names of 42 rivers. Some of these rivers lead to the dwelling of the gods (such as G\u00f6mul and Geirvimul), while at least two (Gj\u00f6ll and Leipt), reach to Hel.\n\"Prose Edda\".\nHvergelmir is mentioned several times in the \"Prose Edda\". In \"Gylfaginning\", Just-as-High explains that the spring Hvergelmir is located in the foggy realm of Niflheim: \"It was many ages before the earth was created that Niflheim was made, and in its midst lies a spring called Hvergelmir, and from it flows the rivers called Svol, Gunnthra, Fiorm, Fimbulthul, Slidr and Hrid, Sylg and Ylg, Vid, Leiptr; Gioll is next to Hell-gates.\"\nLater in \"Gylfaginning\", Just-as-High describes the central tree Yggdrasil. Just-as-High says that three roots of the tree support it and \"extend very, very far\" and that the third of these three roots extends over Niflheim. Beneath this root, says Just-as-High, is the spring Hvergelmir, and that the base of the root is gnawed on by the dragon N\u00ed\u00f0h\u00f6ggr. Additionally, High says that Hvergelmir contains not only N\u00ed\u00f0h\u00f6ggr but also so many snakes that \"no tongue can enumerate them\".\nThe spring is mentioned a third time in \"Gylfaginning\" where High recounts its source: the stag Eik\u00feyrnir stands on top of the afterlife hall Valhalla feeding branches of Yggdrasil, and from the stag's antlers drips great amounts of liquid down into Hvergelmir. High tallies 26 rivers here.\nHvergelmir is mentioned a final time in the \"Prose Edda\" where Third discusses the unpleasantries of N\u00e1str\u00f6nd. Third notes that Hvergelmir yet worse than the venom-filled N\u00e1str\u00f6nd because\u2014by way of quoting a portion of a stanza from the \"Poetic Edda\" poem \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\"\u2014\"There Nidhogg torments the bodies of the dead\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13664", "revid": "1063872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13664", "title": "Housdorff maximality theorem", "text": ""}
{"id": "13665", "revid": "1300391387", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13665", "title": "Hausdorff maximal principle", "text": "Mathematical result or axiom on order relations\nIn mathematics, the Hausdorff maximal principle is an alternate and earlier formulation of Zorn's lemma proved by Felix Hausdorff in 1914 (Moore 1982:168). It states that in any partially ordered set, every totally ordered subset is contained in a maximal totally ordered subset, where \"maximal\" is with respect to set inclusion.\nIn a partially ordered set, a totally ordered subset is also called a chain. Thus, the maximal principle says every chain in the set extends to a maximal chain.\nThe Hausdorff maximal principle is one of many statements equivalent to the axiom of choice over ZF (Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory without the axiom of choice). The principle is also called the Hausdorff maximality theorem or the Kuratowski lemma (Kelley 1955:33).\nStatement.\nThe Hausdorff maximal principle states that, in any partially ordered set formula_1, every chain formula_2 (i.e., a totally ordered subset) is contained in a maximal chain formula_3 (i.e., a chain that is not contained in a strictly larger chain in formula_1). In general, there may be several maximal chains containing a given chain.\nAn equivalent form of the Hausdorff maximal principle is that in every partially ordered set, there exists a maximal chain. (Note if the set is empty, the empty subset is a maximal chain.)\nThis form follows from the original form since the empty set is a chain. Conversely, to deduce the original form from this form, consider the set formula_5 of all chains in formula_1 containing a given chain formula_2 in formula_1. Then formula_5 is partially ordered by set inclusion. Thus, by the maximal principle in the above form, formula_5 contains a maximal chain formula_11. Let formula_3 be the union of formula_11, which is a chain in formula_1 since a union of a totally ordered set of chains is a chain. Since formula_3 contains formula_2, it is an element of formula_5. Also, since any chain containing formula_3 is contained in formula_3 as formula_3 is a union, formula_3 is in fact a maximal element of formula_5; i.e., a maximal chain in formula_1.\nThe proof that the Hausdorff maximal principle is equivalent to Zorn's lemma is somehow similar to this proof. Indeed, first assume Zorn's lemma. Since a union of a totally ordered set of chains is a chain, the hypothesis of Zorn's lemma (every chain has an upper bound) is satisfied for formula_5 and thus formula_5 contains a maximal element or a maximal chain in formula_1.\nConversely, if the maximal principle holds, then formula_1 contains a maximal chain formula_3. By the hypothesis of Zorn's lemma, formula_3 has an upper bound formula_30 in formula_1. If formula_32, then formula_33 is a chain containing formula_3 and so by maximality, formula_35; i.e., formula_36 and so formula_37. formula_38\nExamples.\nIf \"A\" is any collection of sets, the relation \"is a proper subset of\" is a strict partial order on \"A\". Suppose that \"A\" is the collection of all circular regions (interiors of circles) in the plane. One maximal totally ordered sub-collection of \"A\" consists of all circular regions with centers at the origin. Another maximal totally ordered sub-collection consists of all circular regions bounded by circles tangent from the right to the y-axis at the origin.\nIf (x0, y0) and (x1, y1) are two points of the plane formula_39, define (x0, y0) &lt; (x1, y1) if y0 = y1 and x0 &lt; x1. This is a partial ordering of formula_39 under which two points are comparable only if they lie on the same horizontal line. The maximal totally ordered sets are horizontal lines in formula_39.\nApplication.\nBy the Hausdorff maximal principle, we can show every Hilbert space formula_42 contains a maximal orthonormal subset formula_43 as follows. (This fact can be stated as saying that formula_44 as Hilbert spaces.)\nLet formula_1 be the set of all orthonormal subsets of the given Hilbert space formula_42, which is partially ordered by set inclusion. It is nonempty as it contains the empty set and thus by the maximal principle, it contains a maximal chain formula_47. Let formula_43 be the union of formula_47. We shall show it is a maximal orthonormal subset. First, if formula_50 are in formula_47, then either formula_52 or formula_53. That is, any given two distinct elements in formula_43 are contained in some formula_55 in formula_47 and so they are orthogonal to each other (and of course, formula_43 is a subset of the unit sphere in formula_42). Second, if formula_59 for some formula_60 in formula_1, then formula_60 cannot be in formula_47 and so formula_64 is a chain strictly larger than formula_47, a contradiction. formula_38\nFor the purpose of comparison, here is a proof of the same fact by Zorn's lemma. As above, let formula_1 be the set of all orthonormal subsets of formula_42. If formula_47 is a chain in formula_1, then the union of formula_47 is also orthonormal by the same argument as above and so is an upper bound of formula_47. Thus, by Zorn's lemma, formula_1 contains a maximal element formula_43. (So, the difference is that the maximal principle gives a maximal chain while Zorn's lemma gives a maximal element directly.)\nProof 1.\nThe idea of the proof is essentially due to Zermelo and is to prove the following weak form of Zorn's lemma, from the axiom of choice.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLemma\u2014Let formula_75 be a set consisting of subsets of some fixed set formula_1 such that formula_75 satisfies the following properties:\nThen formula_75 has a maximal element with respect to set inclusion.\n(Zorn's lemma itself also follows from this weak form.) The maximal principle follows from the above since the set of all chains in formula_1 satisfies the above conditions.\nBy the axiom of choice, we have a function formula_87 such that formula_88 for the power set formula_89 of formula_1.\nFor each formula_91, let formula_92 be the set of all formula_93 such that formula_94 is in formula_75. If formula_96, then let formula_35. Otherwise, let\nformula_98\nNote formula_3 is a maximal element if and only if formula_35. Thus, we are done if we can find a formula_3 such that formula_35.\nFix a formula_2 in formula_75. We call a subset formula_105 a \"tower (over formula_2)\" if\nThere exists at least one tower; indeed, the set of all sets in formula_75 containing formula_2 is a tower. Let formula_117 be the intersection of all towers, which is again a tower.\nNow, we shall show formula_117 is totally ordered. We say a set formula_3 is \"comparable in formula_117\" if for each formula_43 in formula_117, either formula_123 or formula_124. Let formula_125 be the set of all sets in formula_117 that are comparable in formula_117. We claim formula_125 is a tower. The conditions 1. and 2. are straightforward to check. For 3., let formula_3 in formula_125 be given and then let formula_131 be the set of all formula_43 in formula_117 such that either formula_123 or formula_135.\nWe claim formula_131 is a tower. The conditions 1. and 2. are again straightforward to check. For 3., let formula_43 be in formula_131. If formula_123, then since formula_3 is comparable in formula_117, either formula_142 or formula_143. In the first case, formula_144 is in formula_131. In the second case, we have formula_146, which implies either formula_147 or formula_148. (This is the moment we needed to collapse a set to an element by the axiom of choice to define formula_144.) Either way, we have formula_144 is in formula_131. Similarly, if formula_124, we see formula_144 is in formula_131. Hence, formula_131 is a tower. Now, since formula_156 and formula_117 is the intersection of all towers, formula_158, which implies formula_113 is comparable in formula_117; i.e., is in formula_125. This completes the proof of the claim that formula_125 is a tower.\nFinally, since formula_125 is a tower contained in formula_117, we have formula_165, which means formula_117 is totally ordered.\nLet formula_3 be the union of formula_117. By 2., formula_3 is in formula_117 and then by 3., formula_171 is in formula_117. Since formula_3 is the union of formula_117, formula_175 and thus formula_176. formula_38\nProof 2.\nThe Bourbaki\u2013Witt theorem, together with the Axiom of choice, can be used to prove the Hausdorff maximal principle. Indeed, let formula_1 be a nonempty poset and formula_179 be the set of all totally ordered subsets of formula_1. Notice that formula_181, since formula_182 and formula_183, for any formula_184. Also, equipped with the inclusion formula_185, formula_186 is a poset. We claim that every chain formula_187 has a supremum. In order to check this out, let formula_55 be the union formula_189. Clearly, formula_190, for all formula_191. Also, if formula_131 is any upper bound of formula_193, then formula_194, since by definition formula_195 for all formula_191. \nNow, consider the map formula_197 given by\nformula_198\nwhere formula_199 is a choice function on formula_200 whose existence is ensured by the Axiom of choice, and the fact that formula_201 is an immediate consequence of the non-maximality of formula_3. Thus, formula_203, for each formula_204. In view of the Bourbaki-Witt theorem, there exists an element formula_205 such that formula_206, and therefore formula_2 is a maximal chain of formula_1.\nIn the case formula_209, the empty set is trivially a maximal chain of formula_1, as already mentioned above. formula_38\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13666", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13666", "title": "Hel (mythological being)", "text": "Underworld entity in Norse mythology\nHel (Old Norse) is a female being in Norse mythology who is said to preside over an underworld realm of the same name, where she receives a portion of the dead. Hel is attested in the \"Poetic Edda\", compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources, and the \"Prose Edda\", written in the 13th century. In addition, she is mentioned in poems recorded in \"Heimskringla\" and \"Egils saga\" that date from the 9th and 10th centuries, respectively. An episode in the Latin work \"Gesta Danorum\", written in the 12th century by Saxo Grammaticus, is generally considered to refer to Hel, and Hel may appear on various Migration Period bracteates.\nIn the \"Poetic Edda\", \"Prose Edda\", and \"Heimskringla\", Hel is referred to as a daughter of Loki. In the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Gylfaginning\", Hel is described as having been appointed by the god Odin as ruler of a realm of the same name, located in Niflheim. In the same source, her appearance is described as half blue and half flesh-coloured and further as having a gloomy, downcast appearance. The \"Prose Edda\" details that Hel rules over vast mansions with many servants in her underworld realm and plays a key role in the attempted resurrection of the god Baldr.\nScholarly theories have been proposed about Hel's potential connections to figures appearing in the 11th-century \"Old English Gospel of Nicodemus\" and Old Norse \"Bartholomeus saga postola\", that she may have been considered a goddess with potential Indo-European parallels in Bhavani, Kali, and Mahakali or that Hel may have become a being only as a late personification of the location of the same name.\nEtymology.\nThe Old Norse name \"Hel\" is identical to the name of the location over which she rules. It stems from the Proto-Germanic feminine noun \"*halj\u014d-\" 'concealed place, the underworld' (compare with Gothic \"halja\", Old English \"hel\" or \"hell\", Old Frisian \"helle\", Old Saxon \"hellia\", Old High German \"hella\"), itself a derivative of \"*helan-\" 'to cover &gt; conceal, hide' (compare with OE \"helan\", OF \"hela\", OS \"helan\", OHG \"helan\"). It derives, ultimately, from the Proto-Indo-European verbal root \"*\u1e31el-\" 'to conceal, cover, protect' (compare with Latin \"c\u0113l\u014d\", Old Irish \"ceilid\", Greek \"kal\u00fapt\u014d\"). The Old Irish masculine noun \"cel\" 'dissolution, extinction, death' is also related.\nOther related early Germanic terms and concepts include the compounds \"*halja-r\u016bn\u014d(n)\" and *\"halja-w\u012btjan\".' The feminine noun \"*halja-r\u016bn\u014d(n)\" is formed with \"*halj\u014d-\" 'hell' attached to \"*r\u016bno\" 'mystery, secret' &gt; runes. It has descendant cognates in the Old English \"helle-r\u00fane\" 'possessed woman, sorceress, diviner', the Old High German \"helli-r\u016bna\" 'magic', and perhaps in the Latinized Gothic form \"haliurunnae\",' although its second element may derive instead from \"rinnan\" 'to run, go', leading to Gothic \"*haljurunna\" as the 'one who travels to the netherworld'. The neutral noun *\"halja-w\u012btjan\" is composed of the same root \"*halj\u014d-\" attached to *\"w\u012btjan\" (compare with Goth. \"un-witi\" 'foolishness, understanding', OE \"witt\" 'right mind, wits', OHG \"wizzi\" 'understanding'), with descendant cognates in Old Norse \"hel-v\u00edti\" 'hell', Old English \"helle-w\u00edte\" 'hell-torment, hell', Old Saxon helli-w\u012bti 'hell', or Middle High German \"helle-w\u012bzi\" 'hell'.\"\"\n\"Hel\" is also etymologically related\u2014although distantly in this case\u2014to the Old Norse word \"Valh\u00f6ll\" 'Valhalla', literally 'hall of the slain', and to the English word \"hall\", both likewise deriving from Proto-Indo-European \"*\u1e31el-\" via the Proto-Germanic root *\"hall\u014d-\" 'covered place, hall'.\nAttestations.\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nThe \"Poetic Edda\", compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources, features various poems that mention Hel. In the \"Poetic Edda\" poem \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", Hel's realm is referred to as the \"Halls of Hel\". In stanza 31 of \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\", Hel is listed as living beneath one of three roots growing from the world tree Yggdrasil. In \"F\u00e1fnism\u00e1l\", the hero Sigurd stands before the mortally wounded body of the dragon F\u00e1fnir, and states that F\u00e1fnir lies in pieces, where \"Hel can take\" him. In \"Atlam\u00e1l\", the phrases \"Hel has half of us\" and \"sent off to Hel\" are used in reference to death, though it could be a reference to the location and not the being, if not both. In stanza 4 of \"Baldrs draumar\", Odin rides towards the \"high hall of Hel\".\nHel may also be alluded to in \"Ham\u00f0ism\u00e1l\". Death is paraphrased as \"joy of the troll-woman\" (or \"ogress\") and ostensibly it is Hel being referred to as the troll-woman or the ogre (\"flag\u00f0\"), although it may otherwise be some unspecified \"d\u00eds\".\n\"Prose Edda\".\nHel receives notable mention in the \"Prose Edda\". In chapter 34 of the book \"Gylfaginning\", Hel is listed by High as one of the three children of Loki and Angrbo\u00f0a; the wolf Fenrir, the serpent J\u00f6rmungandr, and Hel. High continues that, once the gods found that these three children are being brought up in the land of J\u00f6tunheimr, and when the gods \"traced prophecies that from these siblings great mischief and disaster would arise for them\" then the gods expected a lot of trouble from the three children, partially due to the nature of the mother of the children, yet worse so due to the nature of their father.\nHigh says that Odin sent the gods to gather the children and bring them to him. Upon their arrival, Odin threw J\u00f6rmungandr into \"that deep sea that lies round all lands\", Odin threw Hel into Niflheim, and bestowed upon her authority over nine worlds, in that she must \"administer board and lodging to those sent to her, and that is those who die of sickness or old age\". High details that in this realm Hel has \"great Mansions\" with extremely high walls and immense gates, a hall called \u00c9lj\u00fa\u00f0nir, a dish called \"Hunger\", a knife called \"Famine\", the servant Ganglati (Old Norse \"lazy walker\"), the serving-maid Gangl\u00f6t (also \"lazy walker\"), the entrance threshold \"Stumbling-block\", the bed \"Sick-bed\", and the curtains \"Gleaming-bale\". High describes Hel as \"half black and half flesh-coloured\", adding that this makes her easily recognizable, and furthermore that Hel is \"rather downcast and fierce-looking\".\nIn chapter 49, High describes the events surrounding the death of the god Baldr. The goddess Frigg asks who among the \u00c6sir will earn \"all her love and favour\" by riding to Hel, the location, to try to find Baldr, and offer Hel herself a ransom. The god Herm\u00f3\u00f0r volunteers and sets off upon the eight-legged horse Sleipnir to Hel. Herm\u00f3\u00f0r arrives in Hel's hall, finds his brother Baldr there, and stays the night. The next morning, Herm\u00f3\u00f0r begs Hel to allow Baldr to ride home with him, and tells her about the great weeping the \u00c6sir have done upon Baldr's death. Hel says the love people have for Baldr that Herm\u00f3\u00f0r has claimed must be tested, stating:\nIf all things in the world, alive or dead, weep for him, then he will be allowed to return to the \u00c6sir. If anyone speaks against him or refuses to cry, then he will remain with Hel.\nLater in the chapter, after the female j\u00f6tunn \u00de\u00f6kk refuses to weep for the dead Baldr, she responds in verse, ending with \"let Hel hold what she has\". In chapter 51, High describes the events of Ragnar\u00f6k, and details that when Loki arrives at the field V\u00edgr\u00ed\u00f0r \"all of Hel's people\" will arrive with him.\nIn chapter 12 of the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", Hel is mentioned in a kenning for Baldr (\"Hel's companion\"). In chapter 23, \"Hel's [...] relative or father\" is given as a kenning for Loki. In chapter 50, Hel is referenced (\"to join the company of the quite monstrous wolf's sister\") in the skaldic poem \"Ragnarsdr\u00e1pa\".\n\"Heimskringla\".\nIn the \"Heimskringla\" book \"Ynglinga saga\", written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson, Hel is referred to, though never by name. In chapter 17, the king Dyggvi dies of sickness. A poem from the 9th-century \"Ynglingatal\" that forms the basis of \"Ynglinga saga\" is then quoted that describes Hel's taking of Dyggvi:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn chapter 45, a section from \"Ynglingatal\" is given which refers to Hel as \"howes'-warder\" (meaning \"guardian of the graves\") and as taking King Halfdan Hvitbeinn from life. In chapter 46, King Eystein Halfdansson dies by being knocked overboard by a sail yard. A section from \"Ynglingatal\" follows, describing that Eystein \"fared to\" Hel (referred to as \"B\u00fdleistr's-brother's-daughter\"). In chapter 47, the deceased Eystein's son King Halfdan dies of an illness, and the excerpt provided in the chapter describes his fate thereafter, a portion of which references Hel:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn a stanza from \"Ynglingatal\" recorded in chapter 72 of the \"Heimskringla\" book \"Saga of Harald Sigurdsson\", \"given to Hel\" is again used as a phrase to referring to death.\n\"Egils saga\".\nThe Icelanders' saga \"Egils saga\" contains the poem \"Sonatorrek\". The saga attributes the poem to 10th-century skald Egill Skallagr\u00edmsson, and writes that it was composed by Egill after the death of his son Gunnar. The final stanza of the poem contains a mention of Hel, though not by name:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Gesta Danorum\".\nIn the account of Baldr's death in Saxo Grammaticus' early 13th-century work \"Gesta Danorum\", the dying Baldr has a dream visitation from Proserpina (here translated as \"the goddess of death\"):\nThe following night the goddess of death appeared to him in a dream standing at his side, and declared that in three days time she would clasp him in her arms. It was no idle vision, for after three days the acute pain of his injury brought his end.\nScholars have assumed that Saxo used Proserpina as a goddess equivalent to the Norse Hel.\nArchaeological record.\nIt has been suggested that several imitation medallions and bracteates of the Migration Period (ca. first centuries AD) feature depictions of Hel. In particular the bracteates IK 14 and IK 124 depict a rider traveling down a slope and coming upon a female being holding a scepter or a staff. The downward slope may indicate that the rider is traveling towards the realm of the dead and the woman with the scepter may be a female ruler of that realm, corresponding to Hel.\nSome B-class bracteates showing three godly figures have been interpreted as depicting Baldr's death, the best known of these is the Fakse bracteate. Two of the figures are understood to be Baldr and Odin while both Loki and Hel have been proposed as candidates for the third figure. If it is Hel she is presumably greeting the dying Baldr as he comes to her realm.\nScholarly reception.\nSeo Hell.\nThe \"Old English Gospel of Nicodemus\", preserved in two manuscripts from the 11th century, contains a female figure referred to as \"Seo hell\" who engages in flyting with Satan and tells him to leave her dwelling (Old English \"ut of mynre onwununge\"). Regarding Seo Hell in the \"Old English Gospel of Nicodemus\", Michael Bell states that \"her vivid personification in a dramatically excellent scene suggests that her gender is more than grammatical, and invites comparison with the Old Norse underworld goddess Hel and the Frau Holle of German folklore, to say nothing of underworld goddesses in other cultures\" yet adds that \"the possibility that these genders \"are\" merely grammatical is strengthened by the fact that an Old Norse version of Nicodemus, possibly translated under English influence, personifies Hell in the neutral (Old Norse \"\u00feat helv\u00edti\")\".\n\"Bartholomeus saga postola\".\nThe Old Norse \"Bartholomeus saga postola\", an account of the life of Saint Bartholomew dating from the 13th century, mentions a \"Queen Hel\". In the story, a devil is hiding within a pagan idol, and bound by Bartholomew's spiritual powers to acknowledge himself and confess, the devil refers to Jesus as the one which \"made war on Hel our queen\" (Old Norse \"heria\u00f0i a Hel drottning vara\"). \"Queen Hel\" is not mentioned elsewhere in the saga.\nMichael Bell says that while Hel \"might at first appear to be identical with the well-known pagan goddess of the Norse underworld\" as described in chapter 34 of \"Gylfaginning\", \"in the combined light of the Old English and Old Norse versions of \"Nicodemus\" she casts quite a different a shadow\", and that in \"Bartholomeus saga postola\" \"she is clearly the queen of the Christian, not pagan, underworld\".\nOrigins and development.\nJacob Grimm described Hel as an example of a \"half-goddess\": \"one who cannot be shown to be either wife or daughter of a god, and who stands in a dependent relation to higher divinities\", and argued that \"half-goddesses\" stand higher than \"half-gods\" in Germanic mythology. Grimm regarded Hel (whom he refers to here as \"Halja\", the theorized Proto-Germanic form of the term) as essentially an \"image of a greedy, unrestoring, female deity\" and theorized that \"the higher we are allowed to penetrate into our antiquities, the less hellish and more godlike may \"Halja\" appear\". He compared her role, her black color, and her name to \"the Indian Bhavani, who travels about and bathes like Nerthus and Holda, but is likewise called \"Kali\" or \"Mahakali\", the great \"black\" goddess\" and concluded that \"\"Halja\" is one of the oldest and commonest conceptions of our heathenism\". He theorized that the Helhest, a three-legged horse that in Danish folklore roams the countryside \"as a harbinger of plague and pestilence\", was originally the steed of the goddess Hel, and that on this steed Hel roamed the land \"picking up the dead that were her due\". He also says that a wagon was once ascribed to Hel.\nIn her 1948 work on death in Norse mythology and religion, \"The Road to Hel\", Hilda Ellis Davidson argued that the description of Hel as a goddess in surviving sources appeared to be literary personification, the word \"hel\" generally being \"used simply to signify death or the grave\", which she states \"naturally lends itself to personification by poets\". While noting that \"whether this personification has originally been based on a belief in a goddess of death called Hel [was] another question\", she stated that she did not believe the surviving sources gave any reason to believe so, while they included various other examples of \"supernatural women\" who \"seem to have been closely connected with the world of death, and were pictured as welcoming dead warriors\". She suggested that the depiction of Hel \"as a goddess\" in \"Gylfaginning\" \"might well owe something to these\".\nIn a later work (1998), Davidson wrote that the description of Hel found in chapter 33 of \"Gylfaginning\" \"hardly suggests a goddess\", but that \"in the account of Hermod's ride to Hel later in \"Gylfaginning\" (49)\", Hel \"[speaks] with authority as ruler of the underworld\" and that from her realm \"gifts are sent back to Frigg and Fulla by Balder's wife Nanna as from a friendly kingdom\". She posited that Snorri may have \"earlier turned the goddess of death into an allegorical figure, just as he made Hel, the underworld of shades, a place 'where wicked men go,' like the Christian Hell (\"Gylfaginning\" 3)\". She then, like Grimm, compared Hel to Kali:\nOn the other hand, a goddess of death who represents the horrors of slaughter and decay is something well known elsewhere; the figure of Kali in India is an outstanding example. Like Snorri's Hel, she is terrifying to in appearance, black or dark in colour, usually naked, adorned with severed heads or arms or the corpses of children, her lips smeared with blood. She haunts the battlefield or cremation ground and squats on corpses. Yet for all this she is \"the recipient of ardent devotion from countless devotees who approach her as their mother\" [...].\nDavidson further compared Hel to early attestations of the Irish goddesses Badb (described in \"The Destruction of Da Choca's Hostel\" as dark in color, with a large mouth, wearing a dusky mantle, and with gray hair falling over her shoulders, or, alternatively, \"as a red figure on the edge of the ford, washing the chariot of a king doomed to die\") and the Morr\u00edgan. She concluded that, in these examples, \"here we have the fierce destructive side of death, with a strong emphasis on its physical horrors, so perhaps we should not assume that the gruesome figure of Hel is wholly Snorri's literary invention\".\nJohn Lindow stated that most details about Hel, as a figure, are not found outside of Snorri's writing in \"Gylfaginning\", and that when older skaldic poetry \"says that people are 'in' rather than 'with' Hel, we are clearly dealing with a place rather than a person, and this is assumed to be the older conception\". He theorizes that the noun and place \"Hel\" likely originally simply meant \"grave\", and that \"the personification came later\". Lindow also drew a parallel between the personified Hel's banishment to the underworld and the binding of Fenrir as part of a recurring theme of the bound monster, where an enemy of the gods is bound but destined to break free at Ragnarok. Rudolf Simek similarly stated that the figure of Hel is \"probably a very late personification of the underworld Hel\", that \"on the whole nothing speaks in favour of there being a belief in Hel in pre-Christian times\", and noted that \"the first scriptures using the goddess Hel are found at the end of the 10th and in the 11th centuries\". He characterized the allegorical description of Hel's house in \"Gylfaginning\" as \"clearly\u00a0... in the Christian tradition\". However, elsewhere in the same work, Simek cites an argument made by Karl Hauck that one of three figures appearing together on Migration Period B-bracteates is to be interpreted as Hel.\nAs a given name.\nIn January 2017, the Icelandic Naming Committee ruled that parents could not name their child \"Hel\" \"on the grounds that the name would cause the child significant distress and trouble as it grows up\".\nIn popular culture.\nHel is one of the playable gods in the third-person multiplayer online battle arena game \"Smite\" and was one of the original 17 gods. Hel is also featured in Ensemble Studios' 2002 real-time strategy game \"Age of Mythology\", where she is one of 12 gods Norse players can choose to worship.\nHela.\nHel was the inspiration for the Marvel comic book character Hela, created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby; Hela first appeared in \"Journey into Mystery\" #102 (March 1964). In the widely popular \"\" (2017), Hela is portrayed as \"violent, vicious, brutal and cruel\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13667", "revid": "18340714", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13667", "title": "Hawar Islands", "text": "Group of islands in the Gulf of Bahrain\nThe Hawar Islands (; transliterated: \"Juzur \u1e24aw\u0101r\") are an archipelago of desert islands; all but one are owned by Bahrain, while the southern, small, and uninhabited Jinan Island (Arabic: \u062c\u0632\u064a\u0631\u0629 \u062c\u064a\u0646\u0627\u0646; transliterated: \"Jazirat Jinan\") is administered by Qatar as part of its Al-Shahaniya municipality. The archipelago is situated off the west coast of Qatar in the Gulf of Bahrain of the Persian Gulf.\nDescription.\nThe islands used to be one of the settlements of the Bahraini branch of the Dawasir who settled there in the early 19th century. The islands were first surveyed in 1820, when they were called the Warden's Islands, and two villages were recorded. They are now uninhabited, other than a police garrison and a hotel on the main island; access to all but Hawar island itself is severely restricted. Local fishermen are allowed to fish in adjacent waters and there is some recreational fishing and tourism on and around the islands. Fresh water has always been scarce; historically it was obtained by surface collection and even today, with the desalination plant, additional supplies have to be brought in.\nGeography.\nDespite their proximity to Qatar (they are only about from the Qatari mainland whilst being about from the main islands of Bahrain), most of the islands belong to Bahrain, having been a part of a dispute between Bahrain and Qatar which was resolved in 2001. The islands were formerly coincident with the district or \"Min\u1e6daqat\" Juzur \u1e24aw\u0101r (\u0645\u0650\u0646\u0652\u0637\u064e\u0642\u064e\u0629 \u062c\u064f\u0632\u064f\u0631 \u062d\u064e\u0648\u064e\u0627\u0631) and are now administered as part of the Southern Governorate of Bahrain. The land area of the islands is approximately .\nAlthough there are 36 islands in the group, many of the smaller islands are little more than sand or shingle accumulations on areas of exposed bedrock molded by the ongoing processes of sedimentation and accretion. The World Heritage Site application named 8 major islands, which conforms to the description of the islands when first surveyed as consisting of 8 or 9 islands. It has often been described as an archipelago of 16 islands. Janan Island, to the south of Hawar island, is not legally considered to be a part of the group and is owned by Qatar.\nFlora and fauna.\nThere are small herds of Arabian oryx and sand gazelle on Hawar island, and the seas around support sea turtles and a large population of dugongs.\nThe islands are home to many bird species. The archipelago has been designated an Important Bird Area by BirdLife International because it supports significant populations of western reef egrets, Socotra cormorants (with some 200,000\u2013300,000 adults recorded in 1992, making it the largest known breeding concentration in the world), Saunders's and white-cheeked terns, and sooty falcons. Other breeding birds include Caspian and bridled terns, and ospreys. Wintering birds include great crested grebes and greater flamingos.\nConservation.\nThe islands were listed as a Ramsar site in 1997. In 2002, the Bahraini government applied to have the islands recognised as a World Heritage Site due to their unique environment and habitat for endangered species; the application was ultimately unsuccessful.\nAdministration.\nThe islands were formerly coincident with the region or \"Min\u1e6daqat\" of Juzur \u1e24aw\u0101r (\u0645\u0650\u0646\u0652\u0637\u064e\u0642\u064e\u0629 \u062c\u064f\u0632\u064f\u0631 \u062d\u064e\u0648\u064e\u0627\u0631) and are now administered as part of the Southern Governorate of Bahrain.\nJinan Island is administered as part of Al-Shahaniya Municipality of Qatar.\nAccess.\nThe islands are connected through a ferry ride from Manama and are reported to have a potential to be developed as a beach tourism destination.\nList of islands.\nHawar archipelago.\nBy far the largest island is Hawar, which accounts for more than of the land area. Following in size are Suw\u0101d al Jan\u016bb\u012byah, Suw\u0101d ash Sham\u0101l\u012byah, Rubud Al Sharqiyah, Rubud Al Gharbiyah, and Muhazwarah (Umm Hazwarah).\nThe following were not considered as part of the Hawar islands in the International Court of Justice (ICJ) judgment, being located between Hawar and the Bahrain Islands and not disputed by Qatar, but have been included in the Hawar archipelago by the Bahrain government as part of the 2002 World Heritage Site application.\nJanan Island.\nJanan (or Jinan) Island, a small island south of Hawar island, was also considered in the 2001 ICJ judgment. Based on a previous agreement when both Qatar and Bahrain were under British occupation, it was judged to be separate from the Hawar islands and so considered by the court separately. It was awarded to Qatar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13669", "revid": "13744393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13669", "title": "Hans-Dietrich Genscher", "text": "German politician (1927\u20132016)\nHans-Dietrich Genscher (; 21 March 1927 \u2013 31 March 2016) was a German statesman and a member of the liberal Free Democratic Party (FDP), who served as Federal Minister of the Interior from 1969 to 1974, and as Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs and Vice Chancellor of Germany from 1974 to 1992 (except for a two-week break in 1982, after the FDP had left the Third Schmidt cabinet), making him the longest-serving occupant of either post and the only person to have held one of these positions under two different Chancellors of the Federal Republic of Germany. In 1991 he was chairman of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).\nA proponent of Realpolitik, Genscher has been called \"a master of diplomacy\". He is widely regarded as having been a principal \"architect of German reunification\". In 1991, he played a pivotal role in international diplomacy surrounding the breakup of Yugoslavia by successfully pushing for international recognition of Croatia, Slovenia and other republics declaring independence, in an effort to halt \"a trend towards a Greater Serbia\". After leaving office, he worked as a lawyer and international consultant. He was President of the German Council on Foreign Relations and was involved with several international organisations, and with former Czech President V\u00e1clav Havel, he called for a Cold War museum to be built in Berlin.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nGenscher was born on 21 March 1927 in Reideburg (Province of Saxony Anhalt), now a part of Halle, in what later became East Germany. He was the son of Hilda Kreime and Kurt Genscher. His father, a lawyer, died when Genscher was nine years old. In 1943, he was drafted to serve as a member of the Air Force Support Personnel (\"Luftwaffenhelfer\") at the age of 16. At age 17, close to the end of the war, he and his fellow soldiers became members of the Nazi Party due to a collective application (\"Sammelantrag\") by his Wehrmacht unit. He later said he was unaware of it at the time.\nLate in the war, Genscher was deployed as a soldier in General Walther Wenck's 12th Army, which ostensibly was directed to relieve the siege of Berlin. After the German surrender he was an American and British prisoner of war, but was released after two months. Following World War II, he studied law and economics at the universities of Halle and Leipzig (1946\u20131949) and joined the East German Liberal Democratic Party (LDPD) in 1946.\nPolitical career.\nIn 1952, Genscher fled to West Germany, where he joined the Free Democratic Party (FDP). He passed his second state examination in law in Hamburg in 1954 and became a solicitor in Bremen. During these early years after the war, Genscher continuously struggled with illness. From 1956 to 1959 he was a research assistant of the FDP parliamentary group in Bonn. From 1959 to 1965 he was the FDP group managing director, while from 1962 to 1964 he was National Secretary of the FDP.\nIn 1965 Genscher was elected on the North Rhine-Westphalian FDP list to the West German parliament and remained a member of parliament until his retirement in 1998. He was elected deputy national chairman in 1968. From 1969 he served as minister of the interior in the SPD-FDP coalition government led by Chancellor Willy Brandt.\nIn 1974 he became foreign minister and vice chancellor, both posts he would hold for 18 years. From 1 October 1974 to 23 February 1985 he was Chairman of the FDP. It was during his tenure as party chairman that the FDP switched from being the junior member of social-liberal coalition to being the junior member of the 1982 coalition with the CDU/CSU. In 1985 he gave up the post of national chairman. After his resignation as Foreign Minister, Genscher was appointed honorary chairman of the FDP in 1992.\nFederal Minister of the Interior.\nAfter the federal election of 1969 Genscher was instrumental in the formation of the social-liberal coalition of chancellor Willy Brandt and was on 22 October 1969 appointed as federal minister of the interior. \nIn 1972, while minister for the interior, Genscher rejected Israel's offer to send an Israeli special forces unit to Germany to deal with the Munich Olympics hostage crisis. He offered himself as a hostage under the condition that the Israeli athletes would be released, but the leader of the terror group rejected that offer. A flawed rescue attempt by German police forces at F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck air base resulted in a bloody shootout, which left all eleven hostages, five terrorists, and one German policeman dead. Genscher then offered to resign as Minister of the Interior to chancellor Brandt, but Brandt rejected the offer. Genscher's popularity with Israel declined further when he endorsed the release of the three captured attackers following the hijacking of a Lufthansa aircraft on 29 October 1972.\nIn the SPD\u2013FDP coalition, Genscher helped shape Brandt's policy of deescalation with the communist East, commonly known as \"Ostpolitik\", which was continued under chancellor Helmut Schmidt after Brandt's resignation in 1974. He would later be a driving factor in continuing this policy in the new conservative-liberal coalition under Helmut Kohl.\nVice Chancellor and Federal Foreign Minister.\nIn the negotiations on a coalition government of SPD and FDP following the 1976 elections, it took Genscher 73 days to reach agreement with Chancellor Helmut Schmidt.\nAs Foreign Minister, Genscher stood for a policy of compromise between East and West, and developed strategies for an active policy of d\u00e9tente and the continuation of the East\u2013West dialogue with the USSR. He was widely regarded a strong advocate of negotiated settlements to international problems. As a popular story on Genscher's preferred method of shuttle diplomacy has it, \"two Lufthansa jets crossed over the Atlantic, and Genscher was on both\".\nGenscher was a major player in the negotiations on the text of the Helsinki Accords. In December 1976, the General Assembly of the United Nations in New York City accepted Genscher's proposal of an anti-terrorism convention in New York, which was set among other things, to respond to demands from hostage-takers under any circumstances.\nGenscher was one of the FDP's driving forces when, in 1982, the party switched sides from its coalition with the SPD to support the CDU/CSU in their Constructive vote of no confidence to have incumbent Helmut Schmidt replaced with opposition leader Helmut Kohl as Chancellor. The reason for this was the increase in the differences between the coalition partners, particularly in economic and social policy. The switch was controversial, not least in his own party.\nAt several points in his tenure, he irritated the governments of the United States and other allies of Germany by appearing not to support Western initiatives fully. \"During the Cold War, his penchant to seek the middle ground at times exasperated United States policy-makers who wanted a more decisive, less equivocal Germany\", according to Tyler Marshall. Genscher's perceived quasi-neutralism was dubbed \"Genscherism\". \"Fundamental to \"Genscherism\" was said to be the belief that Germany could play a role as a bridge between East and West without losing its status as a reliable NATO ally.\" In the 1980s, Genscher opposed the deployment of new short-range NATO missiles in Germany. At the time, the Reagan Administration questioned whether Germany was straying from the Western alliance and following a program of its own.\nIn 1984, Genscher became the first Western foreign minister to visit Tehran since the Iranian Revolution of 1979. In 1988, he appointed J\u00fcrgen Hellner as West Germany's new ambassador to Libya, a post that had been vacant since the 1986 Berlin discotheque bombing, a tragedy which U.S. officials blamed on the government of Muammar Gaddafi.\nGenscher's proposals frequently set the tone and direction of foreign affairs among Western Europe's democracies. He was also an active participant in the further development of the European Union, taking an active part in the Single European Act Treaty negotiations in the mid-1980s, as well as the joint publication of the Genscher-Colombo plan with Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs Emilio Colombo which advocated further integration and deepening of relations in the European Union towards a more federal Europe. He later was among the politicians who pushed hard for monetary union alongside Edouard Balladur, France's finance minister, and Giuliano Amato, circulating a memorandum to that effect.\nGenscher retained his posts as foreign minister and vice chancellor through German reunification and until 1992 when he stepped down for health reasons.\nReunification efforts.\nGenscher is most respected for his efforts that helped spell the end of the Cold War, in the late 1980s when Communist eastern European governments toppled, and which led to German reunification. During his time in office, he focused on maintaining stability and balance between the West and the Soviet bloc. From the beginning, he argued that the West should seek cooperation with Communist governments rather than treat them as implacably hostile; this policy was embraced by many Germans and other Europeans.\nGenscher had great interest in European integration and the success of German reunification. He soon pushed for effective support of political reform processes in Poland and Hungary. For this purpose, he visited Poland to meet the chairman of Solidarity Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa as early as January 1980. Especially from 1987 he campaigned for an \"active relaxation\" policy response by the West to the Soviet efforts. In the years before German reunification, he made a point of maintaining strong ties with his birthplace Halle, which was regarded as significant by admirers and critics alike.\nWhen thousands of East Germans sought refuge in West German embassies in Czechoslovakia and Poland, Genscher held discussions on the refugee crisis at the United Nations in New York with the foreign ministers of Czechoslovakia, Poland, East Germany and the Soviet Union in September 1989. Genscher's 30 September 1989 speech from the balcony of the German embassy in Prague was an important milestone on the road to the end of the GDR. In the embassy courtyard thousands of East German citizens had assembled. They were trying to travel to West Germany, but were being denied permission to travel by the Czechoslovak government at the request of East Germany. He announced that he had reached an agreement with the Communist Czechoslovak government that the refugees could leave: \"We have come to you to tell you that today, your departure ...\" (German: \"Wir sind zu Ihnen gekommen, um Ihnen mitzuteilen, dass heute Ihre Ausreise ...\"). After these words, the speech was drowned in cheers.\nWith his fellow foreign ministers James Baker of the United States and Eduard Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union, Genscher is widely credited with securing Germany's subsequent peaceful unification and the withdrawal of Soviet forces. He negotiated the German reunification in 1990 with his counterpart from the GDR, Markus Meckel. On 12 September 1990 he signed the Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany on behalf of West Germany. In November 1990, Genscher and his Polish counterpart Krzysztof Skubiszewski signed the German-Polish Border Treaty on the establishment of the Oder\u2013Neisse line as Poland's western border. Meanwhile, he strongly endorsed the plans of the Bush Administration to assure continued U.S. influence in a post-Cold War Europe.\nPost-reunification.\nIn 1991, Genscher successfully pushed for Germany's recognition of the Republic of Croatia in the Croatian War of Independence shortly after JNA entered Vukovar. After Croatia and Slovenia had declared independence, Genscher concluded that Yugoslavia could not be held together, and that republics that wanted to break from the Serbian-dominated federation deserved quick diplomatic recognition. He hoped that such recognition would stop the fighting. The rest of the European Union was subsequently pressured to follow suit soon afterward. The UN Secretary-General Javier P\u00e9rez de Cu\u00e9llar had warned the German Government that a recognition of Slovenia and Croatia would lead to an increase in aggression in the former Yugoslavia.\nAt a meeting of the European Community's foreign ministers in 1991, Genscher proposed to press for a war crimes trial for President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, accusing him of aggression against Kuwait, using chemical weapons against civilians and condoning genocide against the Kurds.\nDuring the Gulf War, Genscher sought to deal with Iraq after other Western leaders had decided to go to war to force it out of Kuwait. Germany made a substantial financial contribution to the allied cause but, citing constitutional restrictions on the use of its armed forces, provided almost no military assistance. In January 1991, Germany sent Genscher on a state visit to Israel and followed up with an agreement to provide the Jewish state with $670 million in military aid, including financing for two submarines long coveted by Israel, a battery of Patriot missiles to defend against Iraqi missiles, 58 armored vehicles specially fitted to detect chemical and biological attacks, and a shipment of gas masks. When, in the aftermath of the war, a far-reaching political debate broke out over how Germany should fulfill its global responsibilities, Genscher responded that if foreign powers expect Germany to assume greater responsibility in the world, they should give it a chance to express its views \"more strongly\" in the United Nations Security Council. He also famously held that \"whatever floats is fine, whatever rolls is not\" to sum up Germany's military export policy for restless countries \u2013 based on a navy's unsuitability for use against a country's own people.\nIn 1992, Genscher, together with his Danish colleague Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, took the initiative to create the Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS) and the EuroFaculty.\nMore than half a century after Nazi leaders assembled their infamous exhibition \"Degenerate Art\", a sweeping condemnation of the work of the avant-garde, Genscher opened a re-creation of the show at the Altes Museum in March 1992, describing Nazi attempts to restrict artistic expression as \"a step toward the catastrophe that produced the mass murder of European Jews and the war of extermination against Germany's neighbors.\" \"The paintings in this exhibition have survived oppression and censorship\", he asserted in his opening remarks. \"They are not only a monument but also a sign of hope. They stand for the triumph of creative freedom over barbarism.\"\nOn 18 May 1992, Genscher retired at his own request from the federal government, which he had been member of for a total of 23 years. At the time, he was the world's longest-serving foreign minister and Germany's most popular politician. He had announced his decision three weeks earlier, on 27 April 1992. Genscher did not specify his reasons for quitting; however, he had suffered two heart attacks by that time. His resignation took effect in May, but he remained a member of parliament and continued to be influential in the Free Democratic Party.\nFollowing Genscher's resignation, Chancellor Helmut Kohl and FDP chairman Otto Graf Lambsdorff named Irmgard Schwaetzer, a former aide to Genscher, to be the new Foreign Minister. In a surprise decision, however, a majority of the FDP parliamentary group rejected her nomination and voted instead to name Justice Minister Klaus Kinkel to head the Foreign Ministry.\nActivities after politics.\nAhead of the German presidential election in 1994, Genscher proclaimed his lack of interest in the position, but was nonetheless widely considered a leading contender. After a poll taken for \"Stern\" magazine showed him to be the favored candidate of 48 percent of German voters, he reiterated in 1993 that he would \"in no case\" accept the presidency.\nHaving finished his political career, Genscher remained active as a lawyer and in international organizations. In late 1992, Genscher was appointed chairman of a newly established donors' board of the Berlin State Opera. Between 1997 and 2010, Genscher was affiliated with the law firm B\u00fcsing, M\u00fcffelmann &amp; Theye. He founded his own consulting firm, Hans-Dietrich Genscher Consult GmbH, in 2000. Between 2001 and 2003, he served as president of the German Council on Foreign Relations. In 2001, Genscher headed an arbitration that ended a monthlong battle between German airline Lufthansa and its pilots' union and resulted in an agreement on increasing wages by more than 15 percent by the end of the following year.\nIn 2008, Genscher joined former Czech President V\u00e1clav Havel, former United States Ambassador to Germany John Kornblum and several other well-known political figures in calling for a Cold War museum to be built at Checkpoint Charlie in Berlin. In 2009 Genscher expressed public concern at Pope Benedict XVI's lifting of excommunication of the bishops of the Society of Saint Pius X. Genscher wrote in the \"Mitteldeutsche Zeitung\": \"Poles can be proud of Pope John Paul II. At the last papal election, we said We are the pope! But please\u2014not like this.\" He argued that Pope Benedict XVI was making a habit of offending non-Catholics. \"This is a deep moral and political question. It is about respect for the victims of crimes against humanity\", Genscher said.\nOn 20 December 2013, it was revealed that Genscher played a key role in coordinating the release and flight to Germany of Mikhail Khodorkovsky, the former head of Yukos. Genscher had first met Khodorkovsky in 2002 and had chaired a conference at which Khodorkovsky blasted Russian President Vladimir Putin's pursuit of his oil company. Khodorkovsky asked his lawyers during a 2011 prison visit to let Genscher help mediate early release. Once Putin was re-elected in 2012, German Chancellor Angela Merkel instructed her officials to lobby for the president to meet Genscher. The subsequent negotiations involved two meetings between Genscher and Putin \u2013 one at Berlin Tegel Airport at the end of Putin's first visit to Germany after he was re-elected in 2012, the other in Moscow. While keeping the chancellor informed, Khodorkovsky's attorneys and Genscher spent the ensuing months developing a variety of legal avenues that could allow Putin to release his former rival early, ranging from amendments to existing laws to clemency. When Khodorkovsky's mother was in a Berlin hospital with cancer in November 2013, Genscher passed a message to Khodorkovsky suggesting the prisoner should write a pardon letter to Putin emphasizing his mother's ill health. Following Putin's pardoning of Khodorkovsky \"for humanitarian reasons\" in December 2013, a private plane provided by Genscher brought Khodorkovsky to Berlin for a family reunion at the Hotel Adlon.\nGenscher signed on in 2014 to be a member of the Southern Corridor Advisory Panel, a BP-led consortium which includes former British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Peter Sutherland, chairman of Goldman Sachs International. The panel's purpose is to facilitate the expansion of a vast natural-gas field in the Caspian Sea and the building of two pipelines across Europe. The $45 billion enterprise, championed by the Azerbaijani president, Ilham Aliyev, has been called by critics \"the Blair Rich Project\".\nDeath.\nGenscher died at his home outside Bonn in Wachtberg on 31 March 2016 from heart failure, 10 days after his 89th birthday.\nRecognition (selection).\nGenscher has been awarded honorary citizenship by his birthplace Halle (Saale) (in 1991) and the city of Berlin (in 1993).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13670", "revid": "94147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13670", "title": "Holy Trinity", "text": ""}
{"id": "13673", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13673", "title": "Herod Agrippa I", "text": ""}
{"id": "13675", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13675", "title": "Henry Ainsworth", "text": "English Nonconformist clergyman and scholar (1571\u20131622)\nHenry Ainsworth (1571\u20131622) was an English Nonconformist clergyman and scholar. He led the Ancient Church, a Brownist or English Separatist congregation in Amsterdam alongside Francis Johnson from 1597, and after their split led his own congregation. His translations of and commentaries on the Hebrew scriptures were influential for centuries.\nSeparatist career.\nAinsworth was born of a farming family of Swanton Morley, Norfolk. He was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, later moving to Caius College, but left without a degree. After associating with the Puritan party in the Church, he joined the Brownists, but submitted to the Church of England after being arrested in London, and again when he was arrested in Ireland.\nBy 1597, Ainsworth moved to Amsterdam and found a home in \"a blind lane at Amsterdam\", working as porter to a bookseller, and lived in severe poverty. According to Roger Williams, Ainsworth \u2018lived on 9d a week with roots boiled\u2019. When the pastor Francis Johnson came to the church from London, where he had been in prison, Ainsworth was elected as teacher (or doctor), thanks to his knowledge of Hebrew.\nAinsworth attempted to arbitrate the quarrel between Francis and Thomasine Johnson on the one side and his brother George Johnson on the other, where George accused Thomasine of dressing immodestly and Francis of ruling the church tyrannically. Though he may initially have sympathised with George, on 15 January 1598, Ainsworth chaired a church meeting which censured him. Francis and Ainsworth also ex-communicated their elder Matthew Slade for refusing to stop going to services in the Dutch Reformed Church. Ainsworth himself caused some scandal when it emerged that he had twice submitted to the Church of England, but he was not disciplined.\nThough often involved in controversy, Ainsworth was not arrogant, but was a steadfast and cultured champion of the principles represented by the early Congregationalists. Amid all the controversy, he steadily pursued his studies. The combination was so unique that some have mistaken him for two different individuals. Confusion has also been occasioned through his friendly controversy with one John Ainsworth, who left the Anglican for the Roman Catholic church.\nIn 1604, Johnson and Ainsworth wrote a petition for toleration of their church and took it to England in the hope of delivering it to James I. In their attempts to get it to the king, they rewrote it twice, and on their return to Amsterdam published all three versions under the title \nIn 1610, Johnson changed his mind about the democratic Congregational structure of the Ancient Church, arguing that authority lay with the ministers, not the people. After nearly a year of debate, on 15 December, Ainsworth and his followers split from Johnson, and successfully sued them for possession of the church building. John Robinson tried to mediate between the two factions, but ended up taking Ainsworth's side.\nIn 1620, after Johnson's church had departed for North America, but before Robinson's had left on the \"Mayflower\", Ainsworth's church considered joining the latter in their journey and put some money into the project. Robert Cushman criticised the proposal, saying 'Our liberty is to them as ratsbane, and their rigour as bad to us as the Spanish Inquisition.' Though nothing came of the plan, the Ainsworth church still waved the pilgrims off from Leiden.\nPersonal life.\nOn 29 April 1607, Ainsworth married Marjory Appelbey, a widow from Ipswich with one daughter. In 1612, the elder in the Ancient Church, Daniel Studley, was accused of \u2018many lascivious attempts\u2019 the girl, and confessed to having 'clapped' her.\nHenry Ainsworth died in 1622, leaving unfinished work on works on Hosea, Matthew and Hebrews.\nWorks.\nAinsworth was one of the most able apologists of the so-called Brownist movement. His first solo work \"The communion of saincts\" (1607) is summarised by the historian of Separatism Stephen Tomkins as arguing 'that the true church is a holy community while a church that incorporates the entire population is neither holy nor a community'. Tomkins describes his second book \"Covnterpoyson\" (1608) as 'the most compelling apologia that the Separatist movement ever produced'. It was written in reply to the puritan minister John Sprint and to Richard Bernard's \"The Separatist Schisme\".\nAinsworth also wrote reply to John Smyth, the Puritan leader who adopted credobaptism, entitled \"Defence of Holy Scripture, Worship and Ministry used in the Christian Churches separated from Antichrist, against the Challenges, Cavils and Contradictions of Mr Smyth\" (1609). Of Smyth's progression to concluding credobaptism, Ainsworth said he 'had gone \u2018from error to error, and now at last to the abomination of Anabaptism\u2019, which \u2018in him was the worship \u2026 of the devil\u2019.\nHis scholarly works include his \"Annotations\"\u2014on \"Genesis\" (1616); \"Exodus\" (1617); \"Leviticus\" (1618); \"Numbers\" (1619); \"Deuteronomy\" (1619); \"Psalms\" (including a metrical version, 1612); and the \"Song of Solomon\" (1623). These were collected in folio in 1627. From the outset the \"Annotations\" took a commanding place, especially among continental scholars, establishing a scholarly tradition for English nonconformity. Tomkins notes that 'as late as 1866, W.S. Plumer's commentary on Psalms cited Ainsworth as an authority more than a hundred times and the 1885 (English) Revised Version of the Bible drew on his work.'\nHis publication of Psalms, \"The Book of Psalmes: Englished both in Prose and Metre with Annotations\" (Amsterdam, 1612), which includes thirty-nine separate monophonic psalm tunes, constituted the Ainsworth Psalter, the only book of music brought to New England in 1620 by the Pilgrim settlers. Although its content was later reworked into the Bay Psalm Book, it had an important influence on the early development of American psalmody. An early critic of the Brownists said that \u2018by the uncouth and strange translation and metre used in them, the congregation was made a laughing stock\u2019, while the 1885 \"Dictionary of National Biography\" said that Ainsworth \u2018had not the faintest breath of poetical inspiration\u2019.\nAinsworth died in 1622, or early in 1623, for in that year was published his \"Seasonable Discourse, or a Censure upon a Dialogue of the Anabaptists\", in which the editor speaks of him as a departed worthy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13676", "revid": "1302184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13676", "title": "Hilberts tenth problem", "text": ""}
{"id": "13677", "revid": "43590697", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13677", "title": "Hindus", "text": "Adherents of Hinduism\nHindus (; ; also known as San\u0101tan\u012bs) are people who religiously adhere to Hinduism, also known by its endonym San\u0101tana Dharma. Historically, the term has also been used as a geographical, cultural, and later religious identifier for people living in the Indian subcontinent.\nIt is assumed that the term \"Hindu\" traces back to Avestan scripture Vendidad which refers to land of seven rivers as Hapta Hendu which itself is a cognate to Sanskrit term \"Sapta Sindhu\u1e25\". (The term \"Sapta Sindhu\u1e25\" is mentioned in Rig Veda and refers to a North western Indian region of seven rivers and to India as a whole.) The Greek cognates of the same terms are \"\"Indus\" (for the river) and \"India\"\" (for the land of the river). Likewise the Hebrew cognate \"h\u014dd-d\u016b\" refers to India mentioned in Hebrew Bible (https://). The term \"Hindu\" also implied a geographic, ethnic or cultural identifier for people living in the Indian subcontinent around or beyond the Sindhu (Indus) River. By the 16th century CE, the term began to refer to residents of the subcontinent who were not Turkic or Muslims.\nThe historical development of Hindu self-identity within the local Indian population, in a religious or cultural sense, is unclear. Competing theories state that Hindu identity developed in the British colonial era, or that it may have developed post-8th century CE after the Muslim invasions and medieval Hindu\u2013Muslim wars. A sense of Hindu identity and the term \"Hindu\" appears in some texts dated between the 13th and 18th century in Sanskrit and Bengali. The 14th- and 18th-century Indian poets such as Vidyapati, Kabir, Tulsidas and Eknath used the phrase \"Hindu dharma\" (Hinduism) and contrasted it with \"Turaka dharma\" (Islam). The Christian friar Sebastiao Manrique used the term 'Hindu' in a religious context in 1649. In the 18th century, European merchants and colonists began to refer to the followers of Indian religions collectively as \"Hindus\", in contrast to \"Mohamedans\" for groups such as Turks, Mughals and Arabs, who were adherents of Islam. By the mid-19th century, colonial orientalist texts further distinguished Hindus from Buddhists, Sikhs and Jains, but the colonial laws continued to consider all of them to be within the scope of the term \"Hindu\" until about the mid-20th century. Scholars state that the custom of distinguishing between Hindus, Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs is a modern phenomenon.\nAt approximately 1.2\u00a0billion, Hindus are the world's third-largest religious group after Christians and Muslims. The vast majority of Hindus, approximately 966 million (94.3% of the global Hindu population), live in India, according to the 2011 Indian census. After India, the next nine countries with the largest Hindu populations are, in decreasing order: Nepal, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, the United States, Malaysia, the United Arab Emirates and the United Kingdom. These together accounted for 99% of the world's Hindu population, and the remaining nations of the world combined had about 6 million Hindus as of 2010[ [update]].\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Hindu\" is an exonym. This word \"Hindu\" is derived from the Indo-Aryan and Sanskrit word \"Sindhu\", which means \"a large body of water\", covering \"river, ocean\". It was used as the name of the Indus River and also referred to its tributaries. The actual term 'hindu' first occurs, states Gavin Flood, as \"a Persian geographical term for the people who lived beyond the river Indus (Sanskrit: \"Sindhu\")\", more specifically in the 5th-century BCE, DNa inscription of Darius I. The Punjab region, called Sapta Sindhu in the Vedas, is called \"Hapta Hindu\" in Zend Avesta. The 6th-century BCE inscription of Darius I mentions the province of \"Hi[n]dush\", referring to northwestern India. The people of India were referred to as \"Hinduv\u0101n\" and \"hindav\u012b\" was used as the adjective for Indian language in the 8th century text \"Chachnama\". According to D. N. Jha, the term 'Hindu' in these ancient records is an ethno-geographical term and did not refer to a religion.\nThe earliest known records of 'Hindu' with connotations of religion may be in the 7th-century CE Chinese text \"Records on the Western Regions\" by the Buddhist scholar Xuanzang. Xuanzang uses the transliterated term \"In-tu\" whose \"connotation overflows in the religious\" according to Arvind Sharma. While Xuanzang suggested that the term refers to the country named after the moon, another Buddhist scholar I-tsing contradicted the conclusion saying that \"In-tu\" was not a common name for the country.\nAl-Biruni's 11th-century text \"Tarikh Al-Hind\", and the texts of the Delhi Sultanate period use the term 'Hindu', where it includes all non-Islamic people such as Buddhists, and retains the ambiguity of being \"a region or a religion\". The 'Hindu' community occurs as the amorphous 'Other' of the Muslim community in the court chronicles, according to the Indian historian Romila Thapar. The comparative religion scholar Wilfred Cantwell Smith notes that the term 'Hindu' retained its geographical reference initially: 'Indian', 'indigenous, local', virtually 'native'. Slowly, the Indian groups themselves started using the term, differentiating themselves and their \"traditional ways\" from those of the invaders.\nThe text \"Prithviraj Raso\", by Chand Bardai, about the 1192 CE defeat of Prithviraj Chauhan at the hands of Muhammad Ghori, is full of references to \"Hindus\" and \"Turks\", and at one stage, says \"both the religions have drawn their curved swords;\" however, the date of this text is unclear and considered by most scholars to be more recent. In Islamic literature, 'Abd al-Malik Isami's Persian work, \"Futuhu's-salatin\", composed in the Deccan under Bahmani rule in 1350, uses the word \"'hindi' \" to mean Indian in the ethno-geographical sense and the word \"'hindu' \" to mean 'Hindu' in the sense of a follower of the Hindu religion\". The poet Vidyapati's \"Kirtilata\" (1380) uses the term \"Hindu\" in the sense of a religion, it contrasts the cultures of Hindus and Turks (Muslims) in a city and concludes \"The Hindus and the Turks live close together; Each makes fun of the other's religion (\"dhamme\")\" albeit Naqshbandi Indian sufi inhabitations in Constantinople were often attributed as \"Hindular Tekkesi\" in Ottoman Turkish.\nOne of the earliest uses of the word 'Hindu' in a religious context, in a European language (Spanish), was in a publication in 1649 by Sebastio Manrique. In Indian historian DN Jha's essay \"Looking for a Hindu identity\", he writes: \"No Indians described themselves as Hindus before the fourteenth century\" and that \"The British borrowed the word 'Hindu' from India, gave it a new meaning and significance, [and] reimported it into India as a reified phenomenon called Hinduism.\" In the 18th century, the European merchants and colonists began to refer to the followers of Indian religions collectively as Hindus even though in the 19th century, this term was used for Afghan-origin Muslim emperor Ibrahim Lodhi as \"Hindoo emperor\" in Encyclop\u00e6dia Americana (Lieber) of 1829.\nOther prominent mentions of 'Hindu' include the epigraphical inscriptions from kingdoms (in present-day Andhra Pradesh) which battled military expansion of Muslim rulers in the 14th century, where the word 'Hindu' partly implies a religious identity in contrast to 'Turks' or Islamic religious identity. The term \"Hindu\" was later used occasionally in some Sanskrit texts such as the later Rajataranginis of Kashmir (Hinduka, c.\u20091450) and some 16th- to 18th-century Bengali Gaudiya Vaishnava texts, including \"Chaitanya Charitamrita\" and \"Chaitanya Bhagavata\". These texts used it to contrast Hindus from Muslims who are called Yavanas (foreigners) or Mlecchas (barbarians), with the 16th-century \"Chaitanya Charitamrita\" text and the 17th-century \"Bhakta Mala\" text using the phrase \"Hindu dharma\".\nTerminology.\nMedieval-era usage (8th to 18th century).\nScholar Arvind Sharma notes that the term \"Hindus\" was used in the 'Brahmanabad settlement' which Muhammad ibn Qasim made with non-Muslims after the Arab invasion of northwestern Sindh region of India, in 712 CE. The term 'Hindu' meant people who were non-Muslims, and it included Buddhists of the region. In the 11th-century text of Al Biruni, Hindus are referred to as \"religious antagonists\" to Islam, as those who believe in rebirth, presents them to hold a diversity of beliefs, and seems to oscillate between Hindus holding a centralist and pluralist religious views. In the texts of Delhi Sultanate era, states Sharma, the term Hindu remains ambiguous on whether it means people of a region or religion, giving the example of Ibn Battuta's explanation of the name \"Hindu Kush\" for a mountain range in Afghanistan. It was so called, wrote Ibn Battuta, because many Indian slaves died there of freezing cold, as they were marched across the mountain range. The term \"Hindu\" there is ambivalent and could mean geographical region or religion.\nThe term Hindu also appears in the texts from the Mughal Empire era. Jahangir, for example, called the Sikh Guru Arjan a Hindu:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There was a Hindu named Arjan in Gobindwal on the banks of the Beas River. Pretending to be a spiritual guide, he had won over as devotees many simple-minded Indians and even some ignorant, stupid Muslims by broadcasting his claims to be a saint. [...] When Khusraw stopped at his residence, [Arjan] came out and had an interview with [Khusraw]. Giving him some elementary spiritual precepts picked up here and there, he made a mark with saffron on his forehead, which is called qashqa in the idiom of the Hindus and which they consider lucky. When this was reported to me, I realized how perfectly false he was and ordered him brought to me. I awarded his houses and dwellings and those of his children to Murtaza Khan, and I ordered his possessions and goods \nconfiscated and him executed.\u2014\u200a\nSikh scholar Pashaura Singh states, \"in Persian writings, Sikhs were regarded as Hindu in the sense of non-Muslim Indians\". However, scholars like Robert Fraser and Mary Hammond opine that Sikhism began initially as a militant sect of Hinduism and it got formally separated from Hinduism only in the 20th century.\nColonial-era usage (18th to 20th century).\nDuring the colonial era, the term Hindu had connotations of native religions of India, that is religions other than Christianity and Islam. In early colonial era Anglo-Hindu laws and British India court system, the term Hindu referred to people of all Indian religions as well as two non-Indian religions: Judaism and Zoroastrianism. In the 20th century, personal laws were formulated for Hindus, and the term 'Hindu' in these colonial 'Hindu laws' applied to Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs in addition to denominational Hindus.\nBeyond the stipulations of British colonial law, European orientalists and particularly the influential Asiatick Researches founded in the 18th century, later called The Asiatic Society, initially identified just two religions in India \u2013 Islam, and Hinduism. These orientalists included all Indian religions such as Buddhism as a subgroup of Hinduism in the 18th century. These texts termed followers of Islam as \"Mohamedans\", and all others as \"Hindus\". The text, by the early 19th century, began dividing Hindus into separate groups, for chronology studies of the various beliefs. Among the earliest terms to emerge were \"Seeks and their College\" (later spelled Sikhs by Charles Wilkins), \"Boudhism\" (later spelled Buddhism), and in the 9th volume of Asiatick Researches report on religions in India, the term \"Jainism\" received notice.\nAccording to Pennington, the terms Hindu and Hinduism were thus constructed for colonial studies of India. The various sub-divisions and separation of subgroup terms were assumed to be result of \"communal conflict\", and Hindu was constructed by these orientalists to imply people who adhered to \"ancient default oppressive religious substratum of India\", states Pennington. Followers of other Indian religions so identified were later referred Buddhists, Sikhs or Jains and distinguished from Hindus, in an antagonistic two-dimensional manner, with Hindus and Hinduism stereotyped as irrational traditional and others as rational reform religions. However, these mid-19th-century reports offered no indication of doctrinal or ritual differences between Hindu and Buddhist, or other newly constructed religious identities. These colonial studies, states Pennigton, \"puzzled endlessly about the Hindus and intensely scrutinized them, but did not interrogate and avoided reporting the practices and religion of Mughal and Arabs in South Asia\", and often relied on Muslim scholars to characterise Hindus.\nContemporary usage.\nIn contemporary era, Hindus are individuals who identify with one or more aspects of Hinduism, whether they are practising or non-practicing or \"Laissez-faire\". The term does not include those who identify with other Indian religions such as Buddhism, Jainism, Sikhism or various animist tribal religions found in India such as Sarnaism. The term Hindu, in contemporary parlance, includes people who accept themselves as culturally or ethnically Hindu rather than with a fixed set of religious beliefs within Hinduism. One need not be religious in the minimal sense, states Julius Lipner, to be accepted as Hindu by Hindus, or to describe oneself as Hindu.\nHindus subscribe to a diversity of ideas on spirituality and traditions, but have no ecclesiastical order, no unquestionable religious authorities, no governing body, nor a single founding prophet; Hindus can choose to be polytheistic, pantheistic, monotheistic, monistic, agnostic, atheistic or humanist. Because of the wide range of traditions and ideas covered by the term Hinduism, arriving at a comprehensive definition is difficult. The religion \"defies our desire to define and categorize it\". A Hindu may, by his or her choice, draw upon ideas of other Indian or non-Indian religious thought as a resource, follow or evolve his or her personal beliefs, and still identify as a Hindu.\nIn 1995, Chief Justice P. B. Gajendragadkar was quoted in an Indian Supreme Court ruling:\nWhen we think of the Hindu religion, unlike other religions in the world, the Hindu religion does not claim any one prophet; it does not worship any one god; it does not subscribe to any one dogma; it does not believe in any one philosophic concept; it does not follow any one set of religious rites or performances; in fact, it does not appear to satisfy the narrow traditional features of any religion or creed. It may broadly be described as a way of life and nothing more.\nAlthough Hinduism contains a broad range of philosophies, Hindus share philosophical concepts, such as but not limiting to dharma, karma, kama, artha, moksha and samsara, even if each subscribes to a diversity of views. Hindus also have shared texts such as the Vedas with embedded Upanishads, and common ritual grammar (Sanskara (rite of passage)) such as rituals during a wedding or when a baby is born or cremation rituals. Some Hindus go on pilgrimage to shared sites they consider spiritually significant, practice one or more forms of bhakti or puja, celebrate mythology and epics, major festivals, love and respect for guru and family, and other cultural traditions. A Hindu could:\nDisputes.\nIn the Constitution of India, the word \"Hindu\" has been used in some places to denote persons professing any of these religions: Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism or Sikhism. This however has been challenged by the Sikhs and by neo-Buddhists who were formerly Hindus. According to Sheen and Boyle, Jains have not objected to being covered by personal laws termed under 'Hindu', but Indian courts have acknowledged that Jainism is a distinct religion.\nThe Republic of India is in the peculiar situation that the Supreme Court of India has repeatedly been called upon to define \"Hinduism\" because the Constitution of India, while it prohibits \"discrimination of any citizen\" on grounds of religion in article 15, article 30 foresees special rights for \"All minorities, whether based on religion or language\". As a consequence, religious groups have an interest in being recognised as distinct from the Hindu majority in order to qualify as a \"religious minority\". Thus, the Supreme Court was forced to consider the question whether Jainism is part of Hinduism in 2005 and 2006.\nHistory of Hindu identity.\nStarting after the 10th century and particularly after the 12th-century Islamic invasion, states Sheldon Pollock, the political response fused with the Indic religious culture and doctrines. Temples dedicated to deity Rama were built from north to south India, and textual records as well as hagiographic inscriptions began comparing the Hindu epic of Ramayana to regional kings and their response to Islamic attacks. The Yadava king of Devagiri named \"Ramacandra\", for example states Pollock, is described in a 13th-century record as, \"How is this Rama to be described.. who freed Varanasi from the \"mleccha\" (barbarian, Turk Muslim) horde, and built there a golden temple of Sarngadhara\". Pollock notes that the Yadava king \"Ramacandra\" is described as a devotee of deity Shiva (Shaivism), yet his political achievements and temple construction sponsorship in Varanasi, far from his kingdom's location in the Deccan region, is described in the historical records in Vaishnavism terms of Rama, a deity Vishnu avatar. Pollock presents many such examples and suggests an emerging Hindu political identity that was grounded in the Hindu religious text of Ramayana, one that has continued into the modern times, and suggests that this historic process began with the arrival of Islam in India.\nBrajadulal Chattopadhyaya has questioned the Pollock theory and presented textual and inscriptional evidence. According to Chattopadhyaya, the Hindu identity and religious response to Islamic invasion and wars developed in different kingdoms, such as wars between Islamic Sultanates and the Vijayanagara kingdom, and Islamic raids on the kingdoms in Tamil Nadu. These wars were described not just using the mythical story of Rama from Ramayana, states Chattopadhyaya, the medieval records used a wide range of religious symbolism and myths that are now considered as part of Hindu literature. This emergence of religious with political terminology began with the first Muslim invasion of Sindh in the 8th century CE, and intensified 13th century onwards. The 14th-century Sanskrit text, \"Madhuravijayam\", a memoir written by \"Gangadevi\", the wife of Vijayanagara prince, for example describes the consequences of war using religious terms,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nI very much lament for what happened to the groves in Madhura,\nThe coconut trees have all been cut and in their place are to be seen,\n rows of iron spikes with human skulls dangling at the points,\nIn the highways which were once charming with anklets sound of beautiful women,\n are now heard ear-piercing noises of Brahmins being dragged, bound in iron-fetters,\nThe waters of Tambraparni, which were once white with sandal paste,\n are now flowing red with the blood of cows slaughtered by miscreants,\nEarth is no longer the producer of wealth, nor does Indra give timely rains,\nThe God of death takes his undue toll of what are left lives if undestroyed by the Yavanas [Muslims],\nThe Kali age now deserves deepest congratulations for being at the zenith of its power,\ngone is the sacred learning, hidden is refinement, hushed is the voice of Dharma.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe historiographic writings in Telugu language from the 13th- and 14th-century Kakatiya dynasty period presents a similar \"alien other (Turk)\" and \"self-identity (Hindu)\" contrast. Chattopadhyaya, and other scholars, state that the military and political campaign during the medieval era wars in Deccan peninsula of India, and in the north India, were no longer a quest for sovereignty, they embodied a political and religious animosity against the \"otherness of Islam\", and this began the historical process of Hindu identity formation.\nAndrew Nicholson, in his review of scholarship on Hindu identity history, states that the vernacular literature of Bhakti movement sants from 15th to 17th century, such as Kabir, Anantadas, Eknath, Vidyapati, suggests that distinct religious identities, between Hindus and Turks (Muslims), had formed during these centuries. The poetry of this period contrasts Hindu and Islamic identities, states Nicholson, and the literature vilifies the Muslims coupled with a \"distinct sense of a Hindu religious identity\".\nHindu identity amidst other Indian religions.\nScholars state that Hindu, Buddhist and Jain identities are retrospectively-introduced modern constructions. Inscriptional evidence from the 8th century onwards, in regions such as South India, suggests that medieval era India, at both elite and folk religious practices level, likely had a \"shared religious culture\", and their collective identities were \"multiple, layered and fuzzy\". Even among Hinduism denominations such as Shaivism and Vaishnavism, the Hindu identities, states Leslie Orr, lacked \"firm definitions and clear boundaries\".\nOverlaps in Jain-Hindu identities have included Jains worshipping Hindu deities, intermarriages between Jains and Hindus, and medieval era Jain temples featuring Hindu religious icons and sculpture. Beyond India, on Java island of Indonesia, historical records attest to marriages between Hindus and Buddhists, medieval era temple architecture and sculptures that simultaneously incorporate Hindu and Buddhist themes, where Hinduism and Buddhism merged and functioned as \"two separate paths within one overall system\", according to Ann Kenney and other scholars. Similarly, there is an organic relation of Sikhs to Hindus, states Zaehner, both in religious thought and their communities, and virtually all Sikhs' ancestors were Hindus. Marriages between Sikhs and Hindus, particularly among \"Khatris\", were frequent. Some Hindu families brought up a son as a Sikh, and some Hindus view Sikhism as a tradition within Hinduism, even though the Sikh faith is a distinct religion.\nJulius Lipner states that the custom of distinguishing between Hindus, Buddhists, Jains, and Sikhs is a modern phenomena, but one that is a convenient abstraction. Distinguishing Indian traditions is a fairly recent practice, states Lipner, and is the result of \"not only Western preconceptions about the nature of religion in general and of religion in India in particular, but also with the political awareness that has arisen in India\" in its people and a result of Western influence during its colonial history.\nSacred geography.\nScholars such as Fleming and Eck state that the post-Epic era literature from the 1st millennium CE amply demonstrate that there was a historic concept of the Indian subcontinent as a sacred geography, where the sacredness was a shared set of religious ideas. For example, the twelve \"Jyotirlingas\" of Shaivism and fifty-one \"Shaktipithas\" of Shaktism are described in the early medieval era Puranas as pilgrimage sites around a theme. This sacred geography and Shaiva temples with same iconography, shared themes, motifs and embedded legends are found across India, from the Himalayas to hills of South India, from Ellora Caves to Varanasi by about the middle of 1st millennium. Shakti temples, dated to a few centuries later, are verifiable across the subcontinent. Varanasi as a sacred pilgrimage site is documented in the \"Varanasimahatmya\" text embedded inside the \"Skanda Purana\", and the oldest versions of this text are dated to 6th to 8th-century CE.\nThe idea of twelve sacred sites in Shiva Hindu tradition spread across the Indian subcontinent appears not only in the medieval era temples but also in copper plate inscriptions and temple seals discovered in different sites. According to Bhardwaj, non-Hindu texts such as the memoirs of Chinese Buddhist and Persian Muslim travellers attest to the existence and significance of the pilgrimage to sacred geography among Hindus by later 1st millennium CE.\nAccording to Fleming, those who question whether the term Hindu and Hinduism are a modern construction in a religious context present their arguments based on some texts that have survived into the modern era, either of Islamic courts or of literature published by Western missionaries or colonial-era Indologists aiming for a reasonable construction of history. However, the existence of non-textual evidence such as cave temples separated by thousands of kilometers, as well as lists of medieval era pilgrimage sites, is evidence of a shared sacred geography and existence of a community that was self-aware of shared religious premises and landscape. Further, it is a norm in evolving cultures that there is a gap between the \"lived and historical realities\" of a religious tradition and the emergence of related \"textual authorities\". The tradition and temples likely existed well before the medieval era Hindu manuscripts appeared that describe them and the sacred geography. This, states Fleming, is apparent given the sophistication of the architecture and the sacred sites along with the variance in the versions of the Puranic literature. According to Diana L. Eck and other Indologists such as Andr\u00e9 Wink, Muslim invaders were aware of Hindu sacred geography such as Mathura, Ujjain, and Varanasi by the 11th century. These sites became a target of their serial attacks in the centuries that followed.\nHindu persecution.\nThe Hindus have been persecuted during the medieval and modern era. The medieval persecution included waves of plunder, killing, destruction of temples and enslavement by Turk-Mongol Muslim armies from central Asia. This is documented in Islamic literature such as those relating to 8th century Muhammad bin-Qasim, 11th century Mahmud of Ghazni, the Persian traveler Al Biruni, the 14th century Islamic army invasion led by Timur, and various Sunni Islamic rulers of the Delhi Sultanate and Mughal Empire. There were occasional exceptions such as Akbar who stopped the persecution of Hindus, and occasional severe persecution such as under Aurangzeb, who destroyed temples, forcibly converted non-Muslims to Islam and banned the celebration of Hindu festivals such as Holi and Diwali.\nOther recorded persecution of Hindus include those under the reign of 18th century Tipu Sultan in south India, and during the colonial era. In the modern era, religious persecution of Hindus have been reported outside India in Pakistan, Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, and Myanmar.\nHindu nationalism.\nChristophe Jaffrelot states that modern Hindu nationalism was born in Maharashtra, in the 1920s, as a reaction to the Islamic Khilafat Movement wherein Indian Muslims championed and took the cause of the Turkish Ottoman sultan as the Caliph of all Muslims, at the end of the World War I. Hindus viewed this development as one of divided loyalties of Indian Muslim population, of pan-Islamic hegemony, and questioned whether Indian Muslims were a part of an inclusive anti-colonial Indian nationalism. The Hindu nationalism ideology that emerged, states Jeffrelot, was codified by Savarkar while he was a political prisoner of the British colonial authorities.\nChris Bayly traces the roots of Hindu nationalism to the Hindu identity and political independence achieved by the Maratha confederacy, that overthrew the Islamic Mughal empire in large parts of India, allowing Hindus the freedom to pursue any of their diverse religious beliefs and restored Hindu holy places such as Varanasi. A few scholars view Hindu mobilisation and consequent nationalism to have emerged in the 19th century as a response to British colonialism by Indian nationalists and neo-Hinduism gurus. Jaffrelot states that the efforts of Christian missionaries and Islamic proselytizers, during the British colonial era, each of whom tried to gain new converts to their own religion, by stereotyping and stigmatising Hindus to an identity of being inferior and superstitious, contributed to Hindus re-asserting their spiritual heritage and counter cross examining Islam and Christianity, forming organisations such as the \"Hindu Sabhas\" (Hindu associations), and ultimately a Hindu-identity driven nationalism in the 1920s.\nThe colonial era Hindu revivalism and mobilisation, along with Hindu nationalism, states Peter van der Veer, was primarily a reaction to and competition with Muslim separatism and Muslim nationalism. The successes of each side fed the fears of the other, leading to the growth of Hindu nationalism and Muslim nationalism in the Indian subcontinent. In the 20th century, the sense of religious nationalism grew in India, states van der Veer, but only Muslim nationalism succeeded with the formation of the West and East Pakistan (later split into Pakistan and Bangladesh), as \"an Islamic state\" upon independence. Religious riots and social trauma followed as millions of Hindus, Jains, Buddhists and Sikhs moved out of the newly created Islamic states and resettled into the Hindu-majority post-British India. After the separation of India and Pakistan in 1947, the Hindu nationalism movement developed the concept of Hindutva in second half of the 20th century.\nThe Hindu nationalism movement has sought to reform Indian laws, that critics say attempts to impose Hindu values on India's Islamic minority. Gerald Larson states, for example, that Hindu nationalists have sought a uniform civil code, where all citizens are subject to the same laws, everyone has equal civil rights, and individual rights do not depend on the individual's religion. In contrast, opponents of Hindu nationalists remark that eliminating religious law from India poses a threat to the cultural identity and religious rights of Muslims, and people of Islamic faith have a constitutional right to Islamic shariah-based personal laws. A specific law, contentious between Hindu nationalists and their opponents in India, relates to the legal age of marriage for girls. Hindu nationalists seek that the legal age for marriage be eighteen that is universally applied to all girls regardless of their religion and that marriages be registered with local government to verify the age of marriage. Muslim clerics consider this proposal as unacceptable because under the shariah-derived personal law, a Muslim girl can be married at any age after she reaches puberty.\nHindu nationalism in India, states Katharine Adeney, is a controversial political subject, with no consensus about what it means or implies in terms of the form of government and religious rights of the minorities.\nDemographics.\nThere are 1.2 billion Hindus worldwide (15% of world's population), with about 95% of them being concentrated in India alone. Along with Christians (31.5%), Muslims (23.2%) and Buddhists (7.1%), Hindus are one of the four major religious groups of the world.\nMost Hindus are found in Asian countries. The top twenty-five countries with the most Hindu residents and citizens (in decreasing order) are India, Nepal, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, United States, Malaysia, Myanmar, United Kingdom, Mauritius, South Africa, United Arab Emirates, Canada, Australia, Saudi Arabia, Trinidad and Tobago, Singapore, Fiji, Qatar, Kuwait, Guyana, Bhutan, Oman and Yemen.\nThe top fifteen countries with the highest percentage of Hindus (in decreasing order) are Nepal, India, Mauritius, Fiji, Guyana, Bhutan, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Qatar, Sri Lanka, Kuwait, Bangladesh, R\u00e9union, Malaysia, and Singapore.\nThe fertility rate, that is children per woman, for Hindus is 2.4, which is less than the world average of 2.5. Pew Research projects that there will be 1.4\u00a0billion Hindus by 2050.\nIn more ancient times, Hindu kingdoms arose and spread the religion and traditions across Southeast Asia, particularly Thailand, Nepal, Burma, Malaysia, Indonesia, Cambodia, Laos, Philippines, and what is now central Vietnam.\nOver 3 million Hindus are found in Bali Indonesia, a culture whose origins trace back to ideas brought by Hindu traders to Indonesian islands in the 1st millennium CE. Their sacred texts are also the Vedas and the Upanishads. The Puranas and the Itihasa (mainly \"Ramayana\" and the \"Mahabharata\") are enduring traditions among Indonesian Hindus, expressed in community dances and shadow puppet (\"wayang\") performances. As in India, Indonesian Hindus recognise four paths of spirituality, calling it \"Catur Marga\". Similarly, like Hindus in India, Balinese Hindus believe that there are four proper goals of human life, calling it \"Catur Purusartha\" \u2013 dharma (pursuit of moral and ethical living), artha (pursuit of wealth and creative activity), kama (pursuit of joy and love) and moksha (pursuit of self-knowledge and liberation).\nCulture.\nHindu culture is a term used to describe the culture and identity of Hindus and Hinduism, including the historic Vedic people. Hindu culture can be intensively seen in the form of art, architecture, history, diet, clothing, astrology and other forms. The culture of India and Hinduism is deeply influenced and assimilated with each other. With the Indianisation of southeast Asia and Greater India, the culture has also influenced a long region and other religions people of that area. All Indian religions, including Buddhism,\nJainism and Sikhism are deeply influenced and soft-powered by Hinduism.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13678", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13678", "title": "Hernando de Alarc\u00f3n", "text": "Spanish conquistador (1500\u20131541)\nHernando de Alarc\u00f3n (born c. 1500) was a Spanish explorer and navigator of the 16th century, noted for having led a 1540 expedition to the Colorado River Delta, during which he became one of the first Europeans to ascend the Colorado River from its mouth and became the first European to see Alta California.\nLittle is known about Alarc\u00f3n's life outside of his exploits in New Spain. He was probably born in the town of Trujillo, in present-day Extremadura, Spain, in the first years of the 16th century and travelled to the Spanish colonies in the Americas as a young man.\n1540 expedition.\nBy 1540, Mexico had been conquered and state-sponsored expeditions were being sent north in search of new wealth and the existence of a water passage between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Viceroy of New Spain Antonio de Mendoza commissioned Francisco V\u00e1zquez de Coronado to undertake a massive overland expedition to find the Seven Cities of Cibola, which were rumoured to exist in the unexplored northern interior. The expedition was to be resupplied with stores and provisions delivered by ships traveling north up the Sea of Cort\u00e9s (Gulf of California), the commander of which would be Alarc\u00f3n.\nAlarc\u00f3n set sail from the Pacific port of Acapulco with two ships, the \"San Pedro\" and the \"Santa Catalina\", on May 9, 1540, and was later joined by the \"San Gabriel\" at St. Jago de Buena Esperanza (modern-day Manzanillo, Colima). His orders from Mendoza were to await the arrival of Coronado's land expedition at a certain latitude along the coast. The meeting with Coronado was never effected, though Alarc\u00f3n reached the appointed place and left letters, which were soon afterward discovered by Melchor D\u00edaz, another explorer.\nAlarc\u00f3n eventually sailed to the northern terminus of the Gulf of California and completed the explorations begun by Francisco de Ulloa the preceding year. During this voyage Alarc\u00f3n proved to his satisfaction that no open-water passage existed between the Gulf of California and the Pacific Ocean (then called the \"South Sea\"). Subsequently, on September 26, he entered the mouth of the Colorado River, which he named the \"Buena Gu\u00eda\" (\"good guide\"). He was the first European to ascend the river for a distance considerable enough to make important observations. On a second voyage, he probably proceeded past the present-day site of Yuma, Arizona. A map drawn by one of Alarc\u00f3n's pilots is the earliest accurately detailed representation of the Gulf of California and the lower course of the Colorado River.\nAlarc\u00f3n is unusual among 16th-century \"conquistadores\" for his reportedly humane treatment of the Indians he met, as opposed to the often reckless and cruel behavior known from accounts of his contemporaries. Bernard de Voto, in his 1953 \"Westward the Course of Empire\", observed: \"The Indians had an experience they were never to repeat: they were sorry to see these white men leave.\" Alarc\u00f3n wrote of his contact with the Yuma-speaking Indians along Colorado. The information he compiled consisted of their practices in warfare, religion, curing, and even sexual customs.\nCalifornia Historical Landmark No. 568, on the west bank of the Colorado River near Andrade in Imperial County, California, commemorates Alarc\u00f3n's expedition had been the first non-Indians to sight land within the present-day state of California.\nCalifornia Historical Landmark.\nCalifornia Historical Landmark number 568 reads:\n\"NO. 568 HERNANDO DE ALARC\u00d3N EXPEDITION - Alarc\u00f3n's mission was to provide supplies for Francisco Coronado's expedition in search of the fabled Seven Cities of Cibola. The Spaniards led by Hernando de Alarc\u00f3n ascended the Colorado River by boat from the Gulf of California past this point, thereby becoming the first non-Indians to sight Alta California on September 5, 1540.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13679", "revid": "51050103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13679", "title": "Hakka cuisine", "text": "Ethnic cuisine of the Hakka people\nHakka cuisine is the cooking style of the Hakka people, and it may also be found in parts of Taiwan and in countries with significant overseas Hakka communities. There are many restaurants in mainland China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand, as well as in the United States and Canada, that serve Hakka food. Hakka cuisine was listed in 2014 on the first Hong Kong Inventory of Intangible Cultural Heritage.\nBackground.\nThe Hakka people have a marked cuisine and style of Chinese cooking which is little known outside the Hakka home. It concentrates on the texture of food \u2013 the hallmark of Hakka cuisine. Whereas preserved meats feature in Hakka delicacy, stewed, braised, roast meats \u2013 'texturized' contributions to the Hakka palate \u2013 have a central place in their repertoire. Preserved vegetables () are commonly used for steamed and braised dishes such as steamed minced pork with preserved vegetables and braised pork with salted vegetables. In fact, the raw materials for Hakka food are no different from raw materials for any other type of regional Chinese cuisine where what is cooked depends on what is available in the market. Hakka cuisine may be described as outwardly simple but tasty. The skill in Hakka cuisine lies in the ability to cook meat thoroughly without hardening it, and to naturally bring out the proteinous flavor (umami taste) of meat.\nThe Hakka who settled in the harbor and port areas of Hong Kong placed great emphasis on seafood cuisine. Hakka cuisine in Hong Kong is less dominated by expensive meats; instead, emphasis is placed on an abundance of vegetables. Pragmatic and simple, Hakka cuisine is garnished lightly with sparse or little flavoring. Modern Hakka cooking in Hong Kong favors offal, an example being deep-fried intestines (). Others include tofu with preservatives, along with their signature dish, salt-baked chicken (). Another specialty is the poon choi (). While it may be difficult to prove these were the actual diets of the old Hakka community, it is at present a commonly accepted view. The above dishes and their variations are in fact found and consumed throughout China, including Guangdong Province, and are not particularly unique or confined to the Hakka population.\nBesides meat as source of protein, there is a unique vegan dish called lei cha (). It comprises combinations of vegetables and beans. Although not specifically unique for all Hakka people but are definitely famous among the Hakka-Hopo families. This vegetable-based rice tea dish is gaining momentum in some multicultural countries like Malaysia. Cooking of this dish requires the help from other family members to complete all eight combinations. It helps foster the relationship between family members in return.\nSteamed buns () are a popular snack among the Hakka people, especially pork belly bao (\u6263\u8089\u5305) that is stuffed with kiu nyuk. This bun is usually made with flour, water, sugar, and yeast, resulting in a soft, fluffy texture when steamed. Other varieties include a dumpling-like bun called tea fruit (\u8336\u679c), made from glutinous rice. The sweet version is filled with sweetened black-eyed pea paste or peanuts, while the salty version contains preserved vegetables or radishes.\nNotable dishes.\nHakka food also includes other traditional Taiwanese dishes, just as other Taiwanese ethnic groups do. Some of the more notable dishes in Hakka cuisine are listed as follow:\nHakka cuisine in South Asia.\nIn India, Pakistan and other South Asian countries, there is something locally known as \"Hakka cuisine.\" This variation of Chinese-style cuisine is, in reality, mostly Indian Chinese cuisine and Pakistani Chinese cuisine. It is called \"Hakka cuisine\" because, in India and areas of Pakistan, many owners of restaurants who serve this cuisine are of Hakka origin. Typical dishes include 'chilli chicken' and 'Dongbei (northeastern) chow mein/hakka noodles' (an Indian version of real Northeastern Chinese cuisine), and these restaurants also serve traditional South Asian dishes such as pakora. Being very popular in these areas, this style of cuisine is often mistakenly credited as being representative of Hakka cuisine in general, whereas the authentic style of Hakka cuisine is rarely known in these regions.\nOutside of South Asia, the premier place to enjoy Indian-Pakistani-Chinese cuisine is in Toronto, Canada, due to most of it being halal. In Toronto, \"Hakka Chinese food\" almost universally refers to Indian-Chinese cuisine, not Hakka cuisine in general.\nHakka cuisine in Thailand.\nIn Thailand, Bangkok's Chinatown is Yaowarat and including neighboring areas such as Sampheng, Charoen Chai, Charoen Krung, Suan Mali, Phlapphla Chai or 22 July Circle. In the past, many Hakka restaurants are located in the Suan Mali near Bangkok Metropolitan Administration General Hospital. But now they had moved into many places, such as Talad Phlu, which is also one of the Chinatown as well.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13680", "revid": "26637801", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13680", "title": "Hunan cuisine", "text": "Chinese cuisine from Hunan province\nHunan cuisine, also known as Xiang cuisine, consists of the cuisines of the Xiang River region, Dongting Lake and western Hunan Province in China. It is one of the Eight Great Traditions of Chinese cuisine and is well known for its hot and spicy flavours, fresh aroma and deep colours. Despite this, only about 20% of the cuisine uses capsicum to produce a strong spicy taste. Common cooking techniques include stewing, frying, pot-roasting, braising and smoking. Due to the high agricultural output of the region, many different ingredients are used in Hunan dishes.\nHistory.\nThe history of the cooking skills employed in Hunan cuisine dates back to the 17th century. The first mention of chili peppers in local gazettes in the province date to 1684, the 21st year of the Kangxi Emperor. During the course of its history, Hunan cuisine assimilated a variety of local forms, eventually evolving into its own style. Some well-known dishes include fried chicken with Sichuan spicy sauce () and smoked pork with dried long green beans ().\nHunan cuisine consists of three primary styles:\nFeatures.\nWith its liberal use of chili peppers, shallots and garlic, Hunan cuisine is known for being \"gan la\" () or purely hot, as opposed to Sichuan cuisine, to which it is often compared. Sichuan cuisine uses its distinctive \"ma la\" () seasoning and other complex flavour combinations, frequently employs Sichuan pepper along with chilies which are often dried. It also utilises more dried or preserved ingredients and condiments. Hunan cuisine, on the other hand, is often spicier by pure chili content and contains a larger variety of fresh ingredients. Both Hunan and Sichuan cuisine are perhaps significantly oilier than the other cuisines in China, but Sichuan dishes are generally oilier than Hunan dishes. Another characteristic distinguishing Hunan cuisine from Sichuan cuisine is that Hunan cuisine uses smoked and cured goods in its dishes much more frequently.\nHunan cuisine's menu changes with the seasons. In a hot and humid summer, a meal will usually start with cold dishes or a platter holding a selection of cold meats with chilies for opening the pores and keeping cool in the summer. In winter, a popular choice is hot pot, thought to heat the blood in the cold months. A special hot pot called \"yuanyang huoguo\" () is notable for splitting the pot into a spicy and a mild side. One of the classic dishes in Hunan cuisine served in restaurants and at home is farmer pepper fried pork. It is made with several common ingredients: pork belly, green pepper, fermented black beans and other spices.\nList of notable dishes.\nA discussion of Hunan cuisine overall may list a number of piquant dishes, usually but not always very hot and spicy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13681", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13681", "title": "Hyperinflation", "text": "Rapidly accelerating inflation\nIn economics, hyperinflation is a very high and typically accelerating inflation. It quickly erodes the real value of the local currency, as the prices of all goods increase. This causes people to minimize their holdings in that currency as they usually switch to more stable foreign currencies. Effective capital controls and currency substitution (\"dollarization\") are the orthodox solutions to ending short-term hyperinflation; however, there are significant social and economic costs to these policies. Ineffective implementations of these solutions often exacerbate the situation. Many governments choose to attempt to solve structural issues without resorting to those solutions, with the goal of bringing inflation down slowly while minimizing social costs of further economic shocks; however, this can lead to a prolonged period of high inflation.\nUnlike low inflation, where the process of rising prices is protracted and not generally noticeable except by studying past market prices, hyperinflation sees a rapid and continuing increase in nominal prices, the nominal cost of goods, and in the supply of currency. Typically, however, the general price level rises even more rapidly than the money supply as people try ridding themselves of the devaluing currency as quickly as possible. As this happens, the real stock of money (i.e., the amount of circulating money divided by the price level) decreases considerably.\nHyperinflation is often associated with some stress to the government budget, such as wars or their aftermath, sociopolitical upheavals, a collapse in aggregate supply or one in export prices, or other crises that make it difficult for the government to collect tax revenue. A sharp decrease in real tax revenue coupled with a strong need to maintain government spending, together with an inability or unwillingness to borrow, can lead a country into hyperinflation.\nDefinition.\nIn 1956, Columbia University economics professor Phillip Cagan wrote \"The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation\", often regarded as the first serious study of hyperinflation and its effects (though \"The Economics of Inflation\" by C. Bresciani-Turroni on the German hyperinflation was published in Italian in 1931). In this work, Cagan defined a hyperinflationary episode as starting in the month that the monthly inflation rate exceeds 50%, and as ending when the monthly inflation rate drops below 50% and stays that way for at least a year. Economists usually follow Cagan's description that hyperinflation occurs when the monthly inflation rate exceeds 50% (accumulating to a yearly increase of 12,874.63%, or an increase by a factor of 129.7463).\nThe International Accounting Standards Board has issued guidance on accounting rules in a hyperinflationary environment. It does not establish an absolute rule on when hyperinflation arises, but instead lists factors that indicate the existence of hyperinflation:\nCauses.\nWhile there can be a number of causes of moderate inflation, almost all hyperinflations have been caused by government budget deficits financed by currency creation. Peter Bernholz analysed 29 hyperinflations (following Cagan's definition) and concludes that at least 25 of them have been caused in this way. A necessary condition for hyperinflation is the use of paper money instead of gold or silver coins. Most hyperinflations in history, with some exceptions, such as the French hyperinflation of 1789\u20131796, occurred after the use of fiat currency became widespread in the late 19th century. The French hyperinflation took place after the introduction of a non-convertible paper currency, the assignat.\nMoney supply.\nMonetarist theories hold that hyperinflation occurs when there is a continuing (and often accelerating) rapid increase in the amount of money that is not supported by a corresponding growth in the output of goods and services.\nThe increases in price that can result from rapid money creation can create a vicious circle, requiring ever growing amounts of new money creation to fund government deficits. Hence both monetary inflation and price inflation proceed at a rapid pace. Such rapidly increasing prices cause widespread unwillingness of the local population to hold the local currency as it rapidly loses its buying power. Instead, they quickly spend any money they receive, which increases the velocity of money flow; this in turn causes further acceleration in prices. This means that the increase in the price level is greater than that of the money supply.\nThis results in an imbalance between the supply and demand for the money (including currency and bank deposits), causing rapid inflation. Very high inflation rates can result in a loss of confidence in the currency, similar to a bank run. The excessive money supply growth can result from speculating by private borrowers, or may result from the government being either unable or unwilling to fully finance the government budget through taxation or borrowing. The government may instead finance a government deficit through the creation of money.\nGovernments have sometimes resorted to excessively loose monetary policy, as it allows a government to devalue its debts and reduce (or avoid) tax increases. Monetary inflation is effectively a flat tax on creditors that also redistributes proportionally to private debtors. Distributional effects of monetary inflation are complex and vary based on the situation, with some models finding regressive effects but other empirical studies progressive effects. As a form of tax, it is less overt than levied taxes and is therefore harder to understand by ordinary citizens. Inflation can obscure quantitative assessments of the true cost of living, as published price indices only look at data in retrospect, so may increase only months later. Monetary inflation can become hyperinflation if monetary authorities fail to fund increasing government expenses from taxes, government debt, cost cutting, or by other means, because either\nTheories of hyperinflation generally look for a relationship between seigniorage and the inflation tax. In both Cagan's model and the neo-classical models, a tipping point occurs when the increase in money supply or the drop in the monetary base makes it impossible for a government to improve its financial position. Thus when fiat money is printed, government obligations that are not denominated in money increase in cost by more than the value of the money created.\nIn neo-classical economic theory, hyperinflation is rooted in a deterioration of the monetary base, that is the confidence that there is a store of value that the currency will be able to command later. In this model, the perceived risk of holding currency rises dramatically, and sellers demand increasingly high premiums to accept the currency. This in turn leads to a greater fear that the currency will collapse, causing even higher premiums. One example of this is during periods of warfare, civil war, or intense internal conflict of other kinds: governments need to do whatever is necessary to continue fighting, since the alternative is defeat. Expenses cannot be cut significantly since the main outlay is armaments. Further, a civil war may make it difficult to raise taxes or to collect existing taxes. While in peacetime the deficit is financed by selling bonds, during a war it is typically difficult and expensive to borrow, especially if the war is going poorly for the government in question. The banking authorities, whether central or not, \"monetize\" the deficit, printing money to pay for the government's efforts to survive. The hyperinflation under the Chinese Nationalists from 1939 to 1945 is a classic example of a government printing money to pay civil war costs. By the end, currency was flown in over the Himalayas, and then old currency was flown out to be destroyed.\nHyperinflation is a complex phenomenon, and one explanation may not be applicable to all cases. In both of these models, however, whether loss of confidence comes first, or central bank seigniorage, the other phase is ignited. In the case of rapid expansion of the money supply, prices rise rapidly in response to the increased supply of money relative to the supply of goods and services, and in the case of loss of confidence, the monetary authority responds to the risk premiums it has to pay by \"running the printing presses\".\nSupply shocks.\nA number of hyperinflations were caused by some sort of extreme negative supply shock, sometimes but not always associated with wars or natural disasters.\nEffects.\nHyperinflation increases market prices, wipes out the purchasing power of private and public savings, distorts the economy in favor of the hoarding of real assets, causes the monetary base (whether specie or hard currency) to flee the country, and makes the afflicted area anathema to investment.\nOne of the most important characteristics of hyperinflation is the accelerating substitution of the inflating money by stable money\u2014gold and silver in former times, then relatively stable foreign currencies after the breakdown of the gold or silver standards (Thiers' law). If inflation is high enough, government regulations like heavy penalties and fines, often combined with exchange controls, cannot prevent this currency substitution. As a consequence, the inflating currency is usually heavily undervalued compared to stable foreign money in terms of purchasing power parity. So, foreigners can live cheaply and buy at low prices in the countries hit by high inflation. It follows that governments that do not succeed in engineering a successful currency reform in time must finally legalize the stable foreign currencies (or, formerly, gold and silver) that threaten to fully substitute the inflating money. Otherwise, their tax revenues, including the inflation tax, will approach zero. The last episode of hyperinflation in which this process could be observed was in Zimbabwe in the first decade of the 21st century. In this case, the local money was mainly driven out by the US dollar and the South African rand.\nEnactment of price controls to prevent discounting the value of paper money relative to gold, silver, hard currency, or other commodities fail to force acceptance of a paper money that lacks intrinsic value. If the entity responsible for printing a currency promotes excessive money printing, with other factors contributing a reinforcing effect, hyperinflation usually continues. Hyperinflation is generally associated with paper money, which can easily be used to increase the money supply: add more zeros to the plates and print or even stamp old notes with new numbers.\nMuch attention on hyperinflation centres on the effect on savers whose investments become worthless. Interest rate changes often cannot keep up with hyperinflation or even high inflation, certainly with contractually fixed interest rates. For example, in the 1970s in the United Kingdom inflation reached 25% per annum, yet interest rates did not rise above 15%\u2014and then only briefly\u2014and many fixed interest rate loans existed. Contractually, there is often no bar to a debtor clearing his long-term debt with \"hyperinflated cash\", nor could a lender simply somehow suspend the loan. Contractual \"early redemption penalties\" were (and still are) often based on a penalty of \"n\" months of interest/payment; again, no real bar to paying off what had been a large loan. In interwar Germany, for example, much private and corporate debt was effectively wiped out\u2014certainly for those holding fixed interest rate loans.\nAs more and more money is provided, interest rates decline towards zero. Realizing that fiat money is losing value, investors will try to place money in assets such as real estate, stocks, or even art as these appear to represent \"real\" value. Asset prices are thus becoming inflated. This potentially spiralling process will ultimately lead to the collapse of the monetary system. The Cantillon effect says that those institutions that receive the new money first are the beneficiaries of the policy.\nAftermath.\nHyperinflation is usually ended by using drastic remedies, such as imposing the shock therapy of slashing government expenditures or altering the currency basis. One form this may take is dollarization, the use of a foreign currency (not necessarily the U.S. dollar) as a national unit of currency. An example was dollarization in Ecuador, initiated in September 2000 in response to a 75% loss of value of the Ecuadorian sucre in early 2000. Usually the \"dollarization\" takes place in spite of all efforts of the government to prevent it by exchange controls, heavy fines and penalties. The government has thus to try to engineer a successful currency reform stabilizing the value of the money. If it does not succeed with this reform the substitution of the inflating by stable money goes on. Thus, it is not surprising that there have been at least seven historical cases in which the good (foreign) money did fully drive out the use of the inflating currency. In the end, the government had to legalize the former, for otherwise its revenues would have fallen to zero.\nHyperinflation has always been a traumatic experience for the people who suffer it, and the next political regime almost always enacts policies to try to prevent its recurrence. Often this means making the central bank very aggressive about maintaining price stability, as was the case with the German Bundesbank, or moving to some hard basis of currency, such as a currency board. Many governments have enacted extremely stiff wage and price controls in the wake of hyperinflation, but this does not prevent further inflation of the money supply by the central bank and always leads to widespread shortages of consumer goods if the controls are rigidly enforced.\nCurrency.\nIn countries experiencing hyperinflation, the central bank often prints money in larger and larger denominations as the smaller denomination notes become worthless. This can result in the production of unusually large denominations of banknotes, including those denominated in amounts of 1,000,000,000 (109, 1 billion) or more.\nOne way to avoid the use of large numbers is by declaring a new unit of currency. (As an example, instead of 10,000,000,000 dollars, a central bank might set 1 new dollar = 1,000,000,000 old dollars, so the new note would read \"10 new dollars\".) One example of this is Turkey's revaluation of the lira on 1 January 2005, when the old Turkish lira (TRL) was converted to the new Turkish lira (TRY) at a rate of 1,000,000 old to 1 new lira. While this does not lessen the actual value of a currency, it is called redenomination or revaluation and also occasionally happens in countries with lower inflation rates. During hyperinflation, currency inflation happens so quickly that bills reach large numbers before revaluation.\nGovernments may try to disguise the true rate of inflation through a variety of techniques. If these actions do not address the root causes of inflation they may undermine trust in the currency, causing further increases in inflation. Price controls will generally result in shortages and hoarding and extremely high demand for the controlled goods, causing disruptions of supply chains. Products available to consumers may diminish or disappear as businesses no longer find it economic to continue producing and/or distributing such goods at the legal prices, further exacerbating the shortages.\nThere are also issues with computerized money-handling systems. In Zimbabwe, during the hyperinflation of the Zimbabwe dollar, many automated teller machines and payment card machines struggled with arithmetic overflow errors as customers required many billions and trillions of dollars at one time.\nNotable hyperinflationary periods.\nAustria.\nIn 1922, inflation in Austria reached 1,426%, and from 1914 to January 1923, the consumer price index rose by a factor of 11,836, with the highest banknote in denominations of 500,000 Kronen. After World War I, essentially all State enterprises ran at a loss, and the number of state employees in the capital, Vienna, was greater than in the earlier monarchy, even though the new republic was nearly one-eighth of the size.\nObserving the Austrian response to developing hyperinflation, which included the hoarding of food and the speculation in foreign currencies, Owen S. Phillpotts, the Commercial Secretary at the British Legation in Vienna wrote: \"The Austrians are like men on a ship who cannot manage it, and are continually signalling for help. While waiting, however, most of them begin to cut rafts, each for himself, out of the sides and decks. The ship has not yet sunk despite the leaks so caused, and those who have acquired stores of wood in this way may use them to cook their food, while the more seamanlike look on cold and hungry. The population lack courage and energy as well as patriotism.\"\nBolivia.\nIncreasing hyperinflation in Bolivia has plagued, and at times crippled, its economy and currency since the 1970s. At one time in 1985, the country experienced an annual inflation rate of more than 20,000%. Fiscal and monetary reform reduced the inflation rate to single digits by the 1990s, and in 2004 Bolivia experienced a manageable 4.9% rate of inflation.\nIn 1987, the peso boliviano was replaced by the new boliviano at a rate of one million to one (when 1 US dollar was worth 1.8\u20131.9 million pesos bolivianos). At that time, 1 new boliviano was roughly equivalent to 52 U.S. cents.\nBrazil.\nBrazilian hyperinflation lasted from 1985 (the year when the military dictatorship ended) to 1994, with prices rising by 184,901,570,954.39% (or percent; equivalent to a tenfold increase on average a year) in that time due to the uncontrolled printing of money. There were many economic plans that tried to contain hyperinflation including zeroes cuts, price freezes and even confiscation of bank accounts.\nThe highest value was in March 1990, when the government inflation index reached 82.39%. Hyperinflation ended in July 1994 with the Real Plan during the government of Itamar Franco. During the period of inflation Brazil adopted a total of six different currencies, as the government constantly changed due to rapid devaluation and increase in the number of zeros.\nChina.\nHyperinflation was a major factor in the collapse of the Nationalist government of Chiang Kai-shek.\nAfter a brief decrease following the defeat of Japan in the Second Sino-Japanese War, hyperinflation resumed in October 1945.7 From 1948 to 1949, near the end of the Chinese Civil War, the Republic of China went through a period of hyperinflation. In 1947, the highest denomination bill was 50,000 yuan. By mid-1948, the highest denomination was 180,000,000 yuan.\nIn October 1948, the Nationalist government replaced its Fabi currency with the gold yuan.8 The gold yuan deteriorated even faster than the Fabi had.8\nThe Communists gained significant legitimacy by defeating hyperinflation in the late 1940s and early 1950s. Their development of state trading agencies reintegrated markets and trading networks, ultimately stabilizing prices.\nFrance.\nDuring the French Revolution and first Republic, the National Assembly issued bonds, some backed by seized church property, called assignats. Napoleon replaced them with the franc in 1803, at which time the assignats were basically worthless. Stephen D. Dillaye pointed out that one of the reasons for the failure was massive counterfeiting of the paper currency, largely through London. According to Dillaye: \"Seventeen manufacturing establishments were in full operation in London, with a force of four hundred men devoted to the production of false and forged Assignats.\"\nGermany (Weimar Republic).\nBy November 1922, the value in gold of money in circulation had fallen from \u00a3300\u00a0million before World War I to \u00a320\u00a0million. The Reichsbank responded by the unlimited printing of notes, thereby accelerating the devaluation of the mark. In his report to London, Lord D'Abernon wrote: \"In the whole course of history, no dog has ever run after its own tail with the speed of the Reichsbank.\" Germany went through its worst inflation in 1923. In 1922, the highest denomination was 50,000\u2133. By 1923, the highest denomination was 100,000,000,000,000\u2133 ( marks). In December 1923 the exchange rate was 4,200,000,000,000\u2133 ( marks) to 1 US dollar. In 1923, the rate of inflation hit percent per month (prices double every two days). Beginning on 20 November 1923, 1,000,000,000,000\u2133 (\u2133, 1 trillion marks) were exchanged for 1 Rentenmark, so that RM\u00a04.2 was worth 1 US dollar, exactly the same rate the mark had in 1914.\nGreece (German\u2013Italian occupation).\nWith the German invasion in April 1941, there was an abrupt increase in prices. This was due to psychological factors related to the fear of shortages and to the hoarding of goods. During the German and Italian Axis occupation of Greece (1941\u20131944), the agricultural, mineral, industrial etc. production of Greece were used to sustain the occupation forces, but also to secure provisions for the Afrika Korps. One part of these \"sales\" of provisions was settled with bilateral clearing through the German DEGRIGES and the Italian Sagic companies at very low prices. As the value of Greek exports in drachmas fell, the demand for drachmas followed suit and so did its forex rate. While shortages started due to naval blockades and hoarding, the prices of commodities soared. The other part of the \"purchases\" was settled with drachmas secured from the Bank of Greece and printed for this purpose by private printing presses. As prices soared, the Germans and Italians started requesting more and more drachmas from the Bank of Greece to offset price increases; each time prices increased, the note circulation followed suit soon afterwards. For the year starting November 1943, the inflation rate was %, the circulation was drachmae and one gold sovereign cost 43,167 billion drachmas. The hyperinflation started subsiding immediately after the departure of the German occupation forces, but inflation rates took several years to fall below 50%.\nHungary.\nThe Treaty of Trianon and political instability between 1919 and 1924 led to a major inflation of Hungary's currency. In 1921, in an attempt to stop this inflation, the national assembly of Hungary passed the Heged\u00fcs reforms, including a 20% levy on bank deposits, but this precipitated a mistrust of banks by the public, especially the peasants, and resulted in a reduction in savings, and thus an increase in the amount of currency in circulation. Due to the reduced tax base, the government resorted to printing money, and in 1923 inflation in Hungary reached 98% per month.\nBetween the end of 1945 and July 1946, Hungary went through the highest inflation ever recorded. In 1944, the highest banknote value was 1,000 P. By the end of 1945, it was 10,000,000 P, and the highest value in mid-1946 was 100,000,000,000,000,000,000 P (1020 peng\u0151). A special currency, the ad\u00f3peng\u0151 (or \"tax peng\u0151\") was created for tax and postal payments. The inflation was such that the value of the ad\u00f3peng\u0151 was adjusted each day by radio announcement. On 1 January 1946, one ad\u00f3peng\u0151 equalled one peng\u0151, but by late July, one ad\u00f3peng\u0151 equalled 2,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 P or 2\u00d71021 P (2 sextillion peng\u0151).\nWhen the peng\u0151 was replaced in August 1946 by the forint, the total value of all Hungarian banknotes in circulation amounted to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20441,000 of one US cent. Inflation had peaked at % per month (i.e. prices doubled every 15.6 hours). On 18 August 1946, 400,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 P (4\u00d71029 peng\u0151, or four hundred octillion on short scale) became 1\u00a0Ft.\nMalaya and Singapore (Japanese occupation).\nMalaya and Singapore were under Japanese occupation from 1942 until 1945. The Japanese issued \"banana notes\" as the official currency to replace the Straits currency issued by the British. During that time, the cost of basic necessities increased drastically. As the occupation proceeded, the Japanese authorities printed more money to fund their wartime activities, which resulted in hyperinflation and a severe depreciation in value of the banana note.\nFrom February to December 1942, $100 of Straits currency was worth $100 in Japanese scrip, after which the value of Japanese scrip began to erode, reaching $385 in December 1943 and $1,850 one year later. By 1 August 1945, this had inflated to $10,500, and 11 days later it had reached $95,000. After 13 August 1945, Japanese scrip had become valueless.\nNorth Korea.\nNorth Korea most likely experienced hyperinflation from December 2009 to mid-January 2011. Based on the price of rice, North Korea's hyperinflation peaked in mid-January 2010, but according to black market exchange-rate data, and calculations based on purchasing power parity, North Korea experienced its peak month of inflation in early March 2010. These data points are unofficial, however, and therefore must be treated with a degree of caution.\nPeru.\nIn modern history, Peru underwent a period of hyperinflation in the 1980s to the early 1990s starting with President Fernando Bela\u00fande's second administration, heightened during Alan Garc\u00eda's first administration, to the beginning of Alberto Fujimori's term. 1 US dollar was worth over S/3,210,000,000. Garcia's term introduced the inti, which worsened inflation into hyperinflation. Peru's currency and economy were stabilized under Fujimori's Nuevo Sol program, which has remained Peru's currency since 1991.\nPoland.\nPoland has gone through two episodes of hyperinflation since the country regained independence following the end of World War I, the first in 1923, the second in 1989\u20131990. Both events resulted in the introduction of new currencies. In 1924, the z\u0142oty replaced the original currency of post-war Poland, the mark. This currency was subsequently replaced by another of the same name in 1950. As a result of the second hyperinflation crisis, the current \"new z\u0142oty\" was introduced in 1995 (ISO code: PLN).\nThe newly independent Poland had been struggling with a large budget deficit since its inception in 1918 but it was in 1923 when inflation reached its peak. The exchange rate of the Polish mark (Mp) to the US dollar dropped from Mp 9.\u2014 per dollar in 1918 to Mp 6,375,000. \u2014 per dollar at the end of 1923. A new personal 'inflation tax' was introduced. The resolution of the crisis is attributed to W\u0142adys\u0142aw Grabski, who became prime minister of Poland in December 1923. Having nominated an all-new government and being granted extraordinary lawmaking powers by the Sejm for a period of six months, he introduced a new currency, the \"z\u0142oty\" (\"golden\" in Polish), established a new national bank and scrapped the inflation tax, which took place throughout 1924.\nThe economic crisis in Poland in the 1980s was accompanied by rising inflation when new money was printed to cover a budget deficit. Although inflation was not as acute as in 1920s, it is estimated that its annual rate reached around 600% in a period of over a year spanning parts of 1989 and 1990. The economy was stabilised by the adoption of the Balcerowicz Plan in 1989, named after the main author of the reforms, minister of finance Leszek Balcerowicz. The plan was largely inspired by the previous Grabski's reforms.\nPhilippines.\nThe Japanese government occupying the Philippines during World War II issued fiat currencies for general circulation. The Japanese-sponsored Second Philippine Republic government led by Jose P. Laurel at the same time outlawed possession of other currencies, most especially \"guerrilla money\". The fiat money's lack of value earned it the derisive nickname \"Mickey Mouse money\". Survivors of the war often tell tales of bringing suitcases or \"bayong\" (native bags made of woven coconut or buri leaf strips) overflowing with Japanese-issued notes. Early on, 75 JIM pesos could buy one duck egg. In 1944, a box of matches cost more than 100 JIM pesos.\nIn 1942, the highest denomination available was \u20b110. Before the end of the war, because of inflation, the Japanese government was forced to issue \u20b1100, \u20b1500, and \u20b11,000 notes.\nSoviet Union.\nA seven-year period of uncontrollable spiralling inflation occurred in the early Soviet Union, running from the earliest days of the Bolshevik Revolution in November 1917 to the reestablishment of the gold standard with the introduction of the chervonets as part of the New Economic Policy. The inflationary crisis effectively ended in March 1924 with the introduction of the so-called \"gold Ruble\" as the country's standard currency.\nThe early Soviet hyperinflationary period was marked by three successive re-denominations of its currency, in which \"new Rubles\" replaced old at the rates of 10,000:1 (1 January 1922), 100:1 (1 January 1923), and 50,000:1 (7 March 1924), respectively.\nBetween 1921 and 1922, inflation in the Soviet Union reached 213%.\nVenezuela.\nVenezuela's hyperinflation began in November 2016. Inflation of Venezuela's bolivar Fuerte (VEF) in 2014 reached 69% and was the highest in the world. In 2015, inflation was 181%, the highest in the world and the highest in the country's history at that time, 800% in 2016, over 4,000% in 2017, and 1,698,488% in 2018, with Venezuela spiralling into hyperinflation. While the Venezuelan government \"has essentially stopped\" producing official inflation estimates as of early 2018, one estimate of the rate at that time was 5,220%, according to inflation economist Steve Hanke of Johns Hopkins University.\nInflation has affected Venezuelans so much that in 2017, some people became video game gold farmers and could be seen playing games such as \"RuneScape\" to sell in-game currency or characters for real currency. In many cases, these gamers made more money than salaried workers in Venezuela even though they were earning just a few dollars per day. During the Christmas season of 2017, some shops would no longer use price tags since prices would inflate so quickly, so customers were required to ask staff at stores, known as (\"talkers\"), how much each item was. Some then further cut costs by replacing the \"talkers\" with computer screens.\nThe International Monetary Fund estimated in 2018 that Venezuela's inflation rate would reach 1,000,000% by the end of the year. This forecast was criticized by Steve H. Hanke, professor of applied economics at The Johns Hopkins University and senior fellow at the Cato Institute. According to Hanke, the IMF had released a \"bogus forecast\" because \"no one has ever been able to accurately forecast the course or the duration of an episode of hyperinflation. But that has not stopped the IMF from offering inflation forecasts for Venezuela that have proven to be wildly inaccurate\".\nIn July 2018, hyperinflation in Venezuela was sitting at 33,151%, \"the 23rd most severe episode of hyperinflation in history\".\nIn April 2019, the International Monetary Fund estimated that inflation would reach 10,000,000% by the end of 2019.\nIn May 2019, the Central Bank of Venezuela released economic data for the first time since 2015. According to this release, the inflation of Venezuela was 274% in 2016, 863% in 2017 and 130,060% in 2018. The annualised inflation rate as of April 2019 was estimated to be 282,972.8% as of April 2019, and cumulative inflation from 2016 to April 2019 was estimated at 53,798,500%.\nThe new reports imply a contraction of more than half of the economy in five years, according to the \"Financial Times\" \"one of the biggest contractions in Latin American history\". According to undisclosed sources from Reuters, the release of these numbers was due to pressure from China, a Maduro ally. One of these sources claims that the disclosure of economic numbers may bring Venezuela into compliance with the IMF, making it harder to support Juan Guaid\u00f3 during the presidential crisis. At the time, the IMF was not able to support the validity of the data as they had not been able to contact the authorities.\nVietnam.\nVietnam went through a period of chaos and high inflation in the late 1980s, with inflation peaking at 774% in 1988, after the country's \"price-wage-currency\" reform package, led by then-Deputy Prime Minister Tr\u1ea7n Ph\u01b0\u01a1ng, had failed. High inflation also occurred in the early stages of the socialist-oriented market economic reforms commonly referred to as the \u0110\u1ed5i M\u1edbi.\nYugoslavia.\nHyperinflation in the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia happened before and during the period of breakup of Yugoslavia, from 1989 to 1991. In April 1992, one of its successor states, FR Yugoslavia, entered a period of hyperinflation in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, that lasted until 1994. One of several regional conflicts accompanying the dissolution of Yugoslavia was the Bosnian War (1992\u20131995). The Belgrade government of Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107 backed ethnic Serbian forces in the conflict, resulting in a United Nations boycott of Yugoslavia. The UN boycott collapsed an economy already weakened by regional war, with the projected monthly inflation rate accelerating to one million percent by December 1993 (prices double every 2.3 days).\nThe highest denomination in 1988 was 50,000 . By 1989, it was 2,000,000\u00a0. In the 1990 currency reform, 1 new dinar was exchanged for 10,000 old dinars. After socialist Yugoslavia broke up, the 1992 currency reform in FR Yugoslavia led to 1 new dinar being exchanged for 10 old dinars. The highest denomination in 1992 was 50,000\u00a0. By 1993, it was 10,000,000,000 . In the 1993 currency reform, 1 new dinar was exchanged for 1,000,000 old dinars. Before the year was over, however, the highest denomination was 500,000,000,000 dinars. In the 1994 currency reform, 1 new dinar was exchanged for 1,000,000,000 old dinars. In another currency reform a month later, 1 novi dinar was exchanged for 13 million dinars (1 novi dinar = 1 Deutschmark at the time of exchange). The overall impact of hyperinflation was that 1 novi dinar was equal to \u2013 pre-1990 dinars. Yugoslavia's rate of inflation hit % cumulative inflation over the time period 1 October 1993 and 24 January 1994. \nZimbabwe.\nHyperinflation in Zimbabwe was one of the few instances that resulted in the abandonment of the local currency. At independence in 1980, the Zimbabwe dollar (ZWD) was worth about US$1.49 (or 67 Zimbabwean cents per U.S. dollar). Afterwards, however, rampant inflation and the collapse of the economy severely devalued the currency. Inflation was relatively steady until the early 1990s when economic disruption caused by failed land reform agreements and rampant government corruption resulted in reductions in food production and the decline of foreign investment. Several multinational companies began hoarding retail goods in warehouses in Zimbabwe and just south of the border, preventing commodities from becoming available on the market. The result was that to pay its expenditures Mugabe's government and Gideon Gono's Reserve Bank printed more and more notes with higher face values.\nHyperinflation began early in the 21st century, reaching 624% in 2004. It fell back to low triple digits before surging to a new high of 1,730% in 2006. The Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe revalued on 1 August 2006 at a ratio of 1,000 ZWD to each second dollar (ZWN), but year-to-year inflation rose by June 2007 to 11,000% (versus an earlier estimate of 9,000%). Larger denominations were progressively issued in 2008:\nInflation by 16 July officially surged to 2,200,000% with some analysts estimating figures surpassing 9,000,000%. As of 22 July 2008 the value of the Zimbabwe dollar fell to approximately Z$688 billion per US$1, or Z$688 trillion in pre-August 2006 Zimbabwean dollars.\nOn 1 August 2008, the Zimbabwe dollar was redenominated at the ratio of 1010 ZWN to each third dollar (ZWR). On 19 August 2008, official figures announced for June estimated the inflation over 11,250,000%. Zimbabwe's annual inflation was 231,000,000% in July (prices doubling every 17.3 days). By October 2008 Zimbabwe was mired in hyperinflation with wages falling far behind inflation. In this dysfunctional economy hospitals and schools had chronic staffing problems, because many nurses and teachers could not afford bus fare to work. Most of the capital of Harare was without water because the authorities had stopped paying the bills to buy and transport the treatment chemicals. Desperate for foreign currency to keep the government functioning, Zimbabwe's central bank governor, Gideon Gono, sent runners into the streets with suitcases of Zimbabwean dollars to buy up American dollars and South African rand.\nFor periods after July 2008, no official inflation statistics were released. Prof. Steve H. Hanke overcame the problem by estimating inflation rates after July 2008 and publishing the Hanke Hyperinflation Index for Zimbabwe. Prof. Hanke's HHIZ measure indicated that the inflation peaked at an annual rate of 89.7 sextillion percent (89,700,000,000,000,000,000,000%, or %) in mid-November 2008. The peak monthly rate was 79.6 billion percent, which is equivalent to a 98% daily rate, or around % yearly rate. At that rate, prices were doubling every 24.7 hours. Note that many of these figures should be considered mostly theoretical since hyperinflation did not proceed at this rate over a whole year.\nAt its November 2008 peak, Zimbabwe's rate of inflation approached, but failed to surpass, Hungary's July 1946 world record. On 2 February 2009, the dollar was redenominated for the third time at the ratio of 1012 ZWR to 1 ZWL, only three weeks after the Z$100\u00a0trillion banknote was issued on 16 January, but hyperinflation waned by then as official inflation rates in USD were announced and foreign transactions were legalised, and on 12 April the Zimbabwe dollar was abandoned in favour of using only foreign currencies. The overall impact of hyperinflation was US$1 = Z$1025.\nIronically, following the abandonment of the ZWR and subsequent use of reserve currencies, banknotes from the hyperinflation period of the old Zimbabwe dollar began attracting international attention as collector's items, having accrued numismatic value, selling for prices many orders of magnitude higher than their old purchasing power.\nUnits of inflation.\nInflation rate is usually measured in percent per year. It can also be measured in percent per month or in price doubling time.\nformula_1\nformula_2\nformula_3\nformula_4\nformula_5\nformula_6\nOften, at redenominations, three zeros are cut from the face values of denominations. It can be read from the table that if the (annual) inflation is for example 100%, it takes about 3.32 years for prices to increase by an order of magnitude (e.g., to produce one more zero on the price tags), or 9.97 years to produce three zeros. Thus, can one expect a redenomination to take place about ten years after the currency was introduced.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13682", "revid": "48366681", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13682", "title": "Herbert Hoover", "text": "President of the United States from 1929 to 1933\nHerbert Clark Hoover (August 10, 1874 \u2013 October 20, 1964) was the 31st president of the United States, serving from 1929 to 1933. A wealthy mining engineer before his presidency, Hoover led the wartime Commission for Relief in Belgium and was the director of the U.S. Food Administration, followed by post-war relief of Europe. As a member of the Republican Party, he served as the third United States secretary of commerce from 1921 to 1928 before being elected president in 1928. His presidency was dominated by the Great Depression, and his policies and methods to combat it were seen as lackluster. Amid his unpopularity, he decisively lost reelection to Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1932.\nBorn to a Quaker family in West Branch, Iowa, Hoover grew up in Oregon. He was one of the first graduates of the new Stanford University in 1895. Hoover took a position with a London-based mining company working in Australia and China. He rapidly became a wealthy mining engineer. In 1914, the outbreak of World War I, he organized and headed the Commission for Relief in Belgium, an international relief organization that provided food to occupied Belgium. When the U.S. entered the war in 1917, President Woodrow Wilson appointed Hoover to lead the Food Administration. He became famous as his country's \"food dictator\". After the war, Hoover led the American Relief Administration, which provided food to the starving millions in Central and Eastern Europe, especially Russia. His wartime service made him a favorite of many progressives, and he unsuccessfully sought the Republican nomination in the 1920 United States presidential election.\nHoover served as Secretary of Commerce under presidents Warren G. Harding and Calvin Coolidge. Hoover was an unusually active and visible Cabinet member, becoming known as \"Secretary of Commerce and Under-Secretary of all other departments.\" He was influential in the development of air travel and radio. Hoover led the federal response to the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927. He won the Republican nomination in the 1928 presidential election and defeated Democratic candidate Al Smith in a landslide. In 1929, Hoover assumed the presidency. However, during his first year in office, the stock market crashed, signaling the onset of the Great Depression. Hoover supported the Mexican Repatriation and his response to the Great Depression was widely seen as lackluster.\nIn the midst of the Great Depression, he was decisively defeated by Democratic nominee Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1932 presidential election. Hoover's retirement was over 31 years long, one of the longest presidential retirements. He authored numerous works and became increasingly conservative in retirement. He strongly criticized Roosevelt's foreign policy and the New Deal. In the 1940s and 1950s, public opinion of Hoover improved, largely due to his service in various assignments for presidents Harry S. Truman and Dwight D. Eisenhower, including chairing the influential Hoover Commission. Critical assessments of his presidency by historians and political scientists generally rank him as a significantly below-average president, although Hoover has received praise for his actions as a humanitarian and public official.\nEarly life and education.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHerbert Clark Hoover was born on August 10, 1874, in West Branch, Iowa. His father, Jesse Hoover, was a blacksmith and farm implement store owner of German, Swiss, and English ancestry. Hoover's mother, Hulda Randall Minthorn, was raised in Norwich, Ontario, Canada, before moving to Iowa in 1859. Like most other citizens of West Branch, Jesse and Hulda were Quakers. Around age two \"Bertie\", as he was called during that time, contracted a serious bout of croup, and was momentarily thought to have died until resuscitated by his uncle, John Minthorn. As a young child he was often referred to by his father as \"my little stick in the mud\" when he repeatedly got trapped in the mud crossing the unpaved street. Herbert's family figured prominently in the town's public prayer life, due almost entirely to mother Hulda's role in the church. As a child, Hoover consistently attended schools, but he did little reading on his own aside from the Bible. Hoover's father, noted by the local paper for his \"pleasant, sunshiny disposition\", died in 1880 at the age of 34 of a sudden heart attack. Hoover's mother died in 1884 of typhoid, leaving Hoover, his older brother, Theodore, and his younger sister, May, as orphans. Hoover lived the next 18 months with his uncle Allen Hoover at a nearby farm.\nIn November 1885, Hoover was sent to Newberg, Oregon, to live with his uncle John Minthorn, a Quaker physician and businessman whose own son had died the year before. The Minthorn household was considered cultured and educational, and imparted a strong work ethic. Much like West Branch, Newberg was a frontier town settled largely by Midwestern Quakers. Minthorn ensured that Hoover received an education, but Hoover disliked the many chores assigned to him and often resented Minthorn. One observer described Hoover as \"an orphan [who] seemed to be neglected in many ways\". Hoover attended Friends Pacific Academy (now George Fox University), but dropped out at the age of thirteen to become an office assistant for his uncle's real estate office (Oregon Land Company) in Salem, Oregon. Though he did not attend high school, Hoover learned bookkeeping, typing, and mathematics at a night school.\nHoover was a member of the inaugural \"Pioneer Class\" of Stanford University, entering in 1891 despite failing all the entrance exams except mathematics. During his freshman year, he switched his major from mechanical engineering to geology after working for John Casper Branner, the chairman of Stanford's geology department. During his sophomore year, Sam Collins proposed founding, \"Romero Hall Boarding Club\", the first student cooperative boarding house at Romero Hall, for \"sociability and economy\", which Hoover and William Foster Hidden co-founded. Hoover was a mediocre student, and he spent much of his time working in various part-time jobs or participating in campus activities. Though he was initially shy among fellow students, Hoover won election as student treasurer and became known for his distaste for fraternities and sororities. He served as student manager of both the baseball and football teams, and helped organize the inaugural Big Game versus the University of California. During the summers before and after his senior year, Hoover interned under economic geologist Waldemar Lindgren of the United States Geological Survey; these experiences convinced Hoover to pursue a career as a mining geologist.\nMining engineer.\nBewick, Moreing.\nWhen Hoover graduated from Stanford in 1895, the country was in the midst of the Panic of 1893 and he initially struggled to find a job. He worked in various low-level mining jobs in the Sierra Nevada Mountains until persuading prominent mining engineer Louis Janin to hire him. After working as a mine scout for a year, Hoover was hired by Bewick, Moreing &amp; Co. (\"Bewick\"), a London-based company that operated gold mines in Western Australia. He first went to Coolgardie, then the center of the Eastern Goldfields, which was actually in Western Australia, receiving a $5,000 salary (). Conditions were harsh in the goldfields; Hoover described the Coolgardie and Murchison rangelands on the edge of the Great Victoria Desert as a land of \"black flies, red dust and white heat\".\nHoover traveled constantly across the Outback to evaluate and manage the company's mines. He convinced Bewick to purchase the Sons of Gwalia gold mine, which proved to be one of the most successful mines in the region. Partly due to Hoover's efforts, the company eventually controlled approximately 50 percent of gold production in Western Australia. Hoover brought in many Italian immigrants to cut costs and counter the labour movement of the Australian miners. During his time with the mining company, Hoover became opposed to measures such as a minimum wage and workers' compensation, feeling that they were unfair to owners. Hoover's work impressed his employers, and in 1898 he was promoted to junior partner. An open feud developed between Hoover and his boss, Ernest Williams, but Bewick's leaders defused the situation by offering Hoover a compelling position in China.\nUpon arriving in China, Hoover developed gold mines near Tianjin on behalf of Bewick and the Chinese-owned Chinese Engineering and Mining Company. He became deeply interested in Chinese history, but gave up on learning the language to a fluent level. He publicly warned that Chinese workers were inefficient and racially inferior. He made recommendations to improve the lot of the Chinese worker, seeking to end the practice of imposing long-term servitude contracts and to institute reforms for workers based on merit. The Boxer Rebellion broke out shortly after the Hoovers arrived in China, trapping them and numerous other foreign nationals until a multi-national military force defeated Boxer forces in the Battle of Tientsin. Fearing the imminent collapse of the Chinese government, the director of the Chinese Engineering and Mining Company agreed to establish a new Sino-British venture with Bewick. After they established effective control over the new Chinese mining company, Hoover became the operating partner in late 1901.\nIn this role, Hoover continually traveled the world on behalf of Bewick, visiting mines operated by the company on different continents. Beginning in December 1902, the company faced mounting legal and financial issues after one of the partners admitted to having fraudulently sold stock in a mine. More issues arose in 1904 after the British government formed two separate royal commissions to investigate Bewick's labor practices and financial dealings in Western Australia. After the company lost a lawsuit Hoover began looking for a way to get out of the partnership, and he sold his shares in mid-1908.\nSole proprietor.\nAfter leaving Bewick, Moreing, Hoover worked as a London-based independent mining consultant and financier. Though he had risen to prominence as a geologist and mine operator, Hoover focused much of his attention on raising money, restructuring corporate organizations, and financing new ventures. He specialized in rejuvenating troubled mining operations, taking a share of the profits in exchange for his technical and financial expertise. Hoover thought of himself and his associates as \"engineering doctors to sick concerns\", and he earned a reputation as a \"doctor of sick mines\". He made investments on every continent and had offices in San Francisco; London; New York City; Paris; Petrograd; and Mandalay, British Burma. By 1914, Hoover was a very wealthy man, with an estimated personal fortune of $4 million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024).\nHoover co-founded the Zinc Corporation to extract zinc near the Australian city of Broken Hill, New South Wales. The Zinc Corporation developed the froth flotation process to extract zinc from lead-silver ore and operated the world's first selective ore differential flotation plant. Hoover worked with the Burma Corporation, a British firm that produced silver, lead, and zinc in large quantities at the Namtu Bawdwin Mine. He also helped increase copper production in Kyshtym, Russia, through the use of pyritic smelting. He also agreed to manage a separate mine in the Altai Mountains that, according to Hoover, \"developed probably the greatest and richest single body of ore known in the world\".\nIn his spare time, Hoover wrote. His lectures at Columbia and Stanford universities were published in 1909 as \"Principles of Mining\", which became a standard textbook. The book reflects his move towards progressive ideals, as Hoover came to endorse eight-hour workdays and organized labor. Hoover became deeply interested in the history of science, and he was especially drawn to the \"De re metallica\", an influential 16th century work on mining and metallurgy by Georgius Agricola. In 1912, Hoover and his wife published the first English translation of \"De re metallica\". Hoover also joined the board of trustees at Stanford, and led a successful campaign to appoint John Branner as the university's president.\nMarriage and family.\nDuring his senior year at Stanford, Hoover became smitten with a classmate named Lou Henry, though his financial situation precluded marriage at that time. The daughter of a banker from Monterey, California, Lou Henry decided to study geology at Stanford after attending a lecture delivered by John C. Branner. Immediately after earning a promotion in 1898, Hoover cabled Lou Henry, asking her to marry him. After she cabled back her acceptance of the proposal, Hoover briefly returned to the United States for their wedding. They would remain married until Lou Henry Hoover's death in 1944.\nThough his Quaker upbringing strongly influenced his career, Hoover rarely attended Quaker meetings during his adult life. Hoover and his wife had two children: Herbert Hoover Jr. (born in 1903) and Allan Henry Hoover (born in 1907). The Hoover family began living in London in 1902, though they frequently traveled as part of Hoover's career. After 1916, the Hoovers began living in the United States, maintaining homes in Stanford, California, and Washington, D.C. Hoover's great-granddaughter (through Allan) is conservative political commentator, strategist, media personality and author Margaret Hoover.\nHoover's elder brother Theodore also studied mining engineering at Stanford, and returned there to become dean of the engineering school. In retirement, Theodore bought a large property on the remote north coast of Santa Cruz County. The Theodore J. Hoover Natural Preserve is now part of Big Basin State Park.\nWorld War I and aftermath.\nRelief in Europe.\nWorld War I broke out in August 1914, pitting Germany and its allies against France and its allies. The German Schlieffen plan was to achieve a quick victory by marching through neutral Belgium to envelop the French Army east of Paris. The maneuver failed to reach Paris, however the Germans were successful in taking nearly all of Belgium and would occupy the majority of nation for the remainder of the war. Hoover and other London-based American businessmen established a committee to organize the return of the roughly 100,000 Americans stranded in Europe. Hoover was appointed as the committee's chairman and, with the assent of Congress and the Wilson administration, took charge of the distribution of relief to Americans in Europe. Hoover later stated, \"I did not realize it at the moment, but on August 3, 1914, my career was over forever. I was on the slippery road of public life.\" By early October 1914, Hoover's organization had distributed relief to at least 40,000 Americans.\nThe German invasion of Belgium in August 1914 set a food crisis into motion in Belgium, a nation which relied heavily on food imports. The Germans refused to take responsibility for feeding Belgian citizens in captured territory, and the British refused to lift their blockade of German-occupied Belgium unless the U.S. government supervised Belgian food imports as a neutral party in the war. With the cooperation of the Wilson administration and the CNSA, a Belgian relief organization, Hoover established the Commission for Relief in Belgium (CRB). The CRB obtained and imported millions of tons of foodstuffs for the CNSA to distribute, and helped ensure that the German army did not appropriate the food. Private donations and government grants supplied the majority of its $11-million-a-month budget, and the CRB became a veritable independent republic of relief, with its own flag, navy, factories, mills, and railroads.\nHoover worked 14-hour days from London, administering the distribution of over two million tons of food to nine million war victims. In an early form of shuttle diplomacy, he crossed the North Sea forty times to meet with German authorities and persuade them to allow food shipments. He also convinced British Chancellor of the Exchequer David Lloyd George to allow individuals to send money to the people of Belgium, thereby lessening workload of the CRB. At the request of the French government, the CRB began delivering supplies to the people of German-occupied Northern France in 1915. In 1926, American diplomat Walter Page described Hoover as \"probably the only man living who has privately (i.e., without holding office) negotiated understandings with the British, French, German, Dutch, and Belgian governments\".\nU.S. Food Administration.\nWar upon Germany was declared in April 1917, and American food was essential to Allied victory. With the U.S. mobilizing for war, President Wilson appointed Hoover to head the U.S. Food Administration, which was charged with ensuring the nation's food needs during the war. Hoover had hoped to join the administration in some capacity since at least 1916, and he obtained the position after lobbying several members of Congress and Wilson's confidant, Edward M. House. Earning the appellation of \"food czar\", Hoover recruited a volunteer force of hundreds of thousands of women and deployed propaganda in movie theaters, schools, and churches. He carefully selected men to assist in the agency leadership\u2014Alonzo E. Taylor (technical abilities), Robert Taft (political associations), Gifford Pinchot (agricultural influence), and Julius Barnes (business acumen).\nWorld War I had created a global food crisis that dramatically increased food prices and caused food riots and starvation in the countries at war. Hoover's chief goal as food czar was to provide supplies to the Allied Powers, but he also sought to stabilize domestic prices and to prevent domestic shortages. Under the broad powers granted by the Food and Fuel Control Act, the Food Administration supervised food production throughout the United States, and the administration made use of its authority to buy, import, store, and sell food. Determined to avoid rationing, Hoover established set days for people to avoid eating specified foods and save them for soldiers' rations: meatless Mondays, wheatless Wednesdays, and \"when in doubt, eat potatoes\". These policies were dubbed \"Hooverizing\" by government publicists, in spite of Hoover's continual orders that publicity should not mention him by name. The Food Administration shipped 23 million metric tons of food to the Allied Powers, preventing their collapse and earning Hoover great acclaim. As head of the Food Administration, Hoover gained a following in the United States, especially among progressives who saw in Hoover an expert administrator and symbol of efficiency. He was elected to the American Philosophical Society during his tenure.\nPost-war relief in Europe.\nWorld War I came to an end in November 1918, but Europe continued to face a critical food situation; Hoover estimated that as many as 400 million people faced the possibility of starvation. The United States Food Administration became the American Relief Administration (ARA), and Hoover was charged with providing food to Central and Eastern Europe. In addition to providing relief, the ARA rebuilt infrastructure in an effort to rejuvenate the economy of Europe. Throughout the Paris Peace Conference, Hoover served as a close adviser to President Wilson, and he largely shared Wilson's goals of establishing the League of Nations, settling borders on the basis of self-determination, and refraining from inflicting a harsh punishment on the defeated Central Powers. The following year, the famed British economist John Maynard Keynes wrote in The Economic Consequences of the Peace that if Hoover's realism, \"knowledge, magnanimity and disinterestedness\" had found wider play in the councils of Paris, the world would have had \"the Good Peace\". After U.S. government funding for the ARA expired in mid-1919, Hoover transformed the ARA into a private organization, raising millions of dollars from private donors. He also established the European Children's Fund, which provided relief to fifteen million children across fourteen countries.\nDespite the opposition of Senator Henry Cabot Lodge and other Republicans, Hoover provided aid to the defeated German nation after the war, as well as relief to famine-stricken Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic. Hoover condemned the Bolsheviks but warned President Wilson against an intervention in the Russian Civil War, as he viewed the White Russian forces as little better than the Bolsheviks and feared the possibility of a protracted U.S. involvement. The Russian famine of 1921\u201322 claimed six million people, but the intervention of the ARA likely saved millions of lives. When asked if he was not helping Bolshevism by providing relief, Hoover stated, \"twenty million people are starving. Whatever their politics, they shall be fed!\" Reflecting the gratitude of many Europeans, in July 1922, Soviet author Maxim Gorky told Hoover that \"your help will enter history as a unique, gigantic achievement, worthy of the greatest glory, which will long remain in the memory of millions of Russians whom you have saved from death\".\nIn 1919, Hoover established the Hoover War Collection at Stanford University. He donated all the files of the Commission for Relief in Belgium, the U.S. Food Administration, and the American Relief Administration, and pledged $50,000 as an endowment (). Scholars were sent to Europe to collect pamphlets, society publications, government documents, newspapers, posters, proclamations, and other ephemeral materials related to the war and the revolutions that followed it. The collection was renamed the Hoover War Library in 1922 and is now known as the Hoover Institution Library and Archives. During the post-war period, Hoover also served as the president of the Federated American Engineering Societies.\n1920 election.\nHoover had been little known among the American public before 1914, but his service in the Wilson administration established him as a contender in the 1920 presidential election. Hoover's wartime push for higher taxes, criticism of Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer's actions during the First Red Scare, and his advocacy for measures such as the minimum wage, forty-eight-hour workweek, and elimination of child labor made him appealing to progressives of both parties. Despite his service in the Democratic administration of Woodrow Wilson, Hoover had never been closely affiliated with either the Democrats or the Republicans. He initially sought to avoid committing to any party in the 1920 election, hoping that either of the two major parties would draft him for president at their national conventions. In March 1920, he changed strategy and declared himself a Republican; he was motivated in large part by the belief that the Democrats had little chance of winning. Despite his national renown, Hoover's service in the Wilson administration had alienated farmers and the conservative Old Guard of the GOP, and his presidential candidacy fizzled out after his defeat in the California primary by favorite son Hiram Johnson. At the 1920 Republican National Convention, Warren G. Harding emerged as a compromise candidate after the convention became deadlocked among supporters of Johnson, Leonard Wood, and Frank Orren Lowden. Hoover backed Harding's successful campaign in the general election, and he began laying the groundwork for a future presidential run by building a base of strong supporters in the Republican Party.\nSecretary of Commerce (1921\u20131928).\nAfter his election as president in 1920, Harding rewarded Hoover for his support, offering to appoint him as either Secretary of the Interior or Secretary of Commerce. Secretary of Commerce was considered a minor Cabinet post, with limited and vaguely defined responsibilities, but Hoover decided to accept the position. Hoover's progressive stances, continuing support for the League of Nations, and recent conversion to the Republican Party aroused opposition to his appointment from many Senate Republicans. To overcome this opposition, Harding paired Hoover's nomination with that of conservative favorite Andrew Mellon as Secretary of the Treasury, and the nominations of both Hoover and Mellon were confirmed by the Senate. Hoover would serve as Secretary of Commerce from 1921 to 1928, serving under Harding and, after Harding's death in 1923, President Calvin Coolidge. While some of the most prominent members of the Harding administration, including Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty and Secretary of Interior Albert B. Fall, were implicated in major scandals, Hoover emerged largely unscathed from investigations into the Harding administration.\nHoover envisioned the Commerce Department as the hub of the nation's growth and stability. His experience mobilizing the war-time economy convinced him that the federal government could promote efficiency by eliminating waste, increasing production, encouraging the adoption of data-based practices, investing in infrastructure, and conserving natural resources. He promoted the scheme of \"Super Power\" for electrical utility interconnection, and accepted the first ceremonial Picturephone call in Washington in April 1927 from Walter Gifford, the Chairman of AT&amp;T in New York City.\nContemporaries described Hoover's approach as a \"third alternative\" between \"unrestrained capitalism\" and socialism, which was becoming increasingly popular in Europe. Hoover sought to foster a balance among labor, capital, and the government, and for this, he has been variously labeled a corporatist or an associationalist. A high priority was economic diplomacy, including promoting the growth of exports, as well as protection against monopolistic practices of foreign governments, especially regarding rubber and coffee.\nHoover demanded, and received, authority to coordinate economic affairs throughout the government. He created many sub-departments and committees, overseeing and regulating everything from manufacturing statistics to air travel. In some instances, he \"seized\" control of responsibilities from other Cabinet departments when he deemed that they were not carrying out their responsibilities well; some began referring to him as the \"Secretary of Commerce and Under-Secretary of all other departments\". In response to the Depression of 1920\u201321, he convinced Harding to assemble a presidential commission on unemployment, which encouraged local governments to engage in countercyclical infrastructure spending. He endorsed much of Mellon's tax reduction program but favored a more progressive tax system and opposed the treasury secretary's efforts to eliminate the estate tax.\nRegulation of radio and transportation.\nBetween 1923 and 1929, the number of families with radios grew from 300,000 to 10 million, and Hoover's tenure as Secretary of Commerce heavily influenced radio use in the United States. Between 1922 and 1925, Hoover organized conferences among radio manufacturers, news agencies, and government organizations which played a key role in the organization, development, and regulation of radio broadcasting. Hoover also helped pass the Radio Act of 1927, which allowed the government to intervene and abolish radio stations that were deemed \"non-useful\" to the public. Hoover's attempts at regulating radio were not supported by all congressmen, and he received much opposition from the Senate and from radio station owners.\nHoover was also influential in the early development of air travel, and he sought to create a thriving private industry boosted by government subsidies. He encouraged the development of emergency landing fields, required all runways to be equipped with lights and radio beams, and encouraged farmers to make use of planes for crop dusting. Hoover also established the federal government's power to inspect planes and license pilots, setting a precedent for the later Federal Aviation Administration.\nAs Commerce Secretary, he hosted national conferences on street traffic collectively known as the National Conference on Street and Highway Safety. His chief objective was to address the growing casualty toll of traffic accidents, but the scope of the conferences grew and soon embraced motor vehicle standards, rules of the road, and urban traffic control. He left the invited interest groups to negotiate agreements among themselves, which were then presented for adoption by states and localities. Because automotive trade associations were the best organized, many of the positions taken by the conferences reflected their interests. The conferences issued a model Uniform Vehicle Code for adoption by the states and a Model Municipal Traffic Ordinance for adoption by cities. Both were widely influential, promoting greater uniformity among jurisdictions and tending to promote the automobile's priority in city streets.\nHoover's image building.\nPhillips Payson O'Brien argues that Hoover had a Britain problem. He had spent so many years living in Britain and Australia, as an employee of British companies, there was a risk that he would be labeled a British tool. There were three solutions, all of which he tried in close collaboration with the media, which greatly admired him. First came the image of the dispassionate scientist, emotionally uninvolved but always committed to finding and implementing the best possible solution. The second solution was to gain the reputation of a humanitarian, deeply concerned with the world's troubles, such as famine in Belgium, as well as specific American problems which he had solved as food commissioner during the world war. The third solution was to fall back on the old tactic of twisting the British tail, which he employed during the 1925\u20131926 worldwide rubber crisis. The American auto industry consumed 70% of the world's output, but British investors controlled much of the supply. Their plan was to drastically cut back on output from British Malaya, which had the effect of tripling rubber prices. Hoover energetically gave a series of speeches and interviews denouncing the monopolistic practice and demanding that it be ended. The American State Department wanted no such crisis and compromised the issue in 1926. By then Hoover had solved his image problem, and during his 1928 campaign he successfully squelched attacks that alleged he was too close to British interests.\nMississippi flood.\nThe Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 broke the banks and levees of the lower Mississippi River in early 1927, resulting in the flooding of millions of acres and leaving 1.5 million people displaced from their homes. Although disaster response did not fall under the duties of the Commerce Department, the governors of six states along the Mississippi River specifically asked President Coolidge to appoint Hoover to coordinate the response to the flood. Believing that disaster response was not the domain of the federal government, Coolidge initially refused to become involved, but he eventually acceded to political pressure and appointed Hoover to chair a special committee to help the region. Hoover established over one hundred tent cities and a fleet of more than six hundred vessels and raised $17 million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024). In large part due to his leadership during the flood crisis, by 1928, Hoover had begun to overshadow President Coolidge himself. Though Hoover received wide acclaim for his role in the crisis, he ordered the suppression of reports of mistreatment of African Americans in refugee camps. He did so with the cooperation of black American leader Robert Russa Moton, who was promised unprecedented influence once Hoover became president.\nOther initiatives.\nWith the goal of encouraging wise business investments, Hoover made the Commerce Department a clearinghouse of information. He recruited numerous academics from various fields and tasked them with publishing reports on different aspects of the economy, including steel production and films. To eliminate waste, he encouraged standardization of products like automobile tires and baby bottle nipples. Other efforts at eliminating waste included reducing labor losses from trade disputes and seasonal fluctuations, reducing industrial losses from accident and injury, and reducing the amount of crude oil spilled during extraction and shipping. He promoted international trade by opening overseas offices to advise businessmen. Hoover was especially eager to promote Hollywood films overseas. His \"Own Your Own Home\" campaign was a collaboration to promote ownership of single-family dwellings, with groups such as the Better Houses in America movement, the Architects' Small House Service Bureau, and the Home Modernizing Bureau. He worked with bankers and the savings and loan industry to promote the new long-term home mortgage, which dramatically stimulated home construction. Other accomplishments included winning the agreement of U.S. Steel to adopt an eight-hour workday, and the fostering of the Colorado River Compact, a water rights compact among Southwestern states.\nPresidential election of 1928.\nHoover quietly gathered support for a future presidential bid throughout the 1920s, but he carefully avoided alienating Coolidge, who possibly could have run for another term in the 1928 presidential election. Along with the rest of the nation, he was surprised when Coolidge in August 1927 declared \"I do not choose to run\" for another term. With the impending retirement of Coolidge, Hoover immediately emerged as the front-runner for the 1928 Republican nomination, and he quickly put together a strong campaign team led by Hubert Work, Will H. Hays, and Reed Smoot. Coolidge was unwilling to anoint Hoover as his successor, and once remarked \"for six years that man has given me unsolicited advice\u2014all of it bad\". Despite his lukewarm feelings towards Hoover, Coolidge had no desire to split the party by publicly opposing the popular Commerce Secretary's candidacy.\nOne public figure who endorsed Hoover for the Republican presidential candidacy was William Randolph Hearst, who argued that \"The present situation demands conservatism, and Secretary Hoover\u2019s conservatism is of the constructive and not the reactionary type.\" \nMany wary Republican leaders cast about for an alternative candidate, such as Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon or former secretary of state Charles Evans Hughes. However, Hughes and Mellon declined to run, and other potential contenders like Frank Orren Lowden and Vice President Charles G. Dawes failed to garner widespread support. Hoover won the presidential nomination on the first ballot of the 1928 Republican National Convention. Convention delegates considered re-nominating Vice President Charles Dawes to be Hoover's running mate, but Coolidge, who hated Dawes, remarked that this would be \"a personal affront\" to him. The convention instead selected Senator Charles Curtis of Kansas. Hoover accepted the nomination at Stanford Stadium, telling a huge crowd that he would continue the policies of the Harding and Coolidge administrations. The Democrats nominated New York governor Al Smith, who became the first Catholic major party nominee for president.\nHoover submitted his resignation as Commerce Secretary on July 7, but Coolidge kept him on until August 21 to wind up pending business. Hoover centered his campaign around the Republican record of peace and prosperity, as well as his own reputation as a successful engineer and public official. Averse to giving political speeches, Hoover largely stayed out of the fray and left the campaigning to Curtis and other Republicans. Smith was more charismatic and gregarious than Hoover, but his campaign was damaged by anti-Catholicism and his overt opposition to Prohibition. Hoover had never been a strong proponent of Prohibition, but he accepted the Republican Party's plank in favor of it and issued an ambivalent statement calling Prohibition \"a great social and economic experiment, noble in motive and far-reaching in purpose\". In the South, Hoover and the national party pursued a \"lily-white\" strategy, removing black Republicans from leadership positions in an attempt to curry favor with white Southerners.\nHoover maintained polling leads throughout the 1928 campaign, and he decisively defeated Smith on election day, taking 58 percent of the popular vote and 444 of the 531 electoral votes. Historians agree that Hoover's national reputation and the booming economy, combined with deep splits in the Democratic Party over religion and Prohibition, guaranteed his landslide victory. Hoover's appeal to Southern white voters succeeded in cracking the \"Solid South\", and he won five Southern states. Hoover's victory was positively received by newspapers; one wrote that Hoover would \"drive so forcefully at the tasks now before the nation that the end of his eight years as president will find us looking back on an era of prodigious achievement\".\nHoover's detractors wondered why he did not do anything to reapportion congress after the 1920 United States census which saw an increase in urban and immigrant populations. The 1920 census was the first and only decennial census where the results were not used to reapportion Congress, which ultimately influenced the 1928 Electoral College and impacted the presidential election.\nPresidency (1929\u20131933).\nHoover saw the presidency as a vehicle for improving the conditions of all Americans by encouraging public-private cooperation\u2014what he termed \"volunteerism\". He tended to oppose governmental coercion or intervention, as he thought they infringed on American ideals of individualism and self-reliance. The first major bill that he signed, the Agricultural Marketing Act of 1929, established the Federal Farm Board in order to stabilize farm prices. Hoover made extensive use of commissions to study issues and propose solutions, and many of those commissions were sponsored by private donors rather than by the government. One of the commissions started by Hoover, the Research Committee on Social Trends, was tasked with surveying the entirety of American society. He appointed a Cabinet consisting largely of wealthy, business-oriented conservatives, including Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon. Lou Henry Hoover was an activist First Lady. She typified the new woman of the post\u2013World War I era: intelligent, robust, and aware of multiple female possibilities.\nGreat Depression.\nOn taking office, Hoover said that \"given the chance to go forward with the policies of the last eight years, we shall soon with the help of God, be in sight of the day when poverty will be banished from this nation\". Having seen the fruits of prosperity brought by technological progress, many shared Hoover's optimism, and the already bullish stock market climbed even higher on Hoover's accession. This optimism concealed several threats to sustained U.S. economic growth, including a persistent farm crisis, a saturation of consumer goods like automobiles, and growing income inequality. Most dangerous of all to the economy was excessive speculation that had raised stock prices far beyond their value. Some regulators and bankers had warned Coolidge and Hoover that a failure to curb speculation would lead to \"one of the greatest financial catastrophes that this country has ever seen,\" but both presidents were reluctant to become involved with the workings of the Federal Reserve System, which regulated banks.\nIn late October 1929, the stock market crashed, and the worldwide economy began to spiral downward into the Great Depression. The causes of the Great Depression remain a matter of debate, but Hoover viewed a lack of confidence in the financial system as the fundamental economic problem facing the nation. He sought to avoid federal intervention, believing that the best way to bolster the economy was through the strengthening of businesses such as banks and railroads. He also feared that allowing individuals on the \"dole\" would permanently weaken the country, and believed that \"relief to individuals from the federal government would bring an inevitable train of corruption and waste such as our nation had never witnessed.\" Instead, Hoover strongly believed that local governments and private giving should address the needs of individuals.\nEarly policies.\nThough he attempted to put a positive spin on Black Tuesday, Hoover moved quickly to address the stock market collapse. In the days following Black Tuesday, Hoover gathered business and labor leaders, asking them to avoid wage cuts and work stoppages while the country faced what he believed would be a short recession similar to the Depression of 1920\u201321. Hoover also convinced railroads and public utilities to increase spending on construction and maintenance, and the Federal Reserve announced that it would cut interest rates. In early 1930, Hoover acquired from Congress an additional $100 million to continue the Federal Farm Board lending and purchasing policies. These actions were collectively designed to prevent a cycle of deflation and provide a fiscal stimulus. At the same time, Hoover opposed congressional proposals to provide federal relief to the unemployed, as he believed that such programs were the responsibility of state and local governments and philanthropic organizations.\nHoover had taken office hoping to raise agricultural tariffs in order to help farmers reeling from the farm crisis of the 1920s, but his attempt to raise agricultural tariffs became connected with a bill that broadly raised tariffs. Hoover refused to become closely involved in the congressional debate over the tariff, and Congress produced a tariff bill that raised rates for many goods. Despite the widespread unpopularity of the bill, Hoover felt that he could not reject the main legislative accomplishment of the Republican-controlled 71st Congress. Over the objection of many economists, Hoover signed the Smoot\u2013Hawley Tariff Act into law in June 1930. Canada, France, and other nations retaliated by raising tariffs, resulting in a contraction of international trade and a worsening of the economy. Progressive Republicans such as Senator William E. Borah of Idaho were outraged when Hoover signed the tariff act, and Hoover's relations with that wing of the party never recovered.\nLater policies.\nBy the end of 1930, the national unemployment rate had reached 11.9 percent, but it was not yet clear to most Americans that the economic downturn would be worse than the Depression of 1920\u201321. A series of bank failures in late 1930 heralded a larger collapse of the economy in 1931. While other countries left the gold standard, Hoover refused to abandon it; he derided any other monetary system as \"collectivism\". Hoover viewed the weak European economy as a major cause of economic troubles in the United States. In response to the collapse of the German economy, Hoover marshaled congressional support behind a one-year moratorium on European war debts. The Hoover Moratorium was warmly received in Europe and the United States, but Germany remained on the brink of defaulting on its loans. As the worldwide economy worsened, democratic governments fell; in Germany, Nazi Party leader Adolf Hitler assumed power and dismantled the Weimar Republic.\nBy mid-1931, the unemployment rate had reached 15 percent, giving rise to growing fears that the country was experiencing a depression far worse than recent economic downturns. A reserved man with a fear of public speaking, Hoover allowed his opponents in the Democratic Party to define him as cold, incompetent, reactionary, and out-of-touch. Hoover's opponents developed defamatory epithets to discredit him, such as \"Hooverville\" (the shanty towns and homeless encampments), \"Hoover leather\" (cardboard used to cover holes in the soles of shoes), and \"Hoover blanket\" (old newspaper used to cover oneself from the cold). While Hoover continued to resist federal relief efforts, Governor Franklin D. Roosevelt of New York launched the Temporary Emergency Relief Administration to provide aid to the unemployed. Democrats positioned the program as a kinder alternative to Hoover's alleged apathy towards the unemployed, despite Hoover's belief that such programs were the responsibility of state and local governments.\nThe economy continued to worsen, with unemployment rates nearing 23 percent in early 1932, and Hoover finally heeded calls for more federal intervention. In January 1932, he convinced Congress to authorize the establishment of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC), which would provide government-secured loans to financial institutions, railroads, and local governments. The RFC saved numerous businesses from failure, but it failed to stimulate commercial lending as much as Hoover had hoped, partly because it was run by conservative bankers unwilling to make riskier loans. The same month the RFC was established, Hoover signed the Federal Home Loan Bank Act, establishing 12 district banks overseen by a Federal Home Loan Bank Board in a manner similar to the Federal Reserve System. He also helped arrange passage of the Glass\u2013Steagall Act of 1932, emergency banking legislation designed to expand banking credit by expanding the collateral on which Federal Reserve banks were authorized to lend. As these measures failed to stem the economic crisis, Hoover signed the Emergency Relief and Construction Act, a $2 billion public works bill, in July 1932.\nBudget policy.\nAfter a decade of budget surpluses, the federal government experienced a budget deficit in 1931. Though some economists, like William Trufant Foster, favored deficit spending to address the Great Depression, most politicians and economists believed in the necessity of keeping a balanced budget. In late 1931, Hoover proposed a tax plan to increase tax revenue by 30 percent, resulting in the passage of the Revenue Act of 1932. The act increased taxes across the board, rolling back much of the tax cut reduction program Mellon had presided over during the 1920s. Top earners were taxed at 63 percent on their net income, the highest rate since the early 1920s. The act also doubled the top estate tax rate, cut personal income tax exemptions, eliminated the corporate income tax exemption, and raised corporate tax rates. Prior to its passage, the legislation included a sales tax, but this part of the bill was defeated in the House of Representatives by 211 to 178 votes. Despite the passage of the Revenue Act, the federal government continued to run a budget deficit.\nCivil rights and Mexican Repatriation.\nHoover seldom mentioned civil rights while he was president. He believed that African Americans and other races could improve themselves with education and individual initiative. Hoover appointed more African Americans to federal positions than Harding and Coolidge combined, but many African American leaders condemned various aspects of the Hoover administration, including Hoover's unwillingness to push for a federal anti-lynching law. Hoover also continued to pursue the lily-white strategy, removing African Americans from positions of leadership in the Republican Party in an attempt to end the Democratic Party's dominance in the South. Though Robert Moton and some other black leaders accepted the lily-white strategy as a temporary measure, most African American leaders were outraged. Hoover further alienated black leaders by nominating conservative Southern judge John J. Parker to the Supreme Court; Parker's nomination ultimately failed in the Senate due to opposition from the NAACP and organized labor. Many black voters switched to the Democratic Party in the 1932 election, and African Americans would later become an important part of Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal coalition.\nAs part of his efforts to limit unemployment, Hoover sought to cut immigration to the United States, and in 1930 he promulgated an executive order requiring individuals to have employment before migrating to the United States. The Hoover Administration began a campaign to prosecute illegal immigrants in the United States, which most strongly affected Mexican Americans, especially those living in Southern California. The federal government also supported the Mexican repatriation which saw anywhere from 300,000 to two million Mexicans and Mexican Americans repatriated, deported, or expelled to Mexico during the 1930s primarily during Hoover's term. Forty to sixty percent of them were American citizens. While the federal government encouraged repatriations, they were largely organized by state and local authorities with support from private entities. The Hoover administration deported 34,000 people to Mexico between 1930 to 1933. It was however more common for people to repatriate voluntarily. Some scholars argue that the mass repatriations was a policy of Hoover's administration. According to legal professor Kevin R. Johnson, the repatriation campaign meets the modern legal standards of ethnic cleansing, as it involved the forced removal of a racial minority by government actors.\nHoover reorganized the Bureau of Indian Affairs to limit exploitation of Native Americans.\nProhibition.\nOn taking office, Hoover urged Americans to obey the Eighteenth Amendment and the Volstead Act, which had established Prohibition across the United States. To make public policy recommendations regarding Prohibition, he created the Wickersham Commission. Hoover had hoped that the commission's public report would buttress his stance in favor of Prohibition, but the report criticized the enforcement of the Volstead Act and noted the growing public opposition to Prohibition. After the Wickersham Report was published in 1931, Hoover rejected the advice of some of his closest allies and refused to endorse any revision of the Volstead Act or the Eighteenth Amendment, as he feared doing so would undermine his support among Prohibition advocates. As public opinion increasingly turned against Prohibition, more and more people flouted the law, and a grassroots movement began working in earnest for Prohibition's repeal. In January 1933, a constitutional amendment repealing the Eighteenth Amendment was approved by Congress and submitted to the states for ratification. By December 1933, it had been ratified by the requisite number of states to become the Twenty-first Amendment to the United States Constitution.\nForeign relations.\nAccording to Leuchtenburg, Hoover was \"the last American president to take office with no conspicuous need to pay attention to the rest of the world\". Nevertheless, during Hoover's term, the world order established in the immediate aftermath of World War I began to crumble. As president, Hoover largely made good on his pledge made prior to assuming office not to interfere in Latin America's internal affairs. In 1930, he released the Clark Memorandum, a rejection of the Roosevelt Corollary and a move towards non-interventionism in Latin America. Hoover did not completely refrain from the use of the military in Latin American affairs; he thrice threatened intervention in the Dominican Republic, and he sent warships to El Salvador to support the government against a left-wing revolution. Notwithstanding those actions, he wound down the Banana Wars, ending the occupation of Nicaragua and nearly bringing an end to the occupation of Haiti.\nHoover placed a priority on disarmament, which he hoped would allow the United States to shift money from the military to domestic needs. Hoover and Secretary of State Henry L. Stimson focused on extending the 1922 Washington Naval Treaty, which sought to prevent a naval arms race. As a result of Hoover's efforts, the United States and other major naval powers signed the 1930 London Naval Treaty. The treaty represented the first time that the naval powers had agreed to cap their tonnage of auxiliary vessels, as previous agreements had only affected capital ships.\nAt the 1932 World Disarmament Conference, Hoover urged further cutbacks in armaments and the outlawing of tanks and bombers, but his proposals were not adopted.\nIn 1931, Japan invaded Manchuria, defeating the Republic of China's National Revolutionary Army and establishing Manchukuo, a puppet state. The Hoover administration deplored the invasion, but also sought to avoid antagonizing the Japanese, fearing that taking too strong a stand would weaken the moderate forces in the Japanese government and alienate a potential ally against the Soviet Union, which he saw as a much greater threat. In response to the Japanese invasion, Hoover and Secretary of State Stimson outlined the Stimson Doctrine, which held that the United States would not recognize territories gained by force.\nBonus Army.\nThousands of World War I veterans and their families demonstrated and camped out in Washington, DC, during June 1932, calling for immediate payment of bonuses that had been promised by the World War Adjusted Compensation Act in 1924; the terms of the act called for payment of the bonuses in 1945. Although offered money by Congress to return home, some members of the \"Bonus Army\" remained. Washington police attempted to disperse the demonstrators, but they were outnumbered and unsuccessful. Shots were fired by the police in a futile attempt to attain order, and two protesters were killed while many officers were injured. Hoover sent U.S. Army forces led by General Douglas MacArthur to the protests. MacArthur, believing he was fighting a Communist revolution, chose to clear out the camp with military force. Though Hoover had not ordered MacArthur's clearing out of the protesters, he endorsed it after the fact. The incident proved embarrassing for the Hoover administration and hurt his bid for re-election.\n1932 re-election campaign.\nBy mid-1931 few observers thought that Hoover had much hope of winning a second term in the midst of the ongoing economic crisis. The Republican expectations were so bleak that Hoover faced no serious opposition for re-nomination at the 1932 Republican National Convention. Coolidge and other prominent Republicans all passed on the opportunity to challenge Hoover. Franklin D. Roosevelt won the presidential nomination on the fourth ballot of the 1932 Democratic National Convention, defeating the 1928 Democratic nominee, Al Smith. The Democrats attacked Hoover as the cause of the Great Depression, and for being indifferent to the suffering of millions. As Governor of New York, Roosevelt had called on the New York legislature to provide aid for the needy, establishing Roosevelt's reputation for being more favorable toward government interventionism during the economic crisis. The Democratic Party, including Al Smith and other national leaders, coalesced behind Roosevelt, while progressive Republicans like George Norris and Robert La Follette Jr. deserted Hoover. Prohibition was increasingly unpopular and wets offered the argument that states and localities needed the tax money. Hoover proposed a new constitutional amendment that was vague on particulars. Roosevelt's platform promised repeal of the 18th Amendment.\nHoover originally planned to make only one or two major speeches and to leave the rest of the campaigning to proxies, as sitting presidents had traditionally done. However, encouraged by Republican pleas and outraged by Democratic claims, Hoover entered the public fray. In his nine major radio addresses Hoover primarily defended his administration and his philosophy of government, urging voters to hold to the \"foundations of experience\" and reject the notion that government interventionism could save the country from the Depression. Historians contend that his radio speeches were not received well in part due to his monotone, awkward delivery. In his campaign trips around the country, Hoover was faced with perhaps the most hostile crowds ever seen by a sitting president. Besides having his train and motorcades pelted with eggs and rotten fruit, he was often heckled while speaking, and on several occasions, the Secret Service halted attempts to hurt Hoover, including capturing one man nearing Hoover carrying sticks of dynamite, and another already having removed several spikes from the rails in front of the president's train. Hoover's attempts to vindicate his administration fell on deaf ears, as much of the public blamed his administration for the depression. In the electoral vote, Hoover lost 59\u2013472, carrying six states. Hoover won 39.6 percent of the popular vote, a plunge of 18.6 percentage points from his result in the 1928 election.\nPost-presidency (1933\u20131964).\nRoosevelt administration.\nOpposition to the New Deal.\nHoover departed from Washington in March 1933, bitter at his election loss and continuing unpopularity. As Coolidge, Harding, Wilson, and Taft had all died during the 1920s or early 1930s and Roosevelt died in office (in 1945), Hoover was the sole living former president from 1933 to 1953. He and his wife lived in Palo Alto until her death in 1944, at which point Hoover began to live permanently at the Waldorf Astoria hotel in New York City. During the 1930s, Hoover increasingly self-identified as a conservative. He closely followed national events after leaving public office, becoming a constant critic of Franklin Roosevelt. In response to continued attacks on his character and presidency, Hoover wrote more than two dozen books, including \"The Challenge to Liberty\" (1934), which harshly criticized Roosevelt's New Deal. Hoover described the New Deal's National Recovery Administration and Agricultural Adjustment Administration as \"fascistic\", and he called the 1933 Banking Act a \"move to gigantic socialism\".\nOnly 58 when he left office, Hoover held out hope for another term as president throughout the 1930s. At the 1936 Republican National Convention, Hoover's speech attacking the New Deal was well received, but the nomination went to Kansas governor Alf Landon. In the general election, Hoover delivered numerous well-publicized speeches on behalf of Landon, but Landon was defeated by Roosevelt. Though Hoover was eager to oppose Roosevelt at every turn, Senator Arthur Vandenberg and other Republicans urged the still-unpopular Hoover to remain out of the fray during the debate over Roosevelt's proposed Judiciary Reorganization Bill of 1937. At the 1940 Republican National Convention, he again hoped for the presidential nomination, but it went to the internationalist Wendell Willkie, who lost to Roosevelt in the general election. Hoover was the last president to seek public office after leaving office until 2022 when Donald Trump announced his successful bid for president in the 2024 presidential election.\nWorld War II.\nDuring a 1938 trip to Europe, Hoover met with Adolf Hitler and stayed at Hermann G\u00f6ring's hunting lodge. He expressed dismay at the persecution of Jews in Germany and believed that Hitler was mad, but did not present a threat to the U.S. Instead, Hoover believed that Roosevelt posed the biggest threat to peace, holding that Roosevelt's policies provoked Japan and discouraged France and the United Kingdom from reaching an \"accommodation\" with Germany. After the September 1939 invasion of Poland by Germany, Hoover opposed U.S. involvement in World War II, including the Lend-Lease policy. He was active in the isolationist America First Committee. He rejected Roosevelt's offers to help coordinate relief in Europe, but, with the help of old friends from the CRB, helped establish the Commission for Polish Relief. After the beginning of the occupation of Belgium in 1940, Hoover provided aid for Belgian civilians, though this aid was described as unnecessary by German broadcasts.\nIn December 1939, sympathetic Americans led by Hoover formed the Finnish Relief Fund to donate money to aid Finnish civilians and refugees after the Soviet Union had started the Winter War by attacking Finland, which had outraged Americans. By the end of January, it had already sent more than two million dollars to the Finns.\nDuring a radio broadcast on June 29, 1941, one week after the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union, Hoover disparaged any \"tacit alliance\" between the U.S. and the USSR, stating, \"if we join the war and Stalin wins, we have aided him to impose more communism on Europe and the world... War alongside Stalin to impose freedom is more than a travesty. It is a tragedy.\" Much to his frustration, Hoover was not called upon to serve after the United States entered World War II due to his differences with Roosevelt and his continuing unpopularity. He did not pursue the presidential nomination at the 1944 Republican National Convention, and, at the request of Republican nominee Thomas E. Dewey, refrained from campaigning during the general election. In 1945, Hoover advised President Harry S. Truman to drop the United States' demand for the unconditional surrender of Japan because of the high projected casualties of the planned invasion of Japan, although Hoover was unaware of the Manhattan Project and the atomic bomb.\nIn 1943, Hoover expressed his support for Zionism.\nPost-World War II.\nFollowing World War II, Hoover befriended President Truman despite their ideological differences. Because of Hoover's experience with Germany at the end of World War I, in 1946 Truman selected the former president to tour Allied-occupied Germany and Rome, Italy to ascertain the food needs of the occupied nations. After touring Germany, Hoover produced a number of reports critical of U.S. occupation policy. He stated in one report that \"there is the illusion that the New Germany left after the annexations can be reduced to a 'pastoral state.' It cannot be done unless we exterminate or move 25,000,000 people out of it.\" On Hoover's initiative, a school meals program in the American and British occupation zones of Germany was begun on April 14, 1947; the program served 3,500,000 children.\nEven more important, in 1947 Truman appointed Hoover to lead the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government a new high level study. Truman accepted some of the recommendations of the \"Hoover Commission\" for eliminating waste, fraud, and inefficiency, consolidating agencies, and strengthening White House control of policy. Though Hoover had opposed Roosevelt's concentration of power in the 1930s, he believed that a stronger presidency was required with the advent of the Atomic Age. During the 1948 presidential election, Hoover supported Republican nominee Thomas E. Dewey's unsuccessful campaign against Truman, but he remained on good terms with Truman. Hoover favored the United Nations in principle, but he opposed granting membership to the Soviet Union and other Communist states. He viewed the Soviet Union to be as morally repugnant as Nazi Germany and supported the efforts of Richard Nixon and others to expose Communists in the United States.\nIn 1949, Dewey, as governor of New York, offered Hoover the Senate seat vacated by Robert F. Wagner. It was a matter of being senator for only two months and he declined.\nHoover backed conservative leader Robert A. Taft at the 1952 Republican National Convention, but the party's presidential nomination instead went to Dwight D. Eisenhower, who went on to win the 1952 election. Though Eisenhower appointed Hoover to another presidential commission, Hoover disliked Eisenhower, faulting the latter's failure to roll back the New Deal. Hoover's public work helped to rehabilitate his reputation, as did his use of self-deprecating humor; he occasionally remarked that \"I am the only person of distinction who's ever had a depression named after him.\" In 1958, Congress passed the Former Presidents Act, offering a $25,000 yearly pension () to each former president. Hoover took the pension even though he did not need the money, possibly to avoid embarrassing Truman, whose allegedly precarious financial status played a role in the law's enactment. In the early 1960s, President John F. Kennedy offered Hoover various positions; Hoover declined the offers but defended the Kennedy administration after the Bay of Pigs Invasion, Cuban Missile Crisis and was personally distraught by the assassination of John F. Kennedy in 1963.\nHoover wrote several books during his retirement, including \"The Ordeal of Woodrow Wilson\", in which he strongly defended Wilson's actions at the Paris Peace Conference. In 1944, he began working on \"Freedom Betrayed\", which he often referred to as his \"magnum opus\". In \"Freedom Betrayed\", Hoover strongly critiques Roosevelt's foreign policy, especially Roosevelt's decision to recognize the Soviet Union in order to provide aid to that country during World War II. The book was published in 2012 after being edited by historian George H. Nash.\nDeath.\nHoover faced three major illnesses during the last two years of his life, including an August 1962 operation in which a growth on his large intestine was removed. He died in New York City on October 20, 1964, following massive internal bleeding. Though Hoover's last spoken words are unknown, his last-known written words were a get-well message to his friend former President Harry S. Truman, six days before his death, after he heard that Truman had sustained injuries from slipping in a bathroom: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Bathtubs are a menace to ex-presidents for as you may recall a bathtub rose up and fractured my vertebrae when I was in Venezuela on your world famine mission in 1946. My warmest sympathy and best wishes for your recovery.\"Two months earlier on August 10, Hoover reached the age of 90, only the second U.S. president (after John Adams) to do so. When asked how he felt on reaching the milestone, Hoover replied, \"Too old.\" At the time of his death, Hoover had been out of office for over 31 years ( days all together). This was the longest retirement in presidential history, surpassing Adams' 25 years, until Jimmy Carter broke that record in September 2012.\nPresident Lyndon B. Johnson ordered flags flown at half-staff and was among the 500 guests invited for the funeral service held at St. Bartholomew's Episcopal Church. Other dignitaries included former Vice President and future President Richard Nixon, Representative William E. Miller, Governor Nelson Rockefeller, former Governor Thomas E. Dewey, former Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, former Postmaster General James A. Farley, Rear Admiral Lewis L. Strauss and Senators Hubert Humphrey, Barry Goldwater, Kenneth Keating, and Jacob Javits.\nHoover was honored with a state funeral in which he lay in state in the United States Capitol rotunda. President Johnson and First Lady Lady Bird Johnson attended, but former presidents Truman and Eisenhower were both too ill to attend. Then, on October 25, he was buried in West Branch, Iowa, near his presidential library and birthplace on the grounds of the Herbert Hoover National Historic Site. Afterwards, Hoover's wife, Lou Henry Hoover, who had been buried in Palo Alto, California, following her death in 1944, was re-interred beside him.\nThe state funeral was the third in a span of twelve months, following those of President John F. Kennedy and General of the Army Douglas MacArthur. Black Jack was the riderless horse in all three funerals.\nLegacy.\nHistorical reputation.\nHoover was extremely unpopular when he left office after the 1932 election, and his historical reputation would not begin to recover until the 1970s. According to Professor David E. Hamilton, historians have credited Hoover for his genuine belief in voluntarism and cooperation, as well as the innovation of some of his programs. However, Hamilton also notes that Hoover was politically inept and failed to recognize the severity of the Great Depression. Nicholas Lemann writes that Hoover has been remembered \"as the man who was too rigidly conservative to react adeptly to the Depression, as the hapless foil to the great Franklin Roosevelt, and as the politician who managed to turn a Republican country into a Democratic one\". Polls of historians and political scientists have generally ranked Hoover in the bottom third of presidents. A 2018 poll of the American Political Science Association's Presidents and Executive Politics section ranked Hoover as the 36th best president. A 2017 C-SPAN poll of historians also ranked Hoover as the 36th best president.\nAlthough Hoover is generally regarded as having had a failed presidency, he has also received praise for his actions as a humanitarian and public official. Biographer Glen Jeansonne wrote in 2016 that Hoover was \"one of the most extraordinary Americans of modern times,\" adding that Hoover \"led a life that was a prototypical Horatio Alger story, except that Horatio Alger stories stop at the pinnacle of success\". Biographer Kenneth Whyte writes that, \"the question of where Hoover belongs in the American political tradition remains a loaded one to this day. While he clearly played important roles in the development of both the progressive and conservative traditions, neither side will embrace him for fear of contamination with the other.\"\nHistorian Richard Pipes, on his actions leading the American Relief Administration, said of him: \"Many statesmen occupy a prominent place in history for having sent millions to their death; Herbert Hoover, maligned for his performance as President, and soon forgotten in Russia, has the rare distinction of having saved millions.\"\nViews of race.\nAlthough racist remarks and humor were common at the time, Hoover never indulged in them while president, and deliberate discrimination was anathema to him. Like many of his peers, Hoover considered white people to be inherently superior to black people, considering the \"mixture of bloods disadvantageous\". He did think education and work would improve black people's standing, hence his support for the Tuskegee Institute. His wife Lou Henry Hoover broke the color bar as first lady by inviting Jessie De Priest, wife of the first black congressman elected in several decades, to a traditional tea for the wives of congressmen, as well as later inviting the Tuskegee Institute choir (then under the direction of William Dawson).\nAlthough he thought of himself as a friend to black people and an advocate for their progress, many of his black contemporaries had a different view. W. E. B. Du Bois described him as an \"undemocratic racist who saw blacks as a species of 'sub-men'\". Some historians trace the disaffection of African-Americans with the Republican party to his time in office especially due to his attempt to remove African-Americans from leadership in the Republican party in the South.\nHoover's time in China shaped his views of Asian people and Asian-Americans. He erroneously wrote that \"no world-startling mechanical invention\" had come from China, claiming this was due to Chinese people not possessing the same mechanical instincts as Europeans. This may have influenced his decision to reduce immigration through restrictions on visas.\nMemorials.\nThe Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum is located in West Branch, Iowa next to the Herbert Hoover National Historic Site. The library is one of thirteen presidential libraries run by the National Archives and Records Administration. The Hoover\u2013Minthorn House, where Hoover lived from 1885 to 1891, is located in Newberg, Oregon. His Rapidan fishing camp in Virginia, which he donated to the government in 1933, is now a National Historic Landmark within the Shenandoah National Park. The Lou Henry and Herbert Hoover House, built in 1919 in Stanford, California, is now the official residence of the president of Stanford University, and a National Historic Landmark. Also located at Stanford is the Hoover Institution, a think tank and research institution started by Hoover.\nHoover has been memorialized in the names of several things, including the Hoover Dam on the Colorado River and numerous elementary, middle, and high schools across the United States. Two minor planets, 932 Hooveria and 1363 Herberta, are named in his honor. The Polish capital of Warsaw has a square named after Hoover, and the historic townsite of Gwalia, Western Australia contains the Hoover House Bed and Breakfast, where Hoover resided while managing and visiting the mine during the first decade of the twentieth century. A medicine ball game known as Hooverball is named for Hoover; it was invented by White House physician Admiral Joel T. Boone to help Hoover keep fit while serving as president.\nOther honors.\nHoover was inducted into the National Mining Hall of Fame in 1988 (inaugural class). His wife was inducted into the hall in 1990.\nHoover was inducted into the Australian Prospectors and Miners' Hall of Fame in the category Directors and Management.\nHoover was awarded an honorary doctorate by the Charles University in Prague and University of Helsinki in March 1938. The ceremonial sword is today on display in the lobby of the Hoover tower.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBiographical.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nScholarly studies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "13684", "revid": "36498778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13684", "title": "Hildegard of Bingen", "text": "German nun and polymath (c. 1098 \u2013 1179)\nHildegard of Bingen OSB (, ; ; c.\u20091098\u00a0\u2013 17 September 1179), also known as the Sibyl of the Rhine, was a German Benedictine abbess and polymath active as a writer, composer, philosopher, mystic, visionary, and as a medical writer and practitioner during the High Middle Ages. She is one of the best-known composers of sacred monophony, as well as the most recorded in modern history. She has been considered by a number of scholars to be the founder of scientific natural history in Germany.\nHildegard's convent at Disibodenberg elected her as (mother superior) in 1136. She founded the monasteries of Rupertsberg in 1150 and Eibingen in 1165. Hildegard wrote theological, botanical, and medicinal works, as well as letters, hymns, and antiphons for the liturgy. She wrote poems, and supervised miniature illuminations in the Rupertsberg manuscript of her first work, . There are more surviving chants by Hildegard than by any other composer from the entire Middle Ages, and she is one of the few known composers to have written both the music and the words. One of her works, the , is an early example of liturgical drama and arguably the oldest surviving morality play. She is noted for the invention of a constructed language known as .\nAlthough the history of her formal canonization is complicated, regional calendars of the Catholic Church have listed her as a saint for centuries. On 10 May 2012, Pope Benedict XVI extended the liturgical cult of Hildegard to the entire Catholic Church in a process known as \"equivalent canonization\". On 7 October 2012, he named her a Doctor of the Church, in recognition of \"her holiness of life and the originality of her teaching.\"\nBiography.\nHildegard was born around 1098. Her parents were Mechtild of Merxheim-Nahet and Hildebert of Bermersheim, a family of the free lower nobility in the service of the Count Meginhard of Sponheim. Sickly from birth, Hildegard is traditionally considered their youngest and tenth child, although there are records of only seven older siblings. In her , Hildegard states that from a very young age she experienced visions.\nSpirituality.\nFrom early childhood, long before she undertook her public mission or even her monastic vows, Hildegard's spiritual awareness was grounded in what she called the , the reflection of the living Light. Her letter to Guibert of Gembloux, which she wrote at the age of 77, describes her experience of this light:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From my early childhood, before my bones, nerves, and veins were fully strengthened, I have always seen this vision in my soul, even to the present time when I am more than seventy years old. In this vision, my soul, as God would have it, rises up high into the vault of heaven and into the changing sky and spreads itself out among different peoples, although they are far away from me in distant lands and places. And because I see them this way in my soul, I observe them in accord with the shifting of clouds and other created things. I do not hear them with my outward ears, nor do I perceive them by the thoughts of my own heart or by any combination of my five senses, but in my soul alone, while my outward eyes are open. So I have never fallen prey to ecstasy in the visions, but I see them wide awake, day and night. And I am constantly fettered by sickness, and often in the grip of pain so intense that it threatens to kill me, but God has sustained me until now. The light which I see thus is not spatial, but it is far, far brighter than a cloud which carries the sun. I can measure neither height, nor length, nor breadth in it; and I call it \"the reflection of the living Light.\" And as the sun, the moon, and the stars appear in water, so writings, sermons, virtues, and certain human actions take form for me and gleam.\nMonastic life.\nPerhaps because of Hildegard's visions or as a method of political positioning, or both, Hildegard's parents offered her as an oblate to the Benedictine monastery at Disibodenberg, which had been recently reformed in the Palatinate Forest. The date of Hildegard's enclosure at the monastery is the subject of debate. Her says she was eight years old when she was professed with Jutta, who was the daughter of Count Stephan II of Sponheim and about six years older than Hildegard. Jutta's date of enclosure is known to have been in 1112, when Hildegard would have been 14. Their vows were received by Bishop Otto of Bamberg on All Saints Day 1112. Some scholars speculate that Hildegard was placed in the care of Jutta at the age of eight, and that the two of them were then enclosed together six years later.\nIn any case, Hildegard and Jutta were enclosed together at Disibodenberg and formed the core of a growing community of women attached to the monastery of monks, named a \"Frauenklause,\" a type of female hermitage. Jutta was also a visionary and thus attracted many followers who came to visit her at the monastery. Hildegard states that Jutta taught her to read and write, but that she was unlearned, and therefore incapable of teaching Hildegard sound Biblical interpretation. The written record of the \"Life of Jutta\" indicates that Hildegard probably assisted her in reciting the psalms, working in the garden, other handiwork, and tending to the sick. This might have been a time when Hildegard learned how to play the ten-stringed psaltery. Volmar, a frequent visitor, may have taught Hildegard simple psalm notation. The time she studied music could have been the beginning of the compositions she would later create.\nUpon Jutta's death in 1136, Hildegard was unanimously elected as of the community by her fellow nuns. Abbot Kuno of Disibodenberg asked Hildegard to be prioress, which would be under his authority. Hildegard, wanting more independence for herself and her nuns, asked Abbot Kuno to allow them to move to Rupertsberg. This was to be a move toward poverty, from a stone complex that was well established to a temporary dwelling place. When the abbot declined Hildegard's proposition, Hildegard went over his head and received the approval of Archbishop Henry I of Mainz. Abbot Kuno did not relent, however, until Hildegard was stricken by an illness that rendered her paralyzed and unable to move from her bed, an event that she attributed to God's unhappiness at her not following his orders to move her nuns to Rupertsberg. It was only when the Abbot himself could not move Hildegard that he decided to grant the nuns their own monastery. Hildegard and approximately 20 nuns thus moved to the St. Rupertsberg monastery in 1150, where Volmar served as provost, as well as Hildegard's confessor and scribe. In 1165, Hildegard founded a second monastery for her nuns at Eibingen.\nBefore Hildegard's death in 1179, a problem arose with the clergy of Mainz: a man buried in Rupertsberg had died after excommunication from the Catholic Church. Therefore, the clergy wanted to remove his body from the sacred ground. Hildegard did not accept this idea, replying that it was a sin and that the man had been reconciled to the church at the time of his death.\nFriendship with Richardis von Stade.\nWhile completing \"Scivias\", Hildegard found a close friend and personal assistant in Richardis von Stade, a fellow nun. In 1151, Richardis was elected abbess of a distant convent, much to Hildegard's displeasure. In a series of letters to multiple church officials (the Pope included), Richardis' family, and even Richardis herself, Hildegard pleaded for her companion to be allowed to stay with her. Hildegard remained adamant that it was \"not God's will\" for Richardis and her to be separated.\nDespite Hildegard's efforts, Richardis was eventually moved. A year later, Richardis' brother sent Hildegard a letter notifying her that Richardis had died, and had met \"a good Christian end\". In response to this, Hildegard grieved the death of her friend, and assured her brother that she was confident in Richardis' salvation, and that she cherished Richardis with \"divine love\".\nVisions.\nHildegard said that she first saw \"The Shade of the Living Light\" at the age of three, and by the age of five, she began to understand that she was experiencing visions. She used the term (Latin for 'vision') to describe this feature of her experience and she recognized that it was a gift that she could not explain to others. Hildegard explained that she saw all things in the light of God through the five senses: sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch. Hildegard was hesitant to share her visions, confiding only to Jutta, who in turn told Volmar, Hildegard's tutor and, later, secretary. Throughout her life, she continued to have many visions, and in 1141, at the age of 42, Hildegard received a vision she believed to be an instruction from God, to \"write down that which you see and hear.\" Still hesitant to record her visions, Hildegard became physically ill. The illustrations recorded in the book of were visions that Hildegard experienced, causing her great suffering and tribulations. In her first theological text, (\"Know the Ways\"), Hildegard describes her struggle within:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hildegard von Bingen, , translated by Columba Hart and Jane Bishop, 1990\nIt was between November 1147 and February 1148 at the synod in Trier that Pope Eugenius heard about Hildegard's writings. It was from this that she received papal approval to document her visions as revelations from the Holy Spirit, giving her instant credence.\nOn 17 September 1179, when Hildegard died, her sisters said they saw two streams of light appear in the skies and cross over the room where she was dying.\nHildegard's hagiography, , was compiled by the monk Theoderic of Echternach after Hildegard's death. He included the hagiographical work , or \"Little Book\", begun by Godfrey of Disibodenberg. Godfrey had died before he was able to complete his work. Guibert of Gembloux was invited to finish the work; however, he had to return to his monastery with the project unfinished. Theoderic utilized sources Guibert had left behind to complete the .\nWorks.\nHildegard's works include three great volumes of visionary theology; a variety of musical compositions for use in the liturgy, as well as the musical morality play ; one of the largest bodies of letters (nearly 400) to survive from the Middle Ages, addressed to correspondents ranging from popes to emperors to abbots and abbesses, and including records of many of the sermons she preached in the 1160s and 1170s; two volumes of material on natural medicine and cures; an invented language called the ('unknown language'); and various minor works, including a gospel commentary and two works of hagiography.\nSeveral manuscripts of her works were produced during her lifetime, including the illustrated Rupertsberg manuscript of her first major work, ; the Dendermonde Codex, which contains one version of her musical works; and the Ghent manuscript, which was the first fair-copy made for editing of her final theological work, the . At the end of her life, and probably under her initial guidance, all of her works were edited and gathered into the single Riesenkodex manuscript. The Riesenkodex manuscript is a collection of 481 folios of vellum bound in pig leather over wooden boards that measure .\nVisionary theology.\nHildegard's most significant works were her three volumes of visionary theology: (\"Know the Ways\", composed 1142\u20131151), (\"Book of Life's Merits\" or \"Book of the Rewards of Life\", composed 1158\u20131163); and (\"Book of Divine Works\", also known as , \"On God's Activity\", begun around 1163 or 1164 and completed around 1172 or 1174). In these volumes, the last of which was completed when she was well into her seventies, Hildegard first describes each vision, whose details are often strange and enigmatic, and then interprets their theological contents in the words of the \"voice of the Living Light.\"\nWith permission from Abbot Kuno of Disibodenberg, she began journaling visions she had (which is the basis for ). is a contraction of ('Know the Ways of the Lord'), and it was Hildegard's first major visionary work, and one of the biggest milestones in her life. Perceiving a divine command to \"write down what you see and hear,\" Hildegard began to record and interpret her visionary experiences. In total, 26 visionary experiences were captured in this compilation.\n is structured into three parts of unequal length. The first part (six visions) chronicles the order of God's creation: the Creation and Fall of Adam and Eve, the structure of the universe (described as the shape of an \"egg\"), the relationship between body and soul, God's relationship to his people through the Synagogue, and the choirs of angels. The second part (seven visions) describes the order of redemption: the coming of Christ the Redeemer, the Trinity, the church as the Bride of Christ and the Mother of the Faithful in baptism and confirmation, the orders of the church, Christ's sacrifice on the cross and the Eucharist, and the fight against the devil. Finally, the third part (thirteen visions) recapitulates the history of salvation told in the first two parts, symbolized as a building adorned with various allegorical figures and virtues. It concludes with the Symphony of Heaven, an early version of Hildegard's musical compositions.\nIn early 1148, a commission was sent by the Pope to Disibodenberg to find out more about Hildegard and her writings. The commission found that the visions were authentic and returned to the Pope, with a portion of the . Portions of the uncompleted work were read aloud to Pope Eugenius III at the Synod of Trier in 1148, after which he sent Hildegard a letter with his blessing. This blessing was later construed as papal approval for all of Hildegard's wide-ranging theological activities. Towards the end of her life, Hildegard commissioned a richly decorated manuscript of (the Rupertsberg Codex); although the original has been lost since its evacuation to Dresden for safekeeping in 1945, its images are preserved in a hand-painted facsimile from the 1920s.\nIn her second volume of visionary theology, , composed between 1158 and 1163, after she had moved her community of nuns into independence at the Rupertsberg in Bingen, Hildegard tackled the moral life in the form of dramatic confrontations between the virtues and the vices. She had already explored this area in her musical morality play, , and the \"Book of the Rewards of Life\" takes up the play's characteristic themes. Each vice, although ultimately depicted as ugly and grotesque, nevertheless offers alluring, seductive speeches that attempt to entice the unwary soul into their clutches. Standing in humankind's defence, however, are the sober voices of the Virtues, powerfully confronting every vicious deception.\nAmongst the work's innovations is one of the earliest descriptions of purgatory as the place where each soul would have to work off its debts after death before entering heaven. Hildegard's descriptions of the possible punishments there are often gruesome and grotesque, which emphasize the work's moral and pastoral purpose as a practical guide to the life of true penance and proper virtue.\nHildegard's last and grandest visionary work, , had its genesis in one of the few times she experienced something like an ecstatic loss of consciousness. As she described it in an autobiographical passage included in her , sometime in about 1163, she received \"an extraordinary mystical vision\" in which was revealed the \"sprinkling drops of sweet rain\" that she stated John the Evangelist experienced when he wrote, \"In the beginning was the Word\" (John 1:1). Hildegard perceived that this Word was the key to the \"Work of God\", of which humankind is the pinnacle. The \"Book of Divine Works\", therefore, became in many ways an extended explication of the prologue to the Gospel of John.\nThe ten visions of this work's three parts are cosmic in scale, to illustrate various ways of understanding the relationship between God and his creation. Often, that relationship is established by grand allegorical female figures representing Divine Love () or Wisdom (). The first vision opens the work with a salvo of poetic and visionary images, swirling about to characterize God's dynamic activity within the scope of his work within the history of salvation. The remaining three visions of the first part introduce the image of a human being standing astride the spheres that make up the universe and detail the intricate relationships between the human as microcosm and the universe as macrocosm. This culminates in the final chapter of Part One, Vision Four with Hildegard's commentary on the prologue to the Gospel of John (John 1:1\u201314), a direct rumination on the meaning of \"In the beginning was the Word\". The single vision that constitutes the whole of Part Two stretches that rumination back to the opening of Genesis, and forms an extended commentary on the seven days of the creation of the world told in Genesis 1\u20132:3. This commentary interprets each day of creation in three ways: literal or cosmological; allegorical or ecclesiological (i.e. related to the church's history); and moral or tropological (i.e. related to the soul's growth in virtue). Finally, the five visions of the third part take up again the building imagery of to describe the course of salvation history. The final vision (3.5) contains Hildegard's longest and most detailed prophetic program of the life of the church from her own days of \"womanish weakness\" through to the coming and ultimate downfall of the Antichrist.\nMusic.\nAttention in recent decades to women of the medieval Catholic Church has led to a great deal of popular interest in Hildegard's music. In addition to the , 69 musical compositions, each with its own original poetic text, survive, and at least four other texts are known, though their musical notation has been lost. This is one of the largest repertoires among medieval composers.\nOne of her better-known works, (\"Play of the Virtues\"), is a morality play. It is uncertain when some of Hildegard's compositions were composed, though the is thought to have been composed as early as 1151. It is an independent Latin morality play with music (82 songs); it does not supplement or pay homage to the Mass or the Office of a certain feast. It is, in fact, the earliest known surviving musical drama that is not attached to a liturgy.\nThe would have been performed within Hildegard's monastery by and for her select community of noblewomen and nuns. It was probably performed as a manifestation of the theology Hildegard delineated in the . The play serves as an allegory of the Christian story of sin, confession, repentance, and forgiveness. Notably, it is the female Virtues who restore the fallen to the community of the faithful, not the male Patriarchs or Prophets. This would have been a significant message to the nuns in Hildegard's convent. Scholars assert that the role of the Devil would have been played by Volmar, while Hildegard's nuns would have played the parts of Anima (the human souls) and the Virtues. The devil's part is entirely spoken or shouted, with no musical setting. All other characters sing in monophonic plainchant. This includes patriarchs, prophets, a happy soul, an unhappy soul, and a penitent soul along with 16 virtues (including mercy, innocence, chastity, obedience, hope, and faith).\nIn addition to the , Hildegard composed many liturgical songs that were collected into a cycle called the . The songs from the Symphonia are set to Hildegard's own text and range from antiphons, hymns, and sequences (such as \"Columba Aspexit\"), to responsories. Her music is monophonic, consisting of exactly one melodic line. Its style has been said to be characterized by soaring melodies that can push the boundaries of traditional Gregorian chant and to stand outside the normal practices of monophonic monastic chant. Researchers are also exploring ways in which it may be viewed in comparison with her contemporaries, such as Hermannus Contractus. Another feature of Hildegard's music that both reflects the 12th-century evolution of chant, and pushes that evolution further, is that it is highly melismatic, often with recurrent melodic units. Scholars such as Margot Fassler, Marianne Richert Pfau, and Beverly Lomer also note the intimate relationship between music and text in Hildegard's compositions, whose rhetorical features are often more distinct than is common in 12th-century chant. As with most medieval chant notation, Hildegard's music lacks any indication of tempo or rhythm; the surviving manuscripts employ late German style notation, which uses very ornamental neumes. The reverence for the Virgin Mary reflected in music shows how deeply influenced and inspired Hildegard of Bingen and her community were by the Virgin Mary and the saints.\nScientific and medicinal writings.\nHildegard's medicinal and scientific writings, although thematically complementary to her ideas about nature expressed in her visionary works, are different in focus and scope. Neither claim to be rooted in her visionary experience and its divine authority. Rather, they spring from her experience helping in and then leading the monastery's herbal garden and infirmary, as well as the theoretical information she likely gained through her wide-ranging reading in the monastery's library. As she gained practical skills in diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment, she combined physical treatment of physical diseases with holistic methods centered on \"spiritual healing\". She became well known for her healing powers involving the practical application of tinctures, herbs, and precious stones. She combined these elements with a theological notion ultimately derived from Genesis: all things put on earth are for the use of humans. In addition to her hands-on experience, she also gained medical knowledge, including elements of her humoral theory, from traditional Latin texts.\nHildegard catalogued both her theory and practice in two works. The first, , contains nine books that describe the scientific and medicinal properties of various plants, stones, fish, reptiles, and animals. This document is also thought to contain the first recorded reference of the use of hops in beer as a preservative. The second, , is an exploration of the human body, its connections to the rest of the natural world, and the causes and cures of various diseases. Hildegard documented various medical practices in these books, including the use of bleeding and home remedies for many common ailments. She also explains remedies for common agricultural injuries such as burns, fractures, dislocations, and cuts. Hildegard may have used the books to teach assistants at the monastery. These books are historically significant because they show areas of medieval medicine that were not well documented because their practitioners, mainly women, rarely wrote in Latin. Her writings were commentated on by M\u00e9lanie Lipinska, a Polish scientist.\nIn addition to its wealth of practical evidence, is also noteworthy for its organizational scheme. Its first part sets the work within the context of the creation of the cosmos and then humanity as its summit, and the constant interplay of the human person as microcosm both physically and spiritually with the macrocosm of the universe informs all of Hildegard's approach. Her hallmark is to emphasize the vital connection between the \"green\" health of the natural world and the holistic health of the human person. , or greening power, was thought to sustain human beings and could be manipulated by adjusting the balance of elements within a person. Thus, when she approached medicine as a type of gardening, it was not just as an analogy. Rather, Hildegard understood the plants and elements of the garden as direct counterparts to the humors and elements within the human body, whose imbalance led to illness and disease.\nThe nearly three hundred chapters of the second book of \"explore the etiology, or causes, of disease as well as human sexuality, psychology, and physiology.\" In this section, she gives specific instructions for bleeding based on various factors, including gender, the phase of the moon (bleeding is best done when the moon is waning), the place of disease (use veins near diseased organ or body part) or prevention (big veins in arms), and how much blood to take (described in imprecise measurements, like \"the amount that a thirsty person can swallow in one gulp\"). She even includes bleeding instructions for animals to keep them healthy. In the third and fourth sections, Hildegard describes treatments for malignant and minor problems and diseases according to the humoral theory, again including information on animal health. The fifth section is about diagnosis and prognosis, which includes instructions to check the patient's blood, pulse, urine, and stool. Finally, the sixth section documents a lunar horoscope to provide an additional means of prognosis for both disease and other medical conditions, such as conception and the outcome of pregnancy. For example, she indicates that a waxing moon is good for human conception and is also good for sowing seeds for plants (sowing seeds is the plant equivalent of conception). Elsewhere, Hildegard is even said to have stressed the value of boiling drinking water in an attempt to prevent infection.\nAs Hildegard elaborates the medical and scientific relationship between the human microcosm and the macrocosm of the universe, she often focuses on interrelated patterns of four: \"the four elements (fire, air, water, and earth), the four seasons, the four humors, the four zones of the earth, and the four major winds.\" Although she inherited the basic framework of humoral theory from ancient medicine, Hildegard's conception of the hierarchical inter-balance of the four humors (blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile) was unique, based on their correspondence to \"superior\" and \"inferior\" elements \u2013 blood and phlegm corresponding to the \"celestial\" elements of fire and air, and the two biles corresponding to the \"terrestrial\" elements of water and earth. Hildegard understood the disease-causing imbalance of these humors to result from the improper dominance of the subordinate humors. This disharmony reflects that introduced by Adam and Eve in the Fall, which for Hildegard marked the indelible entrance of disease and humoral imbalance into humankind. As she writes in c. 42:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It happens that certain men suffer diverse illnesses. This comes from the phlegm which is superabundant within them. For if man had remained in paradise, he would not have had the within his body, from which many evils proceed, but his flesh would have been whole and without dark humor []. However, because he consented to evil and relinquished good, he was made into a likeness of the earth, which produces good and useful herbs, as well as bad and useless ones, and which has in itself both good and evil moistures. From tasting evil, the blood of the sons of Adam was turned into the poison of semen, out of which the sons of man are begotten. And therefore their flesh is ulcerated and permeable [to disease]. These sores and openings create a certain storm and smoky moisture in men, from which the arise and coagulate, which then introduce diverse infirmities to the human body. All this arose from the first evil, which man began at the start, because if Adam had remained in paradise, he would have had the sweetest health, and the best dwelling-place, just as the strongest balsam emits the best odor; but on the contrary, man now has within himself poison and phlegm and diverse illnesses.\nand.\nHildegard also created an alternative alphabet. (\u201cunknown letters\u201d) appears to have served as a secretive or symbolic writing system\u2014something closer to a devotional code than a practical script.\nHer (\u201cunknown language\u201d) consists of a list of roughly 1,000 invented nouns, with no verbs or other parts of speech. The two most important sources for the are the Wiesbaden, Hessische Landesbibliothek 2 (the Riesenkodex) and the Berlin manuscript. In both manuscripts, medieval German and Latin glosses appear above Hildegard\u2019s coined words, and the Berlin manuscript includes additional glosses not found in the Riesenkodex. The first two words of the in the Berlin manuscript are \"aigonz\" (German ; Latin ; English \u201cgod\u201d) and \"aleganz\" (German ; Latin ; English \u201cangel\u201d).\"\nBarbara Newman has suggested that Hildegard used the to strengthen communal bonds among her nuns. Sarah Higley offers a different reading, noting that there is no evidence Hildegard taught the language to the community. She argues that the inclusion of both sacred and everyday terms suggests a language meant for the entire abbey\u2014and possibly the wider monastic world. Higley also describes the language as \u201ca linguistic distillation of the philosophy expressed in her three prophetic books: it represents the cosmos of divine and human creation and the sins that flesh is heir to.\u201d\nThe text of Hildegard\u2019s writing and musical compositions shows her facility with adapting medieval Latin, including the creation of invented, conflated, and abridged words. Because of these linguistic innovations and her use of a constructed script, many conlangers regard her as a medieval precursor.\nSignificance.\nDuring her lifetime.\nMaddocks claims that it is likely Hildegard learned simple Latin and the tenets of the Christian faith, but was not instructed in the Seven Liberal Arts, which formed the basis of all education for the learned classes in the Middle Ages: the of grammar, dialectic, and rhetoric plus the of arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music. The correspondence she kept with the outside world, both spiritual and social, transcended the cloister as a space of spiritual confinement and served to document Hildegard's grand style and strict formatting of medieval letter writing.\nContributing to Christian European rhetorical traditions, Hildegard \"authorized herself as a theologian\" through alternative rhetorical arts. Hildegard was creative in her interpretation of theology. She believed that her monastery should exclude novices who were not from the nobility because she did not want her community to be divided on the basis of social status. She also stated that \"woman may be made from man, but no man can be made without a woman.\"\nBecause of church limitation on public, discursive rhetoric, the medieval rhetorical arts included preaching, letter writing, poetry, and the encyclopedic tradition. Hildegard's participation in these arts speaks to her significance as a female rhetorician, transcending bans on women's social participation and interpretation of scripture. The acceptance of public preaching by a woman, even a well-connected abbess and acknowledged prophet, does not fit the stereotype of this time. Her preaching was not limited to the monasteries; she preached publicly in 1160 in Germany. She conducted four preaching tours throughout Germany, speaking to both clergy and laity in chapter houses and in public, mainly denouncing clerical corruption and calling for reform.\nMany abbots and abbesses asked her for prayers and opinions on various matters. She traveled widely during her four preaching tours. She had several devoted followers, including Guibert of Gembloux, who wrote to her frequently and became her secretary after Volmar's death in 1173. Hildegard also influenced several monastic women, exchanging letters with Elisabeth of Sch\u00f6nau, a nearby visionary.\nHildegard corresponded with popes such as Eugene III and Anastasius IV, statesmen such as Abbot Suger, German emperors such as Frederick I Barbarossa, and other notable figures such as Bernard of Clairvaux, who advanced her work, at the behest of her abbot, Kuno, at the Synod of Trier in 1147 and 1148. Hildegard of Bingen's correspondence is an important component of her literary output.\nVeneration.\nHildegard was one of the first persons for whom the Roman canonization process was officially applied, but the process took so long that four attempts at canonization were not completed and she remained at the level of her beatification. Her name was nonetheless included in the Roman Martyrology at the end of the 16th century up to the current 2004 edition, listing her as \"Saint Hildegard\" with her feast on 17 September, which would eventually be added to the General Roman Calendar as an optional memorial. Numerous popes have referred to Hildegard as a saint, including Pope John Paul II and Pope Benedict XVI. Hildegard's pilgrimage church in Eibingen houses her relics.\nOn 10 May 2012, Pope Benedict XVI extended the veneration of Saint Hildegard to the entire Catholic Church in a process known as \"equivalent canonization,\" thus laying the groundwork for naming her a Doctor of the Church. On 7 October 2012, the feast of the Holy Rosary, the pope named her a Doctor of the Church. He called Hildegard \"perennially relevant\" and \"an authentic teacher of theology and a profound scholar of natural science and music.\"\nHildegard of Bingen also appears in the calendar of saints of various Anglican churches, such as that of the Church of England, in which she is commemorated on 17 September.\nModern interest.\nIn recent years, Hildegard has become of particular interest to feminist scholars. They note her reference to herself as a member of the weaker sex and her belittling of women. Hildegard frequently referred to herself as an unlearned woman, completely incapable of Biblical exegesis. Such a statement on her part, however, worked slyly to her advantage because it made her statements that all of her writings and music came from visions of the Divine more believable, therefore giving Hildegard the authority to speak in a time and place where few women were permitted a voice. Hildegard used her voice to amplify the church's condemnation of institutional corruption, in particular simony.\nHildegard has also become a figure of reverence within the contemporary New Age movement, mostly because of her holistic and natural view of healing, as well as her status as a mystic. Although her medical writings were long neglected and then, studied without reference to their context, she was the inspiration for Dr. Gottfried Hertzka's \"Hildegard-Medicine\", and is the namesake for June Boyce-Tillman's Hildegard Network, a healing center that focuses on a holistic approach to wellness and brings together people interested in exploring the links between spirituality, the arts, and healing. Her reputation as a medicinal writer and healer was also used by early feminists to argue for women's rights to attend medical schools.\nReincarnation of Hildegard has been debated since 1924 when Austrian mystic Rudolf Steiner lectured that a nun of her description was the past life of Russian poet-philosopher Vladimir Soloviev, whose visions of Holy Wisdom are often compared to Hildegard's. Sophiologist Robert Powell writes that hermetic astrology proves the match, while mystical communities in Hildegard's lineage include that of artist Carl Schroeder as studied by Columbia sociologist Courtney Bender and supported by reincarnation researchers Walter Semkiw and Kevin Ryerson.\nRecordings and performances of Hildegard's music have gained critical praise and popularity since 1979. There is an extensive discography of her musical works.\nHildegard of Bingen has also become of interest to modern scholars of queer medieval studies. One queer interpretation of Hildegard's work is that of the depictions of the side wound in \"Scivias,\" some have noted that the shape of the side wound appears very similar to that of a vulva, while others maintain that the shape was meant to be perceived as a mandorla, which was common for other depictions of Christ's wounds at the time.\nIn addition to potential queer readings of Hildegard's work as a mystic, there has also been interest in a queer reading of the relationship Hildegard of Bingen had with Richardis von Stade. The language used by Hildegard von Bingen to describe her relationship with Richardis von Stade, in addition to the fervor in which Hildegard expressed her disappointment in Richardis' appointment as abbess to another convent, and her attempts at drawing multiple other church officials to her aid in stopping this appointment, have led scholars of queer medieval studies to suspect that the relationship between Richardis and Hildegard might have been more than simply platonic.\nQueer readings of Hildegard von Bingen have inspired a variety of works. In November of 2025, the LA Opera debuted a new opera called \"Hildegard,\" which was inspired by the life of Hildegard von Bingen. The Opera was conceived by Sarah Kirkland Snider, who researched Hildegard and her work for eight years.\nHildegard's life story has also portrayed in a 2009 movie called \"Vision: From the Life of Hildegard von Bingen\", where the relationship between Hildegard and Richardis is explored.\nAdditionally, Hildegard von Bingen served as inspiration for a play by lesbian feminist playwright Carolyn Gage, called \"Artemisia and Hildegard.\"\nIn culture.\nThe following modern musical works are directly linked to Hildegard and her music or texts:\nThe artwork \"The Dinner Party\" features a place setting for Hildegard.\nHildegard was the subject of season 2, episode 3 of the ZDF documentary \"Die Deutschen\", titled \"Hildegard von Bingen und die Macht der Frauen\" (\"Hildegard of Bingen and the Power of Women\"), it was released in 2010.\nHildegard was the subject of a 2012 fictionalized biographic novel \"Illuminations\" by Mary Sharatt.\nHildegard was the subject of an episode of the Vision TV Apocalypse-themed documentary series https:// in 2012.\nThe off-Broadway musical \"In the Green\", written by Grace McLean, followed Hildegard's story.\nIn his book, \"The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat\", neurologist Oliver Sacks devotes a chapter to Hildegard and concludes that in his opinion her visions were migrainous.\nIn film, Hildegard has been portrayed by Patricia Routledge in a BBC documentary called \"Hildegard of Bingen\" (1994), by \u00c1ngela Molina in \"Barbarossa\" (2009) and by Barbara Sukowa in the film \"Vision\", directed by Margarethe von Trotta.\nA feature documentary film, \"\", was released by American director Michael M. Conti in 2014.\nHildegard makes an appearance in \"The Baby-Sitters Club #101: Claudia Kishi, Middle School Drop-Out\" by Ann M. Martin, when Anna Stevenson dresses as Hildegard for Halloween.\nKristin Hayter, known professionally as Lingua Ignota, was inspired by Hildegard of Bingen.\nIn the historical novel, A Flight of Saints, five unruly novices escape across the Alps to join the convent of their heroine Hildegard of Bingen.\nThe plant genus \"Hildegardia\" is named after her because of her contributions to herbal medicine.\nIn space, the minor planet 898 Hildegard is named for her.\nBibliography.\nTranslations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral commentary\nOn Hildegard's illuminations\nBackground reading"}
{"id": "13685", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13685", "title": "Halting probability", "text": ""}
{"id": "13686", "revid": "39952955", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13686", "title": "Hilversum", "text": "Hilversum () is a city and municipality in the province of North Holland, Netherlands. Located in the heart of the Gooi, it is the largest urban centre in that area. It is surrounded by heathland, woods, meadows, lakes and smaller towns. Hilversum is part of the Randstad, one of the largest conurbations in Europe, and the Amsterdam metropolitan area; it is about 22km southeast of Amsterdam's city centre and about 15km north of Utrecht.\nThe city is home to several major radio, television, and newspaper companies such as NOS. Hilversum is thus known for being the \"mediastad\" (media city) of the Netherlands.\nTown.\nHilversum lies south-east of Amsterdam and north of Utrecht. The town is known for its architecturally important Town Hall (Raadhuis Hilversum), designed by Willem Marinus Dudok and built in 1931.\nHilversum has one public library, two swimming pools (Van Hellemond Sport and De Lieberg), several sports halls, and several shopping centers (such as Hilvertshof, Winkelcentrum Kerkelanden, De Riebeeckgalerij, and Winkelcentrum Seinhorst). Locally, the town center is known as .\nGeography.\nHilversum is located on the sandy, hilly parts of the Gooi region and has four hills: the Boomberg (closest to the town center); the Trompenberg (now a luxury residential area), the Hoorneboeg (farther to the south), and two kilometers east of there, the Zwaluwenberg (25m), home to the headquarters of the inspector-general of the armies since 1950. These hills date from the period of the Ice-age, when Hilversum was the southern-most point covered by glaciers.\nThe surrounding towns of Hilversum are Nieuw-Loosdrecht, Bussum, Kortenhoef, Blaricum, Hollandsche Rading, Lage Vuursche, Maartensdijk, 's-Graveland, Laren, Nederhorst den Berg, and Ankeveen.\nHilversum consists of the following districts and neighborhoods: Center (Langgewenstbuurt, Sint Vitusbuurt, Havenstraatbuurt, and Centrum), Northwest (Nimrodpark, Trompenberg North, Trompenberg South, Media Park, Raadhuiskwartier, and Boomberg), Northeast (North, Johannes Geradtswegbuurt, Erfgooiersbuurt, and AZC Crailo), East (Geuzenbuurt, Electrobuurt, Astronomiebuurt, Science neighborhood, Kamrad, Kleine Driftbuurt and Liebergen), Southeast (Bloemkwartier Noord, Bloemenkwartier Zuid, Schilderskwartier, 't Hoogt van' t Kruis, Arenaparkkwartier and West Indi\u00ebkwartier), Zuid (Schrijverskwartier, Staatsliedenkwartier and Zeeheldenkwartier), Southwest (Kerkelanden, Havenkwartier, Zeverijn and Het Rode Dorp) and Hilversumse Meent. In 1767, Hilversum was still divided into 4 districts (quarters): the Neuquartier, Groestquartier, Kerkquartier, and the Sandtbergerquartier.\nThe Oude Haven in the southwest is at the end of the Gooische Vaart. The construction of the canal between 's-Graveland and Hilversum was done in stages over 240 years. The canal was completed in 1876. Later, a modern harbor was dug, surrounded by an industrial estate. There is also a leisure harbor.\nInternational.\nHilversum has a variety of international schools, such as the \"Violenschool\" and \"International School Hilversum \"Alberdingk Thijm\"\". Also, Nike's, Hunkem\u00f6ller's and Converse's European headquarters are located in Hilversum.\nHistory.\nEarthenware found in Hilversum gives its name to the Hilversum culture, which is an early- to mid-Bronze Age, or 1800\u20131200 BC material culture. Artifacts from this prehistoric civilization bear similarities to the Wessex Culture of southern Britain and may indicate that the first Hilversum residents emigrated from that area.\nThe first brick settlements formed around 900, but it was not until 1305 that the first official mention of Hilversum (\"Hilfersheem\" from \"Hilvertshem\" meaning \"houses between the hills\") was found. At that time it was a part of Naarden, the oldest town in the Gooi area.\nFarming, raising sheep, and wool manufacturing were the main sources of income for inhabitants of the Gooi region in the Middle Ages. In 1424, Hilversum received its first official independent status. This made further growth possible because permission was no longer needed from neighboring Naarden for new industrial development.\nThe town grew further in the 17th century when the Dutch economy was strong, and several canals were built connecting it indirectly to Amsterdam.\nIn 1725 and 1766 large fires destroyed most of the town, leveling parts of the old townhouse and the church next to it. The town overcame these setbacks and the textile industry continued to develop, among other ways by devising a way to weave cows' hair.\nIn the 19th century a substantial textile and tapestry industry emerged, aided by a railway link to Amsterdam in 1874. From that time onward the town grew quickly with wealthy commuters from Amsterdam moving in, building themselves large villas in the wooded surroundings, and gradually starting to live in Hilversum permanently. Despite this growth, Hilversum was never granted city rights so it is still referred to by many locals as \"het dorp\", or \"the village.\"\nFor the 1928 Summer Olympics in neighboring Amsterdam, it hosted all of the non-jumping equestrian and the running part of the modern pentathlon event.\nThe \"Nederlandse Seintoestellen Fabriek\" (NSF) company established a professional transmitter and radio factory in Hilversum in the early 1920s, growing into the largest of its kind in the Netherlands.\nFollowing the defeat of Allied forces in the Netherlands in 1940, and its occupation by Nazi Germany, Hilversum became the headquarters of the German Army (\"Heer\") in the Netherlands. On February 25 and 26, 1941, most of Hilversum's factories went on strike against the start of the Holocaust in the so-called February strike (Amsterdam Docker's Strike). Some 10,000 people took part. The Holocaust took the lives of 2,000 Hilversum Jews and the community never fully recovered. Since 2015 there has been an annual remembrance service. Some 50 Hilversummers were awarded the title of Righteous among the nations from Yad Vashem, including Victor Kugler, one of Anne Frank's helpers.\nIn 1948, NSF was taken over by Philips. However, Dutch radio broadcasting organizations (followed by television broadcasters during the 1950s) centralised their operations in Hilversum, providing a source of continuing economic growth. The concentration of broadcasters in Hilversum has given it its enduring status as the media city for the Netherlands.\nIn 1964, the population reached a record high of over 103,000. However, the textile industry had started its decline; only one factory, Veneta, managed to continue into the 1960s, when it also had to close. Another major industry, the chemical factory IFF, also closed by the end of the 1960s.\nAfter the 1960s, the population gradually declined, until stabilising at around 86,000 in 2006 and rising to 90,000 in 2018. Several factors other than the slump in manufacturing contributed to this decline: one is the reduction in average family size, with fewer people living in each house; second, the town is virtually unable to expand because much surrounding land was sold by city architect W.M. Dudok to the Goois Natuurreservaat (\"\"); third, the rapid increase in property values forced many people to move to less expensive areas in the Netherlands.\nIn the 1970s, Hilversum solidified its status as a media hub of the Netherlands, largely due to the concentration of broadcasting organizations, particularly radio and television, in the city.\nHilversum was one of the first towns to have a local party of the populist movement called \"Leefbaar\" (\"liveable\"). Founded by former social-democrat Jan Nagel, it was initially held at bay for alderman positions. In 2001, Nagel from Leefbaar Hilversum teamed up with Leefbaar Utrecht leaders to found a national Leefbaar Nederland party.\nThe town has undertaken many improvements, including renovating its central train station, renovation of the main shopping centre (Hilvertshof), and development of new dining and retail districts downtown including the \"vintage\" district in the Leeuwenstraat. Several notable architectural accomplishments include the Institute for Sound and Vision, and Zanderij Crailoo (\"), the largest man-made wildlife crossing in the world.\nThe nearby Media Park was the scene of the 2002 assassination of politician Pim Fortuyn; in 2015, a gunman carrying a false pistol stormed into Nederlandse Omroep Stichting's headquarters, demanding airtime on the evening news.\nCulture.\nThere is the large Catholic neo-gothic St. Vitus church (P.J.H. Cuypers, 1892, bell tower . The city played host to many landscape artists during the 19th century, including Barend Cornelis Koekkoek.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s the city played host to a major European Tennis tournament.\nThe 1958 Eurovision Song Contest took place in Hilversum. In 2020 the international television event \" was broadcast from Studio 21 in Hilversum's Media Park. This event was held in place of the Eurovision Song Contest 2020 which was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nBroadcasting.\nHilversum is often called \"media city\", since it is the principal centre for radio and television broadcasting in the Netherlands, and is home to an extensive complex of radio and television studios and to the administrative headquarters of the multiple broadcasting organizations which make up the Netherlands Public Broadcasting system. Hilversum is also home to many newer commercial TV production companies. Radio Netherlands, which had been broadcasting worldwide via shortwave radio since the 1920s, was also based in Hilversum until it was dissolved in 2013.\nThe following is a list of organizations that have, or are continuing to, broadcast from studios in Hilversum:\nOne result of the town's history as an important radio transmission centre is that many older radio sets throughout Europe featured \"Hilversum\" as a pre-marked dial position on their tuning scales.\nDutch national voting in the Eurovision Song Contest is normally co-ordinated from Hilversum.\nTransport.\nAirport.\nHilversum Airport is located in the southwest of the municipality. Next to it is the former Marine Training Camp (MOK), now Corporal Van Oudheusden Barracks for the medical troops. In wartime the airfield was expanded significantly by the German military. They also set up an assembly line for training aircraft, produced by Fokker in Weesp.\nRailway.\nHilversum is well connected to the Dutch railway network, and has three stations.\nPublic buses.\nMost local and regional buses are operated by Connexxion, but two of the bus routes are operated by Syntus Utrecht and two others by U-OV and Pouw Vervoer. Regional bus route 320 is operated by both Connexxion and Pouw Vervoer. In 2018, major road works started to make room for a new BRT bus lane from Hilversum to Huizen, set to open in early 2021.\nLocal government.\nThe municipal council of Hilversum consists of 37 seats, which are divided as follows since the last local election of 2022:\nGovernment.\nAfter the 2022 elections, the municipal government was made up of aldermen from the political parties Hart voor Hilversum, VVD, GroenLinks and CDA. The mayor is Gerhard van den Top.\nHart voor Hilversum, a local party, is the largest group on the council. Originally a part of Leefbaar Hilversum, it separated to form a party called DLPH, which won 1 seat in the 2006 elections. In 2006 leadership was taken over by L\u00e9onie Sazias, a TV celebrity. She later changed the party name to Hart voor Hilversum. They won 3 seats in the 2010 elections, 6 in 2014 and 8 in both 2018 and 2022.\nNotable residents.\nNotable people born in Hilversum:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13688", "revid": "38775", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13688", "title": "The Hound of Heaven", "text": "1890 poem written by Francis Thompson\n\"The Hound of Heaven\" is a 182-line poem written by English poet Francis Thompson (1859\u20131907). The poem became famous and was the source of much of Thompson's posthumous reputation. It was first printed in 1890 in the periodical \"Merry England\", later to appear in Thompson's first volume of poems in 1893. It was included in the \"Oxford Book of English Mystical Verse\" (1917).\nForm and theme.\nThe poem is an ode, and its subject is the pursuit of the human soul by God's love - a theme also found in the devotional poetry of George Herbert and Henry Vaughan. Moody and Lovett point out that Thompson's use of free and varied line lengths and irregular rhythms reflect the panicked retreat of the soul, while the structured, often recurring refrain suggests the inexorable pursuit as it comes ever closer.\nThe Jesuit J.F.X. O'Conor remarks of the Christian themes of the poem that,\n\"The name is strange. It startles one at first. It is so bold, so new, so fearless. It does not attract, rather the reverse. But when one reads the poem this strangeness disappears. The meaning is understood. As the hound follows the hare, never ceasing in its running, ever drawing nearer in the chase, with unhurrying and unperturbed pace, so does God follow the fleeing soul by His Divine grace. And though in sin or in human love, away from God it seeks to hide itself, Divine grace follows after, unwearyingly follows ever after, till the soul feels its pressure forcing it to turn to Him alone in that never ending pursuit.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13691", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13691", "title": "Hilberts first problem", "text": ""}
{"id": "13692", "revid": "10044298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13692", "title": "History of the Internet", "text": "The history of the Internet originated in the efforts of scientists and engineers to build and interconnect computer networks. The Internet Protocol Suite, the set of rules used to communicate between networks and devices on the Internet, arose from research and development in the United States and involved international collaboration, particularly with researchers in the United Kingdom and France.\nComputer science was an emerging discipline in the late 1950s that began to consider time-sharing between computer users, and later, the possibility of achieving this over wide area networks. J. C. R. Licklider developed the idea of a universal network at the Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO) of the United States Department of Defense (DoD) Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA). Independently, Paul Baran at the RAND Corporation proposed a distributed network based on data in message blocks in the early 1960s, and Donald Davies conceived of packet switching in 1965 at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL), proposing a national commercial data network in the United Kingdom.\nARPA awarded contracts in 1969 for the development of the ARPANET project, directed by Robert Taylor and managed by Lawrence Roberts. ARPANET adopted the packet switching technology proposed by Davies and Baran. The network of Interface Message Processors (IMPs) was built by a team at Bolt, Beranek, and Newman, with the design and specification led by Bob Kahn. The host-to-host protocol was specified by a group of graduate students at UCLA, led by Steve Crocker, along with Jon Postel and others. The ARPANET expanded rapidly across the United States with connections to the United Kingdom and Norway.\nSeveral early packet-switched networks emerged in the 1970s which researched and provided data networking. Louis Pouzin and Hubert Zimmermann pioneered a simplified end-to-end approach to internetworking at the IRIA. Peter Kirstein put internetworking into practice at University College London in 1973. Bob Metcalfe developed the theory and practice behind Ethernet and the PARC Universal Packet. ARPA initiatives and the International Network Working Group developed and refined ideas for internetworking, in which multiple separate networks could be joined into a \"network of networks\". Vint Cerf, now at Stanford University, and Bob Kahn, now at DARPA, published their research on internetworking in 1974. Through the Internet Experiment Note series and later RFCs this evolved into the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and Internet Protocol (IP), two protocols of the Internet protocol suite. The design included concepts pioneered in the French CYCLADES project directed by Louis Pouzin. The development of packet switching networks was underpinned by mathematical work in the 1970s by Leonard Kleinrock at UCLA.In the late 1970s, national and international public data networks emerged based on the X.25 protocol, designed by R\u00e9mi Despr\u00e9s and others. In the United States, the National Science Foundation (NSF) funded national supercomputing centers at several universities in the United States, and provided interconnectivity in 1986 with the NSFNET project, thus creating network access to these supercomputer sites for research and academic organizations in the United States. International connections to NSFNET, the emergence of architecture such as the Domain Name System, and the adoption of TCP/IP on existing networks in the United States and around the world marked the beginnings of the Internet. Commercial Internet service providers (ISPs) emerged in 1989 in the United States and Australia. Limited private connections to parts of the Internet by officially commercial entities emerged in several American cities by late 1989 and 1990. The optical backbone of the NSFNET was decommissioned in 1995, removing the last restrictions on the use of the Internet to carry commercial traffic, as traffic transitioned to optical networks managed by Sprint, MCI and AT&amp;T in the United States.\nResearch at CERN in Switzerland by the British computer scientist Tim Berners-Lee in 1989\u201390 resulted in the World Wide Web, linking hypertext documents into an information system, accessible from any node on the network. The dramatic expansion of the capacity of the Internet, enabled by the advent of wave division multiplexing (WDM) and the rollout of fiber optic cables in the mid-1990s, had a revolutionary impact on culture, commerce, and technology. This made possible the rise of near-instant communication by electronic mail, instant messaging, voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) telephone calls, video chat, and the World Wide Web with its discussion forums, blogs, social networking services, and online shopping sites. Increasing amounts of data are transmitted at higher and higher speeds over fiber-optic networks operating at 1 Gbit/s, 10\u00a0Gbit/s, and 800\u00a0Gbit/s by 2019. The Internet's takeover of the global communication landscape was rapid in historical terms: it only communicated 1% of the information flowing through two-way telecommunications networks in the year 1993, 51% by 2000, and more than 97% of the telecommunicated information by 2007. The Internet continues to grow, driven by ever greater amounts of online information, commerce, entertainment, and social networking services. However, the future of the global network may be shaped by regional differences.\nThe practice of transmitting messages between two different places through an electromagnetic medium dates back to the electrical telegraph in the late 19th century, which was the first fully digital communication system. Radiotelegraphy began to be used commercially in the early 20th century. Telex became an operational teleprinter service in the 1930s. Such systems were limited to point-to-point communication between two end devices.\nFundamental theoretical work in telecommunications technology was developed by Harry Nyquist and Ralph Hartley in the 1920s. Information theory, as enunciated by Claude Shannon in 1948, provided a firm theoretical underpinning to understand the trade-offs between signal-to-noise ratio, bandwidth, and error-free transmission in the presence of noise.\nEarly fixed-program computers in the 1940s were operated manually by entering small programs via switches in order to load and run a series of programs. As transistor technology evolved in the 1950s, central processing units and user terminals came into use by 1955. The mainframe computer model was devised, and modems, such as the Bell 101, allowed digital data to be transmitted over regular unconditioned telephone lines at low speeds by the late 1950s. These technologies made it possible to exchange data between remote computers. However, a fixed-line link was still necessary; the point-to-point communication model did not allow for direct communication between any two arbitrary systems. In addition, the applications were specific and not general purpose. Examples included SAGE (1958) and SABRE (1960).\nChristopher Strachey, who became Oxford University's first Professor of Computation, filed a patent application in the United Kingdom for time-sharing in February 1959. In June that year, he gave a paper \"Time Sharing in Large Fast Computers\" at the UNESCO Information Processing Conference in Paris where he passed the concept on to J. C. R. Licklider. Licklider, a vice president at Bolt Beranek and Newman, Inc. (BBN), promoted the idea of time-sharing as an alternative to batch processing. John McCarthy, at MIT, wrote a memo in 1959 that broadened the concept of time sharing to encompass multiple interactive user sessions, which resulted in the Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS) implemented at MIT. Other multi-user mainframe systems developed, such as PLATO at the University of Illinois Chicago. In the early 1960, the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) of the United States Department of Defense funded further research into time-sharing at MIT through Project MAC.\nFoundations.\nInspiration.\nJ. C. R. Licklider, while working at BBN, proposed a computer network in his March 1960 paper \"Man-Computer Symbiosis\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A network of such centers, connected to one another by wide-band communication lines [...] the functions of present-day libraries together with anticipated advances in information storage and retrieval and symbiotic functions suggested earlier in this paper\nIn August 1962, Licklider and Welden Clark published the paper \"On-Line Man-Computer Communication\" which was one of the first descriptions of a networked future.\nIn October 1962, Licklider was hired by Jack Ruina as director of the newly established Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO) within ARPA, with a mandate to interconnect the United States Department of Defense's main computers at Cheyenne Mountain, the Pentagon, and SAC HQ. There he formed an informal group within DARPA to further computer research. He began by writing memos in 1963 describing a distributed network to the IPTO staff, whom he called \"Members and Affiliates of the Intergalactic Computer Network\".\nAlthough he left the IPTO in 1964, five years before the ARPANET went live, it was his vision of universal networking that provided the impetus for one of his successors, Robert Taylor, to initiate the ARPANET development. Licklider later returned to lead the IPTO in 1973 for two years.\nPacket switching.\nThe infrastructure for telephone systems at the time was based on circuit switching, which requires pre-allocation of a dedicated communication line for the duration of the call. Telegram services had developed store and forward telecommunication techniques. Western Union's Automatic Telegraph Switching System Plan 55-A was based on message switching. The U.S. military's AUTODIN network became operational in 1962. These systems, like SAGE and SBRE, still required rigid routing structures that were prone to single point of failure.\nThe technology was considered vulnerable for strategic and military use because there were no alternative paths for the communication in case of a broken link. In the early 1960s, Paul Baran of the RAND Corporation produced a study of survivable networks for the U.S. military in the event of nuclear war. Information would be transmitted across a \"distributed\" network, divided into what he called \"message blocks\". Baran's design was not implemented.\nIn addition to being prone to a single point of failure, existing telegraphic techniques were inefficient and inflexible. Beginning in 1965 Donald Davies, at the National Physical Laboratory in the United Kingdom, independently developed a more advanced proposal of the concept, designed for high-speed computer networking, which he called packet switching, the term that would ultimately be adopted.\nPacket switching is a technique for transmitting computer data by splitting it into very short, standardized chunks, attaching routing information to each of these chunks, and transmitting them independently through a computer network. It provides better bandwidth utilization than traditional circuit-switching used for telephony, and enables the connection of computers with different transmission and receive rates. It is a distinct concept to message switching.\nNetworks that led to the Internet.\nNPL network.\nFollowing discussions with J. C. R. Licklider in 1965, Donald Davies became interested in data communications for computer networks. Later that year, at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) in the United Kingdom, Davies designed and proposed a national commercial data network based on packet switching. The following year, he described the use of \"switching nodes\" to act as routers in a digital communication network. The proposal was not taken up nationally but he produced a design for a local network to serve the needs of the NPL and prove the feasibility of packet switching using high-speed data transmission. To deal with packet permutations (due to dynamically updated route preferences) and to datagram losses (unavoidable when fast sources send to a slow destinations), he assumed that \"all users of the network will provide themselves with some kind of error control\", thus inventing what came to be known as the end-to-end principle. In 1967, he and his team were the first to use the term 'protocol' in a modern data-commutation context.\nIn 1968, Davies began building the Mark I packet-switched network to meet the needs of his multidisciplinary laboratory and prove the technology under operational conditions. The network's development was described at a 1968 conference. Elements of the network became operational in early 1969, the first implementation of packet switching, and the NPL network was the first to use high-speed links. Many other packet switching networks built in the 1970s were similar \"in nearly all respects\" to Davies' original 1965 design. The Mark II version which operated from 1973 used a layered protocol architecture. In 1977, there were roughly 30 computers, 30 peripherals and 100 VDU terminals all able to interact through the NPL Network. The NPL team carried out simulation work on wide-area packet networks, including datagrams and congestion; and research into internetworking and secure communications. The network was replaced in 1986.\nARPANET.\nRobert Taylor was promoted to the head of the Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO) at Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) in 1966. He intended to realize Licklider's ideas of an interconnected networking system. As part of the IPTO's role, three network terminals had been installed: one for System Development Corporation in Santa Monica, one for Project Genie at University of California, Berkeley, and one for the Compatible Time-Sharing System project at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Taylor's identified need for networking became obvious from the waste of resources apparent to him.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For each of these three terminals, I had three different sets of user commands. So if I was talking online with someone at S.D.C. and I wanted to talk to someone I knew at Berkeley or M.I.T. about this, I had to get up from the S.D.C. terminal, go over and log into the other terminal and get in touch with them... \nI said, oh man, it's obvious what to do: If you have these three terminals, there ought to be one terminal that goes anywhere you want to go where you have interactive computing. That idea is the ARPAnet.Bringing in Larry Roberts from MIT in January 1967, he initiated a project to build such a network. Roberts and Thomas Merrill had been researching computer time-sharing over wide area networks (WANs). Wide area networks emerged during the late 1950s and became established during the 1960s. At the first ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles in October 1967, Roberts presented a proposal for the \"ARPA net\", based on Wesley Clark's idea to use Interface Message Processors (IMP) to create a message switching network. At the conference, Roger Scantlebury presented Donald Davies' work on a hierarchical digital communications network using packet switching and referenced the work of Paul Baran at RAND. Roberts incorporated the packet switching and routing concepts of Davies and Baran into the ARPANET design and upgraded the proposed communications speed from 2.4\u00a0kbit/s to 50\u00a0kbit/s.\nARPA awarded the contract to build the network to Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman. The \"IMP guys\", led by Frank Heart and Bob Kahn, developed the routing, flow control, software design and network control. The first ARPANET link was established between the Network Measurement Center at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science directed by Leonard Kleinrock, and the NLS system at Stanford Research Institute (SRI) directed by Douglas Engelbart in Menlo Park, California at 22:30 hours on October 29, 1969.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBy December 1969, a four-node network was connected by adding the Culler-Fried Interactive Mathematics Center at the University of California, Santa Barbara followed by the University of Utah Graphics Department. In the same year, Taylor helped fund ALOHAnet, a system designed by professor Norman Abramson and others at the University of Hawai\u02bbi at M\u0101noa that transmitted data by radio between seven computers on four islands on Hawaii.\nSteve Crocker formed the \"Network Working Group\" in 1969 at UCLA. Working with Jon Postel and others, he initiated and managed the Request for Comments (RFC) process, which is still used today for proposing and distributing contributions. RFC 1, entitled \"Host Software\", was written by Steve Crocker and published on April 7, 1969. The protocol for establishing links between network sites in the ARPANET, the Network Control Program (NCP), was completed in 1970. These early years were documented in the 1972 film .\nRoberts presented the idea of packet switching to the communication professionals, and faced anger and hostility. Before ARPANET was operating, they argued that the router buffers would quickly run out. After the ARPANET was operating, they argued packet switching would never be economic without the government subsidy. Baran faced the same rejection and thus failed to convince the military into constructing a packet switching network.\nEarly international collaborations via the ARPANET were sparse. Connections were made in 1973 to the Norwegian Seismic Array (NORSAR), via a satellite link at the Tanum Earth Station in Sweden, and to Peter Kirstein's research group at University College London, which provided a gateway to British academic networks, the first international heterogenous resource sharing network. Throughout the 1970s, Leonard Kleinrock developed the mathematical theory to model and measure the performance of packet-switching technology, building on his earlier work on the application of queueing theory to message switching systems. By 1981, the number of hosts had grown to 213. The ARPANET became the technical core of what would become the Internet, and a primary tool in developing the technologies used.\nMerit Network.\nThe Merit Network was formed in 1966 as the Michigan Educational Research Information Triad to explore computer networking between three of Michigan's public universities as a means to help the state's educational and economic development. With initial support from the State of Michigan and the National Science Foundation (NSF), the packet-switched network was first demonstrated in December 1971 when an interactive host to host connection was made between the IBM mainframe computer systems at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor and Wayne State University in Detroit. In October 1972 connections to the CDC mainframe at Michigan State University in East Lansing completed the triad. Over the next several years in addition to host to host interactive connections the network was enhanced to support terminal to host connections, host to host batch connections (remote job submission, remote printing, batch file transfer), interactive file transfer, gateways to the Tymnet and Telenet public data networks, X.25 host attachments, gateways to X.25 data networks, Ethernet attached hosts, and eventually TCP/IP and additional public universities in Michigan join the network. All of this set the stage for Merit's role in the NSFNET project starting in the mid-1980s.\nCYCLADES.\nThe CYCLADES packet switching network was a French research network designed and directed by Louis Pouzin. In 1972, he began planning the network to explore alternatives to the early ARPANET design and to support internetworking research. First demonstrated in 1973, it was the first network to implement the end-to-end principle conceived by Donald Davies and make the hosts responsible for reliable delivery of data, rather than the network itself, using unreliable datagrams. Concepts implemented in this network influenced TCP/IP architecture.\nX.25 and public data networks.\nBased on international research initiatives, particularly the contributions of R\u00e9mi Despr\u00e9s, packet switching network standards were developed by the International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee (ITU-T) in the form of X.25 and related standards. X.25 is built on the concept of virtual circuits emulating traditional telephone connections. In 1974, X.25 formed the basis for the SERCnet network between British academic and research sites, which later became JANET, the United Kingdom's high-speed national research and education network (NREN). The initial ITU Standard on X.25 was approved in March 1976. Existing networks, such as Telenet in the United States adopted X.25 as well as new public data networks, such as DATAPAC in Canada and TRANSPAC in France. X.25 was supplemented by the X.75 protocol which enabled internetworking between national PTT networks in Europe and commercial networks in North America.\nThe British Post Office, Western Union International, and Tymnet collaborated to create the first international packet-switched network, referred to as the International Packet Switched Service (IPSS), in 1978. This network grew from Europe and the US to cover Canada, Hong Kong, and Australia by 1981. By the 1990s it provided a worldwide networking infrastructure.\nUnlike ARPANET, X.25 was commonly available for business use. Telenet offered its Telemail electronic mail service, which was also targeted to enterprise use rather than the general email system of the ARPANET.\nThe first public dial-in networks used asynchronous teleprinter (TTY) terminal protocols to reach a concentrator operated in the public network. Some networks, such as Telenet and CompuServe, used X.25 to multiplex the terminal sessions into their packet-switched backbones, while others, such as Tymnet, used proprietary protocols. In 1979, CompuServe became the first service to offer electronic mail capabilities and technical support to personal computer users. The company broke new ground again in 1980 as the first to offer real-time chat with its CB Simulator. Other major dial-in networks were America Online (AOL) and Prodigy that also provided communications, content, and entertainment features. Many bulletin board system (BBS) networks also provided on-line access, such as FidoNet which was popular amongst hobbyist computer users, many of them hackers and amateur radio operators.\nUUCP and Usenet.\nIn 1979, two students at Duke University, Tom Truscott and Jim Ellis, originated the idea of using Bourne shell scripts to transfer news and messages on a serial line UUCP connection with nearby University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Following public release of the software in 1980, the mesh of UUCP hosts forwarding on the Usenet news rapidly expanded. UUCPnet, as it would later be named, also created gateways and links between FidoNet and dial-up BBS hosts. UUCP networks spread quickly due to the lower costs involved, ability to use existing leased lines, X.25 links or even ARPANET connections, and the lack of strict use policies compared to later networks like CSNET and BITNET. All connects were local. By 1981 the number of UUCP hosts had grown to 550, nearly doubling to 940 in 1984.\nSublink Network, operating since 1987 and officially founded in Italy in 1989, based its interconnectivity upon UUCP to redistribute mail and news groups messages throughout its Italian nodes (about 100 at the time) owned both by private individuals and small companies. Sublink Network evolved into one of the first examples of Internet technology coming into use through popular diffusion.\n1973\u20131989: Merging the networks and creating the Internet.\nTCP/IP.\nWith so many different networking methods seeking interconnection, a method was needed to unify them. Louis Pouzin initiated the CYCLADES project in 1972, building on the work of Donald Davies and the ARPANET. An International Network Working Group formed in 1972; active members included Vint Cerf from Stanford University, Alex McKenzie from BBN, Donald Davies and Roger Scantlebury from NPL, and Louis Pouzin and Hubert Zimmermann from IRIA. Pouzin coined the term \"catenet\" for concatenated network. Bob Metcalfe at Xerox PARC outlined the idea of Ethernet and PARC Universal Packet (PUP) for internetworking. Bob Kahn, now at DARPA, recruited Vint Cerf to work with him on the problem. By 1973, these groups had worked out a fundamental reformulation, in which the differences between network protocols were hidden by using a common internetworking protocol. Instead of the network being responsible for reliability, as in the ARPANET, the hosts became responsible.\nCerf and Kahn published their ideas in May 1974, which incorporated concepts implemented by Louis Pouzin and Hubert Zimmermann in the CYCLADES network. The specification of the resulting protocol, the Transmission Control Program, was published as by the Network Working Group in December 1974. It contains the first attested use of the term \"internet\", as a shorthand for internetwork. This software was monolithic in design using two simplex communication channels for each user session.\nWith the role of the network reduced to a core of functionality, it became possible to exchange traffic with other networks independently from their detailed characteristics, thereby solving the fundamental problems of internetworking. DARPA agreed to fund the development of prototype software, work on which was documented in the Internet Experiment Notes. Testing began in 1975 through concurrent implementations at Stanford, BBN and University College London (UCL). After several years of work, the first demonstration of a gateway between the Packet Radio network (PRNET) in the SF Bay area and the ARPANET was conducted by the Stanford Research Institute. On November 22, 1977, a three network demonstration was conducted including the ARPANET, the SRI's Packet Radio Van on the Packet Radio Network and the Atlantic Packet Satellite Network (SATNET) including a node at UCL.\nThe software was redesigned as a modular protocol stack, using full-duplex channels; between 1976 and 1977, Yogen Dalal and Robert Metcalfe among others, proposed separating TCP's routing and transmission control functions into two discrete layers, which led to the splitting of the Transmission Control Program into the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and the Internet Protocol (IP) in version 3 in 1978. Version 4 was described in IETF publication RFC 791 (September 1981), 792 and 793. It was installed on SATNET in 1982 and the ARPANET in January 1983 after the DoD made it standard for all military computer networking. This resulted in a networking model that became known informally as TCP/IP. It was also referred to as the Department of Defense (DoD) model or DARPA model. Cerf credits his graduate students Yogen Dalal, Carl Sunshine, Judy Estrin, Richard A. Karp, and G\u00e9rard Le Lann with important work on the design and testing. DARPA sponsored or encouraged the development of TCP/IP implementations for many operating systems.\nFrom ARPANET to NSFNET.\nAfter the ARPANET had been up and running for several years, ARPA looked for another agency to hand off the network to; ARPA's primary mission was funding cutting-edge research and development, not running a communications utility. In July 1975, the network was turned over to the Defense Communications Agency, also part of the Department of Defense. In 1983, the U.S. military portion of the ARPANET was broken off as a separate network, the MILNET. MILNET subsequently became the unclassified but military-only NIPRNET, in parallel with the SECRET-level SIPRNET and JWICS for TOP SECRET and above. NIPRNET does have controlled security gateways to the public Internet.\nThe networks based on the ARPANET were government funded and therefore restricted to noncommercial uses such as research; unrelated commercial use was strictly forbidden. This initially restricted connections to military sites and universities. During the 1980s, the connections expanded to more educational institutions, and a growing number of companies such as Digital Equipment Corporation and Hewlett-Packard, which were participating in research projects or providing services to those who were. Data transmission speeds depended upon the type of connection, the slowest being analog telephone lines and the fastest using optical networking technology.\nSeveral other branches of the U.S. government, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the National Science Foundation (NSF), and the Department of Energy (DOE) became heavily involved in Internet research and started development of a successor to ARPANET. In the mid-1980s, all three of these branches developed the first Wide Area Networks based on TCP/IP. NASA developed the NASA Science Network, NSF developed CSNET and DOE evolved the Energy Sciences Network or ESNet.\nNASA developed the TCP/IP based NASA Science Network (NSN) in the mid-1980s, connecting space scientists to data and information stored anywhere in the world. In 1989, the DECnet-based Space Physics Analysis Network (SPAN) and the TCP/IP-based NASA Science Network (NSN) were brought together at NASA Ames Research Center creating the first multiprotocol wide area network called the NASA Science Internet, or NSI. NSI was established to provide a totally integrated communications infrastructure to the NASA scientific community for the advancement of earth, space and life sciences. As a high-speed, multiprotocol, international network, NSI provided connectivity to over 20,000 scientists across all seven continents.\nIn 1981, NSF supported the development of the Computer Science Network (CSNET). CSNET connected with ARPANET using TCP/IP, and ran TCP/IP over X.25, but it also supported departments without sophisticated network connections, using automated dial-up mail exchange. CSNET played a central role in popularizing the Internet outside the ARPANET.\nIn 1986, the NSF created NSFNET, a 56\u00a0kbit/s backbone to support the NSF-sponsored supercomputing centers. The NSFNET also provided support for the creation of regional research and education networks in the United States, and for the connection of university and college campus networks to the regional networks. The use of NSFNET and the regional networks was not limited to supercomputer users and the 56\u00a0kbit/s network quickly became overloaded. NSFNET was upgraded to 1.5\u00a0Mbit/s in 1988 under a cooperative agreement with the Merit Network in partnership with IBM, MCI, and the State of Michigan. The existence of NSFNET and the creation of Federal Internet Exchanges (FIXes) allowed the ARPANET to be decommissioned in 1990.\nNSFNET was expanded and upgraded to dedicated fiber, optical lasers and optical amplifier systems capable of delivering T3 start up speeds or 45\u00a0Mbit/s in 1991. However, the T3 transition by MCI took longer than expected, allowing Sprint to establish a coast-to-coast long-distance commercial Internet service. When NSFNET was decommissioned in 1995, its optical networking backbones were handed off to several commercial Internet service providers, including MCI, PSI Net and Sprint. As a result, when the handoff was complete, Sprint and its Washington DC Network Access Points began to carry Internet traffic, and by 1996, Sprint was the world's largest carrier of Internet traffic.\nThe research and academic community continues to develop and use advanced networks such as Internet2 in the United States and JANET in the United Kingdom.\nTransition towards the Internet.\nThe term \"internet\" was reflected in the first RFC published on the TCP protocol (RFC 675: Internet Transmission Control Program, December 1974) as a short form of \"internetworking\", when the two terms were used interchangeably. In general, an internet was a collection of networks linked by a common protocol. In the time period when the ARPANET was connected to the newly formed NSFNET project in the late 1980s, the term was used as the name of the network, Internet, being the large and global TCP/IP network.\nOpening the Internet and the fiber optic backbone to corporate and consumers increased demand for network capacity. The expense and delay of laying new fiber led providers to test a fiber bandwidth expansion alternative that had been pioneered in the late 1970s by Optelecom using \"interactions between light and matter, such as lasers and optical devices used for optical amplification and wave mixing\". This technology became known as wave division multiplexing (WDM). Bell Labs deployed a 4-channel WDM system in 1995. To develop a mass capacity (dense) WDM system, Optelecom and its former head of Light Systems Research, David R. Huber formed a new venture, Ciena Corp., that deployed the world's first dense WDM system on the Sprint fiber network in June 1996. This was referred to as the real start of optical networking.\nAs interest in networking grew by needs of collaboration, exchange of data, and access of remote computing resources, the Internet technologies spread throughout the rest of the world. The hardware-agnostic approach in TCP/IP supported the use of existing network infrastructure, such as the International Packet Switched Service (IPSS) X.25 network, to carry Internet traffic.\nMany sites unable to link directly to the Internet created simple gateways for the transfer of electronic mail, the most important application of the time. Sites with only intermittent connections used UUCP or FidoNet and relied on the gateways between these networks and the Internet. Some gateway services went beyond simple mail peering, such as allowing access to File Transfer Protocol (FTP) sites via UUCP or mail.\nFinally, routing technologies were developed for the Internet to remove the remaining centralized routing aspects. The Exterior Gateway Protocol (EGP) was replaced by a new protocol, the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP). This provided a meshed topology for the Internet and reduced the centric architecture which ARPANET had emphasized. In 1994, Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) was introduced to support better conservation of address space which allowed use of route aggregation to decrease the size of routing tables.\nOptical networking.\nThe MOS transistor underpinned the rapid growth of telecommunication bandwidth over the second half of the 20th century. To address the need for transmission capacity beyond that provided by radio, satellite and analog copper telephone lines, engineers developed optical communications systems based on fiber optic cables powered by lasers and optical amplifier techniques.\nThe concept of lasing arose from a 1917 paper by Albert Einstein, \"On the Quantum Theory of Radiation\". Einstein expanded upon a conversation with Max Planck on how atoms absorb and emit light, part of a thought process that, with input from Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger, Werner Heisenberg and others, gave rise to quantum mechanics. Specifically, in his quantum theory, Einstein mathematically determined that light could be generated not only by spontaneous emission, such as the light emitted by an incandescent light or the Sun, but also by stimulated emission.\nForty years later, on November 13, 1957, Columbia University physics student Gordon Gould first realized how to make light by stimulated emission through a process of optical amplification. He coined the term LASER for this technology\u2014Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation. Using Gould's light amplification method (patented as \"Optically Pumped Laser Amplifier\"), Theodore Maiman made the first working laser on May 16, 1960.\nGould co-founded Optelecom in 1973 to commercialize his inventions in optical fiber telecommunications, just as Corning Glass was producing the first commercial fiber optic cable in small quantities. Optelecom configured its own fiber lasers and optical amplifiers into the first commercial optical communication systems which it delivered to Chevron and the US Army Missile Defense. Three years later, GTE deployed the first optical telephone system in 1977 in Long Beach, California. By the early 1980s, optical networks powered by lasers, LED and optical amplifier equipment supplied by Bell Labs, NTT and Perelli were used by select universities and long-distance telephone providers.\nTCP/IP goes global (1980s).\nSATNET, CERN and the European Internet.\nIn 1982, Norway (NORSAR/NDRE) and Peter Kirstein's research group at University College London (UCL) left the ARPANET and reconnected using TCP/IP over SATNET. There were 40 British research groups using UCL's link to ARPANET in 1975; by 1984 there was a user population of about 150 people on both sides of the Atlantic.\nBetween 1984 and 1988, CERN began installation and operation of TCP/IP to interconnect its major internal computer systems, workstations, PCs, and an accelerator control system. CERN continued to operate a limited self-developed system (CERNET) internally and several incompatible (typically proprietary) network protocols externally. There was considerable resistance in Europe towards more widespread use of TCP/IP, and the CERN TCP/IP intranets remained isolated from the Internet until 1989, when a transatlantic connection to Cornell University was established.\nThe Computer Science Network (CSNET) began operation in 1981 to provide networking connections to institutions that could not connect directly to ARPANET. Its first international connection was to Israel in 1984. Soon after, connections were established to computer science departments in Canada, France, and Germany.\nIn 1988, the first international connections to NSFNET was established by France's INRIA, and Piet Beertema at the Centrum Wiskunde &amp; Informatica (CWI) in the Netherlands. Daniel Karrenberg, from CWI, visited Ben Segal, CERN's TCP/IP coordinator, looking for advice about the transition of EUnet, the European side of the UUCP Usenet network (much of which ran over X.25 links), over to TCP/IP. The previous year, Segal had met with Len Bosack from the then still small company Cisco about purchasing some TCP/IP routers for CERN, and Segal was able to give Karrenberg advice and forward him on to Cisco for the appropriate hardware. This expanded the European portion of the Internet across the existing UUCP networks. The NORDUnet connection to NSFNET was in place soon after, providing open access for university students in Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden.\nIn January 1989, CERN opened its first external TCP/IP connections. This coincided with the creation of R\u00e9seaux IP Europ\u00e9ens (RIPE), initially a group of IP network administrators who met regularly to carry out coordination work together. Later, in 1992, RIPE was formally registered as a cooperative in Amsterdam.\nThe United Kingdom's national research and education network (NREN), JANET, began operation in 1984 using the UK's Coloured Book protocols and connected to NSFNET in 1989. In 1991, JANET adopted Internet Protocol on the existing network. The same year, Dai Davies introduced Internet technology into the pan-European NREN, EuropaNet, which was built on the X.25 protocol. The European Academic and Research Network (EARN) and RARE adopted IP around the same time, and the European Internet backbone EBONE became operational in 1992.\nNonetheless, for a period in the late 1980s and early 1990s, engineers, organizations and nations were polarized over the issue of which standard, the OSI model or the Internet protocol suite would result in the best and most robust computer networks.\nThe link to the Pacific.\nJapan, which had built the UUCP-based network JUNET in 1984, connected to CSNET, and later to NSFNET in 1989, marking the spread of the Internet to Asia.\nSouth Korea set up a two-node domestic TCP/IP network in 1982, the System Development Network (SDN), adding a third node the following year. SDN was connected to the rest of the world in August 1983 using UUCP (Unix-to-Unix-Copy); connected to CSNET in December 1984; and formally connected to the NSFNET in 1990.\nIn Australia, ad hoc networking to ARPA and in-between Australian universities formed in the late 1980s, based on various technologies such as X.25, UUCPNet, and via a CSNET. These were limited in their connection to the global networks, due to the cost of making individual international UUCP dial-up or X.25 connections. In 1989, Australian universities joined the push towards using IP protocols to unify their networking infrastructures. AARNet was formed in 1989 by the Australian Vice-Chancellors' Committee and provided a dedicated IP based network for Australia.\nNew Zealand adopted the UK's Coloured Book protocols as an interim standard and established its first international IP connection to the U.S. in 1989.\nA \"digital divide\" emerges.\nWhile developed countries with technological infrastructures were joining the Internet, developing countries began to experience a digital divide separating them from the Internet. On an essentially continental basis, they built organizations for Internet resource administration and to share operational experience, which enabled more transmission facilities to be put into place.\nAfrica.\nAt the beginning of the 1990s, African countries relied upon X.25 IPSS and 2400 baud modem UUCP links for international and internetwork computer communications.\nIn August 1995, InfoMail Uganda, Ltd., a privately held firm in Kampala now known as InfoCom, and NSN Network Services of Avon, Colorado, sold in 1997 and now known as Clear Channel Satellite, established Africa's first native TCP/IP high-speed satellite Internet services. The data connection was originally carried by a C-Band RSCC Russian satellite which connected InfoMail's Kampala offices directly to NSN's MAE-West point of presence using a private network from NSN's leased ground station in New Jersey. InfoCom's first satellite connection was just 64\u00a0kbit/s, serving a Sun host computer and twelve US Robotics dial-up modems.\nIn 1996, a USAID funded project, the Leland Initiative, started work on developing full Internet connectivity for the continent. Guinea, Mozambique, Madagascar and Rwanda gained satellite earth stations in 1997, followed by Ivory Coast and Benin in 1998.\nAfrica is building an Internet infrastructure. AFRINIC, headquartered in Mauritius, manages IP address allocation for the continent. As with other Internet regions, there is an operational forum, the Internet Community of Operational Networking Specialists.\nThere are many programs to provide high-performance transmission plant, and the western and southern coasts have undersea optical cable. High-speed cables join North Africa and the Horn of Africa to intercontinental cable systems. Undersea cable development is slower for East Africa; the original joint effort between New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) and the East Africa Submarine System (Eassy) has broken off and may become two efforts.\nAsia and Oceania.\nThe Asia Pacific Network Information Centre (APNIC), headquartered in Australia, manages IP address allocation for the continent. APNIC sponsors an operational forum, the Asia-Pacific Regional Internet Conference on Operational Technologies (APRICOT).\nIn South Korea, VDSL, a last mile technology developed in the 1990s by NextLevel Communications, connected corporate and consumer copper-based telephone lines to the Internet.\nThe People's Republic of China established its first TCP/IP college network, Tsinghua University's TUNET in 1991. The PRC went on to make its first global Internet connection in 1994, between the Beijing Electro-Spectrometer Collaboration and Stanford University's Linear Accelerator Center. However, China went on to implement its own digital divide by implementing a country-wide content filter.\nJapan hosted the annual meeting of the Internet Society, INET'92, in Kobe. Singapore developed TECHNET in 1990, and Thailand gained a global Internet connection between Chulalongkorn University and UUNET in 1992.\nLatin America.\nAs with the other regions, the Latin American and Caribbean Internet Addresses Registry (LACNIC) manages the IP address space and other resources for its area. LACNIC, headquartered in Uruguay, operates DNS root, reverse DNS, and other key services.\n1990\u20132003: Rise of the global Internet, Web 1.0.\nDevelopment.\nInitially, as with its predecessor networks, the system that would evolve into the Internet was primarily for government and government body use. Although commercial use was forbidden, the exact definition of commercial use was unclear and subjective. UUCPNet and the X.25 IPSS had no such restrictions, which would eventually see the official barring of UUCPNet use of ARPANET and NSFNET connections.\nAs a result, during the late 1980s, the first Internet service provider (ISP) companies were formed. Companies like PSINet, UUNET, Netcom, and Portal Software were formed to provide service to the regional research networks and provide alternate network access, UUCP-based email and Usenet News to the public. In 1989, MCI Mail became the first commercial email provider to get an experimental gateway to the Internet. The first commercial dialup ISP in the United States was The World, which opened in 1989.\nIn 1992, the U.S. Congress passed the Scientific and Advanced-Technology Act, \u00a0https://, which allowed NSF to support access by the research and education communities to computer networks which were not used exclusively for research and education purposes, thus permitting NSFNET to interconnect with commercial networks. This caused controversy within the research and education community, who were concerned commercial use of the network might lead to an Internet that was less responsive to their needs, and within the community of commercial network providers, who felt that government subsidies were giving an unfair advantage to some organizations.\nBy 1990, ARPANET's goals had been fulfilled and new networking technologies exceeded the original scope and the project came to a close. New network service providers including PSINet, Alternet, CERFNet, ANS CO+RE, and many others were offering network access to commercial customers. NSFNET was no longer the de facto backbone and exchange point of the Internet. The Commercial Internet eXchange (CIX), Metropolitan Area Exchanges (MAEs), and later Network Access Points (NAPs) were becoming the primary interconnections between many networks. The final restrictions on carrying commercial traffic ended on April 30, 1995, when the National Science Foundation ended its sponsorship of the NSFNET Backbone Service. NSF provided initial support for the NAPs and interim support to help the regional research and education networks transition to commercial ISPs. NSF also sponsored the very high speed Backbone Network Service (vBNS) which continued to provide support for the supercomputing centers and research and education in the United States.\nAn event held on 11 January 1994, \"The Superhighway Summit\" at UCLA's Royce Hall, was the \"first public conference bringing together all of the major industry, government and academic leaders in the field [and] also began the national dialogue about the \"Information Superhighway\" and its implications\".\nInternet use in wider society.\nThe invention of the World Wide Web by Tim Berners-Lee at CERN, as an application on the Internet, brought many social and commercial uses to what was, at the time, a network of networks for academic and research institutions. The Web opened to the public in 1991 and began to enter general use in 1993\u20134, when websites for everyday use started to become available.\nDuring the first decade or so of the public Internet, the immense changes it would eventually enable in the 2000s were still nascent. In terms of providing context for this period, mobile cellular devices (\"smartphones\" and other cellular devices) which today provide near-universal access, were used for business and not a routine household item owned by parents and children worldwide. Social media in the modern sense had yet to come into existence, laptops were bulky and most households did not have computers. Data rates were slow and most people lacked means to video or digitize video; media storage was transitioning slowly from analog tape to digital optical discs (DVD and to an extent still, floppy disc to CD). Enabling technologies used from the early 2000s such as PHP, modern JavaScript and Java, technologies such as AJAX, HTML 4 (and its emphasis on CSS), and various software frameworks, which enabled and simplified speed of web development, largely awaited invention and their eventual widespread adoption.\nThe Internet was widely used for mailing lists, emails, creating and distributing maps with tools like MapQuest, e-commerce and early popular online shopping (Amazon and eBay for example), online forums and bulletin boards, and personal websites and blogs, and use was growing rapidly, but by more modern standards, the systems used were static and lacked widespread social engagement. It awaited a number of events in the early 2000s to change from a communications technology to gradually develop into a key part of global society's infrastructure.\nTypical design elements of these \"Web 1.0\" era websites included: Static pages instead of dynamic HTML; content served from filesystems instead of relational databases; pages built using Server Side Includes or CGI instead of a web application written in a dynamic programming language; HTML 3.2-era structures such as frames and tables to create page layouts; online guestbooks; overuse of GIF buttons and similar small graphics promoting particular items; and HTML forms sent via email. (Support for server side scripting was rare on shared servers so the usual feedback mechanism was via email, using mailto forms and their email program.\nDuring the period 1997 to 2001, the first speculative investment bubble related to the Internet took place, in which \"dot-com\" companies (referring to the \".com\" top level domain used by businesses) were propelled to exceedingly high valuations as investors rapidly stoked stock values, followed by a market crash; the first dot-com bubble. However this only temporarily slowed enthusiasm and growth, which quickly recovered and continued to grow.\nThe history of the World Wide Web up to around 2004 was retrospectively named and described by some as \"Web 1.0\".\nIPv6.\nIn the final stage of IPv4 address exhaustion, the last IPv4 address block was assigned in January 2011 at the level of the regional Internet registries. IPv4 uses 32-bit addresses which limits the address space to 232 addresses, i.e. addresses. IPv4 is in the process of replacement by IPv6, its successor, which uses 128-bit addresses, providing 2128 addresses, i.e. , a vastly increased address space. The shift to IPv6 is expected to take a long time to complete.\n2004\u2013present: Web 2.0, global ubiquity, social media.\nThe rapid technical advances that would propel the Internet into its place as a social system, which has completely transformed the way humans interact with each other, took place during a relatively short period from around 2005 to 2010, coinciding with the point in time in which IoT devices surpassed the number of humans alive at some point in the late 2000s. They included:\nWeb 2.0.\nThe term \"Web 2.0\" describes websites that emphasize user-generated content (including user-to-user interaction), usability, and interoperability. It first appeared in a January 1999 article called \"Fragmented Future\" written by Darcy DiNucci, a consultant on electronic information design, where she wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Web we know now, which loads into a browser window in essentially static screenfuls, is only an embryo of the Web to come. The first glimmerings of Web 2.0 are beginning to appear, and we are just starting to see how that embryo might develop. The Web will be understood not as screenfuls of text and graphics but as a transport mechanism, the ether through which interactivity happens. It will [...] appear on your computer screen, [...] on your TV set [...] your car dashboard [...] your cell phone [...] hand-held game machines [...] maybe even your microwave oven.\nThe term resurfaced during 2002\u20132004, and gained prominence in late 2004 following presentations by Tim O'Reilly and Dale Dougherty at the first Web 2.0 Conference. In their opening remarks, John Battelle and Tim O'Reilly outlined their definition of the \"Web as Platform\", where software applications are built upon the Web as opposed to upon the desktop. The unique aspect of this migration, they argued, is that \"customers are building your business for you\". They argued that the activities of users generating content (in the form of ideas, text, videos, or pictures) could be \"harnessed\" to create value.\n\"Web 2.0\" does not refer to an update to any technical specification, but rather to cumulative changes in the way Web pages are made and used. \"Web 2.0\" describes an approach, in which sites focus substantially upon allowing users to interact and collaborate with each other in a social media dialogue as creators of user-generated content in a virtual community, in contrast to Web sites where people are limited to the passive viewing of content. Examples of Web 2.0 include social networking services, blogs, wikis, folksonomies, video sharing sites, hosted services, Web applications, and mashups. Terry Flew, in his 3rd edition of \"New Media\", described what he believed to characterize the differences between Web 1.0 and Web 2.0:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The] move from personal websites to blogs and blog site aggregation, from publishing to participation, from web content as the outcome of large up-front investment to an ongoing and interactive process, and from content management systems to links based on tagging (folksonomy).\nThis era saw several household names gain prominence through their community-oriented operation \u2013 YouTube, Twitter, Facebook, Reddit and Wikipedia being some examples.\nTelephone networks convert to VoIP.\nTelephone systems have been slowly adopting voice over IP since 2003. Early experiments proved that voice can be converted to digital packets and sent over the Internet. The packets are collected and converted back to analog voice.\nThe mobile revolution.\nThe process of change that generally coincided with Web 2.0 was itself greatly accelerated and transformed only a short time later by the increasing growth in mobile devices. This mobile revolution meant that computers in the form of smartphones became something many people used, took with them everywhere, communicated with, used for photographs and videos they instantly shared or to shop or seek information \"on the move\" \u2013 and used socially, as opposed to items on a desk at home or just used for work.\nLocation-based services, services using location and other sensor information, and crowdsourcing (frequently but not always location based), became common, with posts tagged by location, or websites and services becoming location aware. Mobile-targeted websites (such as \"m.example.com\") became common, designed especially for the new devices used. Netbooks, ultrabooks, widespread 4G and Wi-Fi, and mobile chips capable or running at nearly the power of desktops from not many years before on far lower power usage, became enablers of this stage of Internet development, and the term \"App\" (short for \"Application program\" or \"Program\") became popularized, as did the \"App store\".\nThis \"mobile revolution\" has allowed for people to have a nearly unlimited amount of information at all times. With the ability to access the internet from cell phones came a change in the way media was consumed. Media consumption statistics show that over half of media consumption between those aged 18 and 34 were using a smartphone.\nNetworking in outer space.\nThe first Internet link into low Earth orbit was established on January 22, 2010, when astronaut T. J. Creamer posted the first unassisted update to his Twitter account from the International Space Station, marking the extension of the Internet into space. (Astronauts at the ISS had used email and Twitter before, but these messages had been relayed to the ground through a NASA data link before being posted by a human proxy.) This personal Web access, which NASA calls the Crew Support LAN, uses the space station's high-speed Ku band microwave link. To surf the Web, astronauts can use a station laptop computer to control a desktop computer on Earth, and they can talk to their families and friends on Earth using Voice over IP equipment.\nCommunication with spacecraft beyond Earth orbit has traditionally been over point-to-point links through the Deep Space Network. Each such data link must be manually scheduled and configured. In the late 1990s NASA and Google began working on a new network protocol, delay-tolerant networking (DTN), which automates this process, allows networking of spaceborne transmission nodes, and takes the fact into account that spacecraft can temporarily lose contact because they move behind the Moon or planets, or because space weather disrupts the connection. Under such conditions, DTN retransmits data packages instead of dropping them, as the standard TCP/IP Internet Protocol does. NASA conducted the first field test of what it calls the \"deep space internet\" in November 2008. Testing of DTN-based communications between the International Space Station and Earth (now termed disruption-tolerant networking) has been ongoing since March 2009, and was scheduled to continue until March 2014.\nThis network technology is supposed to ultimately enable missions that involve multiple spacecraft where reliable inter-vessel communication might take precedence over vessel-to-Earth downlinks. According to a February 2011 statement by Google's Vint Cerf, the so-called \"bundle protocols\" have been uploaded to NASA's EPOXI mission spacecraft (which is in orbit around the Sun) and communication with Earth has been tested at a distance of approximately 80 light seconds.\nInternet governance.\nAs a globally distributed network of voluntarily interconnected autonomous networks, the Internet operates without a central governing body. Each constituent network chooses the technologies and protocols it deploys from the technical standards that are developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). However, successful interoperation of many networks requires certain parameters that must be common throughout the network. For managing such parameters, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) oversees the allocation and assignment of various technical identifiers. In addition, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) provides oversight and coordination for the two principal name spaces in the Internet, the Internet Protocol address space and the Domain Name System.\nNIC, InterNIC, IANA, and ICANN.\nThe IANA function was originally performed by USC Information Sciences Institute (ISI), and it delegated portions of this responsibility with respect to numeric network and autonomous system identifiers to the Network Information Center (NIC) at Stanford Research Institute (SRI International) in Menlo Park, California. ISI's Jonathan Postel managed the IANA, served as RFC Editor and performed other key roles until his death in 1998.\nAs the early ARPANET grew, hosts were referred to by names, and a HOSTS.TXT file would be distributed from SRI International to each host on the network. As the network grew, this became cumbersome. A technical solution came in the form of the Domain Name System, created by ISI's Paul Mockapetris in 1983. The Defense Data Network\u2014Network Information Center (DDN-NIC) at SRI handled all registration services, including the top-level domains (TLDs) of .mil, .gov, .edu, .org, .net, .com and .us, root nameserver administration and Internet number assignments under a United States Department of Defense contract. In 1991, the Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) awarded the administration and maintenance of DDN-NIC (managed by SRI up until this point) to Government Systems, Inc., who subcontracted it to the small private-sector Network Solutions, Inc.\nThe increasing cultural diversity of the Internet also posed administrative challenges for centralized management of the IP addresses. In October 1992, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) published RFC 1366, which described the \"growth of the Internet and its increasing globalization\" and set out the basis for an evolution of the IP registry process, based on a regionally distributed registry model. This document stressed the need for a single Internet number registry to exist in each geographical region of the world (which would be of \"continental dimensions\"). Registries would be \"unbiased and widely recognized by network providers and subscribers\" within their region.\nThe RIPE Network Coordination Centre (RIPE NCC) was established as the first RIR in May 1992. The second RIR, the Asia Pacific Network Information Centre (APNIC), was established in Tokyo in 1993, as a pilot project of the Asia Pacific Networking Group.\nSince at this point in history most of the growth on the Internet was coming from non-military sources, it was decided that the Department of Defense would no longer fund registration services outside of the .mil TLD. In 1993 the U.S. National Science Foundation, after a competitive bidding process in 1992, created the InterNIC to manage the allocations of addresses and management of the address databases, and awarded the contract to three organizations. Registration Services would be provided by Network Solutions; Directory and Database Services would be provided by AT&amp;T; and Information Services would be provided by General Atomics.\nOver time, after consultation with the IANA, the IETF, RIPE NCC, APNIC, and the Federal Networking Council (FNC), the decision was made to separate the management of domain names from the management of IP numbers. Following the examples of RIPE NCC and APNIC, it was recommended that management of IP address space then administered by the InterNIC should be under the control of those that use it, specifically the ISPs, end-user organizations, corporate entities, universities, and individuals. As a result, the American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN) was established as in December 1997, as an independent, not-for-profit corporation by direction of the National Science Foundation and became the third Regional Internet Registry.\nIn 1998, both the IANA and remaining DNS-related InterNIC functions were reorganized under the control of ICANN, a California non-profit corporation contracted by the United States Department of Commerce to manage a number of Internet-related tasks. As these tasks involved technical coordination for two principal Internet name spaces (DNS names and IP addresses) created by the IETF, ICANN also signed a memorandum of understanding with the IAB to define the technical work to be carried out by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority. The management of Internet address space remained with the regional Internet registries, which collectively were defined as a supporting organization within the ICANN structure. ICANN provides central coordination for the DNS system, including policy coordination for the split registry / registrar system, with competition among registry service providers to serve each top-level-domain and multiple competing registrars offering DNS services to end-users.\nInternet Engineering Task Force.\nThe Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) is the largest and most visible of several loosely related ad-hoc groups that provide technical direction for the Internet, including the Internet Architecture Board (IAB), the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), and the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF).\nThe IETF is a loosely self-organized group of international volunteers who contribute to the engineering and evolution of Internet technologies. It is the principal body engaged in the development of new Internet standard specifications. Much of the work of the IETF is organized into \"Working Groups\". Standardization efforts of the Working Groups are often adopted by the Internet community, but the IETF does not control or patrol the Internet.\nThe IETF grew out of quarterly meetings with U.S. government-funded researchers, starting in January 1986. Non-government representatives were invited by the fourth IETF meeting in October 1986. The concept of Working Groups was introduced at the fifth meeting in February 1987. The seventh meeting in July 1987 was the first meeting with more than one hundred attendees. In 1992, the Internet Society, a professional membership society, was formed and IETF began to operate under it as an independent international standards body. The first IETF meeting outside of the United States was held in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, in July 1993. Today, the IETF meets three times per year and attendance has been as high as ca. 2,000 participants. Typically one in three IETF meetings are held in Europe or Asia. The number of non-US attendees is typically ca. 50%, even at meetings held in the United States.\nThe IETF is not a legal entity, has no governing board, no members, and no dues. The closest status resembling membership is being on an IETF or Working Group mailing list. IETF volunteers come from all over the world and from many different parts of the Internet community. The IETF works closely with and under the supervision of the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) and the Internet Architecture Board (IAB). The Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) and the Internet Research Steering Group (IRSG), peer activities to the IETF and IESG under the general supervision of the IAB, focus on longer-term research issues.\nRFCs.\nRFCs are the main documentation for the work of the IAB, IESG, IETF, and IRTF. Originally intended as requests for comments, RFC 1, \"Host Software\", was written by Steve Crocker at UCLA in April 1969. These technical memos documented aspects of ARPANET development. They were edited by Jon Postel, the first RFC Editor.\nRFCs cover a wide range of information from proposed standards, draft standards, full standards, best practices, experimental protocols, history, and other informational topics. RFCs can be written by individuals or informal groups of individuals, but many are the product of a more formal Working Group. Drafts are submitted to the IESG either by individuals or by the Working Group Chair. An RFC Editor, appointed by the IAB, separate from IANA, and working in conjunction with the IESG, receives drafts from the IESG and edits, formats, and publishes them. Once an RFC is published, it is never revised. If the standard it describes changes or its information becomes obsolete, the revised standard or updated information will be re-published as a new RFC that \"obsoletes\" the original.\nThe Internet Society.\nThe Internet Society (ISOC) is an international, nonprofit organization founded during 1992 \"to assure the open development, evolution and use of the Internet for the benefit of all people throughout the world\". With offices near Washington, DC, US, and in Geneva, Switzerland, ISOC has a membership base comprising more than 80 organizational and more than 50,000 individual members. Members also form \"chapters\" based on either common geographical location or special interests. There are currently more than 90 chapters around the world.\nISOC provides financial and organizational support to and promotes the work of the standards settings bodies for which it is the organizational home: the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), the Internet Architecture Board (IAB), the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), and the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF). ISOC also promotes understanding and appreciation of the Internet model of open, transparent processes and consensus-based decision-making.\nGlobalization and Internet governance in the 21st century.\nSince the 1990s, the Internet's governance and organization has been of global importance to governments, commerce, civil society, and individuals. The organizations which held control of certain technical aspects of the Internet were the successors of the old ARPANET oversight and the current decision-makers in the day-to-day technical aspects of the network. While recognized as the administrators of certain aspects of the Internet, their roles and their decision-making authority are limited and subject to increasing international scrutiny and increasing objections. These objections have led to the ICANN removing themselves from relationships with first the University of Southern California in 2000, and in September 2009 gaining autonomy from the US government by the ending of its longstanding agreements, although some contractual obligations with the U.S. Department of Commerce continued. Finally, on October 1, 2016, ICANN ended its contract with the United States Department of Commerce National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), allowing oversight to pass to the global Internet community.\nThe IETF, with financial and organizational support from the Internet Society, continues to serve as the Internet's ad-hoc standards body and issues Request for Comments.\nIn November 2005, the World Summit on the Information Society, held in Tunis, called for an Internet Governance Forum (IGF) to be convened by United Nations Secretary General. The IGF opened an ongoing, non-binding conversation among stakeholders representing governments, the private sector, civil society, and the technical and academic communities about the future of Internet governance. The first IGF meeting was held in October/November 2006 with follow up meetings annually thereafter. Since WSIS, the term \"Internet governance\" has been broadened beyond narrow technical concerns to include a wider range of Internet-related policy issues.\nTim Berners-Lee, inventor of the web, was becoming concerned about threats to the web's future and in November 2009 at the IGF in Washington DC launched the World Wide Web Foundation (WWWF) to campaign to make the web a safe and empowering tool for the good of humanity with access to all. In November 2019 at the IGF in Berlin, Berners-Lee and the WWWF went on to launch the \"Contract for the Web\", a campaign initiative to persuade governments, companies and citizens to commit to nine principles to stop \"misuse\" with the warning \"If we don't act now - and act together - to prevent the web being misused by those who want to exploit, divide and undermine, we are at risk of squandering\" (its potential for good).\nPoliticization of the Internet.\nDue to its prominence and immediacy as an effective means of mass communication, the Internet has also become more politicized as it has grown. This has led in turn, to discourses and activities that would once have taken place in other ways, migrating to being mediated by internet.\nExamples include political activities such as public protest and canvassing of support and votes, but also:\nNet neutrality.\nOn April 23, 2014, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) was reported to be considering a new rule that would permit Internet service providers to offer content providers a faster track to send content, thus reversing their earlier net neutrality position. A possible solution to net neutrality concerns may be municipal broadband, according to Professor Susan Crawford, a legal and technology expert at Harvard Law School. On May 15, 2014, the FCC decided to consider two options regarding Internet services: first, permit fast and slow broadband lanes, thereby compromising net neutrality; and second, reclassify broadband as a telecommunication service, thereby preserving net neutrality. On November 10, 2014, President Obama recommended the FCC reclassify broadband Internet service as a telecommunications service in order to preserve net neutrality. On January 16, 2015, Republicans presented legislation, in the form of a U.S. Congress HR discussion draft bill, that makes concessions to net neutrality but prohibits the FCC from accomplishing the goal or enacting any further regulation affecting Internet service providers (ISPs). On January 31, 2015, AP News reported that the FCC will present the notion of applying (\"with some caveats\") Title II (common carrier) of the Communications Act of 1934 to the internet in a vote expected on February 26, 2015. Adoption of this notion would reclassify internet service from one of information to one of telecommunications and, according to Tom Wheeler, chairman of the FCC, ensure net neutrality. The FCC is expected to enforce net neutrality in its vote, according to \"The New York Times\".\nOn February 26, 2015, the FCC ruled in favor of net neutrality by applying Title II (common carrier) of the Communications Act of 1934 and Section 706 of the Telecommunications act of 1996 to the Internet. The FCC chairman, Tom Wheeler, commented, \"This is no more a plan to regulate the Internet than the First Amendment is a plan to regulate free speech. They both stand for the same concept.\"\nOn March 12, 2015, the FCC released the specific details of the net neutrality rules. On April 13, 2015, the FCC published the final rule on its new \"Net Neutrality\" regulations.\nOn December 14, 2017, the FCC repealed their March 12, 2015 decision by a 3\u20132 vote regarding net neutrality rules.\nUse and culture.\nEmail and Usenet.\nEmail has often been called the killer application of the Internet. It predates the Internet, and was a crucial tool in creating it. Email started in 1965 as a way for multiple users of a time-sharing mainframe computer to communicate. Although the history is undocumented, among the first systems to have such a facility were the System Development Corporation (SDC) Q32 and the Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS) at MIT.\nThe ARPANET computer network made a large contribution to the evolution of electronic mail. An experimental inter-system transferred mail on the ARPANET shortly after its creation. In 1971 Ray Tomlinson created what was to become the standard Internet electronic mail addressing format, using the @ sign to separate mailbox names from host names.\nA number of protocols were developed to deliver messages among groups of time-sharing computers over alternative transmission systems, such as UUCP and IBM's VNET email system. Email could be passed this way between a number of networks, including ARPANET, BITNET and NSFNET, as well as to hosts connected directly to other sites via UUCP. See the history of SMTP protocol.\nIn addition, UUCP allowed the publication of text files that could be read by many others. The News software developed by Steve Daniel and Tom Truscott in 1979 was used to distribute news and bulletin board-like messages. This quickly grew into discussion groups, known as newsgroups, on a wide range of topics. On ARPANET and NSFNET similar discussion groups would form via mailing lists, discussing both technical issues and more culturally focused topics (such as science fiction, discussed on the sflovers mailing list).\nDuring the early years of the Internet, email and similar mechanisms were also fundamental to allow people to access resources that were not available due to the absence of online connectivity. UUCP was often used to distribute files using the 'alt.binary' groups. Also, FTP e-mail gateways allowed people that lived outside the US and Europe to download files using ftp commands written inside email messages. The file was encoded, broken in pieces and sent by email; the receiver had to reassemble and decode it later, and it was the only way for people living overseas to download items such as the earlier Linux versions using the slow dial-up connections available at the time. After the popularization of the Web and the HTTP protocol such tools were slowly abandoned.\nFile sharing.\nResource or file sharing has been an important activity on computer networks from well before the Internet was established and was supported in a variety of ways including bulletin board systems (1978), Usenet (1980), Kermit (1981), and many others. The File Transfer Protocol (FTP) for use on the Internet was standardized in 1985 and is still in use today. A variety of tools were developed to aid the use of FTP by helping users discover files they might want to transfer, including the Wide Area Information Server (WAIS) in 1991, Gopher in 1991, Archie in 1991, Veronica in 1992, Jughead in 1993, Internet Relay Chat (IRC) in 1988, and eventually the World Wide Web (WWW) in 1991 with Web directories and Web search engines.\nIn 1999, Napster became the first peer-to-peer file sharing system. Napster used a central server for indexing and peer discovery, but the storage and transfer of files was decentralized. A variety of peer-to-peer file sharing programs and services with different levels of decentralization and anonymity followed, including: Gnutella, eDonkey2000, and Freenet in 2000, FastTrack, Kazaa, Limewire, and BitTorrent in 2001, and Poisoned in 2003.\nAll of these tools are general purpose and can be used to share a wide variety of content, but sharing of music files, software, and later movies and videos are major uses. And while some of this sharing is legal, large portions are not. Lawsuits and other legal actions caused Napster in 2001, eDonkey2000 in 2005, Kazaa in 2006, and Limewire in 2010 to shut down or refocus their efforts. The Pirate Bay, founded in Sweden in 2003, continues despite a trial and appeal in 2009 and 2010 that resulted in jail terms and large fines for several of its founders. File sharing remains contentious and controversial with charges of theft of intellectual property on the one hand and charges of censorship on the other.\nFile hosting services.\nFile hosting allowed for people to expand their computer's hard drives and \"host\" their files on a server. Most file hosting services offer free storage, as well as larger storage amount for a fee. These services have greatly expanded the internet for business and personal use.\nGoogle Drive, launched on April 24, 2012, has become the most popular file hosting service. Google Drive allows users to store, edit, and share files with themselves and other users. Not only does this application allow for file editing, hosting, and sharing. It also acts as Google's own free-to-access office programs, such as Google Docs, Google Slides, and Google Sheets. This application served as a useful tool for University professors and students, as well as those who are in need of Cloud storage.\nDropbox, released in June 2007 is a similar file hosting service that allows users to keep all of their files in a folder on their computer, which is synced with Dropbox's servers. This differs from Google Drive as it is not web-browser based. Now, Dropbox works to keep workers and files in sync and efficient.\nMega, having over 200 million users, is an encrypted storage and communication system that offers users free and paid storage, with an emphasis on privacy. Being three of the largest file hosting services, Google Drive, Dropbox, and Mega all represent the core ideas and values of these services.\nOnline piracy.\nThe earliest form of online piracy began with a P2P (peer to peer) music sharing service named Napster, launched in 1999. Sites like LimeWire, The Pirate Bay, and BitTorrent allowed for anyone to engage in online piracy, sending ripples through the media industry. With online piracy came a change in the media industry as a whole.\nMobile telephone data traffic.\nTotal global mobile data traffic reached 588 exabytes during 2020, a 150-fold increase from 3.86 exabytes/year in 2010. Most recently, smartphones accounted for 95% of this mobile data traffic with video accounting for 66% by type of data. Mobile traffic travels by radio frequency to the closest cell phone tower and its base station where the radio signal is converted into an optical signal that is transmitted over high-capacity optical networking systems that convey the information to data centers. The optical backbones enable much of this traffic as well as a host of emerging mobile services including the Internet of things, 3-D virtual reality, gaming and autonomous vehicles. The most popular mobile phone application is texting, of which 2.1 trillion messages were logged in 2020. The texting phenomenon began on December 3, 1992, when Neil Papworth sent the first text message of \"Merry Christmas\" over a commercial cell phone network to the CEO of Vodafone.\nThe first mobile phone with Internet connectivity was the Nokia 9000 Communicator, launched in Finland in 1996. The viability of Internet services access on mobile phones was limited until prices came down from that model, and network providers started to develop systems and services conveniently accessible on phones. NTT DoCoMo in Japan launched the first mobile Internet service, i-mode, in 1999 and this is considered the birth of the mobile phone Internet services. In 2001, the mobile phone email system by Research in Motion (now BlackBerry Limited) for their BlackBerry product was launched in America. To make efficient use of the small screen and tiny keypad and one-handed operation typical of mobile phones, a specific document and networking model was created for mobile devices, the Wireless Application Protocol (WAP). Most mobile device Internet services operate using WAP. The growth of mobile phone services was initially a primarily Asian phenomenon with Japan, South Korea and Taiwan all soon finding the majority of their Internet users accessing resources by phone rather than by PC. Developing countries followed, with India, South Africa, Kenya, the Philippines, and Pakistan all reporting that the majority of their domestic users accessed the Internet from a mobile phone rather than a PC. The European and North American use of the Internet was influenced by a large installed base of personal computers, and the growth of mobile phone Internet access was more gradual, but had reached national penetration levels of 20\u201330% in most Western countries. The cross-over occurred in 2008, when more Internet access devices were mobile phones than personal computers. In many parts of the developing world, the ratio is as much as 10 mobile phone users to one PC user.\nGrowth in demand.\nGlobal Internet traffic continues to grow at a rapid rate, rising 23% from 2020 to 2021 when the number of active Internet users reached 4.66 billion people, representing half of the global population. Further demand for data, and the capacity to satisfy this demand, are forecast to increase to 717 terabits per second in 2021. This capacity stems from the optical amplification and WDM systems that are the common basis of virtually every metro, regional, national, international and submarine telecommunications networks. These optical networking systems have been installed throughout the 5 billion kilometers of fiber optic lines deployed around the world. Continued growth in traffic is expected for the foreseeable future from a combination of new users, increased mobile phone adoption, machine-to-machine connections, connected homes, 5G devices and the burgeoning requirement for cloud and Internet services such as Amazon, Facebook, Apple Music and YouTube.\nHistoriography.\nThere are nearly insurmountable problems in supplying a historiography of the Internet's development. The process of digitization represents a twofold challenge both for historiography in general and, in particular, for historical communication research. A sense of the difficulty in documenting early developments that led to the internet can be gathered from the quote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The Arpanet period is somewhat well documented because the corporation in charge \u2013 BBN \u2013 left a physical record. Moving into the NSFNET era, it became an extraordinarily decentralized process. The record exists in people's basements, in closets. ... So much of what happened was done verbally and on the basis of individual trust.\"\u2014\u200a\nNotable works on the subject were published by Katie Hafner and Matthew Lyon, \"Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins Of The Internet\" (1996), Roy Rosenzweig, \"Wizards, Bureaucrats, Warriors, and Hackers: Writing the History of the Internet\" (1998), and Janet Abbate, \"Inventing the Internet\" (2000).\nMost scholarship and literature on the Internet lists ARPANET as the prior network that was iterated on and studied to create it, although other early computer networks and experiments existed alongside or before ARPANET.\nThese histories of the Internet have since been criticized as teleologies or Whig history; that is, they take the present to be the end point toward which history has been unfolding based on a single cause:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the case of Internet history, the epoch-making event is usually said to be the demonstration of the 4-node ARPANET network in 1969. From that single happening the global Internet developed.\u2014\u200a\nIn addition to these characteristics, historians have cited methodological problems arising in their work:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Internet history\" ... tends to be too close to its sources. Many Internet pioneers are alive, active, and eager to shape the histories that describe their accomplishments. Many museums and historians are equally eager to interview the pioneers and to publicize their stories.\u2014\u200a\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13693", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13693", "title": "Horace", "text": "Roman lyric poet (65\u20138 BC)\nQuintus Horatius Flaccus (; 8 December 65 BC \u2013 27 November 8 BC), commonly known in the English-speaking world as Horace (), was the leading Roman lyric poet during the time of Augustus (also known as Octavian). The rhetorician Quintilian regarded his \"Odes\" as the only Latin lyrics worth reading: \"He can be lofty sometimes, yet he is also full of charm and grace, versatile in his figures, and felicitously daring in his choice of words.\"\nHorace also crafted elegant hexameter verses (\"Satires\" and \"Epistles\") and caustic iambic poetry (\"Epodes\"). The hexameters are amusing yet serious works, friendly in tone, leading the ancient satirist Persius to comment: \"as his friend laughs, Horace slyly puts his finger on his every fault; once let in, he plays about the heartstrings\".\nHis career coincided with Rome's momentous change from a republic to an empire. An officer in the republican army defeated at the Battle of Philippi in 42 BC, he was befriended by Octavian's right-hand man in civil affairs, Maecenas, and became a spokesman for the new regime. For some commentators, his association with the regime was a delicate balance in which he maintained a strong measure of independence (he was \"a master of the graceful sidestep\") but for others he was, in John Dryden's phrase, \"a well-mannered court slave\".\nLife.\nIn his writings, Horace tells us far more about himself, his character, his development, and his way of life, than any other great poet of antiquity. Some of the biographical material contained in his work can be supplemented from the short but valuable \"Life of Horace\" by Suetonius (in his \"Lives of the Poets\").\nChildhood.\nHe was born on 8 December 65 BC in what later became Lucania et Bruttium under Augustus. His home town, Venusia, lay on a trade route in the region of Lucania at the border with Apulia. Various Italic dialects were spoken in the area and this perhaps enriched his feeling for language. He could have been familiar with Greek words even as a young boy and later he poked fun at the jargon of mixed Greek and Oscan spoken in neighbouring Canusium. One of the works he probably studied in school was the \"Odyssia\" of Livius Andronicus, taught by teachers like the 'Orbilius' mentioned in one of his poems. Army veterans could have been settled there at the expense of local families uprooted by Rome as punishment for their part in the Social War (91\u201388 BC). Such state-sponsored migration must have added still more linguistic variety to the area. According to a local tradition reported by Horace, a colony of Romans or Latins had been installed in Venusia after the Samnites had been driven out early in the third century. In that case, young Horace could have felt himself to be a Roman though there are also indications that he regarded himself as a Samnite or Sabellus by birth. Italians in modern and ancient times have always been devoted to their home towns, even after success in the wider world, and Horace was no different. Images of his childhood setting and references to it are found throughout his poems.\nHorace's father was probably a Venutian taken captive by Romans in the Social War, or possibly he was descended from a Sabine captured in the Samnite Wars. Either way, he was a slave for at least part of his life. He was evidently a man of strong abilities however and managed to gain his freedom and improve his social position. Thus Horace claimed to be the free-born son of a prosperous 'coactor'. The term 'coactor' could denote various roles, such as tax collector, but its use by Horace was explained by scholia as a reference to 'coactor argentarius' i.e. an auctioneer with some of the functions of a banker, paying the seller out of his own funds and later recovering the sum with interest from the buyer.\nThe father spent a small fortune on his son's education, eventually accompanying him to Rome to oversee his schooling and moral development. The poet later paid tribute to him in a poem that the German classical scholar Eduard Fraenkel considered the best memorial by any son to his father. The poem includes this passage:\nIf my character is flawed by a few minor faults, but is otherwise decent and moral, if you can point out only a few scattered blemishes on an otherwise immaculate surface, if no one can accuse me of greed, or of prurience, or of profligacy, if I live a virtuous life, free of defilement (pardon, for a moment, my self-praise), and if I am to my friends a good friend, my father deserves all the credit... As it is now, he deserves from me unstinting gratitude and praise. I could never be ashamed of such a father, nor do I feel any need, as many people do, to apologize for being a freedman's son. \"Satires 1.6.65\u201392\"\nHe never mentioned his mother in his verses and he might not have known much about her. Perhaps she also had been a slave.\nAdulthood.\nHorace left Rome, possibly after his father's death, and continued his formal education in Athens, a great centre of learning in the ancient world, where he arrived at nineteen years of age, enrolling in The Academy. Founded by Plato, The Academy was now dominated by Epicureans and Stoics, whose theories and practices made a deep impression on the young man from Venusia. Meanwhile, he mixed and lounged about with the elite of Roman youth, such as Marcus, the idle son of Cicero, and the Pompeius to whom he later addressed a poem. It was in Athens too that he probably acquired deep familiarity with the ancient tradition of Greek lyric poetry, at that time largely the preserve of grammarians and academic specialists (access to such material was easier in Athens than in Rome, where the public libraries had yet to be built by Asinius Pollio and Augustus).\nRome's troubles following the assassination of Julius Caesar were soon to catch up with him. Marcus Junius Brutus came to Athens seeking support for the republican cause. Brutus was f\u00eated around town in grand receptions and he made a point of attending academic lectures, all the while recruiting supporters among the young men studying there, including Horace. An educated young Roman could begin military service high in the ranks and Horace was made tribunus militum (one of six senior officers of a typical legion), a post usually reserved for men of senatorial or equestrian rank and which seems to have inspired jealousy among his well-born confederates. He learned the basics of military life while on the march, particularly in the wilds of northern Greece, whose rugged scenery became a backdrop to some of his later poems. It was there in 42 BC that Octavian (later Augustus) and his associate Mark Antony crushed the republican forces at the Battle of Philippi. Horace later recorded it as a day of embarrassment for himself, when he fled without his shield, but allowance should be made for his self-deprecating humour. Moreover, the incident allowed him to identify himself with some famous poets who had long ago abandoned their shields in battle, notably his heroes Alcaeus and Archilochus. The comparison with the latter poet is uncanny: Archilochus lost his shield in a part of Thrace near Philippi, and he was deeply involved in the Greek colonization of Thasos, where Horace's die-hard comrades finally surrendered.\nOctavian offered an early amnesty to his opponents and Horace quickly accepted it. On returning to Italy, he was confronted with yet another loss: his father's estate in Venusia was one of many throughout Italy to be confiscated for the settlement of veterans (Virgil lost his estate in the north about the same time). Horace later claimed that he was reduced to poverty and this led him to try his hand at poetry. In reality, there was no money to be had from versifying. At best, it offered future prospects through contacts with other poets and their patrons among the rich. Meanwhile, he obtained the sinecure of \"scriba quaestorius\", a civil service position at the \"aerarium\" or Treasury, profitable enough to be purchased even by members of the \"ordo equester\" and not very demanding in its work-load, since tasks could be delegated to \"scribae\" or permanent clerks. It was about this time that he began writing his \"Satires\" and \"Epodes\".\nHe described in glowing terms the country villa which his patron, Maecenas, had given him in a letter to his friend Quinctius:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"It lies on a range of hills, broken by a shady valley which is so placed that the sun when rising strikes the right side, and when descending in his flying chariot, warms the left. You would like the climate; and if you were to see my fruit trees, bearing ruddy cornils and plums, my oaks and ilex supplying food to my herds, and abundant shade to the master, you would say, Tarentum in its beauty has been brought near to Rome!\nThere is a fountain too, large enough to give a name to the river which it feeds; and the Hebrus itself does not flow through Thrace with cooler or purer stream. Its waters also are good for the head and useful for digestion. This sweet, and, if you will believe me, charming retreat keeps me in good health during the autumnal days.\"\nThe remains of Horace's Villa are situated on a wooded hillside above the river at Licenza, which joins the Aniene as it flows on to Tivoli.\nPoet.\nThe \"Epodes\" belong to iambic poetry. Iambic poetry features insulting and obscene language; sometimes, it is referred to as \"blame poetry\". \"Blame poetry\", or \"shame poetry\", is poetry written to blame and shame fellow citizens into a sense of their social obligations. The poems typically feature an archetypal character Horace wishes to shame, or teach a lesson to. Horace modeled these poems on the poetry of Archilochus. Social bonds in Rome had been decaying since the destruction of Carthage a little more than a hundred years earlier, due to the vast wealth that could be gained by plunder and corruption. These social ills were magnified by rivalry between Julius Caesar, Mark Antony and confederates like Sextus Pompey, all jockeying for a bigger share of the spoils. One modern scholar has counted a dozen civil wars in the hundred years leading up to 31 BC, including the Third Servile War under Spartacus, eight years before Horace's birth. As the heirs to Hellenistic culture, Horace and his fellow Romans were not well prepared to deal with these problems:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At bottom, all the problems that the times were stirring up were of a social nature, which the Hellenistic thinkers were ill qualified to grapple with. Some of them censured oppression of the poor by the rich, but they gave no practical lead, though they may have hoped to see well-meaning rulers doing so. Philosophy was drifting into absorption in self, a quest for private contentedness, to be achieved by self-control and restraint, without much regard for the fate of a disintegrating community.\u2014\u200a\nHorace's Hellenistic background is clear in his Satires, even though the genre was unique to Latin literature. He brought to it a style and outlook suited to the social and ethical issues confronting Rome but he changed its role from public, social engagement to private meditation. Meanwhile, he was beginning to interest Octavian's supporters, a gradual process described by him in one of his satires. The way was opened for him by his friend, the poet Virgil, who had gained admission into the privileged circle around Maecenas, Octavian's lieutenant, following the success of his \"Eclogues\". An introduction soon followed and, after a discreet interval, Horace too was accepted. He depicted the process as an honourable one, based on merit and mutual respect, eventually leading to true friendship, and there is reason to believe that his relationship was genuinely friendly, not just with Maecenas but afterwards with Augustus as well. On the other hand, the poet has been unsympathetically described by one scholar as \"a sharp and rising young man, with an eye to the main chance.\" There were advantages on both sides: Horace gained encouragement and material support, the politicians gained a hold on a potential dissident. His republican sympathies, and his role at Philippi, may have caused him some pangs of remorse over his new status. However, most Romans considered the civil wars to be the result of \"contentio dignitatis\", or rivalry between the foremost families of the city, and he too seems to have accepted the principate as Rome's last hope for much needed peace.\nIn 37 BC, Horace accompanied Maecenas on a journey to Brundisium, described in one of his poems as a series of amusing incidents and charming encounters with other friends along the way, such as Virgil. In fact the journey was political in its motivation, with Maecenas en route to negotiate the Treaty of Tarentum with Antony, a fact Horace artfully keeps from the reader (political issues are largely avoided in the first book of satires). Horace was probably also with Maecenas on one of Octavian's naval expeditions against the piratical Sextus Pompeius, which ended in a disastrous storm off Palinurus in 36 BC, briefly alluded to by Horace in terms of near-drowning. There are also some indications in his verses that he was with Maecenas at the Battle of Actium in 31 BC, where Octavian defeated his great rival, Antony. By then Horace had already received from Maecenas the famous gift of his Sabine farm, probably not long after the publication of the first book of \"Satires\". The gift, which included income from five tenants, may have ended his career at the Treasury, or at least allowed him to give it less time and energy. It signalled his identification with the Octavian regime yet, in the second book of \"Satires\" that soon followed, he continued the apolitical stance of the first book. By this time, he had attained the status of \"eques Romanus\" (Roman 'cavalryman', 'knight'), perhaps as a result of his work at the Treasury.\nKnight.\n\"Odes\" 1\u20133 were the next focus for his artistic creativity. He adapted their forms and themes from Greek lyric poetry of the seventh and sixth centuries BC. The fragmented nature of the Greek world had enabled his literary heroes to express themselves freely and his semi-retirement from the Treasury in Rome to his own estate in the Sabine hills perhaps empowered him to some extent also yet even when his lyrics touched on public affairs they reinforced the importance of private life. Nevertheless, his work in the period 30\u201327 BC began to show his closeness to the regime and his sensitivity to its developing ideology. In \"Odes\" 1.2, for example, he eulogized Octavian in hyperboles that echo Hellenistic court poetry. The name \"Augustus\", which Octavian assumed in January of 27 BC, is first attested in \"Odes\" 3.3 and 3.5. In the period 27\u201324 BC, political allusions in the \"Odes\" concentrated on foreign wars in Britain (1.35), Arabia (1.29), Hispania (3.8), and Parthia (2.2). He greeted Augustus on his return to Rome in 24 BC as a beloved ruler upon whose good health he depended for his own happiness (3.14).\nThe public reception of \"Odes\" 1\u20133 disappointed him, however. He attributed the lack of success to jealousy among imperial courtiers and to his isolation from literary cliques. Perhaps it was this disappointment that led him to put aside the genre in favour of verse letters. He addressed his first book of \"Epistles\" to a variety of friends and acquaintances in an urbane style reflecting his new social status as a knight. In the opening poem, he professed a deeper interest in moral philosophy than poetry but, though the collection demonstrates a leaning towards stoic theory, it reveals no sustained thinking about ethics. Maecenas was still the dominant confidante but Horace had now begun to assert his own independence, suavely declining constant invitations to attend his patron. In the final poem of the first book of \"Epistles\", he revealed himself to be forty-four years old in the consulship of Lollius and Lepidus i.e. 21 BC, and \"of small stature, fond of the sun, prematurely grey, quick-tempered but easily placated\".\nAccording to Suetonius, the second book of \"Epistles\" was prompted by Augustus, who desired a verse epistle to be addressed to himself. Augustus was in fact a prolific letter-writer and he once asked Horace to be his personal secretary. Horace refused the secretarial role but complied with the emperor's request for a verse letter. The letter to Augustus may have been slow in coming, being published possibly as late as 11 BC. It celebrated, among other things, the 15 BC military victories of his stepsons, Drusus and Tiberius, yet it and the following letter were largely devoted to literary theory and criticism. The literary theme was explored still further in \"Ars Poetica\", published separately but written in the form of an epistle and sometimes referred to as \"Epistles\" 2.3 (possibly the last poem he ever wrote). He was also commissioned to write odes commemorating the victories of Drusus and Tiberius and one to be sung in a temple of Apollo for the Secular Games, a long-abandoned festival that Augustus revived in accordance with his policy of recreating ancient customs (\"Carmen Saeculare\").\nSuetonius recorded some gossip about Horace's sexual activities late in life, claiming that the walls of his bedchamber were covered with obscene pictures and mirrors, so that he saw erotica wherever he looked. The poet died at 56 years of age, not long after his friend Maecenas, near whose tomb he was laid to rest. Both men bequeathed their property to Augustus, an honour that the emperor expected of his friends.\nWorks.\nThe dating of Horace's works is only approximately known, and scholars often debate the precise order in which they were first \"published\". There are persuasive arguments for the following chronology:\nHistorical context.\nHorace composed in traditional metres borrowed from archaic Greece, employing hexameters in his \"Satires\" and \"Epistles\", and iambs in his \"Epodes\", all of which were relatively easy to adapt into Latin forms. His \"Odes\" featured more complex measures, including alcaics and sapphics, which were sometimes a difficult fit for Latin structure and syntax. Despite these traditional metres, he presented himself as a partisan in the development of a new and sophisticated style. He was influenced in particular by Hellenistic aesthetics of brevity, elegance and polish, as modelled in the work of Callimachus.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As soon as Horace, stirred by his own genius and encouraged by the example of Virgil, Varius, and perhaps some other poets of the same generation, had determined to make his fame as a poet, being by temperament a fighter, he wanted to fight against all kinds of prejudice, amateurish slovenliness, philistinism, reactionary tendencies, in short to fight for the new and noble type of poetry which he and his friends were endeavouring to bring about.\u2014\u200a\nIn modern literary theory, a distinction is often made between immediate personal experience (\"Urerlebnis\") and experience mediated by cultural vectors such as literature, philosophy, and the visual arts (\"Bildungserlebnis\"). The distinction has little relevance for Horace, however, since his personal and literary experiences are implicated in each other. \"Satires\" 1.5, for example, recounts in detail a real trip Horace made with Virgil and some of his other literary friends, and which parallels a Satire by Lucilius, his predecessor. Unlike much Hellenistic-inspired literature, however, his poetry was not composed for a small coterie of admirers and fellow poets, nor does it rely on abstruse allusions for many of its effects. Though elitist in its literary standards, it was written for a wide audience, as a public form of art. Ambivalence also characterizes his literary persona, since his presentation of himself as part of a small community of philosophically aware people, seeking true peace of mind while shunning vices such as greed, was well adapted to Augustus's plans to reform public morality, corrupted by greed\u2014his personal plea for moderation was part of the emperor's grand message to the nation.\nHorace generally followed the examples of poets established as classics in different genres, such as Archilochus in the \"Epodes\", Lucilius in the \"Satires\", and Alcaeus in the \"Odes\", later broadening his scope for the sake of variation and because his models weren't actually suited to the realities confronting him. Archilochus and Alcaeus were aristocratic Greeks whose poetry had a social and religious function that was immediately intelligible to their audiences, but which became a mere artifice or literary motif when transposed to Rome. However, the artifice of the \"Odes\" is also integral to their success, since they could now accommodate a wide range of emotional effects, and the blend of Greek and Roman elements adds a sense of detachment and universality. Horace proudly claimed to introduce into Latin the spirit and iambic poetry of Archilochus, but (unlike Archilochus) without persecuting anyone (\"Epistles\" 1.19.23\u201325). It was no idle boast. His \"Epodes\" were modelled on the verses of the Greek poet, as 'blame poetry', yet he avoided targeting real scapegoats. Whereas Archilochus presented himself as a serious and vigorous opponent of wrong-doers, Horace aimed for comic effects and adopted the persona of a weak and ineffectual critic of his times (as symbolized, for example, in his surrender to the witch Canidia in the final epode). He also claimed to be the first poet to introduce into Latin the lyrical methods of Alcaeus (\"Epistles\" 1.19.32\u201333), and he was actually the first Latin poet to make consistent use of Alcaic meters and themes: love, politics, and the symposium. He imitated other Greek lyric poets as well, employing a 'motto' technique, beginning each ode with some reference to a Greek original and then diverging from it.\nThe satirical poet Lucilius was a senator's son who could castigate his peers with impunity. Horace was merely a freedman's son who needed to tread carefully. Lucilius was a rugged patriot and a significant voice in Roman self-awareness, endearing himself to his countrymen through his blunt frankness and explicit politics. His work expressed genuine freedom or \"libertas\". His style included 'metrical vandalism' and looseness of structure. Horace instead adopted an oblique and ironic style of satire, ridiculing stock characters and anonymous targets. His \"libertas\" was the private freedom of a philosophical outlook, not a political or social privilege. His \"Satires\" are relatively easy-going in their use of meter (relative to the tight lyric meters of the \"Odes\"), but formal and highly controlled relative to the poems of Lucilius, whom Horace mocked for his sloppy standards (\"Satires\" 1.10.56\u201361)\nThe \"Epistles\" may be considered among Horace's most innovative works. There was nothing like it in Greek or Roman literature. Occasionally poems had borne some resemblance to letters, including an elegiac poem from Solon to Mimnermus, and some lyrical poems from Pindar to Hieron of Syracuse. Lucilius had composed a satire in the form of a letter, and some epistolary poems were composed by Catullus and Propertius. But nobody before Horace had composed an entire collection of verse letters, let alone letters with a focus on philosophical problems. The sophisticated and flexible style that he had developed in his \"Satires\" was adapted to the more serious needs of this new genre. Such refinement of style was not unusual for Horace. His craftsmanship as a wordsmith is apparent even in his earliest attempts at various kinds of poetry, but his handling of each genre tended to improve over time, as he adapted it to his own needs. Thus, for example, it is generally agreed that his second book of \"Satires\", where human folly is revealed through dialogue between characters, is superior to the first, where he propounds his ethics in monologues. Nevertheless, the first book includes some of his most popular poems.\nThemes.\nHorace developed a number of inter-related themes throughout his poetic career, including politics, love, philosophy, and ethics, his own social role, and poetry itself. His \"Epodes\" and \"Satires\" are forms of \"blame poetry\", and both have a natural affinity with the moralising and diatribes of Cynicism. This affinity often takes the form of allusions to the work and philosophy of Bion of Borysthenes, but it is as much a literary game as a philosophical alignment.\nBy the time he composed his \"Epistles\", Horace was a critic of Cynicism along with all impractical and \"high-falutin\" philosophy in general.\nThe \"Satires\" also include a strong element of Epicureanism, with frequent allusions to the Epicurean poet Lucretius. So, for example, the Epicurean sentiment \"carpe diem\" is the inspiration behind Horace's repeated punning on his own name (\"Horatius ~ hora\") in \"Satires\" 2.6. The \"Satires\" also feature some Stoic, Peripatetic, and Platonic (\"Dialogues\") elements. In short, the \"Satires\" present a medley of philosophical programmes, dished up in no particular order\u2014a style of argument typical of the genre.\nThe \"Odes\" display a wide range of topics. Over time, Horace becomes more confident about his political voice. Although he is often thought of as an overly intellectual lover, he is ingenious in representing passion. The \"Odes\" weave various philosophical strands together, with allusions and statements of doctrine present in about a third of the \"Odes\" Books 1\u20133, ranging from the flippant (1.22, 3.28) to the solemn (2.10, 3.2, 3.3). Epicureanism is the dominant influence, characterising about twice as many of these odes as Stoicism.\nA group of odes combines these two influences in tense relationships, such as \"Odes\" 1.7, praising Stoic virility and devotion to public duty, while also advocating private pleasures among friends. While generally favouring the Epicurean lifestyle, the lyric poet is as eclectic as the satiric poet, and in \"Odes\" 2.10 he even proposes Aristotle's golden mean as a remedy for Rome's political troubles.\nMany of Horace's poems also contain substantial reflection on genre, the lyric tradition, and the function of poetry. \"Odes\" 4, thought to be composed at the emperor's request, takes the themes of the first three books of \"Odes\" to a new level. This book shows greater poetic confidence after the public performance of his \"Carmen saeculare\" (or \"Century hymn\") at a public festival orchestrated by Augustus. In the book, Horace addresses the emperor Augustus directly with more confidence and proclaims his power to grant poetic immortality to those he praises. It is the least philosophical collection of his verses, excepting the twelfth ode, addressed to the dead Virgil as if he were living. In that ode, the epic poet and the lyric poet are aligned with Stoicism and Epicureanism respectively, in a mood of bittersweet pathos.\nThe first poem of the \"Epistles\" sets the philosophical tone for the rest of the collection: \"So now I put aside both verses and all those other games: What is true and what befits is my care, this my question, this my whole concern.\" Horace's poetic renunciation of poetry in favour of philosophy is intended to be ambiguous. Ambiguity is the hallmark of the \"Epistles\". It is uncertain if those being addressed by the self-mocking poet-philosopher are being honoured or criticised. Though he emerges as an Epicurean, it is on the understanding that philosophical preferences, like political and social choices, are a matter of personal taste. Thus he depicts the ups and downs of the philosophical life more realistically than do most philosophers.\nReception.\nThe reception of Horace's work has varied from one epoch to another and varied markedly even in his own lifetime. \"Odes\" 1\u20133 were not well received when first 'published' in Rome, yet Augustus later commissioned a ceremonial ode for the Centennial Games in 17 BC and also encouraged the publication of \"Odes\" 4, after which Horace's reputation as Rome's premier lyricist was assured. His Odes were to become the best received of all his poems in ancient times, acquiring a classic status that discouraged imitation: no other poet produced a comparable body of lyrics in the four centuries that followed (though that might also be attributed to social causes, particularly the parasitism that Italy was sinking into). In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, ode-writing became highly fashionable in England and a large number of aspiring poets imitated Horace both in English and in Latin.\nIn a verse epistle to Augustus (Epistle 2.1), in 12 BC, Horace argued for classic status to be awarded to contemporary poets, including Virgil and apparently himself. In the final poem of his third book of Odes he claimed to have created for himself a monument more durable than bronze (\"Exegi monumentum aere perennius\", \"Carmina\" 3.30.1). For one modern scholar, however, Horace's personal qualities are more notable than the monumental quality of his achievement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... when we hear his name we don't really think of a monument. We think rather of a voice which varies in tone and resonance but is always recognizable, and which by its unsentimental humanity evokes a very special blend of liking and respect.\u2014\u200a\nYet for men like Wilfred Owen, scarred by experiences of World War I, his poetry stood for discredited values:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe same motto, \"Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori\", had been adapted to the ethos of martyrdom in the lyrics of early Christian poets like Prudentius.\nThese preliminary comments touch on a small sample of developments in the reception of Horace's work. More developments are covered epoch by epoch in the following sections.\nAntiquity.\nHorace's influence can be observed in the work of his near contemporaries, Ovid and Propertius. Ovid followed his example in creating a completely natural style of expression in hexameter verse, and Propertius cheekily mimicked him in his third book of elegies. His \"Epistles\" provided them both with a model for their own verse letters and it also shaped Ovid's exile poetry.\nHis influence had a perverse aspect. As mentioned before, the brilliance of his \"Odes\" may have discouraged imitation. Conversely, they may have created a vogue for the lyrics of the archaic Greek poet Pindar, due to the fact that Horace had neglected that style of lyric (see Influence and Legacy of Pindar). The iambic genre seems almost to have disappeared after publication of Horace's \"Epodes\". Ovid's \"Ibis\" was a rare attempt at the form but it was inspired mainly by Callimachus, and there are some iambic elements in Martial but the main influence there was Catullus. A revival of popular interest in the satires of Lucilius may have been inspired by Horace's criticism of his unpolished style. Both Horace and Lucilius were considered good role-models by Persius, who critiqued his own satires as lacking both the acerbity of Lucillius and the gentler touch of Horace. Juvenal's caustic satire was influenced mainly by Lucilius but Horace by then was a school classic and Juvenal could refer to him respectfully and in a round-about way as \"the Venusine lamp\".\nStatius paid homage to Horace by composing one poem in Sapphic and one in Alcaic meter (the verse forms most often associated with \"Odes\"), which he included in his collection of occasional poems, \"Silvae\". Ancient scholars wrote commentaries on the lyric meters of the \"Odes\", including the scholarly poet Caesius Bassus. By a process called \"derivatio\", he varied established meters through the addition or omission of syllables, a technique borrowed by Seneca the Younger when adapting Horatian meters to the stage.\nHorace's poems continued to be school texts into late antiquity. Works attributed to Helenius Acro and Pomponius Porphyrio are the remnants of a much larger body of Horatian scholarship. Porphyrio arranged the poems in non-chronological order, beginning with the \"Odes\", because of their general popularity and their appeal to scholars (the \"Odes\" were to retain this privileged position in the medieval manuscript tradition and thus in modern editions also). Horace was often evoked by poets of the fourth century, such as Ausonius and Claudian. Prudentius presented himself as a Christian Horace, adapting Horatian meters to his own poetry and giving Horatian motifs a Christian tone. On the other hand, St Jerome, modelled an uncompromising response to the pagan Horace, observing: \"What harmony can there be between Christ and the Devil? What has Horace to do with the Psalter?\" By the early sixth century, Horace and Prudentius were both part of a classical heritage that was struggling to survive the disorder of the times. Boethius, the last major author of classical Latin literature, could still take inspiration from Horace, sometimes mediated by Senecan tragedy. It can be argued that Horace's influence extended beyond poetry to dignify core themes and values of the early Christian era, such as self-sufficiency, inner contentment, and courage.\nMiddle Ages and Renaissance.\nClassical texts almost ceased being copied in the period between the mid sixth century and the Carolingian revival. Horace's work probably survived in just two or three books imported into northern Europe from Italy. These became the ancestors of six extant manuscripts dated to the ninth century. Two of those six manuscripts are French in origin, one was produced in Alsace, and the other three show Irish influence but were probably written in continental monasteries (Lombardy for example). By the last half of the ninth century, it was not uncommon for literate people to have direct experience of Horace's poetry. His influence on the Carolingian Renaissance can be found in the poems of Heiric of Auxerre and in some manuscripts marked with neumes, notations that may have been an aid to the memorization and discussion of his lyric meters. \"Ode\" is neumed with the melody of a hymn to John the Baptist, \"Ut queant laxis\", composed in Sapphic stanzas. This hymn later became the basis of the solfege system (\"Do, re, mi...\")\u2014an association with western music quite appropriate for a lyric poet like Horace, though the language of the hymn is mainly Prudentian. Stuart Lyons argues that the melody in question was linked with Horace's Ode well before Guido d'Arezzo fitted \"Ut queant laxis\" to it. Ovid does testify to Horace's use of the lyre while performing his Odes.\nThe German scholar Ludwig Traube once dubbed the tenth and eleventh centuries \"The age of Horace\" (\"aetas Horatiana\"), and placed it between the \"aetas Vergiliana\" of the eighth and ninth centuries, and the \"aetas Ovidiana\" of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Horace was a substantial influence in the ninth century as well, and Traube concentrated too much on Horace's \"Satires\". Almost all of Horace's work found favour in the Medieval period, with scholars associating Horace's different genres with the different ages of man. A twelfth-century scholar encapsulated the theory: \n\"...Horace wrote four different kinds of poems on account of the four ages, the \"Odes\" for boys, the \"Ars Poetica\" for young men, the \"Satires\" for mature men, the \"Epistles\" for old and complete men.\" \nIt was then thought that Horace had composed his works in the order in which they had been placed by ancient scholars. This schematism involved an appreciation of Horace's works as a collection, the \"Ars Poetica\", \"Satires\", and \"Epistles\" appearing to find favour as well as the \"Odes\". The later Middle Ages, however, gave special significance to \"Satires\" and \"Epistles\", considered Horace's mature works. Dante referred to Horace as \"Orazio satiro\", and he awarded him a privileged position in the first circle of Hell, with Homer, Ovid, and Lucan.\nHorace's popularity is revealed in the large number of quotes from all his works found in almost every genre of medieval literature, and also in the number of poets imitating him in quantitative Latin meter. The most prolific imitator of his \"Odes\" was the Bavarian monk, Metellus of Tegernsee, who dedicated his work to the patron saint of Tegernsee Abbey, St Quirinus, around the year 1170. He imitated all of Horace's lyrical meters then followed these up with imitations of other meters used by Prudentius and Boethius, indicating that variety, as first modelled by Horace, was considered a fundamental aspect of the lyric genre. The content of his poems however was restricted to simple piety. Among the most successful imitators of \"Satires\" and \"Epistles\" was another Germanic author, calling himself Sextus Amarcius, around 1100, who composed four books, the first two exemplifying vices, the second pair mainly virtues.\nPetrarch is a key figure in the imitation of Horace in accentual meters. His verse letters in Latin were modelled on the \"Epistles\" and he wrote a letter to Horace in the form of an ode. However he also borrowed from Horace when composing his Italian sonnets. One modern scholar has speculated that authors who imitated Horace in accentual rhythms (including stressed Latin and vernacular languages) may have considered their work a natural sequel to Horace's metrical variety. In France, Horace and Pindar were the poetic models for a group of vernacular authors called the Pl\u00e9iade, including for example Pierre de Ronsard and Joachim du Bellay. Montaigne made constant and inventive use of Horatian quotes. The vernacular languages were dominant in Castilia and Portugal in the sixteenth century, where Horace's influence is notable in the works of such authors as Garcilaso de la Vega, Juan Bosc\u00e1n, S\u00e1 de Miranda, Antonio Ferreira, and Fray Luis de Le\u00f3n, the last writing odes on the Horatian theme \"beatus ille\" (\"happy the man\"). The sixteenth century in western Europe was also an age of translations (except in Germany, where Horace wasn't translated into the vernacular until well into the seventeenth century). The first English translator was Thomas Drant, who placed translations of Jeremiah and Horace side by side in \"Medicinable Morall\", 1566. That was also the year that the Scot George Buchanan paraphrased the Psalms in a Horatian setting. Ben Jonson put Horace on the stage in 1601 in \"Poetaster\", along with other classical Latin authors, giving them all their own verses to speak in translation. Horace's part evinces the independent spirit, moral earnestness, and critical insight that many readers look for in his poems.\nAge of Enlightenment.\nDuring the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, or the Age of Enlightenment, neoclassical culture was pervasive. English literature in the middle of that period has been dubbed Augustan. It is not always easy to distinguish Horace's influence during these centuries (the mixing of influences is shown for example in one poet's pseudonym, \"Horace Juvenal\"). However a measure of his influence can be found in the diversity of the people interested in his works, both among readers and authors.\nNew editions of his works were published almost yearly. There were three new editions in 1612 (two in Leiden, one in Frankfurt) and again in 1699 (Utrecht, Barcelona, Cambridge). Cheap editions were plentiful and fine editions were also produced, including one whose entire text was engraved by John Pine in copperplate. The poet James Thomson owned five editions of Horace's work and the physician James Douglas had five hundred books with Horace-related titles. Horace was often commended in periodicals such as The Spectator, as a hallmark of good judgement, moderation, and manliness, a focus for moralising. His verses offered a fund of mottoes, such as \"simplex munditiis\" (elegance in simplicity), \"splendide mendax\" (nobly untruthful), \"sapere aude\" (dare to know), \"nunc est bibendum\" (now is the time to drink), and \"carpe diem\" (seize the day, perhaps the only one still in common use today). These were quoted even in works as prosaic as Edmund Quincy's \"A treatise of hemp-husbandry\" (1765). The fictional hero Tom Jones recited his verses with feeling. His works were also used to justify commonplace themes, such as patriotic obedience, as in James Parry's English lines from an Oxford University collection in 1736:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHoratian-style lyrics were increasingly typical of Oxford and Cambridge verse collections for this period, most of them in Latin but some like the previous ode in English. John Milton's Lycidas first appeared in such a collection. It has few Horatian echoes yet Milton's associations with Horace were lifelong. He composed a controversial version of \"Odes\" 1.5, and Paradise Lost includes references to Horace's 'Roman' \"Odes\" 3.1\u20136 (Book 7 for example begins with echoes of \"Odes\" 3.4). Yet Horace's lyrics could offer inspiration to libertines as well as moralists, and neo-Latin sometimes served as a kind of discrete veil for the risqu\u00e9. Thus for example Benjamin Loveling authored a catalogue of Drury Lane and Covent Garden prostitutes, in Sapphic stanzas, and an encomium for a dying lady \"of salacious memory\". Some Latin imitations of Horace were politically subversive, such as a marriage ode by Anthony Alsop that included a rallying cry for the Jacobite cause. On the other hand, Andrew Marvell took inspiration from Horace's \"Odes\" 1.37 to compose his English masterpiece Horatian Ode upon Cromwell's Return from Ireland, in which subtly nuanced reflections on the execution of Charles I echo Horace's ambiguous response to the death of Cleopatra (Marvell's ode was suppressed in spite of its subtlety and only began to be widely published in 1776). Samuel Johnson took particular pleasure in reading \"The Odes\". Alexander Pope wrote direct \"Imitations\" of Horace (published with the original Latin alongside) and also echoed him in \"Essays\" and The Rape of the Lock. He even emerged as \"a quite Horatian Homer\" in his translation of the \"Iliad\". Horace appealed also to female poets, such as Anna Seward (\"Original sonnets on various subjects, and odes paraphrased from Horace\", 1799) and Elizabeth Tollet, who composed a Latin ode in Sapphic meter to celebrate her brother's return from overseas, with tea and coffee substituted for the wine of Horace's sympotic settings:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nHorace's \"Ars Poetica\" is second only to Aristotle's \"Poetics\" in its influence on literary theory and criticism. Milton recommended both works in his treatise \"of Education\". Horace's \"Satires\" and \"Epistles\" however also had a huge impact, influencing theorists and critics such as John Dryden. There was considerable debate over the value of different lyrical forms for contemporary poets, as represented on one hand by the kind of four-line stanzas made familiar by Horace's Sapphic and Alcaic \"Odes\" and, on the other, the loosely structured Pindarics associated with the odes of Pindar. Translations occasionally involved scholars in the dilemmas of censorship. Thus Christopher Smart entirely omitted \"Odes\" and re-numbered the remaining odes. He also removed the ending of \"Odes\" . Thomas Creech printed \"Epodes\" and in the original Latin but left out their English translations. Philip Francis left out both the English and Latin for those same two epodes, a gap in the numbering the only indication that something was amiss. French editions of Horace were influential in England and these too were regularly bowdlerized.\nMost European nations had their own 'Horaces': thus for example Friedrich von Hagedorn was called \"The German Horace\" and Maciej Kazimierz Sarbiewski \"The Polish Horace\" (the latter was much imitated by English poets such as Henry Vaughan and Abraham Cowley). Pope Urban VIII wrote voluminously in Horatian meters, including an ode on gout.\n19th century on.\nHorace maintained a central role in the education of English-speaking elites right up until the 1960s. A pedantic emphasis on the formal aspects of language-learning at the expense of literary appreciation may have made him unpopular in some quarters yet it also confirmed his influence\u2014a tension in his reception that underlies Byron's famous lines from \"Childe Harold\" (Canto iv, 77):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWilliam Wordsworth's mature poetry, including the preface to \"Lyrical Ballads\", reveals Horace's influence in its rejection of false ornament and he once expressed \"a wish / to meet the shade of Horace...\". John Keats echoed the opening of Horace's \"Epodes\" 14 in the opening lines of \"Ode to a Nightingale\".\nThe Roman poet was presented in the nineteenth century as an honorary English gentleman. William Thackeray produced a version of \"Odes\" in which Horace's 'boy' became 'Lucy', and Gerard Manley Hopkins translated the boy innocently as 'child'. Horace was translated by Sir Theodore Martin (biographer of Prince Albert) but minus some ungentlemanly verses, such as the erotic \"Odes\" and \"Epodes\" 8 and 12. Edward Bulwer-Lytton produced a popular translation and William Gladstone also wrote translations during his last days as Prime Minister.\nEdward FitzGerald's \"Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam\", though formally derived from the Persian \"ruba'i\", nevertheless shows a strong Horatian influence, since, as one modern scholar has observed, \"...the quatrains inevitably recall the stanzas of the 'Odes', as does the narrating first person of the world-weary, ageing Epicurean Omar himself, mixing sympotic exhortation and 'carpe diem' with splendid moralising and 'memento mori' nihilism.\"\" Matthew Arnold advised a friend in verse not to worry about politics, an echo of \"Odes\" , yet later became a critic of Horace's inadequacies relative to Greek poets, as role models of Victorian virtues, observing: \"If human life were complete without faith, without enthusiasm, without energy, Horace...would be the perfect interpreter of human life.\" Christina Rossetti composed a sonnet depicting a woman willing her own death steadily, drawing on Horace's depiction of 'Glycera' in \"Odes\" and Cleopatra in \"Odes\" . A. E. Housman considered \"Odes\" , in Archilochian couplets, the most beautiful poem of antiquity and yet he generally shared Horace's penchant for quatrains, being readily adapted to his own elegiac and melancholy strain. The most famous poem of Ernest Dowson took its title and its heroine's name from a line of \"Odes\" , \"Non sum qualis eram bonae sub regno Cynarae\", as well as its motif of nostalgia for a former flame. Kipling wrote a famous parody of the \"Odes\", satirising their stylistic idiosyncrasies and especially the extraordinary syntax, but he also used Horace's Roman patriotism as a focus for British imperialism, as in the story \"Regulus\" in the school collection \"Stalky &amp; Co.\", which he based on \"Odes\" . Wilfred Owen's famous poem, quoted above, incorporated Horatian text to question patriotism while ignoring the rules of Latin scansion. However, there were few other echoes of Horace in the war period, possibly because war is not actually a major theme of Horace's work. The Spanish poet Miquel Costa i Llobera published his renowned collection of poems named \"Horacianes\", thus being dedicated to the Latin poet Horace, and employing Sapphics, Alcaics, and similar types of stanzas.\nBoth W. H. Auden and Louis MacNeice began their careers as teachers of classics and both responded as poets to Horace's influence. Auden for example evoked the fragile world of the 1930s in terms echoing \"Odes\" , where Horace advises a friend not to let worries about frontier wars interfere with current pleasures.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe American poet Robert Frost echoed Horace's \"Satires\" in the conversational and sententious idiom of some of his longer poems, such as \"The Lesson for Today\" (1941), and also in his gentle advocacy of life on the farm, as in \"Hyla Brook\" (1916), evoking Horace's \"fons Bandusiae\" in \"Ode\" . Now at the beginning of the third millennium, poets are still absorbing and re-configuring the Horatian influence, sometimes in translation (such as a 2002 English/American edition of the \"Odes\" by thirty-six poets) and sometimes as inspiration for their own work (such as a 2003 collection of odes by a New Zealand poet).\nHorace's \"Epodes\" have largely been ignored in the modern era, excepting those with political associations of historical significance. The obscene qualities of some of the poems have repulsed even scholars yet more recently a better understanding of the nature of Iambic poetry has led to a re-evaluation of the \"whole\" collection. A re-appraisal of the \"Epodes\" also appears in creative adaptations by recent poets (such as a 2004 collection of poems that relocates the ancient context to a 1950s industrial town).\nIn literature and the arts.\nThe Oxford Latin Course textbooks use the life of Horace to illustrate an average Roman's life in the late Republic to Early Empire. Horace was portrayed by Norman Shelley in the 1976 miniseries \"I, Claudius\".\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13694", "revid": "50955110", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13694", "title": "Microsoft Windows version history", "text": "List of Windows operating system versions\nMicrosoft Windows was announced by Bill Gates on November 10, 1983, 2 years before it was first released. Microsoft introduced Windows as a graphical user interface for MS-DOS, which had been introduced two years earlier, on August 12, 1981. The product line evolved in the 1990s from an operating environment into a fully complete, modern operating system over two lines of development, each with their own separate codebase.\nThe first versions of Windows (1.0 through to 3.11) were graphical shells that ran from MS-DOS. Windows 95, though still being based on MS-DOS, was its own operating system. Windows 95 also had a significant amount of 16-bit code ported from Windows 3.1. Windows 95 introduced multiple features that have been part of the product ever since, including the Start menu, the taskbar, and Windows Explorer (renamed File Explorer in Windows 8). In 1997, Microsoft released Internet Explorer 4 which included the (at the time controversial) Windows Desktop Update. It aimed to integrate Internet Explorer and the web into the user interface and also brought new features into Windows, such as the ability to display JPEG images as the desktop wallpaper and single window navigation in Windows Explorer. In 1998, Microsoft released Windows 98, which also included the Windows Desktop Update and Internet Explorer 4 by default. The inclusion of Internet Explorer 4 and the Desktop Update led to an antitrust case in the United States. Windows 98 included USB support out of the box, and also plug and play, which allows devices to work when plugged in without requiring a system reboot or manual configuration. Windows Me, the last DOS-based version of Windows, was aimed at consumers and released in 2000. It introduced System Restore, Help and Support Center, updated versions of the Disk Defragmenter and other system tools.\nIn 1993, Microsoft released Windows NT 3.1, the first version of the newly developed Windows NT operating system, followed by Windows NT 3.5 in 1994, and Windows NT 3.51 in 1995. \"NT\" is an initialism for \"New Technology\". Unlike the Windows 9x series of operating systems, it was a fully 32-bit operating system. NT 3.1 introduced NTFS, a file system designed to replace the older File Allocation Table (FAT) which was used by DOS and the DOS-based Windows operating systems. In 1996, Windows NT 4.0 was released, which included a fully 32-bit version of Windows Explorer written specifically for it, making the operating system work like Windows 95. Windows NT was originally designed to be used on high-end systems and servers, but with the release of Windows 2000, many consumer-oriented features from Windows 95 and Windows 98 were included, such as the Windows Desktop Update, Internet Explorer 5, USB support and Windows Media Player. These consumer-oriented features were further extended in Windows XP in 2001, which included a new visual style called Luna, a more user-friendly interface, updated versions of Windows Media Player and Internet Explorer 6 by default, and extended features from Windows Me, such as the Help and Support Center and System Restore. Windows Vista, which was released in 2007, focused on securing the Windows operating system against computer viruses and other malicious software by introducing features such as User Account Control. New features include Windows Aero, updated versions of the standard games (e.g. Solitaire), Windows Movie Maker, and Windows Mail to replace Outlook Express. Despite this, Windows Vista was critically panned for its poor performance on older hardware and its at-the-time high system requirements. Windows 7 followed in 2009 nearly three years after its launch, and despite it technically having higher system requirements, reviewers noted that it ran better than Windows Vista. Windows 7 removed many applications, such as Windows Movie Maker, Windows Photo Gallery and Windows Mail, instead requiring users to download separate Windows Live Essentials to gain some of those features and other online services. Windows 8, which was released in 2012, introduced many controversial changes, such as the replacement of the Start menu with the Start Screen, the removal of the Aero interface in favor of a flat, colored interface as well as the introduction of \"Metro\" apps (later renamed to Universal Windows Platform apps), and the Charms Bar user interface element, all of which received considerable criticism from reviewers. Windows 8.1, a free upgrade to Windows 8, was released in 2013.\nThe following version of Windows, Windows 10, which was released in 2015, reintroduced the Start menu and added the ability to run Universal Windows Platform apps in a window instead of always in full screen. Windows 10 was generally well-received, with many reviewers stating that Windows 10 is what Windows 8 should have been.\nThe latest version of Windows, Windows 11, was released to the general public on October 5, 2021. Windows 11 incorporates a redesigned user interface, including a new Start menu, a visual style featuring rounded corners, and a new layout for the Microsoft Store, and also included Microsoft Edge by default.\nWindows 1.0.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Windows development started back in 1983, and it was a joke in the industry ... Betting the company on it was a big, big bet.\nWindows 1.0, the first independent version of Microsoft Windows, released on November 20, 1985, achieved little popularity. The project was briefly codenamed \"Interface Manager\" before the windowing system was implemented\u2014contrary to popular belief that it was the original name for Windows and Rowland Hanson, the head of marketing at Microsoft, convinced the company that the name \"Windows\" would be more appealing to customers.\nWindows 1.0 was not a complete operating system, but rather an \"operating environment\" that extended MS-DOS, and shared the latter's inherent flaws.\nThe first version of Microsoft Windows included a simple graphics painting program called Windows Paint; Windows Write, a simple word processor; an appointment calendar; a card-filer; a notepad; a clock; a control panel; a computer terminal; Clipboard; and RAM driver. It also included the MS-DOS Executive and a game called Reversi.\nMicrosoft had worked with Apple Computer to develop applications for Apple's new Macintosh computer, which featured a graphical user interface. As part of the related business negotiations, Microsoft had licensed certain aspects of the Macintosh user interface from Apple; in later litigation, a district court summarized these aspects as \"screen displays\".\nIn the development of Windows 1.0, Microsoft intentionally limited its borrowing of certain GUI elements from the Macintosh user interface, to comply with its license. For example, windows were only displayed \"tiled\" on the screen; that is, they could not overlap or overlie one another.\nOn December 31, 2001, Microsoft declared Windows 1.0 obsolete and stopped providing support and updates for the system.\nOS/2 and Windows 2.x.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ironically, Microsoft is competing against itself in the operating systems market. Besides Xenix, Microsoft has announced Windows 386, which [is] somewhat similar to OS/2. Of course, either way users turn, Microsoft wins.\u2014\u200a\nDuring the mid to late 1980s, Microsoft and IBM had cooperatively been developing OS/2 as a successor to DOS. OS/2 would take full advantage of the aforementioned protected mode of the Intel 80286 processor and up to 16\u00a0MB of memory. OS/2 1.0, released in 1987, supported swapping and multitasking and allowed running of MS-DOS executables.\nIBM licensed Windows' GUI for OS/2 as Presentation Manager, and the two companies stated that it and Windows 2.0 would be almost identical. By 1987 \"Computerworld\" said that Microsoft's Bill Gates \"has pushed [Windows] almost fanatically for years\". In an interview that year with Gates, Ed Esber of Ashton-Tate, and Jim Manzi of Lotus Development, Gates said that Microsoft would release Windows applications first with \"very cheap upgrades\" to OS/2 versions, while the others said that their companies would release for OS/2 first. By then Microsoft gave more support to Windows software developers than those for DOS, providing marketing and new product release information. Presentation Manager was not available with OS/2 until version 1.1, released in 1988. Its API was incompatible with Windows. Version 1.2, released in 1989, introduced a new file system, HPFS, to replace the FAT file system.\nBy the early 1990s, conflicts developed in the Microsoft/IBM relationship. They cooperated with each other in developing their PC operating systems and had access to each other's code. Microsoft wanted to further develop Windows, while IBM desired for future work to be based on OS/2. In an attempt to resolve this tension, IBM and Microsoft agreed that IBM would develop OS/2 2.0, to replace OS/2 1.3 and Windows 3.0, while Microsoft would develop the next version, OS/2 3.0.\nThis agreement soon fell apart however, and the Microsoft/IBM relationship was terminated. IBM continued to develop OS/2, while Microsoft changed the name of its (as yet unreleased) OS/2 3.0 to Windows NT. Both retained the rights to use OS/2 and Windows technology developed up to the termination of the agreement; Windows NT, however, was to be written anew, mostly independently (see below).\nAfter an interim 1.3 version to fix up many remaining problems with the 1.x series, IBM released OS/2 version 2.0 in 1992. This was a major improvement: it featured a new, object-oriented GUI, the Workplace Shell (WPS), that included a desktop and was considered by many to be OS/2's best feature. Microsoft would later imitate much of it in Windows 95. Version 2.0 also provided a full 32-bit API, offered smooth multitasking and could take advantage of the 4\u00a0gigabytes of address space provided by the Intel 80386. Still, much of the system had 16-bit code internally which required, among other things, device drivers to be 16-bit code as well. This was one of the reasons for the chronic shortage of OS/2 drivers for the latest devices. Version 2.0 could also run DOS and Windows 3.0 programs, since IBM had retained the right to use the DOS and Windows code as a result of the breakup.\nMicrosoft Windows version 2.0 (2.01 and 2.03 internally) came out on December 9, 1987, and proved slightly more popular than its predecessor. Much of the popularity for Windows 2.0 came by way of its inclusion as a \"run-time version\" with Microsoft's new graphical applications, Excel and Word for Windows. They could be run from MS-DOS, executing Windows for the duration of their activity, and closing down Windows upon exit.\nMicrosoft Windows received a major boost around this time when Aldus PageMaker appeared in a Windows version, having previously run only on Macintosh. Some computer historians date this, the first appearance of a significant \"and\" non-Microsoft application for Windows, as the start of the success of Windows.\nLike prior versions of Windows, version 2.0 could use the real-mode memory model, which confined it to a maximum of 1 megabyte of memory. In such a configuration, it could run under another multitasker like DESQview, which used the 286 protected mode. It was also the first version to support the High Memory Area when running on an Intel 80286 compatible processor. This edition was renamed Windows/286 with the release of Windows 2.1.\nA separate Windows/386 edition had a protected mode kernel, which required an 80386 compatible processor, with LIM-standard EMS emulation and VxD drivers in the kernel. All Windows and DOS-based applications at the time were real mode, and Windows/386 could run them over the protected mode kernel by using the virtual 8086 mode, which was new with the 80386 processor.\nVersion 2.1 came out on May 27, 1988, followed by version 2.11 on March 13, 1989; they included a few minor changes.\nIn Apple Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., version 2.03, and later 3.0, faced challenges from Apple over its overlapping windows and other features Apple charged mimicked the ostensibly copyrighted \"look and feel\" of its operating system and \"embodie[d] and generated a copy of the Macintosh\" in its OS. Judge William Schwarzer dropped all but 10 of Apple's 189 claims of copyright infringement, and ruled that most of the remaining 10 were over uncopyrightable ideas.\nOn December 31, 2001, Microsoft declared Windows 2.x obsolete and stopped providing support and updates for the system.\nWindows 3.0.\nWindows 3.0, released in May 1990, improved capabilities given to native applications. It also allowed users to better multitask older MS-DOS based software compared to Windows/386, thanks to the introduction of virtual memory.\nWindows 3.0's user interface finally resembled a serious competitor to the user interface of the Macintosh computer. PCs had improved graphics by this time, due to VGA video cards, and the protected/enhanced mode allowed Windows applications to use more memory in a more painless manner than their DOS counterparts could. Windows 3.0 could run in real, standard, or 386 enhanced modes, and was compatible with any Intel processor from the 8086/8088 up to the 80286 and 80386. This was the first version to run Windows programs in protected mode, although the 386 enhanced mode kernel was an enhanced version of the protected mode kernel in Windows/386.\nWindows 3.0 received two updates. A few months after introduction, Windows 3.0a was released as a maintenance release, resolving bugs and improving stability. A \"multimedia\" version, Windows 3.0 with Multimedia Extensions 1.0, was released in October 1991. This was bundled with \"multimedia upgrade kits\", comprising a CD-ROM drive and a sound card, such as the Creative Labs Sound Blaster Pro. This version was the precursor to the multimedia features available in Windows 3.1 (first released in April 1992) and later, and was part of Microsoft's specification for the Multimedia PC.\nThe features listed above and growing market support from application software developers made Windows 3.0 wildly successful, selling around 10 million copies in the two years before the release of version 3.1. Windows 3.0 became a major source of income for Microsoft, and led the company to revise some of its earlier plans. Support was discontinued on December 31, 2001.\nWindows 3.1.\nIn response to the impending release of OS/2 2.0, Microsoft developed Windows 3.1 (first released in April 1992), which included several improvements to Windows 3.0, such as display of TrueType scalable fonts (developed jointly with Apple), improved disk performance in 386 Enhanced Mode, multimedia support, and bugfixes. It also removed Real Mode, and only ran on an 80286 or better processor. Later Microsoft also released Windows 3.11, a touch-up to Windows 3.1 which included all of the patches and updates that followed the release of Windows 3.1 in 1992.\nIn 1992 and 1993, Microsoft released Windows for Workgroups (WfW), which was available both as an add-on for existing Windows 3.1 installations and in a version that included the base Windows environment and the networking extensions all in one package. Windows for Workgroups included improved network drivers and protocol stacks, and support for peer-to-peer networking. There were two versions of Windows for Workgroups \u2013 3.1 and 3.11. Unlike prior versions, Windows for Workgroups 3.11 ran in 386 Enhanced Mode only, and needed at least an 80386SX processor. One optional download for WfW was the \"Wolverine\" TCP/IP protocol stack, which allowed for easy access to the Internet through corporate networks.\nAll these versions continued version 3.0's impressive sales pace. Even though the 3.1x series still lacked most of the important features of OS/2, such as long file names, a desktop, or protection of the system against misbehaving applications, Microsoft quickly took over the OS and GUI markets for the IBM PC. The Windows API became the de facto standard for consumer software.\nOn December 31, 2001, Microsoft declared Windows 3.1 obsolete and stopped providing support and updates for the system. However, OEM licensing for Windows for Workgroups 3.11 on embedded systems continued to be available until November 1, 2008.\nWindows NT 3.x.\nMeanwhile, Microsoft continued to develop Windows NT. The main architect of the system was Dave Cutler, one of the chief architects of VAX/VMS at Digital Equipment Corporation. Microsoft hired him in October 1988 to create a successor to OS/2, but Cutler created a completely new system instead. Cutler had been developing a follow-on to VMS at DEC called MICA, and when DEC dropped the project he brought the expertise and around 20 engineers with him to Microsoft.\nWindows NT Workstation (Microsoft marketing wanted Windows NT to appear to be a continuation of Windows 3.1) arrived in Beta form to developers at the July 1992 Professional Developers Conference in San Francisco. Microsoft announced at the conference its intentions to develop a successor to both Windows NT and Windows 3.1's replacement (Windows 95, codenamed Chicago), which would unify the two into one operating system. This successor was codenamed Cairo. In hindsight, Cairo was a much more difficult project than Microsoft had anticipated and, as a result, NT and Chicago would not be unified until Windows XP\u2014albeit Windows 2000, oriented to business, had already unified most of the system's bolts and gears, it was XP that was sold to home consumers like Windows 95 and came to be viewed as the final unified OS. Parts of Cairo have still not made it into Windows as of 2025[ [update]]: most notably, the WinFS file system, which was the much touted Object File System of Cairo. Microsoft announced in 2006 that they would not make a separate release of WinFS for Windows XP and Windows Vista and would gradually incorporate the technologies developed for WinFS in other products and technologies, notably Microsoft SQL Server.\nDriver support was lacking due to the increased programming difficulty in dealing with NT's superior hardware abstraction model. This problem plagued the NT line all the way through Windows 2000. Programmers complained that it was too hard to write drivers for NT, and hardware developers were not going to go through the trouble of developing drivers for a small segment of the market. Additionally, although allowing for good performance and fuller exploitation of system resources, it was also resource-intensive on limited hardware, and thus was only suitable for larger, more expensive machines.\nHowever, these same features made Windows NT perfect for the LAN server market (which in 1993 was experiencing a rapid boom, as office networking was becoming common). NT also had advanced network connectivity options and NTFS, an efficient file system. Windows NT version 3.51 was Microsoft's entry into this field, and took away market share from Novell (the dominant player) in the following years.\nOne of Microsoft's biggest advances initially developed for Windows NT was a new 32-bit API, to replace the legacy 16-bit Windows API. This API was called Win32, and from then on Microsoft referred to the older 16-bit API as Win16. The Win32 API had three levels of implementation: the complete one for Windows NT, a subset for Chicago (originally called Win32c) missing features primarily of interest to enterprise customers (at the time) such as security and Unicode support, and a more limited subset called Win32s which could be used on Windows 3.1 systems. Thus Microsoft sought to ensure some degree of compatibility between the Chicago design and Windows NT, even though the two systems had radically different internal architectures.\nWindows NT was the first Windows operating system based on a hybrid kernel. The hybrid kernel was designed as a modified microkernel, influenced by the Mach microkernel developed by Richard Rashid at Carnegie Mellon University, but without meeting all of the criteria of a pure microkernel.\nAs released, Windows NT 3.x went through three versions (3.1, 3.5, and 3.51), changes were primarily internal and reflected back end changes. The 3.5 release added support for new types of hardware and improved performance and data reliability; the 3.51 release was primarily to update the Win32 APIs to be compatible with software being written for the Win32c APIs in what became Windows 95. Support for Windows NT 3.51 ended in 2001 and 2002 for the Workstation and Server editions, respectively.\nWindows 95.\nAfter Windows 3.11, Microsoft began to develop a new consumer-oriented version of the operating system codenamed Chicago. Chicago was designed to have support for 32-bit preemptive multitasking like OS/2 and Windows NT, although a 16-bit kernel would remain for the sake of backward compatibility. The Win32 API first introduced with Windows NT was adopted as the standard 32-bit programming interface, with Win16 compatibility being preserved through a technique known as \"thunking\". A new object-oriented GUI was not originally planned as part of the release, although elements of the Cairo user interface were borrowed and added as other aspects of the release (notably Plug and Play) slipped.\nMicrosoft did not change all of the Windows code to 32-bit; parts of it remained 16-bit (albeit not directly using real mode) for reasons of compatibility, performance, and development time. Additionally it was necessary to carry over design decisions from earlier versions of Windows for reasons of backwards compatibility, even if these design decisions no longer matched a more modern computing environment. These factors eventually began to impact the operating system's efficiency and stability.\nMicrosoft marketing adopted Windows 95 as the product name for Chicago when it was released on August 24, 1995. Microsoft had a double gain from its release: first, it made it impossible for consumers to run Windows 95 on a cheaper, non-Microsoft DOS, secondly, although traces of DOS were never completely removed from the system and MS DOS 7 would be loaded briefly as a part of the booting process, Windows 95 applications ran solely in 386 enhanced mode, with a flat 32-bit address space and virtual memory. These features make it possible for Win32 applications to address up to 2 gigabytes of virtual RAM (with another 2\u00a0GB reserved for the operating system), and in theory prevented them from inadvertently corrupting the memory space of other Win32 applications. In this respect the functionality of Windows 95 moved closer to Windows NT, although Windows 95/98/Me did not support more than 512 megabytes of physical RAM without obscure system tweaks. Three years after its introduction, Windows 95 was succeeded by Windows 98.\nIBM continued to market OS/2, producing later versions in OS/2 3.0 and 4.0 (also called Warp). Responding to complaints about OS/2 2.0's high demands on computer hardware, version 3.0 was significantly optimized both for speed and size. Before Windows 95 was released, OS/2 Warp 3.0 was even shipped pre-installed with several large German hardware vendor chains. However, with the release of Windows 95, OS/2 began to lose market share.\nIt is probably impossible to choose one specific reason why OS/2 failed to gain much market share. While OS/2 continued to run Windows 3.1 applications, it lacked support for anything but the Win32s subset of Win32 API (see above). Unlike with Windows 3.1, IBM did not have access to the source code for Windows 95 and was unwilling to commit the time and resources to emulate the moving target of the Win32 API. IBM later introduced OS/2 into the United States v. Microsoft case, blaming unfair marketing tactics on Microsoft's part.\nMicrosoft went on to release five different versions of Windows 95:\nOSR2, OSR2.1, and OSR2.5 were not released to the general public, rather, they were available only to OEMs that would preload the OS onto computers. Some companies sold new hard drives with OSR2 preinstalled (officially justifying this as needed due to the hard drive's capacity).\nThe first Microsoft Plus! add-on pack was sold for Windows 95. Microsoft ended extended support for Windows 95 on December 31, 2001.\nWindows NT 4.0.\nMicrosoft released the successor to NT 3.51, Windows NT 4.0, on August 24, 1996, one year after the release of Windows 95. It was Microsoft's primary business-oriented operating system until the introduction of Windows 2000. Major new features included the new Explorer shell from Windows 95, scalability and feature improvements to the core architecture, kernel, USER32, COM and MSRPC.\nWindows NT 4.0 came in five versions:\nMicrosoft ended mainstream support for Windows NT 4.0 Workstation on June 30, 2002, and ended extended support on June 30, 2004, while Windows NT 4.0 Server mainstream support ended on December 31, 2002, and extended support ended on December 31, 2004. Both editions were succeeded by Windows 2000 Professional and the Windows 2000 Server Family, respectively.\nMicrosoft ended mainstream support for Windows NT 4.0 Embedded on June 30, 2003, and ended extended support on July 11, 2006. This edition was succeeded by Windows XP Embedded.\nWindows 98.\nOn June 25, 1998, Microsoft released Windows 98 (code-named Memphis), three years after the release of Windows 95, two years after the release of Windows NT 4.0, and 21 months before the release of Windows 2000. It included new hardware drivers and the FAT32 file system which supports disk partitions that are larger than 2\u00a0GB (first introduced in Windows 95 OSR2). USB support in Windows 98 is marketed as a vast improvement over Windows 95. The release continued the controversial inclusion of the Internet Explorer browser with the operating system that started with Windows 95 OEM Service Release 1. The action eventually led to the filing of the United States v. Microsoft case, dealing with the question of whether Microsoft was introducing unfair practices into the market in an effort to eliminate competition from other companies such as Netscape.\nIn 1999, Microsoft released Windows 98\u00a0Second Edition, an interim release. One of the more notable new features was the addition of Internet Connection Sharing, a form of network address translation, allowing several machines on a LAN (Local Area Network) to share a single Internet connection. Hardware support through device drivers was increased and this version shipped with Internet Explorer 5. Many minor problems that existed in the first edition were fixed making it, according to many, the most stable release of the Windows 9x family.\nMainstream support for Windows 98 and 98 SE ended on June 30, 2002. Extended support ended on July 11, 2006.\nWindows 2000.\nMicrosoft released Windows 2000 on February 17, 2000, as the successor to Windows NT 4.0, 17 months after the release of Windows 98. It has the version number Windows NT 5.0, and it was Microsoft's business-oriented operating system starting with the official release on February 17, 2000, until 2001 when it was succeeded by Windows XP. \nWindows 2000 has had four official service packs. It was successfully deployed both on the server and the workstation markets. Amongst Windows 2000's most significant new features was Active Directory, a near-complete replacement of the NT 4.0 Windows Server domain model, which built on industry-standard technologies like DNS, LDAP, and Kerberos to connect machines to one another. Terminal Services, previously only available as a separate edition of NT 4, was expanded to all server versions. Support for the New Technology File System (NTFS) was added for the first time to a Windows version targeted to consumers, removing the 4 GiB file size limitation. \nA number of features from Windows 98 were incorporated also, such as an improved Device Manager, Windows Media Player, and a revised DirectX that made it possible for the first time for many modern games to work on the NT kernel. Windows 2000 is also the last NT-kernel Windows operating system to lack product activation.\nWhile Windows 2000 upgrades were available for Windows 95 and Windows 98, it was not intended for home users.\nWindows 2000 was available in four editions:\nMicrosoft ended support for both Windows 2000 and Windows XP Service Pack 2 on July 13, 2010.\nWindows Me.\nOn September 14, 2000, Microsoft released a successor to Windows 98 called Windows Me, short for \"Millennium Edition\". It was the last DOS-based operating system from Microsoft. Windows Me introduced a new multimedia-editing application called Windows Movie Maker, came standard with Internet Explorer 5.5 and Windows Media Player 7, and debuted the first version of System Restore \u2013 a recovery utility that enables the operating system to revert system files back to a prior date and time. System Restore was a notable feature that would continue to thrive in all later versions of Windows.\nWindows Me was conceived as a quick one-year project that served as a stopgap release between Windows 98 and Windows XP. Many of the new features were available from the Windows Update site as updates for older Windows versions (\"System Restore\" and \"Windows Movie Maker\" were exceptions). Windows Me was criticized for stability issues, as well as for lacking real mode DOS support, to the point of being referred to as the \"Mistake Edition\". Windows Me was the last operating system to be based on the Windows 9x (monolithic) kernel and MS-DOS, with its successor Windows XP being based on Microsoft's Windows NT kernel instead.\nWindows XP, Server 2003 series and Fundamentals for Legacy PCs.\nOn October 25, 2001, Microsoft released Windows XP (codenamed \"Whistler\"). The merging of the Windows NT/2000 and Windows 95/98/Me lines was finally achieved with Windows XP. Windows XP uses the Windows NT 5.1 kernel, marking the entrance of the Windows NT core to the consumer market, to replace the aging Windows 9x branch. The initial release was met with considerable criticism, particularly in the area of security, leading to the release of three major Service Packs. Windows XP SP1 was released in September 2002, SP2 was released in August 2004 and SP3 was released in April 2008. Service Pack 2 provided significant improvements and encouraged widespread adoption of XP among both home and business users. Windows XP was one of Microsoft's longest-running flagship operating systems, beginning with the public release on October 25, 2001, for at least 5 years, and ending on January 30, 2007, when it was succeeded by Windows Vista.\nWindows XP is available in a number of versions:\nWindows Server 2003.\nOn April 25, 2003, Microsoft launched Windows Server 2003, a notable update to Windows 2000 Server encompassing many new security features, a new \"Manage Your Server\" wizard that simplifies configuring a machine for specific roles, and improved performance. It is based on the Windows NT 5.2 kernel. A few services not essential for server environments are disabled by default for stability reasons, most noticeable are the \"Windows Audio\" and \"Themes\" services; users have to enable them manually to get sound or the \"Luna\" look as per Windows XP. The hardware acceleration for display is also turned off by default, users have to turn the acceleration level up themselves if they trust the display card driver.\nIn March 2006, Microsoft released Windows Server 2003 R2, which is actually Windows Server 2003 with SP1 (Service Pack 1), together with an add-on package.\nAmong the new features are a number of management features for branch offices, file serving, printing and company-wide identity integration.\nWindows Server 2003 is available in six editions:\nWindows Server 2003 R2, an update of Windows Server 2003. It is distributed on two CDs, with one CD being the Windows Server 2003 SP1 CD. The other CD adds many optionally installable features for Windows Server 2003. The R2 update was released for all x86 and x64 versions, except Windows Server 2003 R2 Enterprise Edition, which was not released for Itanium.\nWindows XP x64 and Server 2003 x64 Editions.\nOn April 25, 2005, Microsoft released Windows XP Professional x64 Edition and Windows Server 2003, x64 Editions in Standard, Enterprise and Datacenter SKUs. Windows XP Professional x64 Edition is an edition of Windows XP for x86-64 personal computers. It is designed to use the expanded 64-bit memory address space provided by the x86\u201364 architecture.\nWindows XP Professional x64 Edition is based on the Windows Server 2003 codebase, with the server features removed and client features added. Both \"Windows Server 2003 x64\" and Windows XP Professional x64 Edition use identical kernels.\nWindows XP \"Professional\" \"x64 Edition\" is not to be confused with Windows XP \"64-bit Edition\", as the latter was designed for Intel Itanium processors. During the initial development phases, Windows XP Professional x64 Edition was named \"Windows XP 64-Bit Edition for 64-Bit Extended Systems\".\nWindows Fundamentals for Legacy PCs.\nIn July 2006, Microsoft released a thin-client version of Windows XP Service Pack 2, called Windows Fundamentals for Legacy PCs (WinFLP). It is only available to Software Assurance customers. The aim of WinFLP is to give companies a viable upgrade option for older PCs that are running Windows 95, 98, and Me that will be supported with patches and updates for the next several years. Most user applications will typically be run on a remote machine using Terminal Services or Citrix.\nWhile being visually the same as Windows XP, it has some differences. For example, if the screen has been set to 16 bit colors, the Windows 2000 recycle bin icon and some XP 16-bit icons will show. Paint and some games like Solitaire aren't present either.\nWindows Home Server 2007.\nWindows Home Server (code-named Q, Quattro) is a server product based on Windows Server 2003, designed for consumer use. The system was announced on January 7, 2007, by Bill Gates. Windows Home Server can be configured and monitored using a console program that can be installed on a client PC. Such features as Media Sharing, local and remote drive backup and file duplication are all listed as features. The release of Windows Home Server Power Pack 3 added support for Windows 7 to Windows Home Server.\nWindows Vista and Server 2008.\nWindows Vista was released on November 30, 2006, to business customers\u2014consumer versions followed on January 30, 2007. Windows Vista intended to have enhanced security by introducing a new restricted user mode called User Account Control, replacing the \"administrator-by-default\" philosophy of Windows XP. Vista was the target of much criticism and negative press, and in general was not well regarded, this was seen as leading to the relatively swift release of Windows 7.\nOne major difference between Vista and earlier versions of Windows, Windows 95 and later, was that the original start button was replaced with the Windows icon in a circle (called the Start Orb). Vista also featured new graphics features, the Windows Aero GUI, new applications (such as Windows Calendar, Windows DVD Maker and some new games including Chess, Mahjong, and Purble Place), Internet Explorer 7, Windows Media Player 11, and a large number of underlying architectural changes. Windows Vista had the version number NT 6.0. During its lifetime, Windows Vista had two service packs.\nWindows Vista shipped in six editions:\nAll editions (except Starter edition) were available in both 32-bit and 64-bit versions. The biggest advantage of the 64-bit version was breaking the 4\u00a0gigabyte memory barrier, which 32-bit computers cannot fully access.\nWindows Server 2008.\nWindows Server 2008, released on February 27, 2008, was originally known as Windows Server Codename \"Longhorn\". Windows Server 2008 built on the technological and security advances first introduced with Windows Vista, and was significantly more modular than its predecessor, Windows Server 2003.\nWindows Server 2008 shipped in ten editions:\nWindows 7 and Server 2008 R2.\nWindows 7 was released to manufacturing on July 22, 2009, and reached general retail availability on October 22, 2009. Since its release, Windows 7 had one service pack.\nSome features of Windows 7 were faster booting, Device Stage, Windows PowerShell, less obtrusive User Account Control, multi-touch, and improved window management. The interface was renewed with a bigger taskbar and some improvements in the searching system and the Start menu. Features included with Windows Vista and not in Windows 7 include the sidebar (although gadgets remain) and several programs that were removed in favor of downloading their Windows Live counterparts. Windows 7 met with positive reviews, which said the OS was faster and easier to use than Windows Vista.\nWindows 7 shipped in six editions:\nIn some countries in the European Union, there were other editions that lacked some features such as Windows Media Player, Windows Media Center and Internet Explorer\u2014these editions were called names such as \"Windows 7 N.\"\nMicrosoft focused on selling Windows 7 Home Premium and Professional. All editions, except the Starter edition, were available in both 32-bit and 64-bit versions.\nUnlike the corresponding Vista editions, the Professional and Enterprise editions were supersets of the Home Premium edition.\nAt the Professional Developers Conference (PDC) 2008, Microsoft also announced Windows Server 2008 R2, as the server variant of Windows 7. Windows Server 2008 R2 shipped in 64-bit versions (x64 and Itanium) only.\nWindows Thin PC.\nIn 2010, Microsoft released Windows Thin PC or WinTPC, which was a feature-and size-reduced locked-down version of Windows 7 expressly designed to turn older PCs into thin clients. WinTPC was available for software assurance customers and relied on cloud computing in a business network. Wireless operation is supported since WinTPC has full wireless stack integration, but wireless operation may not be as good as the operation on a wired connection.\nWindows Home Server 2011.\nWindows Home Server 2011 code named 'Vail' was released on April 6, 2011. Windows Home Server 2011 is built on the Windows Server 2008 R2 code base and removed the Drive Extender drive pooling technology in the original Windows Home Server release. Windows Home Server 2011 is considered a \"major release\". Its predecessor was built on Windows Server 2003. WHS 2011 only supports x86-64 hardware.\nMicrosoft decided to discontinue Windows Home Server 2011 on July 5, 2012, while including its features into Windows Server 2012 Essentials. Windows Home Server 2011 was supported until April 12, 2016.\nWindows 8 and Server 2012.\nOn June 1, 2011, Microsoft previewed Windows 8 at both Computex Taipei and the D9: All Things Digital conference in California. The first public preview of Windows Server 2012 was shown by Microsoft at the 2011 Microsoft Worldwide Partner Conference. Windows 8 Release Preview and Windows Server 2012 Release Candidate were both released on May 31, 2012. Product development on Windows 8 was completed on August 1, 2012, and it was released to manufacturing the same day. Windows Server 2012 went on sale to the public on September 4, 2012. Windows 8 went on sale to the public on October 26, 2012. One edition, Windows RT, runs on some system-on-a-chip devices with mobile 32-bit ARM (ARMv7) processors. Windows 8 features a redesigned user interface, designed to make it easier for touchscreen users to use Windows. The interface introduced an updated Start menu known as the Start screen, and a new full-screen application platform. The desktop interface is also present for running windowed applications, although Windows RT will not run any desktop applications not included in the system. On the Building Windows 8 blog, it was announced that a computer running Windows 8 can boot up much faster than Windows 7. New features also include USB 3.0 support, the Windows Store, the ability to run from USB drives with Windows To Go, and others.\nWindows 8 is available in the following editions:\nMicrosoft ended support for Windows 8 on January 12, 2016.\nWindows 8.1.\nWindows 8.1 and Windows Server 2012 R2 were released on October 17, 2013. Windows 8.1 is available as an update in the Windows Store for Windows 8 users only and also available to download for clean installation. The update adds new options for resizing the live tiles on the Start screen. Windows 8 was given the kernel number NT 6.2, with its successor 8.1 receiving the kernel number 6.3. Neither had any service packs, although many consider Windows 8.1 to be a service pack for Windows 8. However, Windows 8.1 received two main updates in 2014. Both versions received some criticism due to the removal of the Start menu and some difficulties to perform tasks and commands.\nWindows 8.1 is available in the same editions as its predecessor for users not running Windows 8.\nMicrosoft ended support on January 10, 2023.\nWindows 10 and corresponding Server versions.\nWindows 10 was unveiled on September 30, 2014, as the successor for Windows 8, and was released on July 29, 2015. It was distributed without charge to Windows 7 and 8.1 users for one year after release. A number of new features like Cortana, the Microsoft Edge web browser, the ability to view Windows Store apps as a window instead of fullscreen, the return of the Start menu, virtual desktops, revamped core apps, Continuum, and a unified Settings app were all features debuted in Windows 10. Like its successor, the operating system was announced as a service OS that would receive constant performance and stability updates. Unlike Windows 8, Windows 10 received mostly positive reviews, praising improvements of stability and practicality than its predecessor, however, it received some criticism due to mandatory update installation, privacy concerns and advertising-supported software tactics.\nAlthough Microsoft claimed Windows 10 would be the last Windows version, eventually a new major release, Windows 11, was announced in 2021. That made Windows 10 last longer as Microsoft's flagship operating system than any other version of Windows, beginning with the public release on July 29, 2015, for six years, and ending on October 5, 2021, when Windows 11 was released. Windows 10 had received thirteen main updates.\nWindows Server 2016.\nWindows Server 2016 is a release of the Microsoft Windows Server operating system that was unveiled on September 30, 2014. Windows Server 2016 was officially released at Microsoft's https:// Conference, September 26\u201330, 2016. It is based on the Windows 10 Anniversary Update codebase.\nWindows Server 2019.\nWindows Server 2019 is a release of the Microsoft Windows Server operating system that was announced on March 20, 2018. The first Windows Insider preview version was released on the same day. It was released for general availability on October 2, 2018. Windows Server 2019 is based on the Windows 10 October 2018 Update codebase.\nOn October 6, 2018, distribution of Windows version 1809 (build 17763) was paused while Microsoft investigated an issue with user data being deleted during an in-place upgrade. It affected systems where a user profile folder (e.g. Documents, Music or Pictures) had been moved to another location, but data was left in the original location. As Windows Server 2019 is based on the Windows version 1809 codebase, it too was removed from distribution at the time, but was re-released on November 13, 2018. The software product life cycle for Server 2019 was reset in accordance with the new release date.\nWindows Server 2022.\nWindows Server 2022 was released on August 18, 2021. This is the first NT server version which does not share the build number with any of its client version counterpart, although its codename is 21H2, similar to the Windows 10 November 2021 Update.\nWindows 11 and corresponding Server versions.\nWindows 11 is the latest release of Windows NT, and the successor to Windows 10. It was unveiled on June 24, 2021, and was released on October 5, serving as a free upgrade to compatible Windows 10 devices. The system incorporates a renewed interface called \"Mica\", which includes translucent backgrounds, rounded edges and color combinations. The taskbar's icons are center aligned by default, while the Start menu replaces the \"Live Tiles\" with pinned apps and recommended apps and files. The MSN widget panel, the Microsoft Store, and the file browser, among other applications, have also been redesigned. However, some features and programs such as Cortana, Internet Explorer (replaced by Microsoft Edge as the default web browser) and Paint 3D were removed. Apps like 3D Viewer, Paint 3D, Skype and OneNote for Windows 10 can be downloaded from the Microsoft Store. Beginning in 2021, Windows 11 included compatibility with Android applications, however, Microsoft has announced support for Android apps will end in March, 2025; the Amazon Appstore is included in Windows Subsystem for Android. Windows 11 received a positive reception from critics. While it was praised for its redesigned interface, and increased security and productivity, it was criticized for its high system requirements (which includes an installed TPM 2.0 chip, enabling the Secure Boot protocol, and UEFI firmware) and various UI changes and regressions (such as requiring a Microsoft account for first-time setup, preventing users from changing default browsers, and inconsistent dark theme) compared to Windows 10.\nWindows Server 2025.\nWindows Server 2025 was released on November 1, 2024. It is graphically based on Windows 11, version 24H2 and uses features like Hotpatching, among others.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13695", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13695", "title": "History of the GUI", "text": ""}
{"id": "13696", "revid": "30552921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13696", "title": "Helsinki", "text": "Capital and most populous city of Finland\nHelsinki () is the capital and most populous city in Finland. It is on the shore of the Gulf of Finland and is the seat of southern Finland's Uusimaa region. About people live in the municipality, with \u00a0million in the capital region and \u00a0million in the metropolitan area. As the most populous urban area in Finland, it is the country's most significant centre for politics, education, finance, culture, and research. Helsinki is north of Tallinn, Estonia, east of Stockholm, Sweden, and west of Saint Petersburg, Russia.\nTogether with the cities of Espoo, Vantaa and Kauniainen\u2014and surrounding commuter towns, including the neighbouring municipality of Sipoo to the east\u2014Helsinki forms a metropolitan area. This area is often considered Finland's only metropolis and is the world's northernmost metropolitan area with over one million inhabitants. Additionally, it is the northernmost capital of an EU member state. Helsinki is the third-largest municipality in the Nordic countries, after Stockholm and Oslo. Its urban area is the third-largest in the Nordic countries, after Stockholm and Copenhagen. Helsinki Airport, in the neighbouring city of Vantaa, serves the city with frequent flights to numerous destinations in Europe, North America, and Asia.\nHelsinki is a bilingual municipality with Finnish and Swedish as its official languages. The population consists of Finnish speakers, Swedish speakers, and speakers of other languages.\nHelsinki has hosted the 1952 Summer Olympics, the first CSCE/OSCE Summit in 1975, the first World Athletics Championships in 1983, the 52nd Eurovision Song Contest in 2007 and it was the 2012 World Design Capital. The city is recognized as a \"Design City\" in 2014 by UNESCO's Creative Cities Network.\nHelsinki has one of the highest standards of urban living in the world. In 2011, the British magazine \"Monocle\" ranked Helsinki as the world's most liveable city in its livable cities index. In the Economist Intelligence Unit's 2016 livability survey, Helsinki ranked ninth out of 140 cities. In July 2021, the American magazine \"Time\" named Helsinki one of the world's greatest places, a city that \"can grow into a burgeoning cultural nest in the future\" and is already known as an environmental pioneer. In an international \"Cities of Choice\" survey conducted in 2021 by the Boston Consulting Group and the BCG Henderson Institute, Helsinki was ranked the third-best city in the world to live in, with London and New York City coming in first and second. In the \"Cond\u00e9 Nast Traveler\" magazine's 2023 Readers' Choice Awards, Helsinki was ranked the 4th-friendliest city in Europe. Helsinki, along with Rovaniemi in Lapland, is also one of Finland's most important tourist cities. Due to the large number of sea passengers, Helsinki is classified as a major port city, and in 2017 it was rated the world's busiest passenger port.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the name is uncertain. According to a theory put forward in the 1630s, at the time of Swedish colonisation of the Finnish coast, colonists from H\u00e4lsingland in central Sweden arrived at what is now the Vantaa River and called it ('Helsinge River'), giving rise to the names of the village and church of Helsinge in the 1300s. This theory is questionable, as dialect research suggests that the settlers came from Uppland and the surrounding areas. Others have suggested that the name derives from the Swedish word , an archaic form of the word ('neck'), which refers to the narrowest part of a river, the rapids. Other Scandinavian towns in similar geographical locations were given similar names at the time, such as Helsing\u00f8r in Denmark and Helsingborg in Sweden.\nWhen a town was founded in the village of Forsby (later ) in 1548, it was called , 'Helsinge rapids'. The name refers to the Vanhankaupunginkoski rapids at the mouth of the river. The town was commonly known as or , from which the modern Finnish name is derived.\nOfficial Finnish government documents and Finnish language newspapers have used the name \"Helsinki\" since 1819, when the Senate of Finland moved to the city from Turku, the former capital of Finland. Decrees issued in Helsinki were dated with Helsinki as the place of issue. This is how the form Helsinki came to be used in written Finnish. When Finland became the Grand Duchy of Finland, an autonomous state under the rule of the Russian Empire, Helsinki was known as () in Russian, because the main and official language of the Grand Duchy of Finland was Swedish.\nIn Helsinki slang, the city is called (from the Swedish word , meaning 'city'). Abbreviated form is equally common, but its use is associated with people of rural origin (\"junantuomat\", lit. \"brought by a train\") and frowned upon by locals. is the Northern Sami name for Helsinki.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nAfter the end of the Ice Age and the retreat of the ice sheet, the first settlers arrived in the Helsinki area around 5000 BC. Their presence has been documented by archaeologists in Vantaa, Pit\u00e4j\u00e4nm\u00e4ki and Kaarela. Permanent settlements did not appear until the beginning of the 1st millennium AD, during the Iron Age, when the area was inhabited by the Tavastians. They used the area for fishing and hunting, but due to the lack of archaeological finds it is difficult to say how extensive their settlements were. Pollen analysis has shown that there were agricultural settlements in the area in the 10th century, and surviving historical records from the 14th century describe Tavastian settlements in the area.\nChristianity does not gain a significant foothold in Finland before the 11th century. After that, a number of crosses and other objects related to Christianity can be found in archaeological material. According to the traditional view, the Kingdom of Sweden made three crusades to Finland, thanks to which the region was incorporated into both Christianity and the Swedish Empire. Recent research has shown that these expeditions, to the extent that there were even three of them, were not the crusades that had been imagined. Later, the conquest of Finland was justified in terms of \"civilisation\" and \"christianisation\", and the myth of the Crusades was developed. It is more likely that it was a multidimensional combination of economic, cultural and political power ambitions.\nThe early settlements were raided by Vikings until 1008, and the Battle at Herdaler was a battle between the Norse Viking leader Olav Haraldsson (later King Olaf II of Norway, also known as Saint Olaf) and local Finns at Herdaler (now Ing\u00e5), not far from Helsinga, around 1007\u20131008. The Saga of Olaf Haraldson tells how Olav raided the coasts of Finland and was almost killed in battle. He ran away in fear and after that the Vikings did not raid the coasts of Finland.\nLater the area was settled by Christians from Sweden. They came mainly from the Swedish coastal regions of Norrland and H\u00e4lsingland, and their migration intensified around 1100. The Swedes permanently colonised the Helsinki region's coastline in the late 13th century, after the successful crusade to Finland that led to the defeat of the Tavastians.\nIn the Middle Ages, the Helsinki area was a landscape of small villages. Some of the old villages from the 1240s in the area of present-day Helsinki, such as Koskela and T\u00f6\u00f6l\u00f6, are now Helsinki districts, as are the rest of the 27 medieval villages. The area gradually became part of the Kingdom of Sweden and Christianity. Kuninkaantie, or the \"King's Road\", ran through the area and two interesting medieval buildings were built here: Vartiokyl\u00e4 hillfort in the 1380s and the Church of St. Lawrence in 1455. In the Middle Ages, several thousand people lived in Helsinki's keep.\nThere was a lot of trade across the Baltic Sea. The shipping route to the coast, and especially to Reval, meant that by the end of the Middle Ages the Helsinki region had become an important trading centre for wealthy peasants, priests and nobles in Finland, after Vyborg and Pohja. Furs, wood, tar, fish and animals were exported from Helsinki, and salt and grain were brought to the fortress. Helsinki was also the most important cattle-breeding area in Uusimaa. With the help of trade, Helsinki became one of the wealthiest cities in Finland and Uusimaa. Thanks to trade and travel, e.g. to Reval, people could speak several languages, at least helpfully. Depending on the situation, Finnish, Swedish, Latin or Low German could be heard in the Helsinki area.\nWritten chronicles from 1417 mention the village of Koskela near the rapids at the mouth of the River Vantaa, where Helsinki was to be founded.\nFounding of Helsinki.\nHelsinki was founded by King Gustav I of Sweden on 12 June 1550 as a trading town called Helsingfors to rival the Hanseatic city of Reval (now Tallinn) on the southern shore of the Gulf of Finland. To populate the new town at the mouth of the Vantaa River, the king ordered the bourgeoisie of Porvoo, Raseborg, Rauma and Ulvila to move there. The shallowness of the bay made it impossible to build a harbour, and the king allowed the settlers to leave the unfortunate location. In 1640, Count Per Brahe the Younger, together with some descendants of the original settlers, moved the centre of the city to the Vironniemi peninsula by the sea, today's Kruununhaka district, where the Senate Square and Helsinki Cathedral are located.\nDuring the second half of the 17th century, Helsinki, as a wooden city, suffered from regular fires, and by the beginning of the 18th century the population had fallen below 1,700. For a long time Helsinki was mainly a small administrative town for the governors of Nyland and Tavastehus County, but its importance began to grow in the 18th century when plans were made to build a more solid naval defence in front of the city. Little came of these plans, however, as Helsinki remained a small town plagued by poverty, war and disease. The plague of 1710 killed most of Helsinki's population. After the Russians captured Helsinki in May 1713 during the Great Northern War, the retreating Swedish administration set fire to parts of the city. Despite this, the city's population grew to 3,000 by the beginning of the 19th century. The construction of the naval fortress of Sveaborg (\"Viapori\" in Finnish, now also called \"Suomenlinna\") in the 18th century helped to improve Helsinki's status. However, it wasn't until Russia defeated Sweden in the Finnish War and annexed Finland as the autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland in 1809 that the city began to develop into a substantial city. The Russians besieged the Sveaborg fortress during the war, and about a quarter of the city was destroyed in a fire in 1808.\nEmperor Alexander I of Russia moved the capital of Finland from Turku to Helsinki on 8 April 1812 to reduce Swedish influence in Finland and bring the capital closer to St Petersburg. After the Great Fire of Turku in 1827, the Royal Academy of Turku, the only university in the country at the time, was also moved to Helsinki and eventually became the modern University of Helsinki. The move consolidated the city's new role and helped set it on a path of continuous growth. This transformation is most evident in the city centre, which was rebuilt in the neoclassical style to resemble St. Petersburg, largely according to a plan by the German-born architect C. L. Engel. As elsewhere, technological advances such as the railway and industrialisation were key factors in the city's growth.\nTwentieth century.\nBy the 1910s, Helsinki's population was already over 100,000, and despite the turbulence of Finnish history in the first half of the 20th century, Helsinki continued to grow steadily. This included the Finnish Civil War and the Winter War, both of which left their mark on the city. At the beginning of the 20th century, there were roughly equal numbers of Finnish and Swedish speakers in Helsinki; the majority of workers were Finnish-speaking. The local Helsinki slang (or \"stadin slangi\") developed among Finnish children and young people from the 1890s as a mixed Finnish-Swedish language, with influences from German and Russian, and from the 1950s the slang began to become more Finnish. A landmark event was the 1952 Olympic Games, which were held in Helsinki. Finland's rapid urbanisation in the 1970s, which occurred late compared to the rest of Europe, tripled the population of the metropolitan area, and the Helsinki Metro subway system was built and put into operation in 1982.\nGeography.\nKnown as the \"Daughter of the Baltic\" or the \"Pearl of the Baltic\", Helsinki is located at the tip of a peninsula and on 315 islands. The city centre is located on a southern peninsula, \"Helsinginniemi\" (\"Cape of Helsinki\"), which is rarely referred to by its actual name, Vironniemi (\"Cape of Estonia\"). Population density is comparatively high in certain parts of downtown Helsinki, reaching in the district of Kallio, overall Helsinki's population density is 3,147 per square kilometre. Outside the city centre, much of Helsinki consists of post-war suburbs separated by patches of forest. A narrow, long Helsinki Central Park, which stretches from the city centre to Helsinki's northern border, is an important recreational area for residents. The City of Helsinki has about 11,000 boat moorings and over of marine fishing waters adjacent to the capital region. About 60 species of fish are found in this area, and recreational fishing is popular.\nHelsinki's main islands include Seurasaari, Lauttasaari and Korkeasaari \u2013 the latter is home to Finland's largest zoo, Korkeasaari Zoo. The former military islands of Vallisaari and Isosaari are now open to the public, but Santahamina is still in military use. The most historic and remarkable island is the fortress of Suomenlinna (Sveaborg). The island of Pihlajasaari is a popular summer resort, comparable to Fire Island in New York City.\nThere are 60 nature reserves in Helsinki with a total area of . Of the total area, are water areas and are land areas. The city also has seven nature reserves in Espoo, Sipoo, Hanko and Ing\u00e5. The largest nature reserve is the Vanhankaupunginselk\u00e4, with an area of . The city's first nature reserve, Tiiraluoto of Lauttasaari, was established in 1948.\nHelsinki's official plant is the Norway maple and its official animal is the red squirrel.\nMetropolitan area.\nThe Helsinki capital region (, ) comprises four municipalities: Helsinki, Espoo, Vantaa, and Kauniainen. The Helsinki urban area is considered to be the only metropolis in Finland. It has a population of about million, and is the most densely populated area of Finland. The Capital Region spreads over a land area of and has a population density of 1,619 per km\u00b2. With over 20 percent of the country's population in just 0.2 percent of its surface area, the area's housing density is high by Finnish standards.\nThe Helsinki metropolitan area or the Greater Helsinki consists of the cities of the capital region and ten surrounding municipalities: Hyvink\u00e4\u00e4, J\u00e4rvenp\u00e4\u00e4, Kerava, Kirkkonummi, Nurmij\u00e4rvi, Sipoo, Tuusula, Pornainen, M\u00e4nts\u00e4l\u00e4 and Vihti. The Metropolitan Area covers and has a population of about million, or about a fourth of the total population of Finland. The metropolitan area has a high concentration of employment: approximately 750,000 jobs. Despite the intensity of land use, the region also has large recreational areas and green spaces. The Helsinki metropolitan area is the world's northernmost urban area with a population of over one million people, and the northernmost EU capital city.\nThe Helsinki urban area is an officially recognized urban area in Finland, defined by its population density. The area stretches throughout 11 municipalities, and is the largest such area in Finland, with a land area of and approximately 1.36 million inhabitants.\nClimate.\nHelsinki has a cold hemiboreal humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dfb\", Trewartha \"Dcbo\"). Due to the moderating influence of the Baltic Sea and the North Atlantic Current (see also Extratropical cyclone), winter temperatures are higher than the northern location would suggest, with an average of in January and February.\nWinters in Helsinki are significantly warmer than in the north of Finland, and the snow season in the capital is much shorter due to its location in the extreme south of Finland and the urban heat island effect. Temperatures below occur only a few times a year. However, due to the latitude, the days around the winter solstice are 5 hours and 48 minutes long, with the sun very low (at noon the sun is just over 6 degrees in the sky), and the cloudy weather at this time of year exacerbates the darkness. Conversely, Helsinki enjoys long days in summer, with 18 hours and 57 minutes of daylight around the summer solstice.\nThe average maximum temperature from June to August is around . Due to the sea effect, especially on hot summer days, daytime temperatures are slightly cooler and nighttime temperatures higher than further inland. The highest temperature recorded in the city was on 28 July 2019 at the Kaisaniemi weather station, breaking the previous record of set in July 1945 at the Ilmala weather station. The lowest temperature recorded in the city was on 10 January 1987, although an unofficial low of was recorded in December 1876. Helsinki Airport (in Vantaa, 17\u00a0km north of Helsinki city centre) recorded a maximum temperature of on 29 July 2010 and a minimum of on 9 January 1987. Precipitation comes from frontal passages and thunderstorms. Thunderstorms are most common in summer.\nNeighbourhoods and other subdivisions.\nHelsinki is divided into three major areas: Helsinki City Centre (, ), North Helsinki (, ) and East Helsinki (, ). Of these, Helsinki City Centre means the undefined core area of capital, as opposed to suburbs. The designations business center and city center usually refer to Kluuvi, Kamppi and Punavuori. Other subdivisional centers outside the downtown area include Malmi (), located in the northeastern part of city, and It\u00e4keskus (), in the eastern part of city.\nCityscape.\nNeoclassical and romantic nationalism trend.\nCarl Ludvig Engel, appointed to plan a new city centre on his own, designed several neoclassical buildings in Helsinki. The focal point of Engel's city plan was the Senate Square. It is surrounded by the Government Palace (to the east), the main building of Helsinki University (to the west), and (to the north) the large Helsinki Cathedral, which was finished in 1852, twelve years after Engel's death. Helsinki's epithet, \"The White City of the North\", derives from this construction era. Most of Helsinki's older buildings were built after the 1808 fire; before that time, the oldest surviving building in the center of Helsinki is the Sederholm House (1757) at the intersection of Senate Square and the Katariinankatu street. Suomenlinna also has buildings completed in the 18th century, including the Kuninkaanportti on the Kustaanmiekka Island (1753\u20131754). The oldest church in Helsinki is the \u00d6stersundom church, built in 1754.\nHelsinki is also home to numerous Art Nouveau-influenced (Jugend in Finnish) buildings belonging to the Kansallisromantiikka (romantic nationalism) trend, designed in the early 20th century and strongly influenced by \"Kalevala\", which was a common theme of the era. Helsinki's Art Nouveau style is also featured in central residential districts, such as Katajanokka and Ullanlinna. An important architect of the Finnish Art Nouveau style was Eliel Saarinen, whose architectural masterpiece was the Helsinki Central Station. Opposite the Bank of Finland building is the Renaissance Revivalish the House of the Estates (1891).\nThe only visible public buildings of the Gothic Revival architecture in Helsinki are St. John's Church (1891) in Ullanlinna, which is the largest stone church in Finland, and its twin towers rise to 74 meters and have 2,600 seats. Other examples of neo-Gothic include the House of Nobility in Kruununhaka and the Catholic St. Henry's Cathedral.\nIn addition to other cities in Northern Europe that were not under the Soviet Union, such as Stockholm, Sweden, Helsinki's neoclassical buildings gained also popularity as a backdrop for scenes intended to depict the Soviet Union in numerous Hollywood movies during the Cold War era, when filming within the actual USSR was not possible. Some of them, including \"The Kremlin Letter\" (1970), \"Reds\" (1981), and \"Gorky Park\" (1983). were possible due to such Russian cities as Leningrad and Moscow also having similar neoclassical architecture. At the same time due to Cold War and Finnish relations with the USSR the government secretly instructed Finnish officials not to extend assistance to such film projects. The city has large numbers of underground areas such as shelters and tunnels, many used daily as swimming pool, church, water management, entertainment etc.\nFunctionalism and modern architecture.\nHelsinki also features several buildings by Finnish architect Alvar Aalto, recognized as one of the pioneers of architectural functionalism. However, some of his works, such as the headquarters of the paper company Stora Enso and the concert venue Finlandia Hall, have been subject to divided opinions from the citizens.\nFunctionalist buildings in Helsinki by other architects include the Olympic Stadium, the Tennis Palace, the Rowing Stadium, the Swimming Stadium, the Velodrome, the Glass Palace, the T\u00f6\u00f6l\u00f6 Sports Hall, and Helsinki-Malmi Airport. The sports venues were built to serve the 1940 Helsinki Olympic Games; the games were initially cancelled due to the Second World War, but the venues fulfilled their purpose in the 1952 Olympic Games. Many of them are listed by DoCoMoMo as significant examples of modern architecture. The Olympic Stadium and Helsinki-Malmi Airport are also catalogued by the Finnish Heritage Agency as cultural-historical environments of national significance. The Linnanm\u00e4ki Amusement Park, owned by the non-profit Children's Day Foundation, was opened in 1950.\nWhen Finland became heavily urbanized in the 1960s and 1970s, the district of Pihlajam\u00e4ki, for example, was built in Helsinki for new residents, where for the first time in Finland, precast concrete was used on a large scale. Pikku Huopalahti, built in the 1980s and 1990s, has tried to get rid of a one-size-fits-all grid pattern, which means that its look is very organic and its streets are not repeated in the same way. It\u00e4keskus in Eastern Helsinki was the first regional center in the 1980s. Efforts have also been made to protect Helsinki in the late 20th century, and many old buildings have been renovated. Modern architecture is represented, for example, by the Museum of Contemporary Art Kiasma, which consists of two straight and curved-walled parts, though this style strongly divided the opinions from the citizens. Next to Kiasma is the glass-walled Sanomatalo (1999).\nThere have been many plans to build highrise buildings in Helsinki since the 1920s when architect Eliel Saarinen proposed the 85-meter-tall Kalevalatalo in 1921, but few tall buildings were built until the 21st century. In 1924 Oiva Kallio won Etu-T\u00f6\u00f6l\u00f6 competition with his plan (several 14- to 16-story buildings). A 32-story city hall was also proposed. Other plans of the 1930s included the 18-story \"Kino\" palace, a 17-story apartment building, and a 30-story Stockmann building were proposed but only the 70-meter-tall 14-story Hotel Torni was built. (Hotel Torni was the tallest high-rise in Finland until 1976, when the 83-meter-tall Neste headquarters were completed in Espoo; Helsinki had rejected the tower.) Twin 30-story buildings were proposed in Pasila in the 1970s but were rejected. In 1990 a planned 104-meter-tall tower for the Kone company was also cancelled.\nHighrise construction only started in the beginning of the 21st century, when the city decided to allow the construction of skyscrapers. Highrises were first built in Kalasatama, a primarily-residential district built on a former container port. As of 2024, four residential towers have been completed: the 35-story, 282-apartment, in 2019 (which is the tallest building in Finland); the 32-story, 124-meter in 2021; the 31-story, 120-meter One in 2022; and the 24-story, 98-meter in 2023. The 26-story, 111-meter-tall office building is to be completed in 2025, and three further towers are to be built in the complex. Tall residential towers have also been built in the eastern district of Vuosaari: the 87-meter, 26-story Cirrus was completed in 2006, the 24-story, 85-meter-tall was completed in 2023 and the 33-story, 288-apartment, 120-meter-tall is due to be completed in late 2024.\nSkyscrapers have also be planned in the Pasila area, with a handful of over-100-meter-tall towers in various stages of planning or early construction as of 2024. In J\u00e4tk\u00e4saari, a 113-meter-tall hotel and a 24-story residential tower have been approved. 121- and 93-meter-tall office buildings are planned to be built in Ruoholahti. Well over 200 high-rise buildings will be built in Helsinki in the 2020s.\nThe freshest building styles in Helsinki also include low-carbon economy; for example, the white-colored Katajanokan Laituri building that opened in Katajanokka in the summer of 2024 is built from Finnish and Swedish wood. This building includes eco-friendly hotel Solo Sokos Pier 4.\nStatues and sculptures.\nWell-known statues and monuments strongly embedded in the cityscape of Helsinki include the Keisarinnankivi (\"Stone of the Empress\", 1835), the statue of Russian Emperor Alexander II (1894), the fountain sculpture \"Havis Amanda\" (1908), the Paavo Nurmi statue (1925), the \"Three Smiths Statue\" (1932), the Aleksis Kivi Memorial (1939), the Eino Leino Statue (1953), the Equestrian statue of Marshal Mannerheim (1960) and the \"Sibelius Monument\" (1967).\nGovernment.\nAs is the case with all Finnish municipalities, Helsinki's city council is the main decision-making organ in local politics, dealing with issues such as urban planning, schools, health care, and public transport. The council is chosen in the nationally held municipal elections, which are held every four years.\nHelsinki's city council consists of eighty-five members. Following the most recent municipal elections in 2025, the three largest parties are the National Coalition Party (21), the Social Democratic Party (21), and the Green League (16).\nThe Mayor of Helsinki is Daniel Sazonov.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe city of Helsinki has inhabitants, making it the most populous municipality in Finland and the third in the Nordics. The Helsinki region is the largest urbanised area in Finland with inhabitants. The city of Helsinki is home to 12% of Finland's population. 20.8% of the population has a foreign background, which is twice above the national average. However, it is lower than in the major Finnish cities of Espoo or Vantaa.\nAt 53 percent of the population, women form a greater proportion of Helsinki residents than the national average of 51 percent. Helsinki's population density of 3,147 people per square kilometre makes Helsinki the most densely populated city in Finland. The life expectancy for men and women is slightly below the national averages: 75.1 years for men as compared to 75.7 years, 81.7 years for women as compared to 82.5 years.\nHelsinki has experienced strong growth since the 1810s, when it replaced Turku as the capital of the Grand Duchy of Finland, which later became the sovereign Republic of Finland. The city continued its growth from that time on, with an exception during the Finnish Civil War. From the end of World War II up until the 1970s there was a massive exodus of people from the countryside to the cities of Finland, in particular Helsinki. Between 1944 and 1969 the population of the city nearly doubled from 275,000 to 525,600.\nIn the 1960s, the population growth of Helsinki began to decrease, mainly due to a lack of housing. Some residents began to move to the neighbouring cities of Espoo and Vantaa, resulting in increased population growth in both municipalities. Espoo's population increased ninefold in sixty years, from 22,874 people in 1950 to 244,353 in 2009. Vantaa saw an even more dramatic change in the same time span: from 14,976 in 1950 to 197,663 in 2009, a thirteenfold increase. These population changes prompted the municipalities of metropolitan area into more intense cooperation in areas such as public transportation \u2013 resulting in the foundation of HSL \u2013 and waste management. The increasing scarcity of housing and the higher costs of living in the capital region have pushed many daily commuters to find housing in formerly rural areas, and even further, to cities such as Lohja, H\u00e4meenlinna, Lahti, and Porvoo.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLanguage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe city of Helsinki is officially bilingual, with both Finnish and Swedish as official languages. As of 2024[ [update]], the majority of the population, persons (), spoke Finnish as their first language. The number of Swedish speakers was persons () of the population.\nIn addition, the number of people who speak S\u00e1mi, Finland's third official language, was only persons () of the population. Although few people speak the S\u00e1mi languages as their mother tongue, there are 527 people of Sami origin. There are 93 Tatar speakers in Helsinki, almost half of the total number of Tatar speakers in Finland.\nHelsinki slang is a regional dialect of the city. Historically, it was a combination of Finnish and Swedish, with influences from Russian and German. Nowadays it has a strong English influence. Today, however, Finnish is the common language of communication between Finnish speakers, Swedish speakers and speakers of other languages (New Finns) in everyday public life between strangers.\nThe city of Helsinki and the national authorities have specifically targeted Swedish speakers. Knowledge of Finnish is essential in business and is usually a basic requirement in the labour market. Swedish speakers are most concentrated in the southern parts of the city. The district with the most Swedish speakers is Ullanlinna/Ulrikasborg with 2,098 (19.6%), while Byholmen is the only district where Swedish is the majority language (at 82.8%). The number of Swedish speakers decreased every year until 2008, and has increased every year since then. Since 2007, the number of Swedish speakers has increased by 2,351. In 1890, Finnish speakers overtook Swedish speakers to become the majority of the city's population. At that time, the population of Helsinki was 61,530.\nForeign languages were spoken by of the population. As English and Swedish are compulsory school subjects, functional bilingualism or trilingualism acquired through language studies is not uncommon. At least 160 different languages are spoken in Helsinki. As of 2024[ [update]], the most common foreign languages are Russian (3.1%), Somali (2.2%), Arabic (1.6%), English (1.5%), Estonian (1.4%), Chinese (0.7%) and Persian (0.7%).\nImmigration.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], there were 142,296 people with an immigrant background living in Helsinki, or 21% of the population. There were 125,142 residents who were born abroad, or 18% of the population. The number of foreign citizens in Helsinki was 84,396.\nThe relative share of immigrants in Helsinki's population is twice the national average, and the city's new residents are increasingly of foreign origin. This will increase the proportion of foreign residents in the coming years. As a crossroads of many international ports and Finland's largest airport, Helsinki is the global gateway to and from Finland.\nMost foreign-born citizens come from the former Soviet Union, Estonia, Somalia, Iraq, China and Russia.\nReligion.\nIn 2023, the Evangelical Lutheran Church was the largest religious group with 46.1% of the Helsinki population. Other religious groups made up 4.5% of the population. 49.4% of the population had no religious affiliation.\nThe most important churches in Helsinki are Helsinki Cathedral (1852), Uspenski Cathedral (1868), St. John's Church (1891), Kallio Church (1912) and Temppeliaukio Church (1969).\nThere are 21 Lutheran congregations in Helsinki, 18 of which are Finnish-speaking and 3 are Swedish-speaking. These form Helsinki's congregationgroup. Outside that there is Finland's German congregation with 3,000 members and Rikssvenska Olaus Petri-f\u00f6rsamlingen for Swedish-citizens with 1,000 members.\nThe largest Orthodox congregation is the Orthodox Church of Helsinki. It has 20,000 members. Its main church is the Uspenski Cathedral. The two largest Catholic congregations are the Cathedral of Saint Henry, with 4,552 members, established in 1860 and St Mary's Catholic Parish, with 4,107 members, established in 1954.\nThere are around 30 mosques in the Helsinki region. Many linguistic and ethnic groups such as Bangladeshis, Kosovars, Kurds and Bosniaks have established their own mosques. The largest congregation in both Helsinki and Finland is the Helsinki Islamic Center, established in 1995. It has over 2,800 members as of 2017[ [update]], and it received \u20ac24,131 in government assistance.\nIn 2015, imam Anas Hajar estimated that on big celebrations around 10,000 Muslims visit mosques. In 2004, it was estimated that there were 8,000 Muslims in Helsinki, 1.5% of the population at the time. The number of people in Helsinki with a background from Muslim majority countries was nearly 41,000 as of 2021, representing over 6% of the population.\nThe main synagogue of Helsinki is the Helsinki Synagogue from 1906, located in Kamppi. It has over 1,200 members, out of the 1,800 Jews in Finland, and it is the older of the two buildings in Finland originally built as a synagogue, followed by the Turku Synagogue in 1912. The congregation includes a synagogue, Jewish kindergarten, school, library, Jewish meat shop, two Jewish cemeteries and an retirement home. Many Jewish organizations and societies are based there, and the synagogue publishes the main Jewish magazine in Finland, \"HaKehila\".\nEconomy.\nHelsinki metropolitan area generates approximately one third of Finland's GDP. GDP per capita is roughly 1.3 times the national average. Helsinki profits on serviced-related IT and public sectors. Having moved from heavy industrial works, shipping companies also employ a substantial number of people.\nThe metropolitan area's gross value added per capita is 200% of the mean of 27 European metropolitan areas, equalling those of Stockholm and Paris. The gross value added annual growth has been around 4%.\n83 of the 100 largest Finnish companies have their headquarters in the metropolitan area. Two-thirds of the 200 highest-paid Finnish executives live in the metropolitan area and 42% in Helsinki. The average income of the top 50 earners was 1.65\u00a0million euro.\nThe tap water is of excellent quality and it is supplied by the P\u00e4ij\u00e4nne Water Tunnel, one of the world's longest continuous rock tunnels.\nEducation.\nHelsinki has 190 comprehensive schools, 41 upper secondary schools, and 15 vocational institutes. Half of the 41 upper secondary schools are private or state-owned, the other half municipal. There are two major research universities in Helsinki, the University of Helsinki and Aalto University, and a number of other higher level institutions and polytechnics which focus on higher-level professional education.\nOther institutions of higher education.\nHelsinki is one of the co-location centres of the Knowledge and Innovation Community (Future information and communication society) of The European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT).\nCulture.\nMuseums.\nThe biggest historical museum in Helsinki is the National Museum of Finland, which displays a vast collection from prehistoric times to the 21st century. The museum building itself, a national romantic-style neomedieval castle, is a tourist attraction. Another major historical museum is the Helsinki City Museum, which introduces visitors to Helsinki's 500-year history. The University of Helsinki also has many significant museums, including the Helsinki University Museum \"Arppeanum\" and the Finnish Museum of Natural History.\nThe Finnish National Gallery consists of three museums: Ateneum Art Museum for classical Finnish art, Sinebrychoff Art Museum for classical European art, and Kiasma Art Museum for modern art, in a building by architect Steven Holl. The old Ateneum, a neo-Renaissance palace from the 19th century, is one of the city's major historical buildings. All three museum buildings are state-owned through Senate Properties.\nThe city of Helsinki hosts its own art collection in the Helsinki Art Museum (HAM), primarily located in its Tennispalatsi gallery. Around 200 pieces of public art lie outside. The art is all city property.\nHelsinki Art Museum will in 2020 launch the Helsinki Biennial, which will bring art to maritime Helsinki \u2013 in its first year to the island of Vallisaari.\nThe Design Museum is devoted to the exhibition of both Finnish and foreign design, including industrial design, fashion, and graphic design. Other museums in Helsinki include the Military Museum of Finland, Didrichsen Art Museum, Amos Rex Art Museum, and the Tram Museum.\nTheatres.\nHelsinki has three major theatres: The Finnish National Theatre, the Helsinki City Theatre, and the Swedish Theatre (\"Svenska Teatern\"). Other notable theatres in the city include the Alexander Theatre, \"Q-teatteri\", Savoy Theatre, \"KOM-teatteri\", and \"Teatteri Jurkka\".\nMusic.\nHelsinki is home to two full-size symphony orchestras, the Helsinki Philharmonic Orchestra and the Finnish Radio Symphony Orchestra, both of which perform at the Helsinki Music Centre concert hall. Acclaimed contemporary composers Kaija Saariaho, Magnus Lindberg, Esa-Pekka Salonen, and Einojuhani Rautavaara, among others, were born and raised in Helsinki, and studied at the Sibelius Academy. The Finnish National Opera, the only full-time, professional opera company in Finland, is located in Helsinki. The opera singer Martti Wall\u00e9n, one of the company's long-time soloists, was born and raised in Helsinki, as was mezzo-soprano Monica Groop.\nMany widely renowned and acclaimed bands have originated in Helsinki, including Children of Bodom, Hanoi Rocks, HIM, Stratovarius, The 69 Eyes, Finntroll, Ensiferum, Wintersun, The Rasmus, Poets of the Fall, and Apocalyptica. The most significant of the metal music events in Helsinki is the Tuska Open Air Metal Festival in Suvilahti, S\u00f6rn\u00e4inen.\nThe city's main musical venues are the Finnish National Opera, the Finlandia concert hall, and the Helsinki Music Centre. The Music Centre also houses a part of the Sibelius Academy. Bigger concerts and events are usually held at one of the city's two big ice hockey arenas: the Helsinki Halli or the Helsinki Ice Hall. Helsinki has Finland's largest fairgrounds, the Messukeskus Helsinki, which is attended by more than a million visitors a year.\nHelsinki Arena hosted the Eurovision Song Contest 2007, the first Eurovision Song Contest arranged in Finland, following Lordi's win in 2006.\nArt.\nHelsinki Day (\"Helsinki-p\u00e4iv\u00e4\") will be celebrated every 12 June, with numerous entertainment events culminating in an open-air concert. Also, the Helsinki Festival is an arts and culture festival that takes place every August (including the Night of the Arts).\nAt the Senate Square in fall 2010, Finland's largest open-air art exhibition to date took place: About 1.4\u00a0million people saw the international exhibition of \"United Buddy Bears\".\nHelsinki was the 2012 World Design Capital, in recognition of the use of design as an effective tool for social, cultural, and economic development in the city. In choosing Helsinki, the World Design Capital selection jury highlighted Helsinki's use of 'Embedded Design', which has tied design in the city to innovation, \"creating global brands, such as Nokia, Kone, and Marimekko, popular events, like the annual Helsinki Design Week, outstanding education and research institutions, such as the Aalto University School of Arts, Design and Architecture, and exemplary architects and designers such as Eliel Saarinen and Alvar Aalto\".\nHelsinki hosts many film festivals. Most of them are small venues, while some have generated interest internationally. The most prolific of these is the Helsinki International Film Festival \u2013 Love &amp; Anarchy film festival, also known as Helsinki International Film Festival, which features films on a wide spectrum. Night Visions, on the other hand, focuses on genre cinema, screening horror, fantasy, and science fiction films in very popular movie marathons that last the entire night. Another popular film festival is DocPoint, a festival that focuses solely on documentary cinema.\nMedia.\nToday, there are around 200 newspapers, 320 popular magazines, 2,100 professional magazines, 67 commercial radio stations, three digital radio channels, and one nationwide and five national public service radio channels.\nSanoma publishes Finland's journal of record, , the tabloid \"Ilta-Sanomat\", the commerce-oriented \"Taloussanomat\", and the television channel Nelonen. Another Helsinki-based media house, Alma Media, publishes over thirty magazines, including the tabloid \"Iltalehti\", and the commerce-oriented \"Kauppalehti\".\nFinland's national public-broadcasting institution Yle operates five television channels and thirteen radio channels in both national languages. Yle is headquartered in the neighbourhood of Pasila. All TV channels are broadcast digitally, both terrestrially and on cable. Yle's studio area houses the high television and radio tower, Yle Transmission Tower (\"Pasilan linkkitorni\"), which is the third tallest structure in Helsinki and one of Helsinki's most famous landmarks, from the top of which, in good weather, can be seen even as far as Tallinn over the Gulf of Finland.\nThe commercial television channel MTV3 and commercial radio channel Radio Nova are owned by Nordic Broadcasting (Bonnier and Proventus).\nFood.\nHelsinki was already known in the 18th century for its abundant number of inns and pubs, where both locals and those who landed in the harbor were offered plenty of alcoholic beverages. At that time, taxes on the sale of alcohol were a very significant source of income for Helsinki, and one of the most important sellers of alcohol was Johan Sederholm (1722\u20131805), a trade councilor who attracted rural merchants with alcohol and made good deals. Gradually, a new kind of beverage culture began to grow in the next century, and as early as 1852, the first caf\u00e9 of Finland, Caf\u00e9 Ekberg, was established by confectioner Fredrik Ekberg (1825\u20131891) after attending his studies in St. Petersburg. Ekberg has also been said to have created Finland's \"national pastry tradition\". At first, caf\u00e9 culture was only a prerogative of sophisticated elite, when it recently began to take shape as the right of every man. Today, there are several hundred caf\u00e9s in Helsinki, the most notable of which is Cafe Regatta, which is very popular with foreign tourists.\nAs an important port city on the Baltic Sea, Helsinki has long been known for its fish food, and it has recently started to become one of the leading fish food capitals in Northern Europe. Helsinki's Market Square is especially known for its traditional herring market, which has been organized since 1743. Salmon is also a typical Helsinki fish dish, both fried and souped. The most prestigious restaurants specializing in seafood include Restaurant Fisken p\u00e5 Disken.\nHelsinki is currently experiencing a period of booming food culture, and it has developed into an internationally acclaimed food city, receiving recognition for promoting food culture; the city's gastronomy is considered unique, because many restaurants offers, in addition to fish dishes, reindeer, elk, and even bear meat. The local food culture is made up of cuisines from around the world and the fusions they form. Various Asian restaurants such as Chinese, Thai, Indian and Nepalese are particularly prominent in Helsinki's cityscape, but over the past couple of years, restaurants serving Vietnamese food have been very popular. Sushi restaurant buffets have also made their way into the city's restaurant offerings in one fell swoop. The third prominent trend is restaurants serving pure local food, many of which specialize primarily in serving pure Nordic flavors. In past years Middle Eastern food culture rose in its popularity. Especially Helsinki's eastern part offers many different options for Middle Eastern cuisine lovers. There is also some touches of Russian cuisine, one of which is the Finnish version of \"blinis\", a thick pancakes that are usually fried in a cast-iron pan. One of the most significant food culture venues in Helsinki is the general public area known as Teurastamo in the Hermanni district, which operated as the city's slaughterhouse between 1933 and 1992, to which the name of the place also refers.\nA nationwide food carnival called Restaurant Day (\"Ravintolap\u00e4iv\u00e4\") has begun in Helsinki and has traditionally been celebrated since May 2011. The purpose of the day is to have fun, share new food experiences and enjoy the common environment with the group.\nOther.\nVappu is an annual carnival for students and workers on 1 May. The last week of June marks the Helsinki Pride human rights event, which was attended by 100,000 marchers in 2018.\nSports.\nHelsinki has a long tradition of sports: the city gained much of its initial international recognition during the 1952 Summer Olympics, and the city has arranged sporting events such as the first World Championships in Athletics 1983 and 2005, and the European Championships in Athletics 1971, 1994, and 2012. Helsinki hosts successful local teams in both of the most popular team sports in Finland: football and ice hockey. Helsinki houses HJK Helsinki, Finland's largest and most successful football club, and IFK Helsingfors, their local rivals with 7 championship titles. The fixtures between the two are commonly known as Stadin derby. Helsinki's track and field club Helsingin Kisa-Veikot is also dominant within Finland. Ice hockey is popular among many Helsinki residents, who usually support either of the local clubs IFK Helsingfors (HIFK) or Jokerit. HIFK, with 14 Finnish championships titles, also plays in the highest bandy division, along with Botnia-69. The Olympic stadium hosted the first Bandy World Championship in 1957.\nHelsinki was elected host-city of the 1940 Summer Olympics, but due to World War II they were canceled. Instead Helsinki was the host of the 1952 Summer Olympics. The Olympics were a landmark event symbolically and economically for Helsinki and Finland as a whole that was recovering from the winter war and the continuation war fought with the Soviet Union. Helsinki was also in 1983 the first city to host the World Championships in Athletics. Helsinki also hosted the event in 2005, thus also becoming the first city to host the Championships for a second time. The Helsinki City Marathon has been held in the city every year since 1981, usually in August. A Formula 3000 race through the city streets was held on 25 May 1997. In 2009 Helsinki was host of the European Figure Skating Championships, and in 2017 it hosted World Figure Skating Championships. The city will host the 2021 FIBA Under-19 Basketball World Cup. American football and the Vaahteraliiga has a strong tradition in the city dating back to the early 1980s; the Helsinki Roosters are the only Finnish team to have participated in the Vaahteraliiga since its inception in 1980 and are by far the most successful American football team in Finnish history.\nMost of Helsinki's sports venues are under the responsibility of the city's sports office, such as 70 sports halls and about 350 sports fields. There are nine ice rinks, three of which are managed by the Helsinki Sports Agency (\"Helsingin liikuntavirasto\"). In winter, there are seven artificial ice rinks. People can swim in Helsinki in 14 swimming pools, the largest of which is the M\u00e4kel\u00e4nrinne Swimming Centre, two inland swimming pools and more than 20 beaches, of which Hietaniemi Beach is probably the most famous.\nTransport.\nRoads.\nThe backbone of Helsinki's motorway network consists of three semicircular beltways, Ring I, Ring II, and Ring III, which connect expressways heading to other parts of Finland, and the western and eastern arteries of \"L\u00e4nsiv\u00e4yl\u00e4\" and \"It\u00e4v\u00e4yl\u00e4\" respectively. While variants of a \"Keskustatunneli\" tunnel under the city centre have been repeatedly proposed, as of 2017[ [update]] the plan remains on the drawing board.\nMany important Finnish highways leave Helsinki for various parts of Finland; most of them in the form of motorways, but a few of these exceptions include \"Vihdintie\". The most significant highways are:\nHelsinki has some 390 cars per 1000 inhabitants. This is less than in cities of similar population and construction density, such as Brussels' 483 per 1000, Stockholm's 401, and Oslo's 413.\nIntercity rail.\nHelsinki Central Railway Station is the main terminus of the rail network in Finland. Two rail corridors lead out of Helsinki, the Main Line to the north (to Tampere, Oulu, Rovaniemi), and the Coastal Line to the west (to Turku). The Main Line (\"p\u00e4\u00e4rata\"), which is the first railway line in Finland, was officially opened on 17 March 1862, between cities of Helsinki and H\u00e4meenlinna. The railway connection to the east branches from the Main Line outside of Helsinki at Kerava, and leads via Lahti to eastern parts of Finland.\nA majority of intercity passenger services in Finland originate or terminate at the Helsinki Central Railway Station. All major cities in Finland are connected to Helsinki by rail service, with departures several times a day. The most frequent service is to Tampere, with more than 25 intercity departures per day as of 2017[ [update]].\nUntil 2022 there also was an international services from Helsinki to Saint Petersburg and Moscow. The Saint Petersburg to Helsinki route was operated by Allegro high-speed trains.\nA Helsinki to Tallinn Tunnel has been proposed and agreed upon by representatives of the cities. The rail tunnel would connect Helsinki to the Estonian capital Tallinn, further linking Helsinki to the rest of continental Europe by Rail Baltica.\nAviation.\nAir traffic is handled primarily from Helsinki Airport, located approximately north of Helsinki's downtown area, in the neighbouring city of Vantaa. The now closed Helsinki-Malmi Airport used to handle general and private aviation. Charter flights are available from Hernesaari Heliport.\nSea transport.\nLike many other cities, Helsinki was deliberately founded at a location on the sea in order to take advantage of shipping. The freezing of the sea imposed limitations on sea traffic up to the end of the 19th century. But for the last hundred years, the routes leading to Helsinki have been kept open even in winter with the aid of icebreakers, many of them built in the Helsinki Hietalahti shipyard. The arrival and departure of ships has also been a part of everyday life in Helsinki. Regular route traffic from Helsinki to Stockholm, Tallinn, and Saint Petersburg began as far back as 1837. Over 300 cruise ships and 360,000 cruise passengers visit Helsinki annually. There are international cruise ship docks in South Harbour, Katajanokka, West Harbour, and Hernesaari. In terms of combined liner and cruise passengers, the Port of Helsinki overtook the Port of Dover in 2017 to become the busiest passenger port in the world.\nFerry connections to Tallinn, Mariehamn, and Stockholm are serviced by various companies; very popular MS \"J. L. Runeberg\" ferry connection to Finland's second oldest city, medieval old town of Porvoo, is also available for tourists. Finnlines passenger-freight ferries to Gdynia, Poland; Travem\u00fcnde, Germany; and Rostock, Germany are also available. St. Peter Line offers passenger ferry service to Saint Petersburg several times a week.\nUrban transport.\nIn the Helsinki metropolitan area, public transportation is managed by the Helsinki Regional Transport Authority, the metropolitan area transportation authority. The diverse public transport system consists of trams, commuter rail, the metro, bus lines, two ferry lines and a public bike system.\nHelsinki's tram system dates back to 1891 when the first horse-drawn trams were introduced; the system was electrified in 1900. As of \u00a02024[ [update]], the system consists of 14 routes covering the inner part of the city center and one newer light rail style line connecting Keilaniemi in Espoo with It\u00e4keskus in eastern Helsinki. The length of the network is planned to more than double during the 2020s and 2030s compared to 2021, with major projects including Vantaa light rail, the Crown Bridges link to the island of Laajasalo and the West Helsinki light rail project connecting Kannelm\u00e4ki to the city center. Construction work on the new tram as the number line 13 (Nihti\u2013Kalasatama\u2013Vallilanlaakso\u2013Pasila) has begun in May 2020, and the line is scheduled for completion in 2024.\nThe commuter rail system includes purpose-built double track for local services in two rail corridors along intercity railways, and the Ring Rail Line, an urban double-track railway with a station at the Helsinki Airport in Vantaa. Electric operation of commuter trains was first begun in 1969, and the system has been gradually expanded since. 15 different services are operated as of 2017[ [update]], some extending outside of the Helsinki region. The frequent services run at a 10-minute headway in peak traffic.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nHelsinki has no official sister cities except Beijing, China. On July 14, 2006, Beijing and Helsinki officially became sister cities. In October 2019, the two cities signed the Work Plan for Promoting the Cooperation between Beijing and Helsinki (2019\u201323). In addition, the city has a special partnership relation with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUntil 2022, Helsinki also had an international partnership with the Russian cities of Moscow and Saint Petersburg, which was suspended after Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13699", "revid": "3861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13699", "title": "Hobart", "text": "Capital city of Tasmania, Australia\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHobart ( ) is the capital and most populous city of the island state of Tasmania, Australia. Located in Tasmania's south-east on the estuary of the River Derwent, it is the southernmost capital city in Australia. Despite containing nearly half of Tasmania's population, Hobart is the least-populated Australian state capital city, and second-smallest by population and area after Darwin if territories are taken into account. Its skyline is dominated by the kunanyi / Mount Wellington, and its harbour forms the second-deepest natural port in the world, with much of the city's waterfront consisting of reclaimed land. The metropolitan area is often referred to as Greater Hobart, to differentiate it from the City of Hobart, one of the seven local government areas that cover the city. It has a mild maritime climate.\nThe city lies on country which was known by the local Muwinina people as Nipaluna, a name which includes surrounding features such as Kunanyi / Mount Wellington and Timtumili Minanya (River Derwent). Prior to British colonisation, the land had been occupied for possibly as long as 35,000 years by Aboriginal Tasmanians, who generally refer to themselves as Palawa or Pakana.\nFounded in 1804 as a British penal colony, Hobart is Australia's second-oldest capital city after Sydney, New South Wales. Whaling quickly emerged as a major industry in the area, and for a time Hobart served as the Southern Ocean's main whaling port. Penal transportation ended in the 1850s, after which the city experienced periods of growth and decline. The early 20th century saw an economic boom on the back of mining, agriculture and other primary industries, and the loss of men who served in the world wars was counteracted by an influx of immigration. Despite the rise in migration from Asia and other non-English speaking regions, Hobart's population is predominantly ethnically Anglo-Celtic and has the highest percentage of Australian-born residents among Australia's capital cities.\nToday, Hobart is the financial and administrative hub of Tasmania, serving as the home port for both Australian and French Antarctic operations and acting as a tourist destination. Well-known drawcards include its convict-era architecture, Salamanca Market and the Museum of Old and New Art (MONA), the Southern Hemisphere's largest private museum.\nName.\nIn 1804, the settlement was named \"Hobart Town\" or \"Hobarton\" by the first Lt-governor David Collins after then British Secretary of State for war and the colonies Lord Hobart (a variant of Hubert, his name was pronounced with emphasis on the second syllable) at Sullivans Cove (named after the under-secretary). Earlier in 1793, Risdon Cove was named after the second officer on the ship \"Duke of Clarence\" by the captain John Hayes, and the river after the River Derwent, Cumbria (also briefly named by Bruni D'Entrecasteaux as \"La Rivi\u00e8re du Nord\"). The city was named the singular \"Hobart\" in 1881, and an inhabitant is known as a \"Hobartian\".\nThough the city is not officially dual-named, the 'saltwater country' of the western shore where the city is located has the Palawa kani name \"Nipaluna\" which was originally documented on 16 January 1831 by George Augustus Robinson (as \"nibberloonne\", later \"niberlooner\") when he was told by Woureddy, a Nununi chief from Bruny Island who spoke five dialects. Though the island is offshore, the language is related and in the same family as the Southeastern Tasmanian language which the local Muwinina people spoke. Another recorded name was an Oyster Bay word \"lebralawaggena\" (Bedford).\nA semi-permanent settlement at Little Sandy Bay was called \"kriwa\" beneath the hill of \"kriwalayti\". The dividing line of the region is the \"timtumili minanya\" (river), which winds its way down from the centre of the island through the lands of the Big River (Lemerina) people. On the eastern shore, the name for the Clarence Plains was known as \"naniyilipata\" by the Mumirimina, a group of the Oyster Bay (Poredareme) people. Droughty Point was known as \"trumanyapayna\" (kangaroo point) as it was a hunting ground, and South Arm as \"mutatayna\". Later names by the TAC include \"piyura kitina\" (little native hens) at Risdon Cove and \"turikina truwala\" (mountain waterfall) on the Myrtle Gully Falls track.\nHistory.\nThe first European settlement began in 1803 as a military camp at Risdon Cove on the eastern shores of the River Derwent, amid British concerns over the presence of French explorers. It was the site of the 1804 Risdon Cove massacre. Later that year, along with the military, settlers and convicts from the abandoned Port Phillip settlement, the camp at Risdon Cove was moved by Captain David Collins to a better location at the present site of Hobart at Sullivans Cove.\nThe area's Indigenous inhabitants were members of the semi-nomadic \"Mouheneener\" tribe. Violent conflict with the European settlers, and the effects of diseases brought by them, dramatically reduced the Aboriginal population, which was rapidly replaced by free settlers and the convict population. In 1832, four years after martial law had been declared, 26 people, including Tongerlongeter (Tukalunginta) and Montpelliatta (Muntipiliyata) of the combined \"Big River\" and \"Oyster Bay\" nations, surrendered to G. A. Robinson's \"friendly mission\" and were marched into Hobart to negotiate a truce with Governor George Arthur. They were forcibly exiled ten days later to Flinders Island.\nCharles Darwin visited Hobart Town in February 1836 as part of the \"Beagle\" expedition. He compares it to Sydney and compliments the \"noble forest\". He writes of Hobart and the Derwent estuary in \"The Voyage of the Beagle\":\"...The lower parts of the hills which skirt the bay are cleared; and the bright yellow fields of corn, and dark green ones of potatoes, appear very luxuriant... I was chiefly struck with the comparative fewness of the large houses, either built or building. Hobart Town, from the census of 1835, contained 13,826 inhabitants, and the whole of Tasmania 36,505.\"\nThe River Derwent was one of Australia's finest deepwater ports and was the centre of South Seas whaling and sealing trades. The settlement rapidly grew into a major port, with allied industries such as shipbuilding.\nHobart Town became a city on 21 August 1842, and was renamed Hobart from the beginning of 1881. The post-transportation era saw the city shift between periods of economic uncertainty in the 1860s and 1890s: \"...While brash Victorians talked of the future, Tasmanians nurtured memories of a more prosperous past. In the 'sixties Martineau found elderly ladies lamenting the gaiety of the old days and merchants the time when 'Hobart Town promised to be the emporium if not the metropolis of Australia'.\" However, this was mixed in with evolving politics, a greater connection with mainland Australia, tourism in the 1880s and the establishment of important cultural and social institutions including The University of Tasmania. \"When the Town Hall was opened in 1866 it symbolised the hope of future greatness for the city\". The Russian navy visited the port multiple times, which had become a leading reason for the Hobart coastal defences. Mark Twain also visited in 1895 when he wrote \"Hobart has a peculiarity\u2014it is the neatest town that the sun shines on; and I incline to believe that it is also the cleanest.\" \nOn 7 September 1936, one of the last known surviving thylacines died at the Beaumaris Zoo in Hobart. During WW2, the city performed drills and built shelters, with German mines found in the estuary and a Japanese scout plane flyover in 1942. While Hobart was isolated, it also contained the not insignificant Electrolytic Zinc Company which was essential for ammunition production.\nDuring the mid 20th century, the state and local governments invested in building Hobart's reputation as a tourist attraction\u2014in 1956 the Lanherne Airport (now Hobart Airport) was opened. Australia's first legal casino, Wrest Point Hotel Casino, opened in 1973. Despite these successes, Hobart faced significant challenges during the 20th century, including the 1967 Tasmanian fires, which claimed 64 lives in Hobart itself and destroyed over 1200 homes, and the 1975 Tasman Bridge disaster, when a bulk ore carrier collided with and destroyed the concrete span bridge that connected the city to its eastern suburbs.\nIn the 21st century, Hobart benefited as Tasmania's economy recovered from the 1990s recession, and the city's long-stagnant population growth began to reverse. A period of significant growth has followed, including the redevelopment of the former Macquarie Point railyards, Parliament Square, and new hotel developments throughout the city.\nGeography.\nTopography.\nHobart is located on the estuary of the River Derwent in the state's south-east. It is built predominantly on Jurassic dolerite around the foothills interspersed with smaller areas of Triassic siltstone and Permian mudstone, straddling the River Derwent.\nThe Western Shore extends from the Derwent Valley in the northwest through the flatter areas around Glenorchy (which rests on older Triassic sediment) bounded by peaks averaging around (including Mount Wellington, Mount Hull, Mount Faulkner and Mount Dromedary). The hilly inner areas rest on the younger Jurassic dolerite deposits, before stretching into the lower areas such as the beaches of Sandy Bay in the south, while the City and Kingston are separated by hills and Taroona's Alum Cliffs. The Derwent estuary exits into Storm Bay wrapped by the South Arm Peninsula, Iron Pot and Betsey Island, with Turrakana / Tasman Peninsula and Bruny Island beyond.\nThe Eastern Shore also extends from the Derwent in a southeasterly direction hugging the Meehan Range (which hovers around with distinctive summits such as Mount Direction, Flagstaff Hill and Gunners Quoin towards the irregular valleys of Brighton) before sprawling into flatter land in suburbs such as Bellerive. These flatter areas of the eastern shore rest on far younger Quaternary deposits. From there the city wraps around the estuary to peninsulas and extends across the hills in an easterly direction into the valley area of Rokeby, before reaching into the tidal flatland area of Lauderdale (between Ralphs Bay and Frederick Henry Bay).\nHobart has access to a number of beach areas including those in the Derwent estuary itself: Long Beach, Nutgrove Beach, Bellerive Beach, Cornelian Bay, Kingston, and Howrah Beaches, as well as many more in Frederick Henry Bay such as Seven Mile, Roaches, Cremorne, Clifton and Goats Beaches.\nEcology.\nHobart is located on the edge of the Tasmanian South East and Tasmanian Southern Ranges IBRA bioregions as well as being surrounded by parts of the South-east Tasmania Important Bird Area (such as the Meehan and Wellington Ranges) which provide important habitat for Tasmanian birds. The East Risdon State Reserve contains the wattles Derwent cascade and \"Acacia riceana\", as well as the rare or endangered Risdon peppermint and \"Eucalyptus morrisbyi\". Other local plant species like heartleaf silver gum and the abundant blue gum are also planted horticulturally, while many exotic species were planted as a result of aesthetic preferences from British colonisation. Black peppermint, silver peppermint, blue wattle, blackwood, drooping sheoak and cherry ballart are another common woodland combination.\nThreatened species of wildlife found in Hobart include the swift parrot, grey goshawk, Tasmanian masked owl, eastern barred bandicoot and eastern quoll. These amount to 11 species of fauna, 10 of flora and 4 vegetation communities. 5 of the threatened species are endemic to Hobart. A common sight within the city are pademelons and wallabies.\nThe Hobart Rivulet is home to urban platypuses. A local community group - \"Hobart Rivulet Platypus -\" is dedicated to the conservation and protection of Hobart's urban platypus population, vigorously campaigning on their behalf. As a result the health of the Hobart Rivulet has improved over recent years. Wildlife groups and road safety advocates have also highlighted the role of slower speeds in reducing urban roadkill and traffic injuries.\nWhile parts of Mount Wellington have been cleared in the past (and species like celery top pine were allegedly present), stands of old-growth white gums accompanied by giant stringybarks (such as the Octopus tree) remain there. A rare patch of non-sclerophyll Tasmanian rainforest dominated by myrtle beech and blackheart sassafras is located near Collinsvale. A famous tree within the city of Hobart is the Anglesea Barracks blue gum which may have been a seedling before the colonial era.\nClimate.\nHobart has a cool to mild oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"; Trewartha: \"Cflk\"). The highest temperature recorded was on 4 January 2013 and the lowest was on 25 June 1972 and 11 July 1981. By global standards, Hobart has cool summers and mild winters for its latitude, being influenced by its seaside location. Nevertheless, the strong northerly winds from the Australian outback ensure that Hobart experiences temperatures above most years.\nAnnually, Hobart receives only 40.8 clear days. Compared to other major Australian cities, Hobart has the fewest daily average hours of sunshine, with only 5.9 hours per day. However, during the summer it has the most hours of daylight of any Australian city, with 15.3 hours on the summer solstice. Hobart has nonetheless exceptionally sunny winters by Tasmanian standards, where its sun hours in June and July exceed those of Wagga Wagga in New South Wales (especially when accounting for latitudinal day length). Strathgordon at the same latitude averages only 51 and 62 sun hours in June and July (compared with Hobart's 132 and 152 hours). This is due to the foehn effect created by the Central Highlands to the west.\nLight frost occurs most years, though air frosts are uncommon. Although Hobart itself rarely receives snow due to the foehn effect, the adjacent kunanyi / Mount Wellington is frequently seen with a snowcap throughout the year. During the 20th century, the city itself has received snowfalls at sea level on average only once every 5 years; however, outer suburbs lying higher on the slopes of Mount Wellington receive snow more often, owing to the more exposed location coupled with their higher altitude. These snow-bearing winds often carry on through Tasmania and southern Victoria, to the Snowy Mountains in north-east Victoria and southern New South Wales (though to a much lesser degree outside of winter). Nevertheless, sleet can occur in Hobart from June to September.\nAverage sea temperatures range from in September to in February.\nUrban structure.\nParks and nature reserves.\nHobart has a diverse array of natural areas, parks and gardens. It is most notably defined by its large areas of native bushland owing to its location. The most prominent of these is Wellington Park which encompasses the plateau of Mount Wellington itself as well as much of the surrounding alpine woodland and dense forests. This is taken advantage of with a large number of trails for walking, hiking and mountain biking activities all across the Hobart metropolitan area, some of which follow watercourses like the Hobart Linear Park (Cascade Gardens), Lambert Park, New Town Rivulet (Ancanthe Park) and Tolosa Park, or ridgelines to viewing points in places like the Truganini Conservation Area and Bicentennial Park. The former Fern Tree Bower of \"Dicksonia antarctica\" can be visited on the Pipeline Track.\nThe city also has many urban bushland areas, most prominent of which is the centrally located Queens Domain which contains the Royal Tasmanian Botanical Gardens established in 1818 (which, though ringed by expressways, remain a highly popular destination with a variety of attractions), the Hobart Cenotaph (accessed via the Bridge of Remembrance and Hobart Regatta grounds which link to the Intercity Cycleway), the University Rose Gardens, a number of sporting facilities (like the Domain Athletic Centre and Doone Kennedy Hobart Aquatic Centre), and formerly the Hobart Zoo (a role now taken up by Bonorong Wildlife Sanctuary in Brighton). Areas along the eastern shore also provide recreation, including many coastal walks to areas like Kangaroo Bluff (one of many former Hobart coastal defences which are now parks) and the Kangaroo Bay Parkland (near Charles Hand Park and the Rosny Parklands) in Bellerive, Anzac Park and Simmons Park in Lindisfarne, Wentworth park at Howrah Beach, as well as hills within the urban area such as Gordons Hill, Natone Hill, Rokeby Hills, Waverly Flora Park and the panoramic lookout at Rosny Hill.\nIn the city, many urban parks and gardens have sprung up over the years, like St David's Park, Franklin Square, the Parliament or Salamanca Gardens, Boat Park (Princes Park), Fitzroy Gardens and St Andrews Park, along with newer pocket parks like the Garden of Memories on Elizabeth Street. Inner suburban parks like Wellesley Park in South Hobart, the Train Park (Caldew Park) in West Hobart, and the Cultural Skatepark and Soundy Park in North Hobart are also popular. Parks continue to extend along the complex coastline of the estuary, from the birdwatching area of Goulds Lagoon, Old Beach's \"little doors\", the Claremont Cenotaph by Windermere Beach, Moorilla Estate winery, Glenorchy Art and Sculpture Park (GASP) with the Montrose Boardwalk, Giblins Reserve and Cornelian Bay to the north, and the Battery Point Sculpture Trail, Errol Flynn Reserve, Long Beach Reserve by Nutgrove Beach and the Alexandra Battery, and Kingston Park to the south.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Annotated view of Hobart straddled along the estuary as seen from kunanyi / Mt Wellington\nArchitecture.\nHobart's architecture is stylistically eclectic and reflects various periods of Australian history. The city is known for its well-preserved Georgian and Victorian-era buildings, giving specific areas an \"Old World\" feel. For locals, this became a source of discomfiture about the city's convict past, but is now a draw card for tourists.\nThe city centre contains many of the city's oldest buildings, including the Hope and Anchor Tavern (1807) and Ingle Hall (1811\u201314). The Cascade Brewery (1824), Australia's longest operating brewery, was built using convict labour, as was the Cascades Female Factory (1828), now a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Other notable early buildings include: (1834), Australia's oldest continuously operating hotel; the Theatre Royal (1837), Australia's oldest continually operating theatre; the Greek revival Lady Franklin Gallery (1843), Australia's first private museum; and the Hobart Synagogue (1845), which is Australia's oldest synagogue and a rare example of an Egyptian revival synagogue. Salamanca Place contains many Georgian era buildings, as well as Kelly's Steps, which were built in 1839 to provide a short-cut to Battery Point, a largely residential suburb known for its weatherboard cottages and multi-storey terraces.\nGovernment architect John Lee Archer designed the Regency-style Customs House (1840), facing Sullivans Cove and now used as Parliament House. He also designed the Gothic revival Engineers Building (1847) later used as the Tasmanian Main Line Company headquarters. Nearby are more buildings in the same style, Australia's oldest tertiary institution was based in the former Hobart High School from 1848 (Domain House, now owned by UTAS), and the Government House building was built in 1857 and is the third iteration. Henry Hunter was an architect known for churches such as St Mary's Cathedral (1898), but he also designed Hobart Town Hall (1866), located on the site of the old Government House.\nThe TMAG building, built in 1902 as a new Second Empire style Customs House, is situated on Constitution Dock and incorporates the Bond (1824) and (1810), the latter of which contributed to Hobart's early street layout when the Hobart Rivulet passed beside it. Away from the mouth of the rivulet was Hunter Island and after 1820 was also used for extensive warehousing.\nHobart is home to many historic churches. The Scots Church (formerly known as St Andrew's) was built in Bathurst Street from 1834 to 1836, and a small sandstone building within the churchyard was used as the city's first Presbyterian Church. St John's in New Town, featuring a clocktower and turrets, sat in the middle of the Queens Orphanage complex (now near the Hobart City High School) from 1835. The Greek revival St George's Anglican Church in Battery Point was completed in 1838, and a classical tower designed by James Blackburn (who also designed the Holy Trinity Church) was added in 1847. St Joseph's was built in 1840 and the Davey Street Congregational Church in 1857. St David's Cathedral, Hobart's first, was consecrated in 1874. The grand Queen Anne style Mount Saint Canice (1893) sits above Sandy Bay.\nThe Edwardian Baroque GPO was built in 1905, and the Hobart City Hall was built in 1915 in a Federation warehouse style on the former city marketplace. The North Hobart Post Office (1913) of a John Smith Murdoch design is in a colourful Edwardian style. Hobart is also home to a number of Art Deco landmarks, including the T&amp;G building (1938) on Murray Street, the Old Mercury Building on Macquarie Street (1938), the former Hydro Tasmania (1938) and the Colonial Mutual Life buildings (1936) on Elizabeth Street. The 1939 Streamline Moderne Riviera Hotel is joined by what remains the tallest building in Tasmania, the Wrest Point Casino (1973) designed by Roy Grounds in Moderne. Several of the tallest buildings in Hobart were built in this era, such as the International Style MLC building (1958\u201377), the Empress Towers (1967), the Brutalist NAB House (1968) and former Reserve Bank Building (1977), and the brown-coloured Modernist Marine Board Building (1972) and Jaffa Building (1978). Dorney House (1978) at the former Fort Nelson is an example of residential modernism.\nThe postmodern Hotel Grand Chancellor was built in 1987 in what was the Wapping neighbourhood, which now features many examples of contemporary architecture, such as the 2001 Federation Concert Hall and The Hedberg, designed in 2013 around Conceptualism. The distinctive shapes of the 2020 K-Block redevelopment of the Royal Hobart Hospital was based on the street grid and convict-made Rajah Quilt. Nearby is the Menzies Institute and UTAS Medical Science Precinct, which features two 2009 examples of avant-garde styles inspired by land-water interplay. On Castray Esplanade, the Salamanca Wharf Hotel was built in 2013 and combines Antarctic colours with the surrounding former-ordnance warehouses. The Myer Centre Icon Complex was completed in 2020 as a replacement for the 1908 Liverpool Street building which burnt down in 2007, while retaining the fa\u00e7ade on Murray Street. Projects designed by local architects include the M\u00f6venpick Hotel, built in 2021 by Jaws.\nHousing.\nHobart as a city has delivered its housing by various means and forms. For its early history, housing was small-scale but clustered in very small areas (the highest concentration and diversity of Hobart's heritage remains around the constantly-evolving city centre). With the development of streets and public transport, such as a railway in 1876 and Australia's first fully-electric tram network in 1893, further growth of the urban area was enabled. Inner suburbs from this era typically have orderly streets (around planned subdivisions of former agriculture grants, often inspired by the City Beautiful movement) with shopfronts (the Hill Street Grocer franchise derives from the commercial legacy of a former tramway) and narrow lanes lined with timber and brick cottages, townhouses and small apartment buildings.\nSocial housing was usually organised by private societies and entities as outreach to those in need until crises brought greater attention from government authorities, such as the Homes Act (1919) and Housing Agreement (1945). The Housing Department focused mainly on mixing these with broad-acre suburban estates, which were sometimes expensive to service with adequate infrastructure. Architects such as Margaret Findlay were employed by the public works department. Bungalows were mass-produced in weatherboard and then fibro materials. The 1944 Town and Country Planning Act was the instrument to transfer control of urban housing to municipalities, which automatically resulted in tightly restricted homebuilding in existing urban areas. The advent of the automotive city and the 1965 Hobart Area Transportation Study (which ultimately resulted in cuts to public transport and parts of the inner city being converted into parking) further made Hobart a sprawling city. Zoning now applies and specific area plans can also be prepared (with the land use near Hobart's northern suburbs transit corridor under particular focus), though planning reform and new provisions schedules are being prepared. While community and social housing projects do occur in expensive areas (such as 25 apartments on Goulburn Street in 2021), it is still difficult to achieve approval.\nAs of 2024, Hobart is the least dense Australian capital with the highest costs per capita (alongside Sydney) for housing and car-ownership (19.7% cost-to-income in 2024). This is credited with contributing to the broader Tasmanian demographic crisis and emigration. The median house price of inner Hobart was A$1,026,500 in 2021, which would be 12.8x the region's median household income per year. Of the 76,686 total dwellings in urban Greater Hobart in 2021, only 10% were a flat or apartment and 7.2% semi-detached or terrace. Greater Hobart builds on average 700 new dwellings per year, which equates to between 3\u20133.5 per 1000 people (lower than the 6\u20139 of other states), mostly concentrated in outer suburbs like Bridgewater (which has the lowest life expectancy in Hobart at 67) which studies show can cost 8x more than infill, meaning they require more infrastructure per dwelling to service than areas closer to existing services (which are more often under-capacity). Rental vacancies have generally been on decline since about 2013 with the rate consistenly under 3% and listings 50.5% lower in southern Tasmania over 11 years. Renting is also typically less protected than other states.\nTenant-oriented housing models may become more common, with a few examples in Hobart such as 2020's all-electric \"The Commons Hobart\" where expensive parking mandates were waivered to enable an affordable green lifestyle.\nCulture.\nSince the 2000s, Hobart has gained a reputation as a \"cool\" and creative cultural capital with increasing numbers of tourists drawn to its unconventional or quirky events and art projects, many spurred by the Museum of Old and New Art (MONA). The term \"MONA effect\" refers to the museum's significant impact on the local economy and Tasmanian tourism.\nThe city's nightlife is primarily concentrated in Salamanca Place, North Hobart, the waterfront area, Elizabeth Street (which includes the pedestrianised Elizabeth Street Mall) and Sandy Bay. These areas are home to popular dining strips, pubs, bars and nightclubs.\nTheatre and entertainment.\nThe city centre is home to several theatres, including live theatre venues, picture palaces, and a multiplex operated by Village Cinemas.\nThe Theatre Royal, established in 1837, is Australia's oldest continually operating theatre, designed by colonial architect John Lee Archer. Another historic theatre is the Playhouse Theatre. Built in the 1860s, it was originally a chapel designed by Henry Bastow. Today, it is owned by the Hobart Repertory Theatre Society.\nHobart's largest arthouse cinema, the State Cinema in North Hobart, was established as the North Hobart Picture Palace in 1913. It was acquired by the Reading Cinemas chain in 2019. Located in New Town, the Rewind Cinema, formerly the Hidden Theatre, is housed in a 19th-century convict-built structure.\nAnother popular live entertainment location is the Hanging Garden precinct, which contains several venues and hosts Dark Mofo and Hobart Festival of Comedy events.\nGalleries and museums.\nAustralia's first privately funded museum, the Lady Franklin Gallery, was established in Acanthe Park by Lady Jane Franklin in 1843 and is now run by The Art Society of Tasmania. Three years later, the Royal Society of Tasmania (the oldest Royal Society outside England) founded the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery (TMAG). Its first permanent home opened in 1863 and the museum has gradually expanded to occupy several surrounding buildings, including the , built in 1810. The TMAG-run was founded in 1955 as the Van Diemen's Land Memorial Folk Museum and is housed within an 1830s Georgian town house. Maritime Museum Tasmania is located near TMAG on the waterfront and has been in operation since 1974.\nThe Museum of Old and New Art (MONA) opened in 2011 to coincide with the third annual MONA FOMA festival. Located within the Moorilla winery on the Berriedale peninsula, the multi-storey MONA gallery houses the collection of David Walsh and is the Southern Hemisphere's largest privately owned museum.\nLiterature.\nThe first book of general Australian literature was published in Hobart. Titled \"The Last and Worst of the Bushrangers of Van Diemen's Land\", it was printed by convict Andrew Bent and details the life and crimes of Michael Howe, the bushranger and outlaw. In 1824, Bent, as proprietor of the \"Hobart Town Gazette\", established the first free press in Australia. The first Australian novel, \"Quintus Servinton\", was written in 1831 by convict Henry Savery and published in Hobart. Written during his imprisonment, it is a semi-autobiographical work about the life of a convict in Van Diemen's Land. Mary Leman Grimstone, whose book \"Woman's Love\" was written in Hobart between 1826 and 1829, holds the distinction of being the author of the first non-biographical Australian novel. It was printed in London in 1832.\nThe State Library of Tasmania is located in the city centre and comprises the Allport Library and Museum of Fine Arts, which houses an extensive collection of colonial works and artefacts. In 2023, Hobart became a UNESCO City of Literature.\nMusic.\nThe Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra is based at the Federation Concert Hall on the city's waterfront. The Federation Concert Hall also hosts the University of Tasmania's Australian International Symphony Orchestra Institute (AISOI) which fosters advanced young musicians from across Australia and internationally. Other live music venues in Hobart include Odeon Theatre, Avalon Theatre and Hobart City Hall. Major national and international music events are usually held at MyState Bank Arena, or the Tasman Room at Wrest Point Hotel Casino.\nThe city's music scene has given rise to internationally acclaimed acts working in a variety of genres, including Striborg and Psycroptic (metal), The Paradise Motel (chamber pop), Sea Scouts (noise rock), and Monique Brumby (indie pop). Other Hobart musicians have co-founded successful mainland Australian bands, including singer-songwriters Sacha Lucashenko (of The Morning After Girls) and Michael Noga (of The Drones), and multi-instrumentalist Monika Fikerle (of Love of Diagrams). Theremin player Miles Brown, blues guitarist Phil Manning (of blues-rock band Chain), and TikTok artist Kim Dracula all originated in Hobart. In addition, founding member of Violent Femmes, Brian Ritchie, now calls Hobart home, and curated the annual international arts festival MONA FOMA. Chloe Alison Escott is from Hobart, and founded The Native Cats with Julian Teakle.\nEvents.\nHobart's recurring events consist of weekly markets, most notably Salamanca Market. The city also hosts festivals including Taste of Tasmania, which celebrates local produce, wine and music; Dark Mofo which is the city's biggest winter festival leading into the solstice featuring the Winter Feast; and Tasmania's biennial international arts festival Ten Days On The Island. Other festivals, including the Southern Roots Festival and the Falls Festival in Marion Bay, also capitalise on Hobart's artistic communities.\nThe Australian Wooden Boat Festival is a biennial event held in Hobart celebrating wooden boats. It is held concurrently with the Royal Hobart Regatta, which began in 1830 and is therefore Tasmania's oldest surviving sporting event. The Sandy Bay Regatta began in 1849. In October is Hobart Show Day where agriculture is showcased at the Hobart Showground in Glenorchy.\nSustainable Living Tasmania has hosted events in Hobart focused on environmental sustainability, such as their Sustainable Living Festivals, since the 1970s.\nSport.\nMost professional Hobart-based sports teams represent Tasmania as a whole rather than exclusively the city.\nCricket is a popular sport in Hobart. The Tasmanian Tigers cricket team plays its home games at Bellerive Oval on the Eastern Shore, and the Hobart Hurricanes compete in the Big Bash League.\nAustralian rules football was introduced to Hobart in the 1860s and has long been the city's most popular spectator sport. Founded in 1879 and headquartered at Hobart, the Tasmanian Football League features four Hobart-based clubs: Clarence, Glenorchy, Lauderdale and North Hobart. Hobart-based teams also play in the Southern Football League. Hobart has hosted Australian Football League (AFL) matches since 1952, and in 2023, Tasmania was awarded a conditional license to field the league's 19th AFL team, nicknamed the Tasmanian Devils. The conditional license is contingent on a 23,000 seat roofed stadium being built at Hobart's Macquarie Point. It is anticipated that the men's team will join the AFL by 2028.\nTasmania is not represented by teams in the National Rugby League (rugby league), nor the Super Rugby (rugby union), Super Netball (netball) and A-League (soccer) competitions. However, the Tasmania JackJumpers entered the National Basketball League in 2021. The Hobart Chargers also represent Hobart in the second-tier NBL1 South.\nThe Tassie Tigers field men's and women's representative sides in Hockey One, which replaced the Australian Hockey League in 2019. They play their home matches at the Tasmanian Hockey Centre, which has also hosted international competition matches, such as the Men's FIH Pro League.\nThe Hobart International is an annual tennis tournament held since 1994. The city is the finishing point of the Targa Tasmania rally car event, which has been held annually in April since 1991.\nHobart is internationally famous among the yachting community as the finish of the Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race which starts in Sydney on Boxing Day. The arrival of the yachts is celebrated as part of the Hobart Summer Festival, a food and wine festival beginning just after Christmas and ending in mid-January.\nThe city co-hosted the basketball FIBA Oceania Championship 1975, where the Australian national basketball team won the gold medal.\nHobart hosted the inaugural 1987 Australian Masters Games.\nHobart hosted the Australian Swimming Championships in 1930, 1935, 1939, 1959, 1965, 1971, 1977, 1983, and 2001.\nHobart hosted the Australasian Athletics Championships in 1908, and 1924.\nHobart hosted the Australian Athletics Championships in 1907, 1923, 1935, 1950, 1958, 1959, 1964, 1966, and 1972.\nHobart hosted the 2001 Men's Hockey Junior World Cup.\nHobart hosted the Real Tennis World Championship in 1994, 1995, and 2000.\nHobart hosted the Australian National Football Carnivals in 1924, 1947, and 1966.\nIn 2022 Tasmania made a bid to host the 2026 Commonwealth Games in Hobart, but lost out to regional Victoria (which later ceded the hosting rights to Glasgow).\nMedia.\nFive free-to-air television stations service Hobart:\nEach station broadcasts a primary channel and several multichannels.\nHobart is served by thirty\u2013two digital free-to-air television channels:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe majority of pay television services are provided by Foxtel via satellite, although other smaller pay television providers do service Hobart.\nCommercial radio stations licensed to cover the Hobart market include Triple M Hobart, hit100.9 Hobart and 7HO FM. Local community radio stations include Christian radio station Ultra106five, Edge Radio and Hobart FM which targets the wider community with specialist programs. The five ABC radio networks available on analogue radio broadcast to Hobart via 936 ABC Hobart, Radio National, Triple J, NewsRadio and ABC Classic FM. Hobart is also home to the video creation company Biteable.\nHobart's major newspaper is \"The Mercury\", which was founded by John Davies in 1854 and has been continually published ever since. The paper is owned and operated by Rupert Murdoch's News Limited. Pulse Tasmania, formerly Pulse Hobart, started as a radio station in Hobart and focuses mainly on short-form news media on its website.\nDemographics.\nAt the 2021 census, there were 247,068 people in the Greater Hobart. The City of Hobart local government area had a population of 55,077.\nAs of 2021, the median weekly household income was $1,542, compared with $1,746 nationally.\n18.1% of households total weekly income is less than $650 week, while 18.9% of households weekly income exceeds $3,000. This compares to national rates of 16.5% and 24.3% respectively.\n35.4% of renting households, and 10.3% of owned households with a mortgage experience housing stress, where rent or mortgage repayments exceed 30% of income.\nAt the 2016 census, The most common occupation categories were professionals (22.6%), clerical and administrative workers (14.7%), technicians and trades workers (13.3%), community and personal service workers (12.8%), and managers (11.3%).\nAncestry and immigration.\n4.5% of the population (11,216 people) are Indigenous Australians (Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders).\nAt the 2021 census, the most commonly nominated ancestry groups include:\n23.4% of the population was born overseas at the 2021 census. The five largest groups of overseas-born were from England (3.3%), Mainland China (2.2%), Nepal (1.7%), India (1.6%) and New Zealand (0.9%).\nLanguage.\nAt the 2021 census, 82.6% of the population spoke only English at home. The other languages most commonly spoken at home were Mandarin (2.6%), Nepali (1.8%), Punjabi (0.7%), Cantonese (0.5%) and Vietnamese (0.4%).\nReligion.\nIn the 2021 census, 49.9% of Greater Hobart residents specified no religion. Christianity comprised the largest religious affiliation (37.1%), with the largest denominations being Anglicanism (14.1%) and Catholicism (14.1%). Hinduism (2.6%), Buddhism (1.3%), Islam (1.3%) and Sikhism (0.6%) constitute the remaining largest religious affiliations.\nHobart has a small community of 456 members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, with meetinghouses in Glenorchy, Rosny, and Glen Huon. There is also a synagogue, with a Jewish community of 203 people. Hobart has a Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community, with a Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Centre of Learning, located within the city. In 2013, Hillsong Church established a Hillsong Connect campus in Hobart.\nEconomy.\nIn 2021, Greater Hobart's main occupations were professionals and service workers, trades, administration and management and other labour professions working in industries such as healthcare, the public service, and supermarkets and small businesses. Incomes are higher than the rest of Tasmania, but lower than the Australian median. These employment areas are reflected by the gross value added provided by industries, which is greatest among the \"healthcare and social assistance (17%), public administration and safety (11%), and financial and insurance services (10%).\" Healthcare is also the fastest-growing, while services and construction have the highest business count. The vast majority of this economic production is concentrated in the City of Hobart area, except manufacturing which is higher in Glenorchy City.\nMajor shopping areas include the Elizabeth Street Mall (the only fully pedestrianised block in the city), which is connected with the Cat and Fiddle Arcade, Centrepoint and Liverpool Street in the CBD, Mayfair Shopping Plaza on Sandy Bay Road, New Town Plaza, Moonah Central (near a foodmarket), Northgate Shopping Centre and Centro in Glenorchy, Claremont Plaza, Eastlands Shopping Centre (Tasmania's biggest) in Rosny Park, Lindisfarne village, Shoreline Plaza in Howrah, Glebe Hill Village Shopping Centre, Cambridge Homemaker Centre by the airport, Green Point Plaza and Covehill Fair Shopping Centre in Bridgewater, New Norfolk, and Channel Court and Kingston Town Shopping Centre in Kingston.\nShipping is significant to the city's economy. The city is a popular cruise ship destination during the summer months, with 47 such ships docking during the course of the 2016\u201317 summer season, and $34.5 million in direct expenditure in 2017 (an average spend of $172 per passenger).\nTourism is a significant part of the economy, with visitors coming to the city to explore its historic inner suburbs and nationally acclaimed restaurants and cafes, as well as its vibrant music and nightlife culture. The two major draw-cards are the weekly market in Salamanca Place, and the Museum of Old &amp; New Art. The city is also used as a base from which to explore the rest of Tasmania.\nThe city also supports many other industries. Major local employers include the Boyer Mill, Incat, Cadbury's, Cascade Brewery, Risdon Zinc Works and Wrest Point Casino. The city also supports a host of light industry manufacturers, as well as a range of redevelopment projects, including the $689\u00a0million Royal Hobart Hospital Redevelopment \u2013 standing as the states largest ever Health Infrastructure project.\nThe last 15\u201320 years have seen Hobart's wine industry thrive as many vineyards have developed in countryside areas outside of the city in the Coal River Wine Region and D'Entrecasteaux Channel, including Moorilla Estate at Berriedale one of the most awarded vineyards in Australia.\nAntarctic gateway.\nHobart is an Antarctic gateway city, with geographical proximity to East Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. Infrastructure is provided by the port of Hobart for scientific research and cruise ships, and Hobart Airport supports an Antarctic Airlink to Wilkins Runway at Casey Station. Hobart is a logistics point for the Australian vessel \"Nuyina\" and French icebreaker \"L'Astrolabe\".\nHobart is the home port for the Australian and French Antarctic programs, and provides port services for other visiting Antarctic nations and Antarctic cruise ships. Antarctic and Southern Ocean expeditions are supported by a specialist cluster offering cold climate products, services and scientific expertise. The majority of these businesses and organisations are members of the Tasmanian polar network, supported in part by the Tasmanian State Government.\nTasmania has a high concentration of Antarctic and Southern Ocean scientists. Hobart is home to the following Antarctic and Southern Ocean scientific institutions:\nTourism.\nHobart serves as a focal point and mecca for tourism in the state of Tasmania. Hobart has been a significant tourist destination for many years, however tourism has evolved to a core industry in the last decade. This process has been termed the \"MONA Effect\" - referring to the significant influence of the Museum of New and Old Art (MONA), the Southern Hemisphere's largest private museum, on the local tourist economy - compared to the effect of the Guggenheim on Bilbao. Since opening in 2011, MONA had received 2.5 million visitors by 2022 and has helped establish a number of art and food venues and events, including MONA FOMA, and the winter festivals of Mid-Winter Fest and Dark Mofo. 27% of visitors to Tasmania visit the museum.\nIn 2016, Hobart received 1.8\u00a0million visitors, surpassing both Perth and Canberra, tying equally with Brisbane. Visitor numbers reached a low of 744,200 in 2021, primarily as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, with expectations that numbers would return to normal by 2023.\nMany local tourist attractions focuses on the convict history of Hobart, the city's historic architecture, art experiences, and food and alcohol experiences. Hobart is home to a significant number of nationally known restaurants, boutique alcohol producers, including Sullivans Cove Whiskey, which won world's best single malt in 2014, boutique hotels, and art experiences. Other significant tourist attractions include Australia's second oldest botanic gardens, the Royal Tasmanian Botanical Gardens, which holds extensive significant plant collections, a range of public and private museums including the Tasmanian Museum &amp; Art Gallery and Maritime Museum Tasmania, and Mount Wellington, one of the dominant features of Hobart's skyline. At , the mountain has its own ecosystems, is rich in biodiversity and plays a large part in determining the local weather.\nHobart is used as a staging ground to visit many of the region's surrounding attractions, including the historic sights of Richmond (where a model of Old Hobart Town is located) and Oatlands, Seven Mile Beach and Turrakana / Tasman Peninsula, the Huon Valley, and the waterfalls of Mount Field National Park via the Derwent Valley.\nGovernment.\nLocal.\nGreater Hobart as of the 2021 Census is divided into seven local government areas - three of which are designated as cities, City of Hobart, City of Glenorchy and City of Clarence. The remaining metropolitan area is within the Municipality of Kingborough, the Municipality of Brighton, the Municipality of Sorell and the Municipality of Derwent Valley. Each local government area has an elected council which manages functions delegated by the Tasmanian state government such as roads, planning, animal control and parks. Mains water and sewerage processing are serviced by TasWater, which is a state-wide authority part owned by the state government and local government areas.\nState.\nHobart is the seat of the Parliament of Tasmania, located at Parliament House, Salamanca Place, and the location of the official residence of the Governor of Tasmania, Government House.\nThe senior sitting of the Supreme Court of Tasmania, and only sitting of the Court's appeal division, as well as the Magistrates' Court and Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (TASCAT), sit in Hobart. The Risdon Prison Complex (which includes the Mary Hutchinson Women's Prison and Barwick Minimum Security Prison) and Hobart Reception Centre are in the region.\nHobart was made the seat of government for the southern district of Tasmania (then called Van Diemen's Land), Buckingham County in 1804, with the northern half of the state separately governed from Port Dalrymple, now George Town. At the time, Van Diemen's Land remained part of the Colony of New South Wales. In 1812, the northern lieutenant governorship ceased and Hobart become de facto seat of government for the entire island. Hobart officially became capital of an independent colony of Van Diemen's Land in 1825, and the seat of responsible self government in 1850 with the Australian Constitutions Act 1850.\nTransport.\nBus.\nThe main public transportation within the city of Hobart is via a network of Metro Tasmania buses operated by the Tasmanian Government. The main hub is at the centrally located Hobart Bus Mall on Elizabeth Street. The GreenCard fare ticketing system is held by about 100 thousand customers.\nThere are also a small number of private bus services, departing from Murray Street and the Brooke Street Pier. These include the airport SkyBus, and charters and coaches by Tassielink Transit and Kinetic Tasmania.\nTasmania spends the least per capita on public transport in Australia, which is partly responsible for a weekday usage decline of 80.8% between 1964 and 2021. However, the State Government has indicated a consolidation of routes into three main BRT spokes.\nRoad.\nHobart's transport is centred around roads. The main arterial routes within the urban area are the Brooker Highway to Glenorchy and the northern suburbs, the Tasman Bridge and Bowen Bridge across the river to Rosny and the Eastern Shore. The East Derwent Highway to Lindisfarne, Geilston Bay, and Northwards to Brighton, the South Arm Highway leading to Howrah, Rokeby, Lauderdale and Opossum Bay and the Southern Outlet south to Kingston and the D'Entrecasteaux Channel. Leaving the city, motorists can travel the Lyell Highway to the west coast, Midland Highway to Launceston and the north, Tasman Highway to the east coast, or the Huon Highway to the far south.\nMany of these highways were built after Australia's first motor vehicle transportation study by US consultants in the 1960s, with an apparent urgency to cater to growing road traffic volumes. However, most of the targets were not achieved in the years after 1985 despite the scale of these projects, with the large amount of public funds required curbing feasibility. Another side-effect of this transition in investment away from public transport is that Hobart has limited mode redundancy compared to larger Australian capitals and a higher proportion of vehicle traffic, meaning that individual incidents can shut the entire network down.\nTasmania's largest transport project, the $786 million Bridgewater Bridge, was completed in 2025.\nFerry.\nThere is a ferry service by Derwent Ferries which operates a single line (F2) between Brooke Street Pier and Bellerive Quay that operates six days a week. It was initiated as a trial in 2021 servicing the Hobart City Centre and Bellerive on the eastern shore, garnering 110 thousand passengers by the end of the year.\nThe ferry provides a convenient alternative to crossing the Tasman Bridge choke point, with its purpose being to reduce congestion. It is seen as a first step in diversifying Hobart's transport options to reduce traffic problems by taking the number of cars off the road rather than inducing more traffic. More ferry terminal sites were revealed in 2023 to Regatta Point, Wrest Point, Wilkinsons Point, Howrah Point, Lindisfarne and Kingston Beach.\nThere are also private tourist ferries like the Spirit of Hobart, and two MONA Roma catamarans which take 25 minutes to the Museum of Old and New Art.\nFerry services from Hobart's Eastern Shore into the city were once a common form of public transportation, but with lack of government funding, as well as a lack of interest from the private sector, the commuter ferry service was closed for many decades \u2013 leaving Hobart's commuters relying solely on travel by automobiles and buses. There was however a water taxi service operating from the Eastern Shore into Hobart which provides an alternative to the Tasman Bridge (ferries were temporarily loaned from Sydney following the Tasman Bridge disaster). The MV Cartela was one of Australia's oldest still operating since 1912.\nAir.\nHobart is served by Hobart Airport with flights to/from Adelaide, Auckland, Brisbane, Canberra, Gold Coast, Melbourne, Perth, Sydney, and regional destinations including the Bass Strait islands. The smaller Cambridge Aerodrome mainly serves small charter airlines offering local tourist flights. In the past decade, Hobart International Airport received a huge upgrade, with the airport now being a first class airport facility.\nIn 2009, it was announced that Hobart Airport would receive more upgrades, including a first floor, aerobridges (currently, passengers must walk on the tarmac) and shopping facilities. Possible new international flights to Asia and New Zealand, and possible new domestic flights to Darwin and Cairns have been proposed. A second runway, possibly to be constructed in the next 15 years, would assist with growing passenger numbers to Hobart. Hobart Control Tower may be renovated and fitted with new radar equipment, and the airport's carpark may be extended further. Also, new facilities will be built just outside the airport. A new service station, hotel and day care centre have already been built and the road leading to the airport has been maintained and re-sealed. In 2016, work began on a 500-metre extension of the existing runway in addition to a $100\u00a0million upgrade of the airport. The runway extension is expected to allow international flights to land and increase air-traffic with Antarctica. This upgrade was, in part, funded under a promise made during the 2013 federal election by the Abbott government.\nSeaport.\nHobart's main port is managed by TasPorts and has a variety of uses. In Sullivans Cove, the two Princes Wharves are used for Antarctic restocking operations, while there are many piers and pontoons for berthing sailing boats, fishing vessels and yachts (at Victoria and Constitution Docks, especially following the Sydney to Hobart) and a seaplane. At Macquarie Point, the six Macquarie wharves are used for cruise ships (with a terminal onto Hunter Street by the port tower building) and defence vessels. Previously, shipping and services to ferry people between Sydney and Hobart such as Tasmanian Steamers and the Australian National Line, and shipbuilding occurred nearby.\nRail.\nWhile freight rail no longer operates within Hobart (since 2014), TasRail still operates the Brighton Transport Hub which connects to the main line to the north of Tasmania. Locomotives can be seen in Bridgewater as they make their way from the Boyer Mill near New Norfolk on the operational part of the Derwent Valley railway.\nLike many large Australian cities, Hobart once operated high-quality passenger rail services. This included a tram network which was closed in the early 1960s. The tracks are still visible in the older streets of Hobart. It was replaced by a short-lived trolleybus network consisting of six routes which operated until 1968. Suburban passenger trains, run by the Tasmanian Government Railways, were closed in 1974 and the intrastate passenger service, the Tasman Limited, ceased running in 1978. The Tasmanian Transport Museum in Glenorchy has a restored section of track for visitors.\nThere has been a push from public transport advocates and the two local councils to establish a light rail network, intended to be fast, efficient, and eco-friendly, along existing tracks on the Northern Suburbs Transit Corridor to solve the frequent jamming of traffic in Hobart CBD. This has grown amidst the need for higher-capacity mass transit and an alternative State Government bus proposal. However the State Government haven't ruled out Light Rail but has raised concerns regarding cost. The earlier Riverline proposal, which reached a business case (at $100 million, demonstrating benefits for socioeconomically disadvantaged areas of the city), was scrapped in the 2014 Australian federal budget.\nInfrastructure.\nEducation.\nThe Greater Hobart area contains 122 primary, secondary and pretertiary (College) schools distributed throughout Clarence, Glenorchy and Hobart City Councils and Kingborough and Brighton Municipalities. These schools are made up of a mix of public, catholic, private and independent run, with the heaviest distribution lying in the more densely populated West around the Hobart city core. The Department for Education, Children and Young People is responsible for government schools and Libraries Tasmania, which operates literacy services and libraries across the region, including the State Library of Tasmania where it is headquartered.\nHobart is home to the main campus of the University of Tasmania, a sandstone university located in Sandy Bay. On-site accommodation colleges include Christ College (founded in 1846, making it Australia's oldest tertiary institution), Jane Franklin Hall and St John Fisher College. UTAS also has many sites within the Hobart City Centre, where it hosts the Medical Science Precinct, the College of Arts, Law and Education's Hunter Street campus (which also has a TasTAFE training facility), and the Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies (IMAS) nearby the CSIRO Marine Laboratories, as well as the Hytten Hall and Hobart Apartments accommodation in Midtown. It also operates the Canopus Hill Observatory in Mount Rumney and the Mount Pleasant Radio Observatory in Cambridge.\nTasTAFE operates a total of seven polytechnic campuses within the Greater Hobart area that provide vocational education and training. These include the Campbell Street campus in the city, the Clarence campus in Warrane, and Drysdale (at Claremont College and on Collins Street).\nHealth.\nThe Royal Hobart Hospital (RHH) is the pre-eminent public hospital in Tasmania, located in central Hobart with 501 beds for emergency presentations and elective surgeries. It also serves as the Hobart Clinical School teaching hospital for the University of Tasmania. There are also nine ambulance stations in the Hobart region, and the SES Southern Regional Headquarters is on Bathurst Street (along with the Tasmania Fire Service Head Office on Melville/Argyle and Tasmania Police Headquarters on Liverpool).\nA private hospital, Hobart Private Hospital is located adjacent to the RHH and operated by Australian healthcare provider Healthscope. The company also owned another hospital in the city, the St Helen's Private Hospital, which featured a mother-baby unit but it was closed in 2023. A new Tasman private hospital in New Town was proposed on a former WIN News site, but abandoned in 2023.\nThe Calvary Hospital is operated by Little Company of Mary Health Care at its main campus the Calvary-St John's Private Hospital in Lenah Valley, and has an older location in South Hobart (the former Homoeopathic Hospital). It has a Private Rehabilitation Unit.\nThe Hobart Clinic (formerly St Michael's Priory) is a not-for-profit operating a 27-bed psychiatric hospital in Rokeby and Mind Hub on Collins Street, with a focus on therapies.\nUtilities.\nDrinking water and sewerage in the city is managed by TasWater, but many organisations and levels of government are involved at different stages. The first dams in Tasmania were built along the Hobart Rivulet and now there are many reservoirs in the region to safeguard the supply of water (as while Mount Wellington receives high rainfall, the city itself is dry), such as the Waterworks reservoirs via the Sandy Bay Rivulet, the Tolosa dam (disused in 2018) and Lime Kiln Gully dam in Glenorchy, and the Flagstaff Gully dam and Risdon Brook dam (which stores treated water from the New Norfolk Bryn Estyn plant) in Clarence.\nTasNetworks is responsible for electricity and telecommunications provision.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13700", "revid": "27417341", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13700", "title": "Hesiod", "text": "Ancient Greek poet of the archaic period\nHesiod ( or ; \"H\u0113s\u00edodos\"; fl.) was an Ancient Greek poet generally thought to have been active between 750 and 650 BC, around the same time as Homer.\nSeveral of Hesiod's works have survived in their entirety. Among these are \"Theogony\", which tells the origins of the gods, their lineages, and the events that led to Zeus's rise to power, and \"Works and Days\", a poem that describes the five Ages of Man, offers advice and wisdom, and includes myths such as Pandora's box.\nHesiod is generally regarded by Western authors as 'the first written poet in the Western tradition to regard himself as an individual persona with an active role to play in his subject.' Ancient authors credited Hesiod and Homer with establishing Greek religious customs. Modern scholars refer to him as a major source on Greek mythology, farming techniques, early economic thought, Archaic Greek astronomy, cosmology, and ancient time-keeping.\nLife.\nThe dating of Hesiod's life is a contested issue in scholarly circles (\"see \u00a7 Dating below\"). Epic narrative allowed poets such as Homer no opportunity for personal revelations. However Hesiod's extant work comprises several didactic poems in which he went out of his way to let his audience in on a few details of his life. There are three explicit references in \"Works and Days\", as well as some passages in his \"Theogony\", that support inferences made by scholars. The former poem says that his father came from Cyme in Aeolis (on the coast of Anatolia, a little south of the island of Lesbos) and crossed the sea to settle at a hamlet near Thespiae in Boeotia named Ascra, \"a cursed place, cruel in winter, hard in summer, never pleasant\" (\"Works\" 640). Hesiod's patrimony (property inherited from one's father or male ancestor) in Ascra, a small piece of ground at the foot of Mount Helicon, occasioned lawsuits with his brother Perses, who at first seems to have cheated him of his rightful share thanks to corrupt authorities or \u2018kings\u2019 but later became impoverished and ended up scrounging from the thrifty poet (\"Works\" 35, 396).\nUnlike his father Hesiod was averse to sea travel, but he once crossed the narrow strait between the Greek mainland and Euboea to participate in funeral celebrations for one Amphidamas of Chalcis and there won a tripod in a singing competition. He also describes meeting the Muses on Mount Helicon, where he had been pasturing sheep, when the goddesses presented him with a laurel staff, a symbol of poetic authority (\"Theogony\" 22\u201335). Fanciful though the story might seem, the account has led ancient and modern scholars to infer that he was not a professionally trained rhapsode or he would have been presented with a lyre instead.\nSome scholars have seen Perses as a literary creation, a foil for the moralizing that Hesiod develops in \"Works and Days\", but there are also arguments against that theory. For example, it is quite common for works of moral instruction to have an imaginative setting as a means of getting the audience's attention, but it could be difficult to see how Hesiod could have traveled around the countryside entertaining people with a narrative about himself if the account was known to be fictitious. Gregory Nagy, on the other hand, sees both \"P\u00e9rs\u0113s\" (\"the destroyer\" from , \"p\u00e9rth\u014d\") and \"H\u0113s\u00edodos\" (\"he who emits the voice\" from , \"h\u00ed\u0113mi\" and , \"aud\u1e17\") as fictitious names for poetical personae.\nIt might seem unusual that Hesiod's father migrated from Anatolia westwards to mainland Greece, the opposite direction to most colonial movements at the time, and Hesiod himself gives no explanation for it. However, around 750 BC or a little later, there was a migration of seagoing merchants from his original home in Cyme in Anatolia to Cumae in Campania (a colony they shared with the Euboeans), and possibly his move west had something to do with that, since Euboea is not far from Boeotia, where he eventually established himself and his family. The family association with Aeolian Cyme might explain his familiarity with Eastern myths, evident in his poems, though the Greek world might have already developed its own versions of them.\nIn spite of Hesiod's complaints about poverty, life on his father's farm could not have been too uncomfortable if \"Works and Days\" is anything to judge by, since he describes the routines of prosperous yeomanry rather than peasants. His farmer employs a friend (\"Works and Days\" 370) as well as servants (502, 573, 597, 608, 766), an energetic and responsible ploughman of mature years (469 ff.), a slave boy to cover the seed (441\u20136), a female servant to keep house (405, 602) and working teams of oxen and mules (405, 607f.). One modern scholar surmises that Hesiod may have learned about world geography, especially the catalogue of rivers in \"Theogony\" (337\u201345), listening to his father's accounts of his own sea voyages as a merchant. The father probably spoke in the Aeolian dialect of Cyme but Hesiod probably grew up speaking the local Boeotian, belonging to the same dialect group. However whilst his poetry features some Aeolisms there are no words that are certainly Boeotian. His basic language was the main literary dialect of the time, Homer's Ionian.\nIt is probable that Hesiod wrote his poems down, or dictated them, rather than passing them on orally, as rhapsodes did\u2014otherwise: the pronounced personality that now emerges from the poems would surely have been diluted through oral transmission from one rhapsode to another. Pausanias asserted that Boeotians showed him an old tablet made of lead on which the \"Works\" were engraved. If he did write or dictate, it was perhaps as an aid to memory or because he lacked confidence in his ability to produce poems extempore, as trained rhapsodes could do. It certainly was not in a quest for immortal fame since poets in his era had probably no such notions for themselves. However some scholars suspect the presence of large-scale changes in the text and attribute it to oral transmission. Possibly he composed his verses during idle times on the farm, in the spring before the May harvest or the dead of winter.\nThe personality behind the poems is unsuited to the kind of \"aristocratic withdrawal\" typical of a rhapsode but is instead \"argumentative, suspicious, ironically humorous, frugal, fond of proverbs, wary of women.\" He was in fact a \"misogynist\" of the same calibre as the later poet Semonides. He resembles Solon in his preoccupation with issues of good versus evil and \"how a just and all-powerful god can allow the unjust to flourish in this life\". He recalls Aristophanes in his rejection of the idealised hero of epic literature in favour of an idealized view of the farmer. Yet the fact that he could eulogize kings in \"Theogony\" (80 ff., 430, 434) and denounce them as corrupt in \"Works and Days\" suggests that he could resemble whichever audience he composed for.\nVarious legends accumulated about Hesiod and they are recorded in several sources: \nDeath.\nTwo different\u2014yet early\u2014traditions record the site of Hesiod's grave. One, as early as Thucydides, reported in Plutarch, the \"Suda\" and John Tzetzes, states that the Delphic oracle warned Hesiod that he would die in Nemea, and so he fled to Locris, where he was killed at the local temple to Nemean Zeus, and buried there. This tradition follows a familiar ironic convention: the oracle predicts accurately after all. The other tradition, first mentioned in an epigram by Chersias of Orchomenus written in the 7th century BC (within a century or so of Hesiod's death), claims that Hesiod lies buried at Orchomenus, a town in Boeotia. According to Aristotle's \"Constitution of Orchomenus\", when the Thespians ravaged Ascra the villagers sought refuge at Orchomenus, where, following the advice of an oracle, they collected the ashes of Hesiod and set them in a place of honour in their \"agora\", next to the tomb of Minyas, their eponymous founder. Eventually they came to regard Hesiod too as their \"hearth-founder\" (, \"oikist\u0113s\"). Later writers attempted to harmonize these two accounts. Yet another account taken from classical sources, cited by author Charles Abraham Elton in his \"Remains of Hesiod the Ascr\u00e6an, Including the Shield of Hercules by Hesiod\", depicts Hesiod as being falsely accused of rape by a girl's brothers and murdered in reprisal despite his advanced age, while the true culprit (his Milesian fellow-traveler) managed to escape.\nDating.\nGreeks in the late 5th and early 4th centuries BC considered their oldest poets to be Orpheus, Musaeus, Hesiod and Homer\u2014in that order. But thereafter, Greek writers began to consider Homer earlier than Hesiod. Devotees of Orpheus and Musaeus were probably responsible for precedence being given to their two cult heroes and maybe the Homeridae were responsible in later antiquity for promoting Homer at Hesiod's expense.\nThe first known writers to locate Homer earlier than Hesiod were Xenophanes and Heraclides Ponticus, though Aristarchus of Samothrace was the first actually to argue the case. Ephorus made Homer a younger cousin of Hesiod, the 5th century BC historian Herodotus (\"Histories\" II, 53) evidently considered them near-contemporaries, and the 4th century BC sophist Alcidamas in his work \"Mouseion\" even brought them together for an imagined poetic \"\u00e1g\u014dn\" (), which survives today as the \"Contest of Homer and Hesiod\". Most scholars today agree with Homer's priority but there are good arguments on either side.\nHesiod certainly predates the lyric and elegiac poets whose work has come down to the modern era. Imitations of his work have been observed in Alcaeus, Epimenides, Mimnermus, Semonides, Tyrtaeus and Archilochus, from which it has been inferred that the latest possible date for him is about 650 BC.\nAn upper limit of 750 BC is indicated by a number of considerations, such as the probability that his work was written down, the fact that he mentions a sanctuary at Delphi that was of little national significance before c. 750 BC (\"Theogony\" 499), and he lists rivers that flow into the Euxine, a region explored and developed by Greek colonists beginning in the 8th century BC. (\"Theogony\" 337\u201345).\nHesiod mentions a poetry contest at Chalcis in Euboea where the sons of one Amphidamas awarded him a tripod (\"Works and Days\" 654\u2013662). Plutarch identified this Amphidamas with the hero of the Lelantine War between Chalcis and Eretria and he concluded that the passage must be an interpolation into Hesiod's original work, assuming that the Lelantine War was too late for Hesiod. Modern scholars have accepted his identification of Amphidamas but disagreed with his conclusion. The date of the war is not known precisely but estimates placing it around 730\u2013705 BC fit the estimated chronology for Hesiod. In that case, the tripod that Hesiod won might have been awarded for his rendition of \"Theogony\", a poem that seems to presuppose the kind of aristocratic audience he would have met at Chalcis.\nWorks.\nThree works have survived which were attributed to Hesiod by ancient commentators: \"Works and Days\", \"Theogony\", and \"Shield of Heracles\". Only fragments exist of other works attributed to him. The surviving works and fragments were all written in the conventional metre and language of epic. However, the \"Shield of Heracles\" is now known to be spurious and probably was written in the sixth century BC. Many ancient critics also rejected \"Theogony\" (e.g., Pausanias 9.31.3), even though Hesiod mentions himself by name in that poem. \"Theogony\" and \"Works and Days\" might be very different in subject matter, but they share a distinctive language, metre, and prosody that subtly distinguish them from Homer's work and from the \"Shield of Heracles\" (see Hesiod's Greek below). Moreover, they both refer to the same version of the Prometheus myth. Yet even these authentic poems may include interpolations. For example, the first ten verses of the \"Works and Days\" may have been borrowed from an Orphic hymn to Zeus (they were recognised as not the work of Hesiod by critics as ancient as Pausanias).\nSome scholars have detected a proto-historical perspective in Hesiod, a view rejected by Paul Cartledge, for example, on the grounds that Hesiod advocates a not-forgetting without any attempt at verification. Hesiod has also been considered the father of gnomic verse. He had \"a passion for systematizing and explaining things\". Ancient Greek poetry in general had strong philosophical tendencies and Hesiod, like Homer, demonstrates a deep interest in a wide range of 'philosophical' issues, from the nature of divine justice to the beginnings of human society. Aristotle (\"Metaphysics\" 983b\u2013987a) believed that the question of first causes may even have started with Hesiod (\"Theogony\" 116\u201353) and Homer (\"Iliad\" 14.201, 246).\nHe viewed the world from outside the charmed circle of aristocratic rulers, protesting against their injustices in a tone of voice that has been described as having a \"grumpy quality redeemed by a gaunt dignity\" but, as stated in the biography section, he could also change to suit the audience. This ambivalence appears to underlie his presentation of human history in \"Works and Days\", where he depicts a golden period when life was easy and good, followed by a steady decline in behaviour and happiness through the silver, bronze, and Iron Ages\u00a0\u2013 except that he inserts a heroic age between the last two, representing its warlike men as better than their bronze predecessors. He seems in this case to be catering to two different world-views, one epic and aristocratic, the other unsympathetic to the heroic traditions of the aristocracy.\n\"Theogony\".\nThe \"Theogony\" is commonly considered Hesiod's earliest work. Despite the different subject matter between this poem and the \"Works and Days\", most scholars, with some notable exceptions, believe that the two works were written by the same man. As M. L. West writes, \"Both bear the marks of a distinct personality: a surly, conservative countryman, given to reflection, no lover of women or life, who felt the gods' presence heavy about him.\" An example:\n&lt;poem&gt;Hateful strife bore painful Toil,\nNeglect, Starvation, and tearful Pain,\nBattles, Combats...&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe \"Theogony\" concerns the origins of the world (cosmogony) and of the gods (theogony), beginning with Chaos, Gaia, Tartarus and Eros, and shows a special interest in genealogy. Embedded in Greek myth, there remain fragments of quite variant tales, hinting at the rich variety of myth that once existed, city by city; but Hesiod's retelling of the old stories became, according to Herodotus, the accepted version that linked all Hellenes. It is the earliest known source for the myths of Pandora, Prometheus and the Golden Age.\nThe creation myth in Hesiod has long been held to have Eastern influences, such as the Hittite Song of Kumarbi and the Babylonian Enuma Elis. This cultural crossover may have occurred in the eighth- and ninth-century Greek trading colonies such as Al Mina in North Syria. (For more discussion, read Robin Lane Fox's \"Travelling Heroes\" and Peter Walcot's \"Hesiod and the Near East\".)\n\"Works and Days\".\n\"Works and Days\" is a poem of over 800 lines which revolves around two general truths: labour is the universal lot of Man, but he who is willing to work will get by. Scholars have interpreted this work against a background of agrarian crisis in mainland Greece, which inspired a wave of documented colonisations in search of new land.\n\"Works and Days\" may have been influenced by an established tradition of didactic poetry based on Sumerian, Hebrew, Babylonian and Egyptian wisdom literature.\nThis work lays out the five Ages of Man, as well as containing advice and wisdom, prescribing a life of honest labour and attacking idleness and unjust judges (like those who decided in favour of Perses) as well as the practice of usury. It describes immortals who roam the earth watching over justice and injustice. The poem regards labor as the source of all good, in that both gods and men hate the idle, who resemble drones in a hive. In the horror of the triumph of violence over hard work and honor, verses describing the \"Golden Age\" present the social character and practice of nonviolent diet through agriculture and fruit-culture as a higher path of living sufficiently.\nHesiodic corpus.\nIn addition to the \"Theogony\" and \"Works and Days\", numerous other poems were ascribed to Hesiod during antiquity. Modern scholarship has doubted their authenticity, and these works are generally referred to as forming part of the \"Hesiodic corpus\" whether or not their authorship is accepted. The situation is summed up in this formulation by Glenn Most:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Hesiod\" is the name of a person; \"Hesiodic\" is a designation for a kind of poetry, including but not limited to the poems of which the authorship may reasonably be assigned to Hesiod himself.\nOf these works forming the extended Hesiodic corpus, only the \"Shield of Heracles\" (, \"Aspis H\u0113rakleous\") is transmitted intact via a medieval manuscript tradition.\nClassical authors also attributed to Hesiod a lengthy genealogical poem known as \"Catalogue of Women\" or \"Ehoiai\" (because sections began with the Greek words \"\u0113 hoi\u0113,\" \"Or like the one who\u00a0...\"). It was a mythological catalogue of the mortal women who had mated with gods, and of the offspring and descendants of these unions.\nSeveral additional hexameter poems were ascribed to Hesiod:\nIn addition to these works, the \"Suda\" lists an otherwise unknown \"dirge for Batrachus, [Hesiod's] beloved\".\nDepictions.\nMonnus mosaic.\nPortrait of Hesiod from Augusta Treverorum (Trier), from the end of the 3rd century AD. The mosaic is signed in its central field by the maker, ('Monnus made this'). The figure is identified by name: ('Hesiod'). It is the only known authenticated portrait of Hesiod.\nPortrait bust.\nThe Roman bronze bust, the so-called \"Pseudo-Seneca,\" of the late first century BC found at Herculaneum is now thought not to be of Seneca the Younger. It has been identified by Gisela Richter as an imagined portrait of Hesiod. In fact, it has been recognized since 1813 that the bust was not of Seneca when an inscribed herma portrait of Seneca with quite different features was discovered. Most scholars now follow Richter's identification.\nHesiod's Greek.\nHesiod employed the conventional dialect of epic verse, which was Ionian. Comparisons with Homer, a native Ionian, can be unflattering. Hesiod's handling of the dactylic hexameter was not as masterful or fluent as Homer's and one modern scholar refers to his \"hobnailed hexameters\". His use of language and meter in \"Works and Days\" and \"Theogony\" distinguishes him also from the author of the \"Shield of Heracles\". All three poets, for example, employed digamma inconsistently, sometimes allowing it to affect syllable length and meter, sometimes not. The ratio of observance/neglect of digamma varies between them. The extent of variation depends on how the evidence is collected and interpreted but there is a clear trend, revealed for example in the following set of statistics.\nHesiod does not observe digamma as often as the others do. That result is a bit counter-intuitive since digamma was still a feature of the Boeotian dialect that Hesiod probably spoke, whereas it had already vanished from the Ionic vernacular of Homer. This anomaly can be explained by the fact that Hesiod made a conscious effort to compose like an Ionian epic poet at a time when digamma was not heard in Ionian speech, while Homer tried to compose like an older generation of Ionian bards, when it was heard in Ionian speech. There is also a significant difference in the results for \"Theogony\" and \"Works and Days\", but that is merely due to the fact that the former includes a catalog of divinities and therefore it makes frequent use of the definite article associated with digamma, o\u1f31.\nThough typical of epic, his vocabulary features some significant differences from Homer's. One scholar has counted 278 un-Homeric words in \"Works and Days\", 151 in \"Theogony\" and 95 in \"Shield of Heracles\". The disproportionate number of un-Homeric words in \"W &amp; D\" is due to its un-Homeric subject matter. Hesiod's vocabulary also includes quite a lot of formulaic phrases that are not found in Homer, which indicates that he may have been writing within a different tradition.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13702", "revid": "37582753", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13702", "title": "Hebrew numerals", "text": "Numeral system using letters of the Hebrew alphabet\nThe system of Hebrew numerals is a quasi-decimal alphabetic numeral system using the letters of the Hebrew alphabet.\nThe system was adapted from that of the Greek numerals sometime between 200 and 78 BCE, the latter being the date of the earliest archeological evidence.\nThe current numeral system is also known as the \"Hebrew alphabetic numerals\" to contrast with earlier systems of writing numerals used in classical antiquity. These systems were inherited from usage in the Aramaic and Phoenician scripts, attested from c.\u2009800 BCE in the Samaria Ostraca.\nThe Greek system was adopted in Hellenistic Judaism and had been in use in Greece since about the 5th century BCE.\nIn this system, there is no notation for zero, and the numeric values for individual letters are added together. Each unit (1, 2, ..., 9) is assigned a separate letter, each tens (10, 20, ..., 90) a separate letter, and the first four hundreds (100, 200, 300, 400) a separate letter. The later hundreds (500, 600, 700, 800 and 900) are represented by the sum of two or three letters representing the first four hundreds. To represent numbers from 1,000 to 999,999, the same letters are reused to serve as thousands, tens of thousands, and hundreds of thousands. Gematria (Jewish numerology) uses these transformations extensively.\nIn Israel today, the decimal system of Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system (ex. 0, 1, 2, 3, etc.) is used in almost all cases (money, age, date on the civil calendar). The Hebrew numerals are used only in special cases, such as when using the Hebrew calendar, or numbering a list (similar to a, b, c, d, etc.), much as Roman numerals are used in the West.\nNumbers.\nThe Hebrew language has names for common numbers that range from zero to one million. Letters of the Hebrew alphabet are used to represent numbers in a few traditional contexts, such as in calendars. In other situations, numerals from the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system are used. Cardinal and ordinal numbers must agree in gender with the noun they are describing. If there is no such noun (e.g., in telephone numbers), the feminine form is used. For ordinal numbers greater than ten, the cardinal is used. Multiples of ten above the value 20 have no gender (20, 30, 40, ... are genderless), unless the number has the digit 1 in the tens position (110, 210, 310, ...).\nOrdinal values.\nNote: For ordinal numbers greater than 10, cardinal numbers are used instead.\nCardinal values.\nNote: Officially, numbers greater than a million were represented by the long scale. However, since January 21, 2013, the modified short scale (under which the long scale milliard is substituted for the strict short scale billion), which was already the colloquial standard, became official.\nSpeaking and writing.\nCardinal and ordinal numbers must agree in gender (masculine or feminine; mixed groups are treated as masculine) with the noun they are describing. If there is no such noun (e.g. a telephone number or a house number in a street address), the feminine form is used. Ordinal numbers must also agree in number and definite status like other adjectives. The cardinal number precedes the noun (e.g., \"shlosha yeladim\"), except for the number one which succeeds it (e.g., \"yeled echad\"). The number two is special: \"shnayim\" (m.) and \"shtayim\" (f.) become \"shney\" (m.) and \"shtey\" (f.) when followed by the noun they count. For ordinal numbers (numbers indicating position) greater than ten the cardinal is used.\nCalculations.\nThe Hebrew numeric system operates on the additive principle in which the numeric values of the letters are added together to form the total. For example, 177 is represented as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e7\u05e2\u05d6\u200e which (from right to left) corresponds to 100 + 70 + 7 = 177.\nMathematically, this type of system requires 27 letters (1\u20139, 10\u201390, 100\u2013900). In practice, the last letter, \"tav\" (which has the value 400), is used in combination with itself or other letters from \"qof\" (100) onwards to generate numbers from 500 and above. Alternatively, the 22-letter Hebrew numeral set is sometimes extended to 27 by using 5 \"sofit\" (final) forms of the Hebrew letters.\nKey exceptions.\nBy convention, the numbers 15 and 16 are represented as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d8\u05f4\u05d5\u200e\u200e (9 + 6) and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d8\u05f4\u05d6\u200e\u200e (9 + 7), respectively, in order to refrain from using the two-letter combinations &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d9-\u05d4\u200e\u200e (10 + 5) and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d9-\u05d5\u200e\u200e (10 + 6), which are alternate written forms for the Name of God in everyday writing. In the calendar, this manifests every full moon since all Hebrew months start on a new moon (see for example: Tu BiShvat).\nThis convention developed sometimes in the Middle Ages, before that it was common to write 15 and 16 as \u05d9\"\u05d4 and \u05d9\"\u05d5.\nCombinations which would spell out words with negative connotations are sometimes avoided by switching the order of the letters. For instance, 744 which should be written as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05ea\u05e9\u05de\u05f4\u05d3\u200e\u200e (meaning \"you/it will be destroyed\") might instead be written as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05ea\u05e9\u05d3\u05f4\u05de\u200e or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05ea\u05de\u05e9\u05f4\u05d3\u200e (meaning \"end to demon\").\nUse of final letters.\nThe Hebrew numeral system has sometimes been extended to include the five final letter forms\u2014&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05da\u200e for 500, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05dd\u200e for 600, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05df\u200e for 700, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e3\u200e for 800, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e5\u200e for 900. Usually though the final letter form are used with the same value as the regular letter form\u2014&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05da\u200e for 20, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05dd\u200e for 40, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05df\u200e for 50, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e3\u200e for 80, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e5\u200e for 90.\nThe ordinary additive forms for 500 to 900 are &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05ea\u05f4\u05e7\u200e, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05ea\u05f4\u05e8\u200e, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05ea\u05f4\u05e9\u200e, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05ea\u05f4\u05ea\u200e and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05ea\u05ea\u05f4\u05e7\u200e.\nGershayim.\nGershayim (U+05F4 in Unicode, and resembling a double quote mark) (sometimes erroneously referred to as \"merkha'ot\", which is Hebrew for double quote) are inserted before (to the right of) the last (leftmost) letter to indicate that the sequence of letters represents something other than a word. This is used in the case where a number is represented by two or more Hebrew numerals (\"e.g.,\" 28 \u2192 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05db\u05f4\u05d7\u200e\u200e).\nSimilarly, a single geresh (U+05F3 in Unicode, and resembling a single quote mark) is appended after (to the left of) a single letter to indicate that the letter represents a number rather than a (one-letter) word. This is used in the case where a number is represented by a single Hebrew numeral (\"e.g.\" 100 \u2192 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e7\u05f3\u200e\u200e).\nNote that geresh and gershayim merely indicate \"not a (normal) word.\" Context usually determines whether they indicate a number or something else (such as an abbreviation).\nWhen the number is used for chapters, verses, pages, lines, etc. there is no need to put on the number a geresh/gershayim.\nAn alternative method found in old manuscripts and still found on modern-day tombstones is to put a dot above each letter of the number.\nDecimals.\nIn print, Arabic numerals are employed in Modern Hebrew for most purposes. Hebrew numerals are used nowadays primarily for writing the days and years of the Hebrew calendar; for references to traditional Jewish texts (particularly for Biblical chapter and verse and for Talmudic folios); for bulleted or numbered lists (similar to \"A\", \"B\", \"C\", \"etc.\", in English); and in numerology (gematria).\nThousands and date formats.\nThousands are counted separately, and the thousands count precedes the rest of the number (to the \"right\", since Hebrew is read from right to left). There are no special marks to signify that the \"count\" is starting over with thousands, which can theoretically lead to ambiguity, although a single quote mark is sometimes used after the letter. When specifying years of the Hebrew calendar in the present millennium, writers usually omit the thousands (which is presently 5 [&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d4\u200e]), but if they do not, this is accepted to mean 5,000, with no ambiguity. The current Israeli coinage includes the thousands.\nDate examples.\n\"Monday, 15 Adar 5764\" (where 5764 = 5(\u00d71000) + 400 + 300 + 60 + 4, and 15 = 9 + 6):\n In full (with thousands): \"Monday, 15(th) of Adar, 5764\"\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u202b\u05d9\u05d5\u05dd \u05e9\u05e0\u05d9 \u05d8\u05f4\u05d5 \u05d1\u05d0\u05d3\u05e8 \u05d4\u05f3\u05ea\u05e9\u05e1\u05f4\u05d3\u202c\u200e\n Common usage (omitting thousands): \"Monday, 15(th) of Adar, (5)764\"\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u202b\u05d9\u05d5\u05dd \u05e9\u05e0\u05d9 \u05d8\u05f4\u05d5 \u05d1\u05d0\u05d3\u05e8 \u05ea\u05e9\u05e1\u05f4\u05d3\u202c\u200e\n\"Thursday, 3 Nisan 5767\" (where 5767 = 5(\u00d71000) + 400 + 300 + 60 + 7):\n In full (with thousands): \"Thursday, 3(rd) of Nisan, 5767\"\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u202b\u05d9\u05d5\u05dd \u05d7\u05de\u05d9\u05e9\u05d9 \u05d2\u05f3 \u05d1\u05e0\u05d9\u05e1\u05df \u05d4\u05f3\u05ea\u05e9\u05e1\u05f4\u05d6\u202c\u200e\n Common usage (omitting thousands): \"Thursday, 3(rd) of Nisan, (5)767\"\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u202b\u05d9\u05d5\u05dd \u05d7\u05de\u05d9\u05e9\u05d9 \u05d2\u05f3 \u05d1\u05e0\u05d9\u05e1\u05df \u05ea\u05e9\u05e1\u05f4\u05d6\u202c\u200e\nTo see how \"today's\" date in the Hebrew calendar is written, see, for example, http://.\nRecent years.\n5785 (2024\u201325) = &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d4\u05f3\u05ea\u05e9\u05e4\u05f4\u05d4\u200e\n5784 (2023\u201324) = &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d4\u05f3\u05ea\u05e9\u05e4\u05f4\u05d3\u200e\n5783 (2022\u201323) = &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d4\u05f3\u05ea\u05e9\u05e4\u05f4\u05d2\u200e\n5772 (2011\u201312) = &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d4\u05f3\u05ea\u05e9\u05e2\u05f4\u05d1\u200e\n5771 (2010\u201311) = &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d4\u05f3\u05ea\u05e9\u05e2\u05f4\u05d0\u200e\n5770 (2009\u201310) = &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d4\u05f3\u05ea\u05e9\u05f4\u05e2\u200e\n5769 (2008\u201309) = &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d4\u05f3\u05ea\u05e9\u05e1\u05f4\u05d8\u200e\n5761 (2000\u201301) = &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d4\u05f3\u05ea\u05e9\u05e1\u05f4\u05d0\u200e\n5760 (1999\u20132000) = &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d4\u05f3\u05ea\u05e9\u05f4\u05e1\u200e\nSimilar systems.\nThe Abjad numerals are equivalent to the Hebrew numerals up to 400. The Greek numerals differ from the Hebrew ones from 90 upwards because in the Greek alphabet there is no equivalent for \"tsade\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e6\u200e).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13703", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13703", "title": "Hill system", "text": ""}
{"id": "13704", "revid": "966023083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13704", "title": "Hydroxy", "text": "Hydroxy can refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "13706", "revid": "33976243", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13706", "title": "Hero", "text": "Person or character who combats adversity through ingenuity, courage, or strength\nA hero (feminine: heroine) is a real person or fictional character who, in the face of danger, combats adversity through feats of ingenuity, courage, or strength. The original hero type of classical epics did such things for the sake of glory and honor. Post-classical and modern heroes, on the other hand, perform great deeds or selfless acts for the common good instead of the classical goal of wealth, pride, and fame. The antonym of \"hero\" is \"villain\". Other terms associated with the concept of \"hero\" may include \"good guy\" or \"white hat\".\nIn classical literature, the hero is the main or revered character in heroic epic poetry celebrated through ancient legends of a people, often striving for military conquest and living by a continually flawed personal honor code. The definition of a hero has changed throughout time. Merriam Webster dictionary defines a hero as \"a person who is admired for great or brave acts or fine qualities\". Examples of heroes range from mythological figures, such as Gilgamesh and Iphigenia, to historical and modern figures, such as Joan of Arc, Giuseppe Garibaldi, Sophie Scholl, Alvin York, Audie Murphy, and Chuck Yeager, and fictional \"superheroes\", including Superman and Batman.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"hero\" comes from the Greek \u1f25\u03c1\u03c9\u03c2 (\"h\u0113r\u014ds\"), \"hero\" particularly one such as Heracles with divine ancestry or later given divine honors. Before the decipherment of Linear B the original form of the word was assumed to be *, \"h\u0113r\u014dw-\", but the Mycenaean compound \"ti-ri-se-ro-e\" demonstrates the absence of -w-.\nAccording to \"The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language\", the Proto-Indo-European root is \"*ser\" meaning \"to protect\". According to Eric Partridge in \"Origins\", the Greek word \"h\u0113r\u014ds\" \"is akin to\" the Latin \"seru\u0101re\", meaning \"to safeguard\". Partridge concludes, \"The basic sense of both Hera and hero would therefore be 'protector'.\" R. S. P. Beekes rejects an Indo-European derivation and asserts that the word has a pre-Greek origin. Hera was a Greek goddess with many attributes, including protection and her worship appears to have similar proto-Indo-European origins.\nThe female term \"heroine\" was taken from the Latin word \"heroina\", from Greek \"h\u0113r\u014din\u0113\", feminine of \"h\u0113r\u014ds\". Its first use in the English language, however, was in 1587 to denote of strong and well-abled women of divine origins, as seen in myths and legends.\nAntiquity.\nA classical hero is considered to be a \"warrior who lives and dies in the pursuit of honor\" and asserts their greatness by \"the brilliance and efficiency with which they kill\". Each classical hero's life focuses on fighting, which occurs in war or during an epic quest. Classical heroes are commonly semi-divine and extraordinarily gifted, such as Achilles, evolving into heroic characters through their perilous circumstances. While these heroes are incredibly resourceful and skilled, they are often foolhardy, court disaster, risk their followers' lives for trivial matters, and behave arrogantly in a childlike manner. During classical times, people regarded heroes with the highest esteem and utmost importance, explaining their prominence within epic literature. The appearance of these mortal figures marks the evolution of audiences and writers turning away from immortal gods to mortal mankind, whose heroic moments of glory survive in the memory of their descendants, extending their legacy.\nHector was a Trojan prince and the greatest fighter for Troy in the Trojan War, which is known primarily through Homer's \"Iliad\". Hector acted as leader of the Trojans and their allies in the defense of Troy, \"killing 31,000 Greek fighters\". Hector was known not only for his courage, but also for his noble and courtly nature. Indeed, Homer places Hector as peace-loving, thoughtful, as well as bold, a good son, husband and father, and without darker motives. However, his familial values conflict greatly with his heroic aspirations in the \"Iliad,\" as he cannot be both the protector of Troy and a father to his child. Hector is ultimately betrayed by the deities when Athena appears disguised as his ally Deiphobus and convinces him to challenge Achilles, leading to his death at the hands of a superior warrior.\nAchilles was a Greek hero who was considered the most formidable military fighter in the entire Trojan War and the central character of the \"Iliad\". He was the child of Thetis and Peleus, making him a demi-god. He wielded superhuman strength on the battlefield and was blessed with a close relationship to the deities. Achilles famously refused to fight after his dishonoring at the hands of Agamemnon, and only returned to the war due to unadulterated rage after Hector killed his beloved companion Patroclus. Achilles was known for uncontrollable rage that defined many of his bloodthirsty actions, such as defiling Hector's corpse by dragging it around the city of Troy seven times. Achilles plays a tragic role in the \"Iliad\" brought about because his \"menis\" (wrath) repeatedly overpowers his \"philos\" (love).\nHeroes in myth often had close but conflicted relationships with the deities. Thus, Heracles's name means \"the glory of Hera\", even though he was tormented all his life by Hera, the Queen of the Greek deities. Perhaps the most striking example is the Athenian king Erechtheus, whom Poseidon killed for choosing Athena rather than him as the city's patron deity. When the Athenians worshiped Erechtheus on the Acropolis, they invoked him as \"Poseidon Erechtheus\".\nFate, or destiny, plays a massive role in the stories of classical heroes. The classical hero's significance stems from battlefield conquests, an inherently dangerous action. The deities in Greek mythology, when interacting with the heroes, often foreshadow the hero's eventual death on the battlefield. Countless heroes and deities go to great lengths to alter their destinies, but with no success, as none, neither human or immortal can change their prescribed outcomes by the three powerful Fates. A characteristic example of this is found in \"Oedipus Rex.\" After learning that his son, Oedipus, will end up killing him, the King of Thebes, Laius, takes huge steps to ensure his son's death by removing him from the kingdom. When Oedipus encounters his father when his father was unknown to him in a dispute on the road many years later, Oedipus slays him without a thought. The lack of recognition enabled Oedipus to slay his father, ironically further binding his father to his fate.\nStories of heroism may serve as moral examples. However, classical heroes often did not embody the Christian notion of an upstanding, perfectly moral hero. For example, Achilles's character-issues of hateful rage lead to merciless slaughter and his overwhelming pride lead to him only joining the Trojan War because he did not want his soldiers to win all the glory. Classical heroes, regardless of their morality, were placed in religion. In classical antiquity, cults that venerated deified heroes such as Heracles, Perseus, and Achilles played an important role in Ancient Greek religion. These ancient Greek hero cults worshipped heroes from oral epic tradition, with these heroes often bestowing blessings, especially healing ones, on individuals.\nMyth and monomyth.\nThe concept of the \"Mythic Hero Archetype\" was first developed by Lord Raglan in his 1936 book, \"The Hero, A Study in Tradition, Myth and Drama\". It is a set of 22 common traits that he said were shared by many heroes in various cultures, myths, and religions throughout history and worldwide. Raglan argued that the higher the score, the more likely the figure is mythical.\nThe concept of a story archetype of the standard monomythical \"hero's quest\" that was reputed to be pervasive across all cultures is somewhat controversial. Expounded mainly by Joseph Campbell in his 1949 work \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\", it illustrates several uniting themes of hero stories that hold similar ideas of what a hero represents despite vastly different cultures and beliefs. The monomyth or Hero's Journey consists of three separate stages: the Departure, Initiation, and Return. Within these stages, there are several archetypes that the hero of either gender may follow, including the call to adventure (which they may initially refuse), supernatural aid, proceeding down a road of trials, achieving a realization about themselves (or an apotheosis), and attaining the freedom to live through their quest or journey. Campbell offered examples of stories with similar themes, such as Krishna, Buddha, Apollonius of Tyana, and Jesus. One of the themes he explores is the androgynous hero, who combines male and female traits, such as Bodhisattva: \"The first wonder to be noted here is the androgynous character of the Bodhisattva: masculine Avalokiteshvara, feminine Kwan Yin.\" In his 1968 book, \"The Masks of God: Occidental Mythology\", Campbell writes, \"It is clear that, whether accurate or not as to biographical detail, the moving legend of the Crucified and Risen Christ was fit to bring a new warmth, immediacy, and humanity, to the old motifs of the beloved Tammuz, Adonis, and Osiris cycles.\"\nSlavic fairy tales.\nVladimir Propp, in his analysis of Russian fairy tales, concluded that a fairy tale had only eight \"dramatis person\u00e6\", of which one was the hero, and his analysis has been widely applied to non-Russian folklore. The actions that fall into such a hero's sphere include:\nPropp distinguished between \"seekers\" and \"victim-heroes\". A villain could initiate the issue by kidnapping the hero or driving him out; these were victim-heroes. On the other hand, an antagonist could rob the hero, or kidnap someone close to him, or, without the villain's intervention, the hero could realize that he lacked something and set out to find it; these heroes are seekers. Victims may appear in tales with seeker heroes, but the tale does not follow them both.\nHistorical studies.\nThe philosopher Hegel gave a central role to the \"hero\", personalized by Napoleon, as the incarnation of a particular culture's \"Volksgeist\" and thus of the general \"Zeitgeist\". Thomas Carlyle's 1841 work, \"On Heroes, Hero-Worship, &amp; the Heroic in History\", also accorded an essential function to heroes and great men in history. Carlyle centered history on the biographies of individuals, as in \"Oliver Cromwell's Letters and Speeches\" and \"History of Frederick the Great\". His heroes were not only political and military figures, the founders or topplers of states, but also religious figures, poets, authors, and captains of industry.\nExplicit defenses of Carlyle's position were rare in the second part of the 20th century. Most in the philosophy of history school contend that the motive forces in history may best be described only with a wider lens than the one that Carlyle used for his portraits. For example, Karl Marx argued that history was determined by the massive social forces at play in \"class struggles\", not by the individuals by whom these forces are played out. After Marx, Herbert Spencer wrote at the end of the 19th century: \"You must admit that the genesis of the great man depends on the long series of complex influences which has produced the race in which he appears, and the social state into which that race has slowly grown...[b]efore he can remake his society, his society must make him.\" Michel Foucault argued in his analysis of societal communication and debate that history was mainly the \"science of the sovereign\", until its inversion by the \"historical and political popular discourse\".\nThe Annales school, led by Lucien Febvre, Marc Bloch, and Fernand Braudel, would contest the exaggeration of the role of individual subjects in history. Indeed, Braudel distinguished various time scales, one accorded to the life of an individual, another accorded to the life of a few human generations, and the last one to civilizations, in which geography, economics, and demography play a role considerably more decisive than that of individual subjects.\nModern examples of heroic leaders associated with transformative change have included Martin Luther King Jr, Nelson Mandela, Mahatma Gandhi and Albert Einstein. Other individuals considered to be historical heroes include Anne Frank, Harriet Tubman and Raoul Wallenberg.\nAmong noticeable events in the studies of the role of the hero and great man in history, one should mention Sidney Hook's book (1943) \"The Hero in History\". In the second half of the twentieth century such male-focused theory has been contested, among others by feminists writers such as Judith Fetterley in \"The Resisting Reader\" (1977) and literary theorist Nancy K. Miller, \"The Heroine's Text: Readings in the French and English Novel, 1722\u20131782\".\nIn the era of globalization an individual may change the development of a country and of the whole world, so this gives reasons to some scholars to suggest returning to the problem of the role of the hero in history from the viewpoint of modern historical knowledge and using up-to-date methods of historical analysis.\nWithin the frameworks of developing counterfactual history, attempts are made to examine some hypothetical scenarios of historical development. The hero attracts much attention because most of those scenarios are based on the suppositions: what would have happened if this or that historical individual had or had not been alive.\nModern fiction.\nThe word \"hero\" is sometimes used to describe the protagonist or the romantic interest of a story, a usage which may conflict with the superhuman expectations of heroism. A good example is Anna Karenina, the lead character in the novel of the same title by Leo Tolstoy. In modern literature the hero is more and more a problematic concept. In 1848, for example, William Makepeace Thackeray gave \"Vanity Fair\" the subtitle, \"A Novel without a Hero\", and imagined a world in which no sympathetic character was to be found. \"Vanity Fair\" is a satirical representation of the absence of truly moral heroes in the modern world. The story focuses on the characters, Emmy Sedley and Becky Sharpe (the latter as the clearly defined anti-hero), with the plot focused on the eventual marriage of these two characters to rich men, revealing character flaws as the story progresses. Even the most sympathetic characters, such as Captain Dobbin, are susceptible to weakness, as he is often narcissistic and melancholic.\nThe larger-than-life hero is a more common feature of fantasy (particularly in comic books and epic fantasy) than more realist works. However, these larger-than life figures remain prevalent in society. The superhero genre is a multibillion-dollar industry that includes comic books, movies, toys, and video games. Superheroes usually possess extraordinary talents and powers that no living human could ever possess. The superhero stories often pit a super villain against the hero, with the hero fighting the crime caused by the super villain. Examples of long-running superheroes include Superman, Wonder Woman, Batman, and Spider-Man.\nResearch indicates that male writers are more likely to make heroines superhuman, whereas female writers tend to make heroines ordinary humans, as well as making their male heroes more powerful than their heroines, possibly due to sex differences in valued traits.\nPsychology.\nSocial psychology has begun paying attention to heroes and heroism. Zeno Franco and Philip Zimbardo point out differences between heroism and altruism, and they offer evidence that observer perceptions of unjustified risk play a role above and beyond risk type in determining the ascription of heroic status.\nPsychologists have also identified the traits of heroes. Elaine Kinsella and her colleagues have identified 12 central traits of heroism, which consist of brave, moral integrity, conviction, courageous, self-sacrifice, protecting, honest, selfless, determined, saves others, inspiring, and helpful. Scott Allison and George Goethals uncovered evidence for \"the great eight traits\" of heroes consisting of wise, strong, resilient, reliable, charismatic, caring, selfless, and inspiring. These researchers have also identified four primary functions of heroism. Heroes give us wisdom; they enhance us; they provide moral modeling; and they offer protection.\nAn evolutionary psychology explanation for heroic risk-taking is that it is a costly signal demonstrating the ability of the hero. It may be seen as one form of altruism for which there are several other evolutionary explanations as well.\nRoma Chatterji has suggested that the hero or more generally protagonist is first and foremost a symbolic representation of the person who is experiencing the story while reading, listening, or watching; thus the relevance of the hero to the individual relies a great deal on how much similarity there is between them and the character. Chatterji suggested that one reason for the hero-as-self interpretation of stories and myths is the human inability to view the world from any perspective but a personal one.\nIn the Pulitzer Prize-winning book, \"The Denial of Death\", Ernest Becker argues that human civilization is ultimately an elaborate, symbolic defense mechanism against the knowledge of our mortality, which in turn acts as the emotional and intellectual response to our basic survival mechanism. Becker explains that a basic duality in human life exists between the physical world of objects and a symbolic world of human meaning. Thus, since humanity has a dualistic nature consisting of a physical self and a symbolic self, he asserts that humans are able to transcend the dilemma of mortality through heroism, by focusing attention mainly on the symbolic self. This symbolic self-focus takes the form of an individual's \"immortality project\" (or \"\"causa sui\" project\"), which is essentially a symbolic belief-system that ensures that one is believed superior to physical reality. By successfully living under the terms of the immortality project, people feel they can become heroic and, henceforth, part of something eternal; something that will never die as compared to their physical body. This he asserts, in turn, gives people the feeling that their lives have meaning, a purpose, and are significant in the grand scheme of things. Another theme running throughout the book is his belief that humanity's traditional \"hero-systems\", such as religion, are no longer convincing in an age of reason. Science attempts to serve as an immortality project, something that Becker believes it can never do, because it is unable to provide agreeable, absolute meanings to human life. The book states that we need new convincing \"illusions\" that enable people to feel heroic in ways that are agreeable. Becker hopes that gradual realization of humanity's innate motivations, namely death, may help to bring about a better world. Terror Management Theory (TMT) has generated evidence supporting this perspective.\nMental and physical integration.\nExamining the success of resistance fighters on Crete during the Nazi occupation in WWII, author and endurance researcher C. McDougall drew connections to the Ancient Greek heroes and a culture of integrated physical self-mastery, training, and mental conditioning. Skills established an \"ability to unleash tremendous resources of strength, endurance, and agility that many people don't realize they already have.\"\nMcDougall cites examples of heroic acts, including a \"scholium\" to Pindar's Fifth Nemean Ode: \"Much weaker in strength than the Minotaur, Theseus fought with it and won using , as he had no knife.\" , a martial art that featured in the ancient Olympic Games, means \"total power and knowledge\", one \"associated with gods and heroes\u00a0... who conquer by tapping every talent\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13708", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13708", "title": "Hilberts eighth problem", "text": ""}
{"id": "13709", "revid": "1302184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13709", "title": "Hilberts fifth problem", "text": ""}
{"id": "13711", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13711", "title": "Hydroxide", "text": "Chemical compound (OH\u2013)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nHydroxide is a diatomic anion with chemical formula OH\u2212. It consists of an oxygen and hydrogen atom held together by a single covalent bond, and carries a negative electric charge. It is an important but usually minor constituent of water. It functions as a base, a ligand, a nucleophile, and a catalyst. The hydroxide ion forms salts, some of which dissociate in aqueous solution, liberating solvated hydroxide ions. Sodium hydroxide is a multi-million-ton per annum commodity chemical.\nThe corresponding electrically neutral compound\u00a0HO\u2022 is the hydroxyl radical. The corresponding covalently bound group\u00a0 of atoms is the hydroxy group.\nBoth the hydroxide ion and hydroxy group are nucleophiles and can act as catalysts in organic chemistry.\nMany inorganic substances which bear the word \"hydroxide\" in their names are not ionic compounds of the hydroxide ion, but covalent compounds which contain hydroxy groups.\nHydroxide ion.\nThe hydroxide ion is naturally produced from water by the self-ionization reaction:\nH3O+ + OH\u2212 \u21cc 2H2O\nThe equilibrium constant for this reaction, defined as\n\"K\"w = [H+][OH\u2212]\nhas a value close to 10\u221214 at 25\u00a0\u00b0C, so the concentration of hydroxide ions in pure water is close to 10\u22127\u00a0mol\u2219dm\u22123, to satisfy the equal charge constraint. The pH of a solution is equal to the decimal cologarithm of the hydrogen cation concentration; the pH of pure water is close to 7 at ambient temperatures. The concentration of hydroxide ions can be expressed in terms of pOH, which is close to (14\u00a0\u2212\u00a0pH), so the pOH of pure water is also close to 7. Addition of a base to water will reduce the hydrogen cation concentration and therefore increase the hydroxide ion concentration (decrease pH, increase pOH) even if the base does not itself contain hydroxide. For example, ammonia solutions have a pH greater than 7 due to the reaction NH3 + H+ \u21cc NH4+, which decreases the hydrogen cation concentration, which increases the hydroxide ion concentration. pOH can be kept at a nearly constant value with various buffer solutions.\nIn an aqueous solution the hydroxide ion is a base in the Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry sense as it can accept a proton from a Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry acid to form a water molecule. It can also act as a Lewis base by donating a pair of electrons to a Lewis acid. In aqueous solution both hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions are strongly solvated, with hydrogen bonds between oxygen and hydrogen atoms. Indeed, the bihydroxide ion H3O2\u2212 has been characterized in the solid state. This compound is centrosymmetric and has a very short hydrogen bond (114.5\u00a0pm) that is similar to the length in the bifluoride ion HF2\u2212 (114\u00a0pm). In aqueous solution the hydroxide ion forms strong hydrogen bonds with water molecules. A consequence of this is that concentrated solutions of sodium hydroxide have high viscosity due to the formation of an extended network of hydrogen bonds as in hydrogen fluoride solutions.\nIn solution, exposed to air, the hydroxide ion reacts rapidly with atmospheric carbon dioxide, which acts as a lewis acid, to form, initially, the bicarbonate ion.\nOH\u2212 + CO2 \u21cc HCO3\u2212\nThe equilibrium constant for this reaction can be specified either as a reaction with dissolved carbon dioxide or as a reaction with carbon dioxide gas (see Carbonic acid for values and details). At neutral or acid pH, the reaction is slow, but is catalyzed by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase, which effectively creates hydroxide ions at the active site.\nSolutions containing the hydroxide ion attack glass. In this case, the silicates in glass are acting as acids. Basic hydroxides, whether solids or in solution, are stored in airtight plastic containers.\nThe hydroxide ion can function as a typical electron-pair donor ligand, forming such complexes as tetrahydroxoaluminate/tetrahydroxidoaluminate [Al(OH)4]\u2212. It is also often found in mixed-ligand complexes of the type [ML\"x\"(OH)\"y\"]\"z\"+, where L is a ligand. The hydroxide ion often serves as a bridging ligand, donating one pair of electrons to each of the atoms being bridged. As illustrated by [Pb2(OH)]3+, metal hydroxides are often written in a simplified format. It can even act as a 3-electron-pair donor, as in the tetramer [PtMe3(OH)]4.\nWhen bound to a strongly electron-withdrawing metal centre, hydroxide ligands tend to ionise into oxide ligands. For example, the bichromate ion [HCrO4]\u2212 dissociates according to\n[O3CrO\u2013H]\u2212 \u21cc [CrO4]2\u2212 + H+\nwith a p\"K\"a of about 5.9.\nVibrational spectra.\nThe infrared spectra of compounds containing the OH functional group have strong absorption bands in the region centered around 3500\u00a0cm\u22121. The high frequency of molecular vibration is a consequence of the small mass of the hydrogen atom as compared to the mass of the oxygen atom, and this makes detection of hydroxyl groups by infrared spectroscopy relatively easy. A band due to an OH group tends to be sharp. However, the band width increases when the OH group is involved in hydrogen bonding. A water molecule has an HOH bending mode at about 1600\u00a0cm\u22121, so the absence of this band can be used to distinguish an OH group from a water molecule.\nWhen the OH group is bound to a metal ion in a coordination complex, an M\u2212OH bending mode can be observed. For example, in [Sn(OH)6]2\u2212 it occurs at 1065\u00a0cm\u22121. The bending mode for a bridging hydroxide tends to be at a lower frequency as in [(bipyridine)Cu(OH)2Cu(bipyridine)]2+ (955\u00a0cm\u22121). M\u2212OH stretching vibrations occur below about 600\u00a0cm\u22121. For example, the tetrahedral ion [Zn(OH)4]2\u2212 has bands at 470\u00a0cm\u22121 (Raman-active, polarized) and 420\u00a0cm\u22121 (infrared). The same ion has a (HO)\u2013Zn\u2013(OH) bending vibration at 300\u00a0cm\u22121.\nApplications.\nSodium hydroxide solutions, also known as lye and caustic soda, are used in the manufacture of pulp and paper, textiles, drinking water, soaps and detergents, and as a drain cleaner. Worldwide production in 2004 was approximately 60\u00a0million tonnes. The principal method of manufacture is the chloralkali process.\nSolutions containing the hydroxide ion are generated when a salt of a weak acid is dissolved in water. Sodium carbonate is used as an alkali, for example, by virtue of the hydrolysis reaction\nCO32\u2212 + H2O \u21cc HCO3\u2212 + OH\u2212 (p\"K\"a2 = 10.33 at 25 \u00b0C and zero ionic strength)\nAn example of the use of sodium carbonate as an alkali is when washing soda (another name for sodium carbonate) acts on insoluble esters, such as triglycerides, commonly known as fats, to hydrolyze them and make them soluble.\nBauxite, a basic hydroxide of aluminium, is the principal ore from which the metal is manufactured. Similarly, goethite (\u03b1-FeO(OH)) and lepidocrocite (\u03b3-FeO(OH)), basic hydroxides of iron, are among the principal ores used for the manufacture of metallic iron.\nInorganic hydroxides.\nAlkali metals.\nAside from NaOH and KOH, which enjoy very large scale applications, the hydroxides of the other alkali metals also are useful. Lithium hydroxide (LiOH) is used in breathing gas purification systems for spacecraft, submarines, and rebreathers to remove carbon dioxide from exhaled gas.\n2 LiOH + CO2 \u2192 Li2CO3 + H2O\nThe hydroxide of lithium is preferred to that of sodium because of its lower mass. Sodium hydroxide, potassium hydroxide, and the hydroxides of the other alkali metals are also strong bases.\nAlkaline earth metals.\nBeryllium hydroxide Be(OH)2 is amphoteric. The hydroxide itself is insoluble in water, with a solubility product log\u00a0\"K\"*sp of \u221211.7. Addition of acid gives soluble hydrolysis products, including the trimeric ion [Be3(OH)3(H2O)6]3+, which has OH groups bridging between pairs of beryllium ions making a 6-membered ring. At very low pH the aqua ion [Be(H2O)4]2+ is formed. Addition of hydroxide to Be(OH)2 gives the soluble tetrahydroxoberyllate or tetrahydroxidoberyllate anion, [Be(OH)4]2\u2212.\nThe solubility in water of the other hydroxides in this group increases with increasing atomic number. Magnesium hydroxide Mg(OH)2 is a strong base (up to the limit of its solubility, which is very low in pure water), as are the hydroxides of the heavier alkaline earths: calcium hydroxide, strontium hydroxide, and barium hydroxide. A solution or suspension of calcium hydroxide is known as limewater and can be used to test for the weak acid carbon dioxide. The reaction Ca(OH)2 + CO2 \u21cc Ca2+ + HCO3\u2212 + OH\u2212 illustrates the basicity of calcium hydroxide. Soda lime, which is a mixture of the strong bases NaOH and KOH with Ca(OH)2, is used as a CO2 absorbent.\nBoron group elements.\nThe simplest hydroxide of boron B(OH)3, known as boric acid, is an acid. Unlike the hydroxides of the alkali and alkaline earth hydroxides, it does not dissociate in aqueous solution. Instead, it reacts with water molecules acting as a Lewis acid, releasing protons.\nB(OH)3 + H2O \u21cc B(OH)4\u2212 + H+\nA variety of oxyanions of boron are known, which, in the protonated form, contain hydroxide groups.\nAluminium hydroxide Al(OH)3 is amphoteric and dissolves in alkaline solution.\nAl(OH)3 (solid) + OH\u2212\u00a0(aq) \u21cc Al(OH)4\u2212\u00a0(aq)\nIn the Bayer process for the production of pure aluminium oxide from bauxite minerals this equilibrium is manipulated by careful control of temperature and alkali concentration. In the first phase, aluminium dissolves in hot alkaline solution as Al(OH)4\u2212, but other hydroxides usually present in the mineral, such as iron hydroxides, do not dissolve because they are not amphoteric. After removal of the insolubles, the so-called red mud, pure aluminium hydroxide is made to precipitate by reducing the temperature and adding water to the extract, which, by diluting the alkali, lowers the pH of the solution. Basic aluminium hydroxide AlO(OH), which may be present in bauxite, is also amphoteric.\nIn mildly acidic solutions, the hydroxo/hydroxido complexes formed by aluminium are somewhat different from those of boron, reflecting the greater size of Al(III) vs. B(III). The concentration of the species [Al13(OH)32]7+ is very dependent on the total aluminium concentration. Various other hydroxo complexes are found in crystalline compounds. Perhaps the most important is the basic hydroxide AlO(OH), a polymeric material known by the names of the mineral forms boehmite or diaspore, depending on crystal structure. Gallium hydroxide, indium hydroxide, and thallium(III) hydroxide are also amphoteric. Thallium(I) hydroxide is a strong base.\nCarbon group elements.\nCarbon forms no simple hydroxides. The hypothetical compound C(OH)4 (orthocarbonic acid or methanetetrol) is unstable in aqueous solution:\nC(OH)4 \u2192 HCO3\u2212 + H3O+\nHCO3\u2212 + H+ \u21cc H2CO3\nCarbon dioxide is also known as carbonic anhydride, meaning that it forms by dehydration of carbonic acid H2CO3 (OC(OH)2).\nSilicic acid is the name given to a variety of compounds with a generic formula [SiO\"x\"(OH)4\u22122\"x\"]\"n\". Orthosilicic acid has been identified in very dilute aqueous solution. It is a weak acid with p\"K\"a1\u00a0=\u00a09.84, p\"K\"a2\u00a0=\u00a013.2 at 25\u00a0\u00b0C. It can be written as H4SiO4 or Si(OH)4. Other silicic acids such as metasilicic acid (H2SiO3), disilicic acid (H2Si2O5), and pyrosilicic acid (H6Si2O7) have been characterized. These acids also have hydroxide groups attached to the silicon; the formulas suggest that these acids are protonated forms of polyoxyanions.\nFew hydroxo complexes of germanium have been characterized. Tin(II) hydroxide Sn(OH)2 was prepared in anhydrous media. When tin(II) oxide is treated with alkali the pyramidal hydroxo complex Sn(OH)3\u2212 is formed. When solutions containing this ion are acidified, the ion [Sn3(OH)4]2+ is formed together with some basic hydroxo complexes. The structure of [Sn3(OH)4]2+ has a triangle of tin atoms connected by bridging hydroxide groups. Tin(IV) hydroxide is unknown but can be regarded as the hypothetical acid from which stannates, with a formula [Sn(OH)6]2\u2212, are derived by reaction with the (Lewis) basic hydroxide ion.\nHydrolysis of Pb2+ in aqueous solution is accompanied by the formation of various hydroxo-containing complexes, some of which are insoluble. The basic hydroxo complex [Pb6O(OH)6]4+ is a cluster of six lead centres with metal\u2013metal bonds surrounding a central oxide ion. The six hydroxide groups lie on the faces of the two external Pb4 tetrahedra. In strongly alkaline solutions soluble plumbate ions are formed, including [Pb(OH)6]2\u2212.\nOther main-group elements.\nIn the higher oxidation states of the pnictogens, chalcogens, halogens, and noble gases there are oxoacids in which the central atom is attached to oxide ions and hydroxide ions. Examples include phosphoric acid H3PO4, and sulfuric acid H2SO4. In these compounds one or more hydroxide groups can dissociate with the liberation of hydrogen cations as in a standard Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry acid. Many oxoacids of sulfur are known and all feature OH groups that can dissociate.\nTelluric acid is often written with the formula H2TeO4\u00b72H2O but is better described structurally as Te(OH)6.\nOrthoperiodic acid can lose all its protons, eventually forming the periodate ion [IO4]\u2212. It can also be protonated in strongly acidic conditions to give the octahedral ion [I(OH)6]+, completing the isoelectronic series, [E(OH)6]\"z\", E = Sn, Sb, Te, I; \"z\" = \u22122, \u22121, 0, +1. Other acids of iodine(VII) that contain hydroxide groups are known, in particular in salts such as the mesoperiodate ion that occurs in K4[I2O8(OH)2]\u00b78H2O.\nAs is common outside of the alkali metals, hydroxides of the elements in lower oxidation states are complicated. For example, phosphorous acid H3PO3 predominantly has the structure OP(H)(OH)2, in equilibrium with a small amount of P(OH)3.\nThe oxoacids of chlorine, bromine, and iodine have the formula OA(OH), where \"n\" is the oxidation number: +1, +3, +5, or +7, and A = Cl, Br, or I. The only oxoacid of fluorine is F(OH), hypofluorous acid. When these acids are neutralized the hydrogen atom is removed from the hydroxide group.\nTransition and post-transition metals.\nThe hydroxides of the transition metals and post-transition metals usually have the metal in the +2 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn) or +3 (M = Fe, Ru, Rh, Ir) oxidation state. None are soluble in water, and many are poorly defined. One complicating feature of the hydroxides is their tendency to undergo further condensation to the oxides, a process called olation. Hydroxides of metals in the +1 oxidation state are also poorly defined or unstable. For example, silver hydroxide Ag(OH) decomposes spontaneously to the oxide (Ag2O). Copper(I) and gold(I) hydroxides are also unstable, although stable adducts of CuOH and AuOH are known. The polymeric compounds M(OH)2 and M(OH)3 are in general prepared by increasing the pH of an aqueous solution of the corresponding metal cation until the hydroxide precipitates out of solution. On the converse, the hydroxides dissolve in acidic solution. Zinc hydroxide Zn(OH)2 is amphoteric, forming the tetrahydroxidozincate ion Zn(OH)42\u2212 in strongly alkaline solution.\nNumerous mixed ligand complexes of these metals with the hydroxide ion exist. In fact, these are in general better defined than the simpler derivatives. Many can be made by deprotonation of the corresponding metal aquo complex.\nL\"n\"M(OH2) + B \u21cc L\"n\"M(OH)\u2013 + BH+ (L = ligand, B = base)\nVanadic acid H3VO4 shows similarities with phosphoric acid H3PO4 though it has a much more complex vanadate oxoanion chemistry. Chromic acid H2CrO4, has similarities with sulfuric acid H2SO4; for example, both form acid salts A+[HMO4]\u2212. Some metals, e.g. V, Cr, Nb, Ta, Mo, W, tend to exist in high oxidation states. Rather than forming hydroxides in aqueous solution, they convert to oxo clusters by the process of olation, forming polyoxometalates.\nBasic salts containing hydroxide.\nIn some cases, the products of partial hydrolysis of metal ion, described above, can be found in crystalline compounds. A striking example is found with zirconium(IV). Because of the high oxidation state, salts of Zr4+ are extensively hydrolyzed in water even at low pH. The compound originally formulated as ZrOCl2\u00b78H2O was found to be the chloride salt of a tetrameric cation [Zr4(OH)8(H2O)16]8+ in which there is a square of Zr4+ ions with two hydroxide groups bridging between Zr atoms on each side of the square and with four water molecules attached to each Zr atom.\nThe mineral malachite is a typical example of a basic carbonate. The formula, Cu2CO3(OH)2 shows that it is halfway between copper carbonate and copper hydroxide. Indeed, in the past the formula was written as CuCO3\u00b7Cu(OH)2. The crystal structure is made up of copper, carbonate and hydroxide ions. The mineral atacamite is an example of a basic chloride. It has the formula Cu2Cl(OH)3. In this case the composition is nearer to that of the hydroxide than that of the chloride: CuCl2\u00b73Cu(OH)2. Copper forms hydroxyphosphate (libethenite), arsenate (olivenite), sulfate (brochantite), and nitrate compounds. White lead is a basic lead carbonate, (PbCO3)2\u00b7Pb(OH)2, which has been used as a white pigment because of its opaque quality, though its use is now restricted because it can be a source for lead poisoning.\nStructural chemistry.\nThe hydroxide ion appears to rotate freely in crystals of the heavier alkali metal hydroxides at higher temperatures so as to present itself as a spherical ion, with an effective ionic radius of about 153\u00a0pm. Thus, the high-temperature forms of KOH and NaOH have the sodium chloride structure, which gradually freezes in a monoclinically distorted sodium chloride structure at temperatures below about 300\u00a0\u00b0C. The OH groups still rotate even at room temperature around their symmetry axes and, therefore, cannot be detected by X-ray diffraction. The room-temperature form of NaOH has the thallium iodide structure. LiOH, however, has a layered structure, made up of tetrahedral Li(OH)4 and (OH)Li4 units. This is consistent with the weakly basic character of LiOH in solution, indicating that the Li\u2013OH bond has much covalent character.\nThe hydroxide ion displays cylindrical symmetry in hydroxides of divalent metals Ca, Cd, Mn, Fe, and Co. For example, magnesium hydroxide Mg(OH)2 (brucite) crystallizes with the cadmium iodide layer structure, with a kind of close-packing of magnesium and hydroxide ions.\nThe amphoteric hydroxide Al(OH)3 has four major crystalline forms: gibbsite (most stable), bayerite, nordstrandite, and doyleite.\nAll these polymorphs are built up of double layers of hydroxide ions\u2014the aluminium atoms on two-thirds of the octahedral holes between the two layers\u2014and differ only in the stacking sequence of the layers. The structures are similar to the brucite structure. However, whereas the brucite structure can be described as a close-packed structure, in gibbsite the OH groups on the underside of one layer rest on the groups of the layer below. This arrangement led to the suggestion that there are directional bonds between OH groups in adjacent layers. This is an unusual form of hydrogen bonding since the two hydroxide ions involved would be expected to point away from each other. The hydrogen atoms have been located by neutron diffraction experiments on \u03b1-AlO(OH) (diaspore). The O\u2013H\u2013O distance is very short, at 265\u00a0pm; the hydrogen is not equidistant between the oxygen atoms and the short OH bond makes an angle of 12\u00b0 with the O\u2013O line. A similar type of hydrogen bond has been proposed for other amphoteric hydroxides, including Be(OH)2, Zn(OH)2, and Fe(OH)3.\nA number of mixed hydroxides are known with stoichiometry A3MIII(OH)6, A2MIV(OH)6, and AMV(OH)6. As the formula suggests these substances contain M(OH)6 octahedral structural units. Layered double hydroxides may be represented by the formula [M1\u2212\"x\"\"z\"+M\"x\"3+(OH)2]\"q\"+(X\"n\"\u2212)\u00b7\"y\"H2O. Most commonly, \"z\"\u00a0=\u00a02, and M2+ = Ca2+, Mg2+, Mn2+, Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Cu2+, or Zn2+; hence \"q\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"x\".\nOrganic reactions.\nPotassium hydroxide and sodium hydroxide are two well-known reagents in organic chemistry.\nBase catalysis.\nThe hydroxide ion may act as a base catalyst. The base abstracts a proton from a weak acid to give an intermediate that goes on to react with another reagent. Common substrates for proton abstraction are alcohols, phenols, amines, and carbon acids. The p\"K\"a value for dissociation of a C\u2013H bond is extremely high, but the pKa alpha hydrogens of a carbonyl compound are about 3 log units lower. Typical p\"K\"a values are 16.7 for acetaldehyde and 19 for acetone. Dissociation can occur in the presence of a suitable base.\nRC(O)CH2R' + B \u21cc RC(O)CH\u2212R' + BH+\nThe base should have a p\"K\"a value not less than about 4 log units smaller, or the equilibrium will lie almost completely to the left.\nThe hydroxide ion by itself is not a strong enough base, but it can be converted to one by adding sodium hydroxide to ethanol\nOH\u2212 + EtOH \u21cc EtO\u2212 + H2O\nto produce the ethoxide ion. The pKa for self-dissociation of ethanol is about 16, so the alkoxide ion is a strong enough base. The addition of an alcohol to an aldehyde to form a hemiacetal is an example of a reaction that can be catalyzed by the presence of hydroxide. Hydroxide can also act as a Lewis-base catalyst.\nAs a nucleophilic reagent.\nThe hydroxide ion is intermediate in nucleophilicity between the fluoride ion F\u2212, and the amide ion NH2\u2212. Ester hydrolysis under alkaline conditions (also known as base hydrolysis)\nR1C(O)OR2 + OH\u2212 \u21cc R1CO(O)H + \u2212OR2 \u21cc R1CO2\u2212 + HOR2\nis an example of a hydroxide ion serving as a nucleophile. \nEarly methods for manufacturing soap treated triglycerides from animal fat (the ester) with lye. \nOther cases where hydroxide can act as a nucleophilic reagent are amide hydrolysis, the Cannizzaro reaction, nucleophilic aliphatic substitution, nucleophilic aromatic substitution, and in elimination reactions. The reaction medium for KOH and NaOH is usually water but with a phase-transfer catalyst the hydroxide anion can be shuttled into an organic solvent as well, for example in the generation of the reactive intermediate dichlorocarbene.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13712", "revid": "594845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13712", "title": "H R Geiger", "text": ""}
{"id": "13713", "revid": "48648674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13713", "title": "H. R. Giger", "text": "Swiss artist (1940\u20132014)\nHans Ruedi Giger ( ; ; 5 February 1940 \u2013 12 May 2014) was a Swiss artist best known for his airbrushed images that blended human physiques with machines, an art style known as \"biomechanical\". He was part of the special effects team that won an Academy Award for the visual design of Ridley Scott's 1979 sci-fi horror film \"Alien\", and was responsible for creating the xenomorph alien itself. His work is on permanent display at the H.\u00a0R. Giger Museum in Gruy\u00e8res, Switzerland. His style has been adapted to many forms of media, including album covers, furniture, and music videos.\nEarly life.\nGiger was born in 1940 in Chur, the capital city of Graub\u00fcnden, the largest and easternmost Swiss canton. His father, a pharmacist, viewed art as a \"breadless profession\" and strongly encouraged him to enter pharmacy. He moved to Z\u00fcrich in 1962 where he studied architecture and industrial design at the School of Applied Arts until 1970.\nCareer.\nGiger's first success occurred when H.\u00a0H. Kunz, co-owner of Switzerland's first poster publishing company, printed and distributed Giger's first posters, beginning in 1969.\nGiger's style and thematic execution were influential. He was part of the special effects team that won an Academy Award for Best Achievement in Visual Effects for their design work on the film \"Alien\". His design for the Alien was inspired by his painting \"Necronom IV\" and earned him the Oscar in 1980. His books of paintings, particularly \"Necronomicon\" and \"Necronomicon II\" (1985) and the frequent appearance of his art in \"Omni\" magazine contributed to his rise to international prominence. Giger was admitted to the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame in 2013. He is also well known for artwork on several music recording albums including \"\" by Danzig, \"Brain Salad Surgery\" by Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer, \"Attahk\" by Magma, \"Heartwork\" by Carcass, \"To Mega Therion\" by Celtic Frost, \"Eparistera Daimones\" and \"Melana Chasmata\" by Triptykon, Deborah Harry's \"KooKoo,\" \"Atomic Playboys\" by Steve Stevens, and \"Frankenchrist\" by the Dead Kennedys.\nIn 1998, Giger acquired the Saint-Germain Castle in Gruy\u00e8res, Switzerland, which now houses the H.R. Giger Museum, a permanent repository of his work.\nPersonal life.\nGiger had a relationship with Swiss actress Li Tobler until she died by suicide in 1975. Tobler's image appears in many of his paintings. He married Mia Bonzanigo in 1979; they divorced a year and a half later.\nGiger lived and worked in Z\u00fcrich with his second wife, Carmen Maria Scheifele Giger, who is the director of the H. R. Giger Museum.\nOn 12 May 2014, Giger died in a Z\u00fcrich hospital after suffering injuries from a fall.\nStyle.\nGiger started with small ink drawings before progressing to oil paintings. For most of his career, he worked predominantly in airbrush, creating monochromatic canvasses depicting surreal, nightmarish dreamscapes. He also worked with pastels, markers and ink.\nGiger's most distinctive stylistic innovation was that of a representation of human bodies and machines in cold, interconnected relationships, which he described as \"biomechanical\". His main influences were painters Dado, Ernst Fuchs, and Salvador Dal\u00ed. He was introduced to Dali by painter Robert Venosa. Giger was also influenced by Polish sculptor Stanislaw Szukalski, and by painters Austin Osman Spare and Mati Klarwein, and was a personal friend of Timothy Leary. He studied interior and industrial design at the School of Commercial Art in Zurich from 1962 to 1965, and made his first paintings as art therapy.\nOther works.\nGiger directed a number of films, including \"Swiss Made\" (1968), \"Tagtraum\" (1973), \"Giger's Necronomicon\" (1975).\nGiger created furniture designs, particularly the Harkonnen Capo Chair for a film of the novel \"Dune\" that was to be directed by Alejandro Jodorowsky. Many years later, David Lynch directed the film, using only rough concepts by Giger. Giger had wished to work with Lynch, as he stated in one of his books that Lynch's film \"Eraserhead\" was closer than even Giger's own films to realizing his vision.\nGiger also applied his biomechanical style to interior design. One \"Giger Bar\" appeared in Tokyo, but the realization of his designs was a great disappointment to him, since the Japanese organization behind the venture did not wait for his final designs, and instead used Giger's rough preliminary sketches. For that reason Giger disowned the Tokyo bar. The two Giger Bars in his native Switzerland, in Gruy\u00e8res and Chur, were built under Giger's close supervision and they accurately reflect his original concepts. At The Limelight in Manhattan, Giger's artwork was licensed to decorate the VIP room, the uppermost chapel of the landmarked church, but it was never intended to be a permanent installation and bore no similarity to the bars in Switzerland. The arrangement was terminated after two years when the Limelight closed.\nGiger's art has greatly influenced tattooists and fetishists worldwide. Under a licensing deal Ibanez guitars released an H. R. Giger signature series: the Ibanez ICHRG2, an Ibanez Iceman, features \"NY City VI\", the Ibanez RGTHRG1 has \"NY City XI\" printed on it, the S Series SHRG1Z has a metal-coated engraving of \"Biomechanical Matrix\" on it, and a 4-string SRX bass, SRXHRG1, has \"N.Y. City X\" on it.\nGiger is often referred to in popular culture, especially in science fiction and cyberpunk. William Gibson (who wrote an early script for \"Alien 3\") seems particularly fascinated: A minor character in \"Virtual Light\", Lowell, is described as having \"New York XXIV\" tattooed across his back, and in \"Idoru\" a secondary character, Yamazaki, describes the buildings of nanotech Japan as Giger-esque.\nRecognition.\nGiger was awarded the Inkpot Award in 1979.\nIn addition to his awards, Giger was recognized by a variety of festivals and institutions. On the one year anniversary of his death, the Museum of Arts and Design in New York City staged the series \"The Unseen Cinema of HR Giger\" in May 2015.\nSince 2018, Neuch\u00e2tel International Fantastic Film Festival has presented the H.R. Giger Narcisse Award for Best Feature Film. The award trophy was designed by H.R. Giger. The image of the Narcisse award has become the festival\u2019s logo.\n\"\", a biographical documentary by Belinda Sallin, debuted 27 September 2014 in Zurich, Switzerland.\nIn July 2018, the asteroid 109712 Giger was named in his memory.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13714", "revid": "50529556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13714", "title": "Hispaniola", "text": "Caribbean island shared by the Dominican Republic and Haiti\nHispaniola is an island in the Greater Antilles of the Caribbean, located between Cuba and Puerto Rico. It is the most populous island in the West Indies, and the second-largest by land area, after Cuba. Covering an area of , it is divided into two separate sovereign countries: the Spanish-speaking Dominican Republic () to the east and the French and Haitian Creole\u2013speaking Haiti () to the west. The only other divided island in the Caribbean is Saint Martin, which is shared between France () and the Netherlands (). At the time of the European arrival of Christopher Columbus, Hispaniola was home to the Ciguayo, Macorix, and Ciboney and Classic Ta\u00edno native peoples.\nHispaniola is the site of the first European fort in the Americas, La Navidad (1492\u20131493), the first settlement, La Isabela (1493\u20131500), and the first permanent settlement, the capital of the Dominican Republic, Santo Domingo (1498\u2013present). These settlements were founded successively during each of Christopher Columbus's first three voyages under the patronage of the Spanish Empire.\nThe Spanish controlled the entire island of Hispaniola from 1492 until the 17th century, when French pirates began establishing bases on the western side of the island, which resulted in the creation of the Saint-Domingue colony under the French Empire by 1659. The most commonly used name for the island is (\"little Spain\"), whose Latinized form is \"Hispaniola\". The name of \"Santo Domingo\", after Saint Dominic de Guzm\u00e1n, the Castilian Catholic priest founder of the Dominican Order, is also widely used.\nEtymology.\nIndigenous rule.\nAt the time of its European discovery during the first voyage of Christopher Columbus in 1492, the island of Hispaniola was called various names by its native peoples: the Ciguayo, the Macorix, and the Ta\u00edno. Early chroniclers identified the indigenous names (appearing with various spellings) of the island as \"Boh\u00edo\" (\"homeland\"), \"Haiti\" (\"land of high mountains\"), and \"Quisqueya\" (\"mother of the lands\"), which were used by natives from different geographic parts of the island, although doubts have been raised about the authenticity of \"Quisqueya\". Another name that has been mentioned is \"Babeque\" (\"land of gold\"), but it likely corresponded to another island, as Columbus only identified on his journal the island of Hispaniola as \"Boh\u00edo\", and used \"Babeque\" to refer to an island located east of Hispaniola, which was likely \"Boriqu\u00e9n\", today Puerto Rico.\nWhile navigating east-west along the northern coastline of the island of Hispaniola during Columbus's second voyage in 1493, physician Diego \u00c1lvarez Chanca recorded that \"Haiti\" was the name of the easternmost part of the island, which he described as low-lying and flat. This region was followed by two others called \"Saman\u00e1\" and \"Boh\u00edo\". Spanish clergyman and historian Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas, who settled in the island's Cibao valley in 1502, documented that the island was called \"Boh\u00edo\" and \"Haiti\" by the Ta\u00edno, while administrator and historian Gonzalo Fern\u00e1ndez de Oviedo, who was supervisor of gold smelting in Santo Domingo in 1514, reported \"Haiti\". In addition to \"Haiti\", which he defined as \"altitude\" synonymous with \"mountains\", Peter Martyr d'Anghiera, author of \"Decades of the New World\" in 1511 and \"c\"hronicler of the newly formed Council of the Indies in 1520, recorded another name, \"Quisqueya\", which he defined as \"something large\" or \"larger than anything\" synonymous with \"universality\".\nLike de las Casas, Ferdinand Columbus, son of Columbus who visited the island of Hispaniola during the fourth voyage of his father (1502-1504) and during the governorship of his brother Diego Columbus in 1509, identified the native names of the island as \"Boh\u00edo\" and \"Haiti\". Like d'Anghiera, prominent Spanish historians Alonzo de Santa Cruz and Francisco L\u00f3pez de G\u00f3mara identified \"Haiti\" and \"Quisqueya\" as the native names of the island. In 1540, de Santa Cruz defined the former as \"montes\" (mountains) and \"aperezas\" (rugged terrain) and the latter as \"grandeza exced\u00eda a todas\" (greatness exceeding all), indicating that \"Haiti\" was how the natives called the island because it was how they universally named the many mountains in the island, while \"Quisqueya\" was used because they thought the large size of island meant that it and its neighboring islands were the full extent of the world. In 1553, L\u00f3pez de G\u00f3mara defined \"Haiti\" as \"aspereza\" (rugged terrain) and \"Quisqueya\" as \"tierra grande\" (large land).\nHowever, historians disagree on the authenticity of the indigenous origins of \"Quisqueya\", as research has shown that the name does not appear to derive from the Ta\u00edno language. While some dismiss it as an invention of d'Anghiera, which was subsequently spread by later historians, others contend that it was one of the names used by the natives, possibly the Ciguayo. Despite the debate, Dominicans have adopted \"Quisqueya\" as the popular and poetic name of the Dominican Republic in eastern Hispaniola.\nSpanish rule.\nUpon landing at the Nord-Ouest department of northwestern Haiti on December 5, 1492, Columbus called the island \"Espa\u00f1ola\" (\"little Spain\"), as it resembled geographical parts of Spain in his opinion. Historians de las Casas and d'Anghiera popularized the name in its Latin form \"Hispaniola\", meaning Spain in diminutive, according to M\u00e1rtir. While the name for the island in Spanish today is \"La Espa\u00f1ola\", Columbus did not use the article \"La\" (\"the\").\nThe island of Hispaniola continued to be called \"Espa\u00f1ola\" until shortly after the mid-17th century, when the territory began to be known interchangeably as \"Isla Espa\u00f1ola de Santo Domingo\". The following two centuries, \"Santo Domingo\" prevailed as the name for the island until the 18th century. This name dates back to 1498, when Bartholomew Columbus founded a city on the bank of the Ozama River, which he named \"Santo Domingo\" after Saint Dominic. Antonio del Monte y Tejada and Jos\u00e9 Gabriel Garc\u00eda, in their respective works, recorded that on December 6, 1508, by Royal Decree, the King of Spain extended the name \"Santo Domingo\" to the entire island. However, this Royal Decree is unknown, and it is believed that the name \"Santo Domingo\" was applied to the island out of general usage, as it was the name of Santo Domingo, the principal political and commercial center in the island, which is today the capital of the Dominican Republic.\nSpanish and French rule.\nWhen the French occupied the western part of the island of Hispaniola in the mid-17th century, which had been abandoned by Spain following the Devastations of Osorio in 1605, they established a colonial plantation system based on the enslavement of Sub-Saharan Africans. This colony, which became the most prosperous of the French empire in the Americas, was known as \"Saint-Domingue\".\nThe island remained a Spanish possession under the official name of \"Capitan\u00eda General de Santo Domingo\" (Captaincy General of Santo Domingo) before the occupation of the French. After the establishment of \"Saint-Domingue\", the Captaincy General of Santo Domingo became official name of the Spanish-controlled territory in eastern Hispaniola. In 1795, Spain ceded the Captaincy General of Santo Domingo to France by way of the Treaty of Basel during the French Revolutionary Wars. France annexed Spanish Santo Domingo into the French Saint-Domingue, uniting the entire island of Hispaniola from 1795 to 1809 under the official name of \"Capitainerie g\u00e9n\u00e9rale de Santo Domingo\" or \"French Santo Domingo\".\nIndependence.\nFollowing the period of the successful insurrection against France in western Hispaniola from 1791 to 1804, which historians dubbed the \"Haitian Revolution\", revolutionary leader Jean-Jacques Dessalines adopted the name of \"Haiti\" as the official name of the island, stating the Haitian Constitution of 1805 that \"The people inhabiting the island formerly called St. Domingo, hereby agree to form themselves into a free state sovereign and independent of any other power in the universe, under the name of empire of Hayti.\" From 1804 to 1806, the independent western side of Hispaniola was officially known as the \"Empire of Haiti\". Following the overthrow of the Empire of Haiti from 1806 to 1808, the northern part of the island of Hispaniola became officially known as the \"State of Haiti\", while the south was called the \"Republic of Haiti\".\nDuring this time the eastern side remained under de jure French control with the official name of \"Capitainerie g\u00e9n\u00e9rale de Santo Domingo\" (Captaincy General of Santo Domingo) or \"French Santo Domingo\". After the Spanish reconquest of the eastern side of the island of Hispaniola in 1809, this territory regained its official name of \"Capitan\u00eda General de Santo Domingo\" (Captaincy General of Santo Domingo), while the independent western side of Hispaniola had several official names: \"State of Haiti\", \"Republic of Haiti\", and \"Kingdom of Haiti\".\nWith the independence of the Captaincy General of Santo Domingo in 1821, this territory officially became the \"Estado Independiente de Hait\u00ed Espa\u00f1ol\" (Republic of Spanish Haiti). However, after the Haitian occupation of the territory from 1822 to 1844, the entire island of Hispaniola became a unified country under the official name of \"Republic of Haiti\". As the Dominicans rebelled against Haitian rule during the Dominican War of Independence from 1844 to 1856, a new independent country with the name of \"Rep\u00fablica Dominicana\" (Dominican Republic) was established in eastern Hispaniola. In 1844, the first Substantive Charter of the new country, stated: \"The Spanish part of the island of Santo Domingo and its adjacent islands form the territory of the Dominican Republic.\" Western Hispaniola remained as the country of Haiti with the official name of \"Empire of Haiti\" or \"Republic of Haiti\".\nWith the official introduction of the name \"Haiti\" in the 19th century, the island of Hispaniola, which until then was most commonly called \"Santo Domingo\", began to be widely identified as \"Haiti\", particularly outside the Spanish-speaking world.\nUnited States occupation.\nThe island of Hispaniola was under the control of the United States from 1915 to 1934 in Haiti and from 1916 to 1924 in the Dominican Republic. In 1918, the American generals J.H. Pendleton, Acting Head of the Military Government, W.W Russell, Minister of the United States in the Dominican Republic, and Harry Shepard Knapp, Military Governor of Santo Domingo (the Dominican Republic) and Military Representative of the United States in Haiti, recommended to the National Geographic Society to apply the name of \"Hispaniola\" to the island, choosing the Latinized form of \"Espa\u00f1ola\", the name given by Columbus in 1492, over \"Santo Domingo\", the most commonly used name since the early 17th century and the name of the oldest political and commercial center, the city of Santo Domingo, and \"Haiti\", one of the names used by the Ta\u00edno natives at the time of European contact and one of the official names adopted and most frequently used in the 19th century.\nAs a result, the island, which contains the country of Haiti in the west and the country of the Dominican Republic in the east, is most widely known today as \"Hispaniola.\"\nHistory.\nPre-Columbian.\nThe Archaic Age people arrived from mainland Central America or northern South America about 6,000 years ago, and are thought to have practiced a largely hunter-gatherer lifestyle. During the 1st millennium BC, the Arawakan-speaking ancestors of the Taino people began to migrate into the Caribbean. Unlike the Archaic peoples, they practiced the intensive production of pottery and agriculture. The earliest evidence of the ancestors of the Taino people on Hispaniola is the Ostionoid culture, which dates to around 600 AD. The Taino represented the dominant group on the island during the period of European contact. Each society on the island was a small independent kingdom with a leader known as a cacique. In 1492, which is considered the peak of the Ta\u00edno, five different kingdoms ruled over the island, the Xaragua, Higuey (Caizcimu), Magua (Huhabo), Ciguayos (Cayabo or Maguana), and Marien (Bainoa). Many distinct Ta\u00edno languages also existed in this time period. There is still heated debate over the population of Ta\u00edno people on the island of Hispaniola in 1492, but estimates range from no more than a few tens of thousands, according to a 2020 genetic analysis, to upwards of 750,000.\nA Ta\u00edno home consisted of a circular building with woven straw and palm leaves as covering. Most individuals slept in fashioned hammocks, but grass beds were also used. The cacique lived in a different structure with larger rectangular walls and a porch. The Ta\u00edno village also had a flat court used for ball games and festivals. Religiously, the Ta\u00edno people were polytheists, and their gods were called Zem\u00ed. Religious worship and dancing were common, and medicine men or priests also consulted the Zem\u00ed for advice in public ceremonies.\nFor food, the Ta\u00edno relied on meat and fish as a primary source for protein. On the island they hunted small mammals, but also snakes, worms, and birds. In lakes and in the sea they were able to catch ducks and turtles.\nThe Ta\u00edno also relied on agriculture as a primary food source. The indigenous people of Hispaniola raised crops in a conuco, which is a large mound packed with leaves and fixed crops to prevent erosion. Some common agricultural goods were cassava, maize, squash, beans, peppers, peanuts, cotton, and tobacco, which was used as an aspect of social life and religious ceremonies.\nThe Ta\u00edno people traveled often and used hollowed canoes with paddles when on the water for fishing or for migration purposes, and upwards of 100 people could fit into a single canoe. The Ta\u00edno came frequently in contact with the Caribs, another indigenous tribe. The Ta\u00edno people had to defend themselves using bows and arrows with poisoned tips and some war clubs. When Columbus landed on Hispaniola, many Ta\u00edno leaders wanted protection from the Caribs.\nPost-Columbian.\nChristopher Columbus first landed at Hispaniola on December 6, 1492, at a small bay he named San Nicolas, now called M\u00f4le-Saint-Nicolas on the north coast of present-day Haiti. He was welcomed in a friendly fashion by the indigenous people known as the Ta\u00edno. Trading with the natives yielded more gold than they had come across previously on the other Caribbean islands and Columbus was led to believe that much more gold would be found inland. Before he could explore further, his flagship, the \"Santa Maria\", ran aground and sank in the bay on December 24. With only two smaller ships remaining for the voyage home, Columbus built a fortified encampment, La Navidad, on the shore and left behind 21 crewman to await his return the following year.\nColonization began in earnest the following year when Columbus brought 1,300 men to Hispaniola in November 1493 with the intention of establishing a permanent settlement. They found the encampment at Navidad had been destroyed and all the crewmen left behind killed by the natives. Columbus decided to sail east in search of a better site to found a new settlement. In January 1494 they established La Isabela in present-day Dominican Republic.\nIn 1496, the town of Nueva Isabela was founded. After being destroyed by a hurricane, it was rebuilt on the opposite side of the Ozama River and called Santo Domingo. It is the oldest permanent European settlement in the Americas. \nThe island had an important role in the establishment of Latin American colonies for decades to come. Due to its strategic location, it was the military stronghold of \"conquistadors\" of the Spanish Empire, serving as a headquarters for the further colonial expansion into the Americas. The colony was a meeting point of European explorers, soldiers, and settlers who brought with them the culture, architecture, laws, and traditions of the Old World.\nSpaniards imposed a harsh regime of forced labor and enslavement of the Ta\u00ednos, as well as redirection of their food production and labor to Spaniards. This had a devastating impact on both mortality and fertility of the Ta\u00edno population over the first quarter century. Colonial administrators and Dominican and Hieronymite friars observed that the search for gold and agrarian enslavement through the \"encomienda\" system were deciminating the indigenous population. Demographic data from two provinces in 1514 shows a low birth rate, consistent with a 3.5% annual population decline. In 1503, Spaniards began to bring enslaved Africans after a charter was passed in 1501, allowing the import of African slaves by Ferdinand and Isabel. The Spanish believed Africans would be more capable of performing physical labor. From 1519 to 1533, the indigenous uprising known as Enriquillo's Revolt, after the Ta\u00edno cacique who led them, ensued, resulting from escaped African slaves on the island (maroons) possibly working with the Ta\u00edno people.\nPrecious metals played a large role in the history of the island after Columbus's arrival. One of the first inhabitants Columbus came across on this island was \"a girl wearing only a gold nose plug\". Soon the Ta\u00ednos were trading pieces of gold for hawk's bells with their cacique declaring the gold came from Cibao. Traveling further east from Navidad, Columbus came across the Yaque del Norte River, which he named R\u00edo de Oro (River of Gold) because its \"sands abound in gold dust\".\nOn Columbus's return during his second voyage, he learned it was the chief Caonabo who had massacred his settlement at Navidad. While Columbus established a new settlement the village of La Isabela on Jan. 1494, he sent Alonso de Ojeda and 15 men to search for the mines of Cibao. After a six-day journey, Ojeda came across an area containing gold, in which the gold was extracted from streams by the Ta\u00edno people. Columbus himself visited the mines of Cibao on 12 March 1494. He constructed the Fort of Santo Tom\u00e1s, present day J\u00e1nico, leaving Captain Pedro Margarit in command of 56 men. On 24 March 1495, Columbus with his ally Guacanagarix, embarked on a war of revenge against Caonabo, capturing him and his family while \"killing many Indians and capturing others\". Afterwards, \"every person of fourteen years of age or upward was to pay a large \"hawk's bell\" of gold dust\", every three months, as \"the Spaniards were sure there was more gold in the island than the natives had yet found, and were determined to make them dig it out.\"\n16th century: gold, sugar and pirates.\nGold mining using forced indigenous labor began early on Hispaniola. Miguel D\u00edaz and Francisco de Garay discovered large gold nuggets on the lower Haina River in 1496. These San Cristobal mines were later known as the Minas Viejas mines. Then, in 1499, the first major discovery of gold was made in the cordillera central, which led to a mining boom. By 1501 Columbus's cousin, Giovanni Colombo, had discovered gold near Buenaventura. The deposits were later known as Minas Nuevas. Two major mining areas resulted, one along San Cristobal-Buenaventura, and another in Cibao within the La Vega-Cotuy-Bonao triangle, while Santiago de los Caballeros, Concepci\u00f3n, and Bonao became mining towns. The gold rush of 1500\u20131508 ensued, and Ovando expropriated the gold mines of Miguel D\u00edaz and Francisco de Garay in 1504, as pit mines became royal mines for Ferdinand II of Aragon, who reserved the best mines for himself, though placers were open to private prospectors. King Ferdinand kept 967 natives in the San Crist\u00f3bal mining area, supervised by salaried miners.\nUnder the royal governor Nicol\u00e1s de Ovando, the indigenous people were forced to work in the gold mines. By 1503, the Spanish Crown legalized the allocation of private grants of indigenous labor to particular Spaniards for mining through the \"encomienda\" system. Once the indigenous were forced into mining far from their home villages, they suffered hunger and other difficult conditions. By 1508, the Ta\u00edno population of about 400,000 was reduced to 60,000, and by 1514, only 26,334 remained. About half resided in the mining towns of Concepci\u00f3n, Santiago, Santo Domingo, and Buenaventura. The repartimiento of 1514 accelerated emigration of the Spanish colonists, coupled with the exhaustion of the mines. The first documented outbreak of smallpox, previously an Eastern hemisphere disease, occurred on Hispaniola in December 1518 among enslaved African miners. Some scholars speculate that European diseases arrived before this date, but there is no compelling evidence for an outbreak. The natives had no acquired immunity to European diseases, including smallpox. By May 1519, as many as one-third of the remaining Ta\u00ednos had died. In the century following the Spanish arrival on Hispaniola, the Ta\u00edno population fell by up to 95% of the population, out of a pre-contact population estimated from tens of thousands to 8,000,000. Many authors have described the treatment of Tainos in Hispaniola under the Spanish Empire as genocide.\nSugar cane was introduced to Hispaniola by settlers from the Canary Islands, and the first sugar mill in the New World was established in 1516, on Hispaniola. The need for a labor force to meet the growing demands of sugar cane cultivation led to an exponential increase in the importation of slaves over the following two decades. The sugar mill owners soon formed a new colonial elite.\nThe first major slave revolt in the Americas occurred in Santo Domingo during 1521, when enslaved Muslims of the Wolof nation led an uprising in the sugar plantation of admiral Don Diego Colon, son of Christopher Columbus. Many of these insurgents managed to escape where they formed independent maroon communities in the south of the island.\nBeginning in the 1520s, the Caribbean Sea was raided by increasingly numerous French pirates. In 1541, Spain authorized the construction of Santo Domingo's fortified wall, and in 1560 decided to restrict sea travel to enormous, well-armed convoys. In another move, which would destroy Hispaniola's sugar industry, in 1561 Havana, more strategically located in relation to the Gulf Stream, was selected as the designated stopping point for the merchant \"flotas\", which had a royal monopoly on commerce with the Americas. In 1564, the island's main inland cities Santiago de los Caballeros and Concepci\u00f3n de la Vega were destroyed by an earthquake. In the 1560s, English privateers joined the French in regularly raiding Spanish shipping in the Americas.\n17th century: European skirmishes, division of the island and trade.\nBy the early 17th century, Hispaniola and its nearby islands (notably Tortuga) became regular stopping points for Caribbean pirates. In 1606, the government of Philip III ordered all inhabitants of Hispaniola to move close to Santo Domingo, to fight against piracy. Rather than secure the island, his action meant that French, English, and Dutch pirates established their own bases on the less populated north and west coasts of the island.\nIn 1625, French and English pirates arrived on the island of Tortuga, just off the northwest coast of Hispaniola, which was originally settled by a few Spanish colonists. The pirates were attacked in 1629 by Spanish forces commanded by Don Fadrique de Toledo, who fortified the island, and expelled the French and English. As most of the Spanish army left for the main island of Hispaniola to root out French colonists there, the French returned to Tortuga in 1630 and had constant battles for several decades. In 1654, the Spanish re-captured Tortuga for the last time.\nIn 1655 the island of Tortuga was reoccupied by the English and French. In 1660 the English appointed a Frenchman as Governor who proclaimed the King of France, set up French colours, and defeated several English attempts to reclaim the island. In 1665, French colonization of the island was officially recognized by King Louis\u00a0XIV. The French colony was given the name Saint-Domingue. By 1670 a Welsh privateer named Henry Morgan invited the pirates on the island of Tortuga to set sail under him. They were hired by the French as a striking force that allowed France to have a much stronger hold on the Caribbean region. Consequently, the pirates never really controlled the island and kept Tortuga as a neutral hideout. The capital of the French Colony of Saint-Domingue was moved from Tortuga to Port-de-Paix on the mainland of Hispaniola in 1676.\nIn 1680, new Acts of Parliament forbade sailing under foreign flags (in opposition to former practice). This was a major legal blow to the Caribbean pirates. Settlements were made in the Treaty of Ratisbon of 1684, signed by the European powers, that put an end to piracy. Most of the pirates after this time were hired out into the Royal services to suppress their former buccaneer allies. In the 1697 Treaty of Ryswick, Spain formally ceded the western third of the island to France. Saint-Domingue quickly came to overshadow the east in both wealth and population. Nicknamed the \"Pearl of the Antilles\", it became the most prosperous colony in the West Indies, with a system of human slavery used to grow and harvest sugar cane during a time when European demand for sugar was high. Slavery kept costs low and profit was maximized. It was an important port in the Americas for goods and products flowing to and from France and Europe.\n18th century to 19th century: Independence.\nEuropean colonists often died young due to tropical fevers, as well as from violent slave resistance in the late 18th century. In 1791, during the French Revolution, a major slave revolt broke out on Saint-Domingue. When the French Republic abolished slavery in the colonies on February 4, 1794, it was a European first. The ex-slave army joined forces with France in its war against its European neighbors. In the second 1795 Treaty of Basel (July 22), Spain ceded the eastern two-thirds of the island of Hispaniola, later to become the Dominican Republic. French settlers had begun to colonize some areas in the Spanish side of the territory.\nUnder Napoleon, France reimposed slavery in most of its Caribbean islands in 1802 and sent an army to bring the island into full control. However, thousands of the French troops succumbed to yellow fever during the summer months, and more than half of the French army died because of disease. After an extremely brutal war with atrocities committed on both sides, the French removed the surviving 7,000 troops in late 1803, and the surviving leaders of the Haitian Revolution declared western Hispaniola the new nation of independent Haiti in early 1804. France continued to rule Spanish Santo Domingo. In 1805, after renewed hostilities with the ruling French government in Santo Domingo, Haitian troops of General Jean Jacques Dessalines tried to conquer all of Hispaniola. He launched an invasion of Santo Domingo and sacked the towns of Santiago de los Caballeros and Moca, killing most of their residents, but news of a French fleet sailing towards Haiti forced the invading army to withdraw from the east, leaving it in French hands.\nIn 1808, a second revolution against France broke out on the island. Following Napoleon's invasion of Spain, the criollos of Santo Domingo revolted against the French regime. With the aid of Great Britain, the French was defeated, and Santo Domingo was returned to Spanish control. France would never regain control of the island, and after some 12 years of Spanish dominion, the leaders in Santo Domingo revolted again, and eastern Hispaniola was declared independent as the Republic of Spanish Haiti in 1821. Fearing the influence of a society of slaves that had successfully revolted against their owners, the United States and European powers refused to recognize Haiti, the second republic in the Western Hemisphere. France demanded a high payment for compensation to slaveholders who lost their property, and Haiti was saddled with unmanageable debt for decades. By this point, the entire island was united under Haitian control. However, suppression of the Dominican culture and the imposition of heavy taxation would lead to the Dominican War of Independence and the establishment of the Dominican Republic in 1844. (This is one of the reasons for the tensions between the two countries today). Years of war, political chaos and economic crisis came to an end with a reintegration of the Dominican Republic to Spanish rule in 1861, at the request of discouraged Dominican political leaders who had hoped that the Spanish would restore order to the country. However, just as in the Espa\u00f1a Boba period, taxations, corruption, and second class treatment of the Dominicans caused support for the regime to wane, and new independence movements had sparked throughout the country. In August 1863, the Dominican Restoration War erupted on the island, and after suffering heavy defeats, the Spanish Crown capitulated. A royal decree, the Treaty of El Carmelo, recognized the independence of the Dominican Republic, and the Spanish were expelled for good in 1865. Renewed annexation projects, this time to the United States, was defeated in Congress, and the masterminds were ousted in an uprising in 1874. Both states have remained independent since then.\n20th century to present: Foreign intervention, dictatorships, aftermath.\nIn the 20th century, however, both states have endured similar outcomes. With many ensuing conflicts such as Banana Wars and World War I taking place, political and economic instabilities continued to ravage as constant power struggles and civil wars engulfed among leaders in both states. Such actions triggered renewed external interest in launching military interventions on the island. This would finally come with U.S. forces issuing a military occupation of both states, first with Haiti in 1915, and the Dominican Republic in 1916. In the following decades after American forces departed from the island, both states would be ruled by heavy handed politicians that had risen to prominence during the American occupation. Haiti's Fran\u00e7ois Duvalier (Papa Doc) and his son, Jean-Claude Duvalier (Baby Doc) and Dominican Republic's Rafael Trujillo would emerge as the leading autocratic rulers at this time. Eventually, the dictatorships of both countries came to a close with the assassination of Trujillo in 1961, (which plunged the country into chaos, triggering a bloody revolution and a second U.S intervention in 1965), and the death of Fran\u00e7ois Duvalier and overthrow of Jean-Claude Duvalier in 1971 and 1986, respectively. Both states would return to a democratic government, as proven with the elections of Jean-Bertrand Aristide in Haiti, and Joaqu\u00edn Balaguer in the Dominican Republic. From this point forward, however, the two countries underwent two distinct paths, both politically and economically. While the Dominican Republic was able to recover from the political crisis that ravaged the country since its conception in 1844, Haiti's political crisis continued to destabilize. The political chaos that erupted following the overthrow of Aristide in 2004 caused a mass intervention by the U.N., which lasted until 2017. Even by that point, Haiti had already suffered a massive catastrophic earthquake in 2010, cholera outbreaks continued, and gang violence had escalated further, which is still ongoing to this day. \nHaiti would become one of the poorest countries in the Americas, while the Dominican Republic gradually has developed into one of the largest economies of Central America and the Caribbean.\nGeography.\nHispaniola is the second-largest island in the Caribbean (after Cuba), with an area of , of which is under the sovereignty of the Dominican Republic occupying the eastern portion and under the sovereignty of Haiti occupying the western portion.\nThe island of Cuba lies to the west across the Windward Passage; to the southwest lie Jamaica, separated by the Jamaica Channel, the Cayman Islands and Navassa Island; . Puerto Rico lies east of Hispaniola across the Mona Passage. The Bahamas and Turks and Caicos Islands lie to the north. Its westernmost point is known as Cap Carcasse. Cuba, Cayman Islands, Navassa Island, Hispaniola, Jamaica, and Puerto Rico are collectively known as the Greater Antilles. Hispaniola is also a part of the Antilles and the West Indies.\nThe island has five major ranges of mountains: The Central Range, known in the Dominican Republic as the Cordillera Central, spans the central part of the island, extending from the south coast of the Dominican Republic into northwestern Haiti, where it is known as the Massif du Nord. This mountain range boasts the highest peak in the Antilles, Pico Duarte at above sea level. The Cordillera Septentrional runs parallel to the Central Range across the northern end of the Dominican Republic, extending into the Atlantic Ocean as the Saman\u00e1 Peninsula. The Cordillera Central and Cordillera Septentrional are separated by the lowlands of the Cibao Valley and the Atlantic coastal plains, which extend westward into Haiti as the Plaine du Nord (Northern Plain). The lowest of the ranges is the Cordillera Oriental, in the eastern part of the country.\nThe Sierra de Neiba rises in the southwest of the Dominican Republic, and continues northwest into Haiti, parallel to the Cordillera Central, as the Montagnes Noires, Cha\u00eene des Matheux and the Montagnes du Trou d'Eau. The Plateau Central lies between the Massif du Nord and the Montagnes Noires, and the Plaine de l'Artibonite lies between the Montagnes Noires and the Cha\u00eene des Matheux, opening westward toward the Gulf of Gon\u00e2ve, the largest gulf of the Antilles.\nThe southern range begins in the southwesternmost Dominican Republic as the Sierra de Bahoruco, and extends west into Haiti as the Massif de la Selle and the Massif de la Hotte, which form the mountainous spine of Haiti's southern peninsula. Pic de la Selle is the highest peak in the southern range, the third highest peak in the Antilles and consequently the highest point in Haiti, at above sea level. A depression runs parallel to the southern range, between the southern range and the Cha\u00eene des Matheux-Sierra de Neiba. It is known as the Plaine du Cul-de-Sac in Haiti, and Haiti's capital Port-au-Prince lies at its western end. The depression is home to a chain of salt lakes, including Lake Azuei in Haiti and Lake Enriquillo in the Dominican Republic.\nThe island has four distinct ecoregions. The Hispaniolan moist forests ecoregion covers approximately 50% of the island, especially the northern and eastern portions, predominantly in the lowlands but extending up to elevation. The Hispaniolan dry forests ecoregion occupies approximately 20% of the island, lying in the rain shadow of the mountains in the southern and western portion of the island and in the Cibao valley in the center-north of the island. The Hispaniolan pine forests occupy the mountainous 15% of the island, above elevation. The flooded grasslands and savannas ecoregion in the south central region of the island surrounds a chain of lakes and lagoons in which the most notable include that of Lake Azuei and Trou Ca\u00efman in Haiti and the nearby Lake Enriquillo in the Dominican Republic, which is not only the lowest point of the island, but also the lowest point for an island country.\nClimate.\nHispaniola's climate shows considerable variation due to its diverse mountainous topography, and is the most varied island of all the Antilles. Except in the Northern Hemisphere summer season, the predominant winds over Hispaniola are the northeast trade winds. As in Jamaica and Cuba, these winds deposit their moisture on the northern mountains, and create a distinct rain shadow on the southern coast, where some areas receive as little as of rainfall, and have semi-arid climates. Annual rainfall under also occurs on the southern coast of Haiti's northwest peninsula and in the central Az\u00faa region of the Plaine du Cul-de-Sac. In these regions, moreover, there is generally little rainfall outside hurricane season from August to October, and droughts are by no means uncommon when hurricanes do not come.\nOn the northern coast, in contrast, rainfall may peak between December and February, though some rain falls in all months of the year. Annual amounts typically range from on the northern coastal lowlands; there is probably much more in the Cordillera Septentrional, though no data exist. The interior of Hispaniola, along with the southeastern coast centered around Santo Domingo, typically receives around per year, with a distinct season from May to October. Usually, this wet season has two peaks: one around May, the other around the hurricane season. In the interior highlands, rainfall is much greater, around per year, but with a similar pattern to that observed in the central lowlands.\nThe variations of temperature depend on altitude and are much less marked than rainfall variations in the island. Lowland Hispaniola is generally more hot and humid, with temperatures averaging . with high humidity during the daytime, and around at night. At higher altitudes, temperatures fall steadily, so that frosts occur during the dry season on the highest peaks, where maxima are no higher than .\nFauna.\nThere are many bird species in Hispaniola, and the island's amphibian species are also diverse. There are many species endemic to the island including insects and other invertebrates, reptiles, amphibians, fishes, birds and mammals (originally animals, native animals) and also (imported animals, introduced animals, not native animals or invasive species) like farm animals, transport animals, house animals, pets and more. The two endemic terrestrial mammals on the island are the Hispaniolan hutia (\"Plagiodontia aedium\") and the Hispaniolan solenodon (\"Solenodon paradoxus\"). There are also many birds on the island, with six endemic genera (\"Calyptophilus\", \"Dulus\", \"Nesoctites\", \"Phaenicophilus\", \"Xenoligea\" and \"Microligea\"). More than half of the original distribution of its ecoregions has been lost due to habitat destruction impacting the local fauna and some of the original animals either threat, threatened with extinction or totally extinct, because of climate change or because they have been hunted by humans or their habitats have been felled or changed for some reasons or have become some of the animals have been threatened by (introduced animals, not native animals or invasive species) or there are fighting for space to survive and perhaps some animals that feed on the same plants or animals or just something like that.\nFlora.\nThe island has four distinct ecoregions. The Hispaniolan moist forests ecoregion covers approximately 50% of the island, especially the northern and eastern portions, predominantly in the lowlands but extending up to elevation. The Hispaniolan dry forests ecoregion occupies approximately 20% of the island, lying in the rain shadow of the mountains in the southern and western portion of the island, and in the Cibao valley in the center-north of the island. The Hispaniolan pine forests occupy the mountainous 15% of the island, above elevation. The flooded grasslands and savannas ecoregion in the south central region of the island surrounds a chain of lakes and lagoons, the most notable of which are Etang Saumatre and Trou Ca\u00efman in Haiti and the nearby Lake Enriquillo in the Dominican Republic.\nIn Haiti, deforestation has long been cited by scientists as a source of ecological crisis; the timber industry dates back to French colonial rule. Haiti has seen a dramatic reduction of forests due to the excessive and increasing use of charcoal as fuel for cooking. Various media outlets have suggested that the country has just 2% forest cover, but this has not been substantiated by research.\nAlso extremely important are the rarely mentioned species of \"Pinguicula casabitoana\" (a carnivorous plant), \"Gonocalyx tetraptera\", \"Gesneria sylvicola\", \"Lyonia alaini\" and \"Myrcia saliana\", as well as palo de viento (\"Didymopanax tremulus\"), jaiqui (\"Bumelia salicifolia\"), pino criciolio (\"Pino criciol\"), sangre de pollo (\"Mecranium amigdalinum\") and palo santo (\"Alpinia speciosa\").\nAccording to reports in the Dominican Republic and Haiti, the flora in this naturally protected area consists of 621 species of vascular plants, of which 153 are highly endemic to Hispaniola. The most prominent endemic species of flora that abound in the area are ebano verde (green ebony), \"Magnolia pallescens\", a highly endangered hardwood.\nRecent in-depth studies of satellite imagery and environmental analysis regarding forest classification conclude that Haiti actually has approximately 30% tree cover; this is, nevertheless, a stark decrease from the country's 60% forest cover in 1925. The country has been significantly deforested over the last 50 years, resulting in the desertification of many portions of Haiti. Haiti's poor citizens use cooking fires often, and this is a major culprit behind the nation's loss of trees. Haitians use trees as fuel either by burning the wood directly, or by first turning it into charcoal in ovens. Seventy-one percent of all fuel consumed in Haiti is wood or charcoal. Haiti's government began establishing protected areas across the country in 1968. These 26 areas today represent nearly 7 per cent of the country's land and 1.5 per cent of its waters.\nIn the Dominican Republic, the forest cover has increased. In 2003, the Dominican Republic's forest cover had been reduced to 32% of its land area, but by 2011, forest cover had increased to nearly 40%. The success of the Dominican forest growth is due to several Dominican government policies and private organizations for the purpose of reforesting, and a strong educational campaign that has resulted in increased awareness by the Dominican people of the importance of forests for their welfare and other forms of life on the island.\nDemographics.\nHispaniola is the most populous Caribbean island with a combined population of 23 million inhabitants as of July\u00a02023[ [update]].\nThe Dominican Republic is a Hispanophone nation of approximately 11.3 million people. Spanish is spoken by essentially all Dominicans as a primary language. Roman Catholicism is the official and dominant religion and some Evangelicalism and Protestant churches and The Church of Jesus Christ and minority religions such as African religions, Afro-American religions, African diaspora religions, Haitian Vodou, Dominican Vodou, Dominican Santeria, Congos Del Espiritu Santo, Dominican Protestants, Pentecostals, \nJudaism, Islam and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, Hinduism, Buddhism, Unitarian Universalism, Jehovah's Witnesses, Pentecostalism and others also exist.\nHaiti is a Creole-speaking nation of roughly 11.7 million people. Although French is spoken as a primary language by the educated and wealthy minority, virtually the entire population speaks Haitian Creole, one of several French-derived creole languages. Roman Catholicism is the dominant religion, practiced by more than half the population, although in some cases in combination with Haitian Vodou faith. Another 25% of the populace belong to Protestant churches.\nEthnic composition.\nThe ethnic composition of the Dominican population is 73% Mulatto or mixed ethnicity, 16% white and 11% black. Descendants of early Spanish settlers and of black slaves from West/Central Africa constitute the two main racial strains. This genetic pattern reflects the societal organization of the former Spanish colonies, such as the Dominican Republic, characterized by a high degree of interethnic relationships between European men and Native American/Taino or African women. Government policy under the Spanish Crown did not prohibit interethnic relationships throughout the colony.\nAt an individual level, Mulattos in the Dominican Republic tend to be approximately 50-60% European, 40-50% Sub-Saharan African, and 8-10% Native American (Ta\u00edno).\nThe ethnic composition of Haiti is estimated to be 95% black and 5% white and Mulatto.\nThe 19:1 ratio of blacks to whites is correlated with the societal organization of former French colonies, such as Haiti. In the British and French colonies, the segregation of slaves was stronger than in the Spanish territories as interethnic marriages were prohibited and no rights were recognized to children of parents of different ethnicity. Therefore, in the former British and French territories, the separation between the two main groups (i.e. European colonists and African slaves) was sharper and the admixture reduced.\nIn addition, a slave rebellion broke out in the colony that eventually ended with the independence of Haiti and a massacre of most of the white population. This is reflected by the mtDNA and Y haplogroup composition of the Haitians.\nIn recent times, Dominican and Puerto Rican researchers identified in the current Dominican population the presence of genes belonging to the aborigines of the Canary Islands (commonly called Guanches). These genes also have been detected in Puerto Rico.\nEconomics.\nThe island has the largest economy in the Greater Antilles; however, most of the economic development is found in the Dominican Republic, the Dominican economy being above 1000% larger than the Haitian economy. As of 2025[ [update]], the estimated annual per capita income is US$3040 in Haiti and US$30,870 in the Dominican Republic.\nThe divergence between the level of economic development in Haiti and the Dominican Republic makes its border the highest contrast of all western land borders.\nNatural resources.\nThe island also has an economic history and current day interest and involvement in precious metals. In 1860, it was observed that the island contained a large supply of gold, which the early Spaniards had hardly developed. By 1919, Condit and Ross noted that much of the island was covered by government granted concessions for mining different types of minerals. Besides gold, these minerals included silver, manganese, copper, magnetite, iron and nickel.\nMining operations in 2016 have taken advantage of the volcanogenic massive sulfide ore deposits around Maim\u00f3n. To the northeast, the Pueblo Viejo Gold Mine was operated by state-owned Rosario Dominicana from 1975 until 1991. In 2009, Pueblo Viejo Dominicana Corporation, formed by Barrick Gold and Goldcorp, started open-pit mining operations of the Monte Negro and Moore oxide deposits. The mined ore is processed with gold cyanidation. Pyrite and sphalerite are the main sulfide minerals found in the 120-meter thick volcanic conglomerates and agglomerates, which constitute the world's second largest sulphidation gold deposit.\nBetween Bonao and Maim\u00f3n, Falconbridge Dominicana has been mining nickel laterites since 1971. The Cerro de Maimon copper/gold open-pit mine southeast of Maim\u00f3n has been operated by Perilya since 2006. Copper is extracted from the sulfide ores, while gold and silver are extracted from both the sulfide and the oxide ores. Processing is via froth flotation and cyanidation. The ore is located in the VMS Early Cretaceous Maim\u00f3n Formation. Goethite enriched with gold and silver is found in the 30-meter thick oxide cap. Below that cap is a supergene zone containing pyrite, chalcopyrite, and sphalerite. Below the supergene zone is found the unaltered massive sulphide mineralization.\nHuman development.\nThis is a list of Dominican Republic and Haiti regions by Human Development Index as of 2023.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13717", "revid": "167282", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13717", "title": "Halle Berry", "text": "American actress (born 1966)\nHalle Maria Berry ( ; born Maria Halle Berry; August 14, 1966) is an American actress. She began her career as a model and entered several beauty contests, becoming Miss Ohio in 1986 and finishing as the first runner-up in the Miss USA pageant of 1986 and also placing sixth in Miss World 1986. Her breakthrough film role was in the romantic comedy \"Boomerang\" (1992), alongside Eddie Murphy, which led to roles in \"The Flintstones\" (1994) and \"Bulworth\" (1998) as well as the television film \"Introducing Dorothy Dandridge\" (1999), for which she won a Primetime Emmy Award and a Golden Globe Award.\nBerry established herself as one of the highest-paid actresses in Hollywood during the 2000s. For her performance of a struggling widow in the romantic drama \"Monster's Ball\" (2001), Berry became the only African-American woman to win the Academy Award for Best Actress, and the first woman of color. Berry took on high-profile roles such as Storm in four installments of the \"X-Men\" film series (2000\u20132014), the henchwoman of a robber in the thriller \"Swordfish\" (2001), Bond girl Jinx in \"Die Another Day\" (2002), and the title role in the much-derided \"Catwoman\" (2004).\nA varying critical and commercial reception followed in subsequent years, with \"Perfect Stranger\" (2007), \"Cloud Atlas\" (2012) and \"The Call\" (2013) being among her notable film releases in that period. Berry launched a production company, 606 Films, in 2014 and has been involved in the production of a number of projects in which she performed, such as the CBS science fiction series \"Extant\" (2014\u20132015). She appeared in the action films ' (2017) and ' (2019) and made her directorial debut with the Netflix drama \"Bruised\" (2020).\nBerry has been a Revlon spokesmodel since 1996. She was formerly married to baseball player David Justice, singer-songwriter Eric Ben\u00e9t, and actor Olivier Martinez. Berry has two children. She shares her first child with her former partner Gabriel Aubry, a model, and she shares her second child with Martinez.\nEarly life.\nBerry was born Maria Halle Berry in Cleveland, Ohio, on August 14, 1966, to Judith Ann (n\u00e9e Hawkins), a first generation American whose mother, Nelle Hawkins (n\u00e9e Dicken), came from Liverpool, and Jerome Jesse Berry, an African-American man. Her name was legally changed to Halle Maria Berry at the age of five. Her parents selected her middle name from Halle's Department Store, then a local landmark in Cleveland. Berry's mother worked as a psychiatric nurse, and her father worked in the same hospital as an attendant in the psychiatric ward. He later became a bus driver. They divorced when Berry was four years old, and she and her older sister Heidi Berry-Henderson were raised exclusively by their mother. \nShe has been estranged from her father since childhood, noting in 1992 that she did not even know if he was still alive. Her father was abusive to her mother; Berry has recalled witnessing her mother being beaten daily, kicked down stairs, and hit in the head with a wine bottle. Berry has also said that she was bullied as a child and, as a result, learned how to fight and protect herself.\nBerry grew up in Oakwood, Ohio, and graduated from Bedford High School, where she was a cheerleader, honor student, editor of the school newspaper, and prom queen. She worked in the children's department of Higbee's department store. She continued her studies at Cuyahoga Community College. In the 1980s, she entered several beauty contests, winning Miss Teen All American 1985 and Miss Ohio USA 1986. She was the 1986 Miss USA first runner-up, with Christy Fichtner of Texas taking home the crown. In the Miss USA 1986 pageant interview competition, Berry said she hoped to become an entertainer or do some kind of work in media. Her interview was awarded the highest score by the judges. In 1986, Berry became the first African-American to represent the United States at the Miss World beauty pageant. She placed sixth, with Trinidad and Tobago's Giselle Laronde being crowned Miss World.\nCareer.\nEarly work and breakthrough (1989\u20131999).\nIn 1989, Berry moved to New York City to pursue her acting ambitions. During her early time there, she ran out of money and briefly lived in a homeless shelter and a YMCA. After turning down numerous roles that required nudity, she said she decided to make \"Swordfish\" because her then-husband, Eric Ben\u00e9t, supported her and encouraged her to take risks.\nBerry appeared as Leticia Musgrove, the troubled wife of an executed murderer (Sean Combs), in the 2001 feature film \"Monster's Ball\". Her performance was awarded the National Board of Review and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress. She became the first African-American woman to win the Academy Award for Best Actress. The NAACP issued the statement: \"Congratulations to Halle Berry and Denzel Washington for giving us hope and making us proud. If this is a sign that Hollywood is finally ready to give opportunity and judge performance based on skill and not on skin color then it is a good thing.\" \nThis role generated controversy. Her graphic nude love scene with a racist character played by co-star Billy Bob Thornton was the subject of much media chatter and discussion among African Americans. Many in the African-American community were critical of Berry for taking the part. Berry responded: \"I don't really see a reason to ever go that far again. That was a unique movie. That scene was special and pivotal and needed to be there, and it would be a really special script that would require something like that again.\"\nBerry asked for a higher fee for Revlon advertisements after winning the Oscar. Ron Perelman, the cosmetics firm's chief, congratulated her, saying how happy he was that she modeled for his company. She replied, \"Of course, you'll have to pay me more.\" Perelman stalked off in a rage. In accepting her award, she gave an acceptance speech honoring previous black actresses who had never had the opportunity. She said, \"This moment is so much bigger than me. This is for every nameless, faceless woman of color who now has a chance tonight because this door has been opened.\"\nAs Bond girl Giacinta 'Jinx' Johnson in the 2002 \"Die Another Day\", Berry filmed an homage to \"Dr. No\", emerging from the surf to be greeted by James Bond as Ursula Andress had 40 years earlier. Lindy Hemming, costume designer on \"Die Another Day\", had insisted that Berry wear a bikini and knife as a homage. Berry has said of the scene: \"It's splashy,\" \"exciting,\" \"sexy,\" \"provocative\" and \"it will keep me still out there after winning an Oscar.\" According to an ITV news poll, Jinx was voted the fourth toughest girl on screen of all time. Berry was hurt during filming when debris from a smoke grenade flew into her eye. It was removed in a 30-minute operation. After Berry won the Academy Award, rewrites were commissioned to give her more screentime for \"X2\".\nShe starred in the psychological thriller \"Gothika\" opposite Robert Downey, Jr. in November 2003. She had broken her arm while filming a scene with Downey, who twisted her arm too hard. Production was halted for eight weeks while she healed. It was a moderate hit at the United States box office, taking in $60\u00a0million; it earned another $80\u00a0million abroad. Berry appeared in the nu metal band Limp Bizkit's music video for \"Behind Blue Eyes\" for the motion picture soundtrack for the film. The same year, she was named No. 1 in \"FHM\"'s 100 Sexiest Women in the World poll.\nBerry starred as the title role in the film \"Catwoman\", for which she received US$12.5\u00a0million. It is widely regarded by critics as one of the worst films ever made. She was awarded the Worst Actress Razzie Award for her performance; she appeared at the ceremony to accept the award in person (while holding her Oscar from \"Monster's Ball\") with a sense of humor, considering it an experience of the \"rock bottom\" in order to be \"at the top.\" Holding the Academy Award in one hand and the Razzie in the other she said, \"I never in my life thought that I would be up here, winning a Razzie! It's not like I ever aspired to be here, but thank you. When I was a kid, my mother told me that if you could not be a good loser, then there's no way you could be a good winner.\"\nEstablished actress and career fluctuations (2005\u20132013).\nHer next role was in the Oprah Winfrey-produced ABC television film \"Their Eyes Were Watching God\" (2005), an adaptation of Zora Neale Hurston's novel of the same name. Berry portrayed a free-spirited woman whose unconventional sexual mores upset her 1920s contemporaries in a small community. She received her second Primetime Emmy Award nomination for her role. Also in 2005, she served as an executive producer in \"Lackawanna Blues\". She was the voice for the character of Cappy, one of the many mechanical beings in the animated feature \"Robots\".\nIn the thriller \"Perfect Stranger\" (2007), Berry starred with Bruce Willis, playing a reporter who goes undercover to uncover the killer of her childhood friend. The film grossed a modest US$73 million worldwide, and received lukewarm reviews from critics, who felt that despite the presence of Berry and Willis, it is \"too convoluted to work, and features a twist ending that's irritating and superfluous.\" Her next 2007 film release was the drama \"Things We Lost in the Fire\", co-starring Benicio del Toro. She played a recently widowed woman who befriended the troubled friend of her late husband. The film was the first time in which she worked with a female director, Danish Susanne Bier, giving her a new feeling of \"thinking the same way,\" which she appreciated. While the film made US$8.6 million in its global theatrical run, it garnered positive reviews. 'The Austin Chronicle\" found the film to be \"an impeccably constructed and perfectly paced drama of domestic and internal volatility\" and felt that \"Berry is brilliant here, as good as she's ever been.\"\nIn April 2007, Berry was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in front of the Kodak Theatre at 6801 Hollywood Boulevard for her contributions to the film industry. By the end of the decade, she established herself as one of the highest-paid actresses in Hollywood, earning an estimated $10\u00a0million per film.\nIn the independent drama \"Frankie and Alice\" (2010), Berry played the leading role of a young multiracial American woman with dissociative identity disorder; she struggled against her alter personality to retain her true self. The film received a limited theatrical release, to a mixed critical response. \"The Hollywood Reporter\" described the film as \"a well-wrought psychological drama that delves into the dark side of one woman's psyche\" and found Berry to be \"spellbinding\" in it. She earned the African-American Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress and a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actress \u2013 Motion Picture Drama. She next made part of a large ensemble cast in Garry Marshall's romantic comedy \"New Year's Eve\" (2011), with Michelle Pfeiffer, Jessica Biel, Robert De Niro, Josh Duhamel, Zac Efron, Sarah Jessica Parker, and Sof\u00eda Vergara, among many others. In the film, she took on the supporting role of a nurse befriending a man in the final stages (De Niro). While the film was panned by critics, it made US$142 million worldwide.\nIn 2012, Berry starred as an expert diver tutor alongside then-husband Olivier Martinez in the little-seen thriller \"Dark Tide\". She led an ensemble cast opposite Tom Hanks and Jim Broadbent in The Wachowskis' epic science fiction film \"Cloud Atlas\" (2012), with each of the actors playing six different characters across a period of five centuries. Budgeted at US$128.8 million, \"Cloud Atlas\" made US$130.4 million worldwide. It garnered polarized reactions from both critics and audiences.\nBerry appeared in a segment of the independent anthology comedy \"Movie 43\" (2013), which the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" called \"the \"Citizen Kane\" of awful.\" Berry found greater success with her next performance, as a 9-1-1 operator receiving a call from a girl kidnapped by a serial killer, in the crime thriller \"The Call\" (2013). Berry was drawn to \"the idea of being a part of a movie that was so empowering for women. We don't often get to play roles like this, where ordinary people become heroic and do something extraordinary.\" Manohla Dargis of \"The New York Times\" found the film to be \"an effectively creepy thriller,\" while reviewer Dwight Brown felt that \"the script gives Berry a blue-collar character she can make accessible, vulnerable and gutsy[...].\" \"The Call\" was a sleeper hit, grossing US$68.6 million around the globe.\nContinued film and television work (2014\u2013present).\nIn 2014, Berry signed on to star and serve as a co-executive producer in CBS drama series \"Extant\", where she took on the role of Molly Woods, an astronaut who struggles to reconnect with her husband and android son after spending 13 months in space. The show ran for two seasons until 2015, receiving largely positive reviews from critics. \"USA Today\" remarked: \"She [Halle Berry] brings a dignity and gravity to Molly, a projected intelligence that allows you to buy her as an astronaut and to see what has happened to her as frightening rather than ridiculous. Berry's all in, and you float along.\" Also in 2014, Berry launched a new production company, 606 Films, with producing partner Elaine Goldsmith-Thomas. It is named after the Anti-Paparazzi Bill, SB 606, that the actress pushed for and which was signed into law by California Governor Jerry Brown in the fall of 2013. The new company emerged as part of a deal for Berry to work in \"Extant\".\nIn the stand-up comedy concert film ' (2016), Berry appeared as herself, opposite Kevin Hart, attending a poker game event that goes horribly wrong. She provided uncredited vocals to the song \"Calling All My Lovelies\" by Bruno Mars from his third studio album, \"24K Magic\" (2016). \"Kidnap\", an abduction thriller Berry filmed in 2014, was released in 2017. In the film, she starred as a diner waitress tailing a vehicle when her son is kidnapped by its occupants. \"Kidnap\" grossed US$34 million and garnered mixed reviews from writers, who felt that it \"strays into poorly scripted exploitation too often to take advantage of its pulpy premise \u2014 or the still-impressive talents of [Berry].\" She next played an agent employed by a secret American spy organisation in the action comedy sequel ' (2017), as part of an ensemble cast, consisting of Colin Firth, Taron Egerton, Mark Strong, Julianne Moore, and Elton John. While critical response towards the film was mixed, it made US$414 million worldwide.\nAlongside Daniel Craig, Berry starred as a working-class mother during the 1992 Los Angeles riots in Deniz Gamze Erg\u00fcven's drama \"Kings\" (2017). The film found a limited theatrical release following its initial screening at the Toronto International Film Festival, and as part of an overall lukewarm reception, \"Variety\" noted: \"It should be said that Berry has given some of the best and worst performances of the past quarter-century, but this is perhaps the only one that swings to both extremes in the same movie.\" Berry competed against James Corden in the first rap battle on the first episode of\u00a0TBS's \"Drop the Mic\", originally aired on October 24, 2017.\nShe played Sofia, an assassin, in the film \"\", which was released on May 17, 2019, by Lionsgate. She is, as of February 2019, executive producer of the BET television series \"Boomerang\", based on the film in which she starred. The series premiered February 12, 2019.\nBerry made her directorial debut with the feature \"Bruised\" in which she plays a disgraced MMA fighter named Jackie Justice, who reconnects with her estranged son. The film premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival in September 2020 and was released on Netflix in November 2021. Berry received a positive review from \"Deadline\" for her performance.\nIn January 2023, Berry signed with Range Media Partners as a producer and director.\nIn April 2025, Berry was announced as a member of the jury for Main Competition section of the 2025 Cannes Film Festival.\nMedia image.\nBerry was ranked No. 1 on \"People\"'s \"50 Most Beautiful People in the World\" list in 2003 after making the top ten seven times and appeared No. 1 on \"FHM\"'s \"100 Sexiest Women in the World\" the same year. She was named \"Esquire\" magazine's \"Sexiest Woman Alive\" in October 2008, about which she stated: \"I don't know exactly what it means, but being 42 and having just had a baby, I think I'll take it.\" \"Men's Health\" ranked her at No. 35 on their \"100 Hottest Women of All-Time\" list. In 2009, she was voted #23 on \"Empire\"'s 100 Sexiest Film Stars. The same year, rapper Hurricane Chris released a song titled \"Halle Berry (She's Fine)\" extolling Berry's beauty and sex appeal. At the age of 42 (in 2008), she was named the \"Sexiest Black Woman\" by Access Hollywood's \"TV One Access\" survey. Born to an African-American father and a white mother, Berry has stated that her biracial background was \"painful and confusing\" when she was a young woman, and she made the decision early on to identify as a black woman because she knew that was how she would be perceived.\nPersonal life.\nBerry dated Chicago dentist John Ronan from March 1989 to October 1991. In November 1993, Ronan sued Berry for $80,000 in what he claimed were unpaid loans to help launch her career. Berry contended that the money was a gift, and a judge dismissed the case because Ronan did not list Berry as a debtor when he filed for bankruptcy in 1992.\nAccording to Berry, a beating from a former abusive boyfriend during the filming of \"The Last Boy Scout\" in 1991 punctured her eardrum and caused her to lose 80% of her hearing in her left ear. She has never named the abuser, but she said that he was someone \"well known in Hollywood\". In 2004, her former boyfriend Christopher Williams accused Wesley Snipes of being responsible for the incident, saying, \"I'm so tired of people thinking I'm the guy [who did it]. Wesley Snipes busted her eardrum, not me.\"\nBerry first saw baseball player David Justice on TV playing in an MTV celebrity baseball game in February 1992. When a reporter from Justice's hometown of Cincinnati told her that Justice was a fan, Berry gave her phone number to the reporter to give to Justice. Berry married Justice shortly after midnight on January 1, 1993. Following their separation in February 1996, Berry stated publicly that she was so depressed that she had considered taking her own life. Berry and Justice were divorced on June 20, 1997.\nIn May 2000, Berry pleaded no contest to a charge of leaving the scene of a car accident; she was sentenced to three years' probation, fined $13,500, and ordered to perform 200 hours of community service.\nBerry married her second husband, singer-songwriter Eric Ben\u00e9t, on January 24, 2001, following a two-year courtship. Ben\u00e9t underwent treatment for sex addiction in 2002. By early October 2003, they had separated, and their divorce was finalized on January 3, 2005.\nIn November 2005, Berry began dating French-Canadian model Gabriel Aubry, whom she had met at a Versace photoshoot. Berry gave birth to their daughter in March 2008. On April 30, 2010, Berry and Aubry announced that their relationship had ended some months earlier. In January 2011, Berry and Aubry became involved in a highly publicized custody battle, centered primarily on Berry's desire to move with their daughter from Los Angeles, where Berry and Aubry resided, to France, the home of French actor Olivier Martinez, whom Berry had started dating in 2010, having met him while filming \"Dark Tide\" in South Africa. Aubry objected to the move on the ground that it would interfere with their joint custody arrangement. In November 2012, a judge denied Berry's request to move the couple's daughter to France. Less than two weeks later, on November 22, 2012, Aubry and Martinez were both treated at a hospital for injuries after engaging in a physical altercation at Berry's residence. Martinez performed a citizen's arrest on Aubry and, because it was considered a domestic violence incident, was granted a temporary emergency protective order preventing Aubry from coming within 100 yards of Berry, Martinez, and the child with whom he shares custody with Berry, until November 29, 2012. In turn, Aubry obtained a temporary restraining order against Martinez on November 26, 2012, asserting that the fight had begun when Martinez had threatened to kill Aubry if he did not allow the couple to move to France. Leaked court documents included photos showing significant injuries to Aubry's face, which were widely displayed in the media. On November 29, 2012, Berry's lawyer announced that Berry and Aubry had reached an amicable custody agreement in court. In June 2014, a Superior Court ruling called for Berry to pay Aubry $16,000 a month in child support as well as a retroactive payment of $115,000 and $300,000 for Aubry's attorney fees.\nBerry and Martinez confirmed their engagement in March 2012, and married in France on July 13, 2013. In October 2013, Berry gave birth to their son. In 2015, after two years of marriage, the couple announced they were divorcing. The divorce was finalized in December 2016. In August 2023, issues dealing with custody and child support were settled.\nBerry started dating American musician Van Hunt in 2020, which was revealed through her Instagram.\nActivism.\nAlong with Pierce Brosnan, Cindy Crawford, Jane Seymour, Dick Van Dyke, T\u00e9a Leoni, and Daryl Hannah, Berry successfully fought in 2006 against the Cabrillo Port Liquefied Natural Gas facility that was proposed off the coast of Malibu. Berry said, \"I care about the air we breathe, I care about the marine life and the ecosystem of the ocean.\" In May 2007, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger vetoed the facility. Hasty Pudding Theatricals gave her its 2006 \"Woman of The Year\" award. Berry took part in a nearly 2,000-house cellphone-bank campaign for Barack Obama in February 2008. In April 2013, she appeared in a video clip for Gucci's \"Chime for Change\" campaign that aims to raise funds and awareness of women's issues in terms of education, health, and justice. In August 2013, Berry testified alongside Jennifer Garner before the California State Assembly's Judiciary Committee in support of a bill that would protect celebrities' children from harassment by photographers. The bill passed in September.\nIn May 2024, Berry advocated for more research and education on menopause by supporting a bill introduced by Senators Patty Murray and Lisa Murkowski.\u00a0Berry said, \"I'm in menopause, OK?... The shame has to be taken out of menopause. We have to talk about this very normal part of our life that happens. Our doctors can't even say the word to us, let alone walk us through the journey.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13720", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13720", "title": "Higher Criticism.", "text": ""}
{"id": "13722", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13722", "title": "Robert Koch", "text": "German physician and bacteriologist (1843\u20131910)\nHeinrich Hermann Robert Koch ( ; ; 11 December 1843 \u2013 27 May 1910) was a German physician and microbiologist. As the discoverer of the specific causative agents of deadly infectious diseases including tuberculosis, cholera and anthrax, he is regarded as one of the main founders of modern bacteriology. As such he is popularly nicknamed the father of microbiology (with Louis Pasteur), and as the father of medical bacteriology. His discovery of the anthrax bacterium (\"Bacillus anthracis\") in 1876 is considered as the birth of modern bacteriology. Koch used his discoveries to establish that germs \"could cause a specific disease\" and directly provided proofs for the germ theory of diseases, therefore creating the scientific basis of public health, saving millions of lives. For his life's work Koch is seen as one of the founders of modern medicine.\nWhile working as a private physician, Koch developed many innovative techniques in microbiology. He was the first to use the oil immersion lens, condenser, and microphotography in microscopy. His invention of the bacterial culture method using agar and glass plates (later developed as the Petri dish by his assistant Julius Richard Petri) made him the first to grow bacteria in the laboratory. In appreciation of his work, he was appointed to government advisor at the Imperial Health Office in 1880, promoted to a senior executive position (\"Geheimer Regierungsrat\") in 1882, Director of Hygienic Institute and Chair (Professor of hygiene) of the Faculty of Medicine at Berlin University in 1885, and the Royal Prussian Institute for Infectious Diseases (later renamed Robert Koch Institute after his death) in 1891.\nThe methods Koch used in bacteriology led to the establishment of a medical concept known as Koch's postulates, four generalized medical principles to ascertain the relationship of pathogens with specific diseases. The concept is still in use in most situations and influences subsequent epidemiological principles such as the Bradford Hill criteria. A major controversy followed when Koch discovered tuberculin as a medication for tuberculosis which was proven to be ineffective, but developed for diagnosis of tuberculosis after his death. For his research on tuberculosis, he received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1905. The day he announced the discovery of the tuberculosis bacterium, 24 March 1882, has been observed by the World Health Organization as \"World Tuberculosis Day\" every year since 1982.\nEarly life and education.\nKoch was born in Clausthal, Germany, on 11 December 1843, to Hermann Koch (1814\u20131877) and Mathilde Julie Henriette (n\u00e9e Biewend; 1818\u20131871). His father was a mining engineer. He was the third of thirteen siblings. He excelled academically from an early age. Before entering school in 1848, he had taught himself how to read and write. He completed secondary education in 1862, having excelled in science and math.\nAt the age of 19, in 1862, Koch entered the University of G\u00f6ttingen to study natural science. He took up mathematics, physics and botany. He was appointed assistant in the university's Pathological Museum. After three semesters, he decided to change his area of study to medicine, as he aspired to be a physician. During his fifth semester at the medical school, Jacob Henle, an anatomist who had published a theory of contagion in 1840, asked him to participate in his research project on uterine nerve structure. This research won him a research prize from the university and enabled him to briefly study under Rudolf Virchow, who was at the time considered \"Germany's most renowned physician\". In his sixth semester, Koch began to research at the Physiological Institute, where he studied the secretion of succinic acid, which is a signalling molecule that is also involved in the metabolism of the mitochondria. This would eventually form the basis of his dissertation. In January 1866, he graduated from the medical school, earning honours of the highest distinction, \"maxima cum laude\".\nAnthrax.\nRobert Koch is widely known for his work with anthrax, discovering the causative agent of the fatal disease to be \"Bacillus anthracis\". After officially becoming a district physician in Wollstein (today's Wolsztyn), Poland, in 1872, Robert began to delve into the disease called Anthrax. Near Wollstein, anthrax disease was regularly taking the lives of humans and livestock without evidence explaining why. Eventually, in 1876, Koch was able to make an incredible discovery that anthrax was triggered by one singular pathogen. Koch's discovery of the dormant stage, the anthrax spores, allowed him to successfully unravel the mystery behind the anthrax disease. By gaining a better understanding of this pathogen, he was able to shed light on the bacterium's remarkable resistance to environmental factors (\"Robert Koch \u2013 Nobel Lecture\" 2018). This groundbreaking achievement marked Koch as the pioneer scientist to discover that a microscopic organism was causing a disease to spread. His findings were especially impressive as they were done in a poorly equipped laboratory in Wollstein.\nHe published the discovery in a booklet as \"Die \u00c4tiologie der Milzbrand-Krankheit, Begr\u00fcndet auf die Entwicklungsgeschichte des Bacillus Anthracis\" (\"The Etiology of Anthrax Disease, Based on the Developmental History of Bacillus Anthracis\") in 1876 while working at in W\u00f6llstein. His publication in 1877 on the structure of anthrax bacterium marked the first photography of a bacterium. He discovered the formation of spores in anthrax bacteria, which could remain dormant under specific conditions. However, under optimal conditions, the spores were activated and caused disease. To determine this causative agent, he dry-fixed bacterial cultures onto glass slides, used dyes to stain the cultures, and observed them through a microscope. His work with anthrax is notable in that he was the first to link a specific microorganism with a specific disease, rejecting the idea of spontaneous generation and supporting the germ theory of disease. \nCareer.\nAfter graduation in 1866, Koch briefly worked as an assistant in the General Hospital of Hamburg. In October of that year, he moved to Idiot's Hospital of Langenhagen (as it was known in English, later named KRH Psychiatrie Langenhagen), near Hanover, as a junior physician. In 1868, he moved to Neimegk and then to Rakwitz in 1869. As the Franco-Prussian War started in 1870, he enlisted in the German army as a volunteer surgeon in 1871 to support the war effort. He was discharged a year later and was appointed as a district physician (\"Kreisphysikus\") in Wollstein in Prussian Posen (now Wolsztyn, Poland). As his family settled there, his wife gave him a microscope as a birthday gift. With the microscope, he set up a private laboratory and started his career in microbiology.\nKoch began conducting research on microorganisms in a laboratory connected to his patient's examination room. His early research in this laboratory yielded one of his major contributions to the field of microbiology, as he developed the technique of growing bacteria. Furthermore, he managed to isolate and grow selected pathogens in a pure laboratory culture. His discovery of the anthrax bacillus (later named \"Bacillus anthracis\") hugely impressed Ferdinand Julius Cohn, professor at the University of Breslau (now the University of Wroc\u0142aw), who helped him publish the discovery in 1876. Cohn had established the Institute of Plant Physiology and invited Koch to demonstrate his new bacterium there in 1877. Koch was transferred to Breslau as district physician in 1879. A year after, he left for Berlin when he was appointed a government advisor at the Imperial Health Office, where he worked from 1880 to 1885. Following his discovery of the tuberculosis bacterium, he was promoted to \"Geheimer Regierungsrat\", a senior executive position, in June 1882.\nIn 1885, Koch received two appointments as an administrator and professor at Berlin University. He became Director of Hygienic Institute and Chair (Professor of hygiene) of the Faculty of Medicine. In 1891, he relinquished his professorship and became a director of the Royal Prussian Institute for Infectious Diseases (now the Robert Koch Institute) which consisted of a clinical division and beds for the division of clinical research. For this, he accepted harsh conditions. The Prussian Ministry of Health insisted after the 1890 scandal with tuberculin, which Koch had discovered and intended as a remedy for tuberculosis, that any of Koch's inventions would unconditionally belong to the government and he would not be compensated. Koch lost the right to apply for patent protection. In 1906, he moved to East Africa to research a cure for trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness). He established the Bugula research camp where up to 1000 people a day were treated with the experimental drug Atoxyl.\nScientific contributions.\nTechniques in bacteria study.\nRobert Koch made two important developments in microscopy; he was the first to use an oil immersion lens and a condenser that enabled smaller objects to be seen. In addition, he was also the first to effectively use photography (microphotography) for microscopic observation. He introduced the \"bedrock methods\" of bacterial staining using methylene blue and Bismarck (Vesuvin) brown dye. In an attempt to grow bacteria, Koch began to use solid nutrients such as potato slices. Through these initial experiments, Koch observed individual colonies of identical, pure cells. He found that potato slices were not suitable media for all organisms, and later began to use nutrient solutions with gelatin. However, he soon realized that gelatin, like potato slices, was not the optimal medium for bacterial growth, as it did not remain solid at 37\u00a0\u00b0C, the ideal temperature for growth of most human pathogens. Furthermore, many bacteria can hydrolyze gelatin, making it a liquid. As suggested to him by his post-doctoral assistant Walther Hesse, who got the idea from his wife Fanny Hesse, in 1881, Koch started using agar to grow and isolate pure cultures. Agar is a polysaccharide that remains solid at 37\u00a0\u00b0C, is not degraded by most bacteria, and results in a stable transparent medium.\nDevelopment of Petri dish.\nKoch's booklet published in 1881 titled \"Zur Untersuchung von pathogenen Organismen\" (\"Methods for the Study of Pathogenic Organisms\") has been known as the \"Bible of Bacteriology.\" In it he described a novel method of using glass slide with agar to grow bacteria. The method involved pouring a liquid agar onto the glass slide and then spreading a thin layer of gelatin over it. The gelatin made the culture medium solidify, in which bacterial samples could be spread uniformly. The whole bacterial culture was then put on a glass plate together with a small wet paper. Koch named this container as \"feuchte Kammer\" (moist chamber). The typical chamber was a circular glass dish 20\u2009cm in diameter and 5\u2009cm in height and had a lid to prevent contamination. The glass plate and the transparent culture media made observation of the bacterial growth easy.\nKoch publicly demonstrated his plating method at the Seventh International Medical Congress in London in August 1881. There, Louis Pasteur exclaimed, \"\"C'est un grand progr\u00e8s, Monsieur\"!\" (\"What a great progress, Sir!\") It was using Koch's microscopy and agar-plate culture method that his students discovered new bacteria. Friedrich Loeffler discovered the bacteria of glanders (\"Burkholderia mallei\") in 1882 and diphtheria (\"Corynebacterium diphtheriae\") in 1884; and Georg Theodor August Gaffky, the bacterium of typhoid (\"Salmonella enterica\") in 1884. Koch's assistant Julius Richard Petri developed an improved method and published it in 1887 as \"Eine kleine Modification des Koch\u2019schen Plattenverfahrens\" (A minor modification of the plating technique of Koch). The culture plate was given an eponymous name Petri dish. It is often asserted that Petri developed a new culture plate, but this was not so. He simply discarded the use of glass plate and instead used the circular glass dish directly, not just as a moist chamber, but as the main culture container. This further reduced the chances of contaminations. It would also have been appropriate if the name \"Koch dish\" had been given.\nTuberculosis.\nDuring his time as the government advisor with the Imperial Health Agency in Berlin in the 1880s, Koch became interested in tuberculosis research. At the time, it was widely believed that tuberculosis was an inherited disease. However, Koch was convinced that the disease was caused by a bacterium and was infectious. In 1882, he published his findings on tuberculosis, in which he reported the causative agent of the disease to be the slow-growing \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\". He published the discovery as \"Die \u00c4tiologie der Tuberkulose\" (\"The Etiology of Tuberculosis\"), and presented before the German Physiological Society at Berlin on 24 March 1882. Koch said,When the cover-glasses were exposed to this staining fluid [methylene blue mixed with potassium hydroxide] for 24 hours, very fine rod-like forms became apparent in the tubercular mass for the first time, having, as further observations showed, the power of multiplication and of spore formation and hence belonging to the same group of organisms as the anthrax bacillus... Microscopic examination then showed that only the previously blue-stained cell nuclei and detritus became brown, while the tubercle bacilli remained a beautiful blue.\nThere was no particular reaction to this announcement. Eminent scientists such as Rudolf Virchow remained sceptical. Virchow clung to his theory that all diseases are due to faulty cellular activities. On the other hand, Paul Ehrlich later recollected that this moment was his \"single greatest scientific experience.\" Koch expanded the report and published it under the same title as a booklet in 1884, in which he concluded that the discovery of tuberculosis bacterium fulfilled the three principles, eventually known as Koch's postulates, which were formulated by his assistant Friedrich Loeffler in 1883, saying:All these factors together allow me to conclude that the bacilli present in the tuberculous lesions do not only accompany tuberculosis, but rather cause it. These bacilli are the true agents of tuberculosis.\nCholera.\nIn August 1883, the German government sent a medical team led by Koch to Alexandria, Egypt, to investigate a cholera epidemic there. Koch soon found that the intestinal mucosa of people who died of cholera always had bacterial infection, yet could not confirm whether the bacteria were the causative pathogens. As the outbreak in Egypt declined, he was transferred to Calcutta (now Kolkata) India, where there was a more severe outbreak. He soon found that the river Ganges was the source of cholera. He performed autopsies of almost 100 bodies, and found in each bacterial infection. He identified the same bacteria from water tanks, linking the source of the infection. He isolated the bacterium in pure culture on 7 January 1884. He subsequently confirmed that the bacterium was a new species, and described as \"a little bent, like a comma.\" His experiment using fresh blood samples indicated that the bacterium could kill red blood cells, and he hypothesized that some sort of poison was used by the bacterium to cause the disease. In 1959, Indian scientist Sambhu Nath De discovered this poison, the cholera toxin. Koch reported his discovery to the German Secretary of State for the Interior on 2 February, and published it in the \"Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift\" (\"German Medical Weekly\") the following month.\nAlthough Koch was convinced that the bacterium was the cholera pathogen, he could not entirely establish critical evidence the bacterium produced the symptoms in healthy subjects (following Koch's postulates). His experiment on animals using his pure bacteria culture did not cause the disease, and correctly explained that animals are immune to human pathogen. The bacterium was then known as \"the comma bacillus\", and scientifically as \"Bacillus comma\". It was later realised that the bacterium was already described by an Italian physician Filippo Pacini in 1854, and was also observed by the Catalan physician Joaquim Balcells i Pascual around the same time. But they failed to identify the bacterium as the causative agent of cholera. Koch's colleague Richard Friedrich Johannes Pfeiffer correctly identified the comma bacillus as Pacini's \"vibrioni\" and renamed it as \"Vibrio cholera\" in 1896.\nTuberculosis treatment and tuberculin.\nKoch gave much of his research attention to tuberculosis throughout his career. After medical expeditions to various parts of the world, he again focussed on tuberculosis from the mid-1880s. By that time the Imperial Health Office was carrying out a project for disinfection of sputum of tuberculosis patients. Koch experimented with arsenic and creosote as possible disinfectants. These chemicals and other available drugs did not work. His report in 1883 also mentioned a failed experiment in an attempt to make a tuberculosis vaccine. By 1888, Koch turned his attention to synthetic dyes as antibacterial chemicals. He developed a method for examining antibacterial activity by mixing the gelatin-based culture media with a yellow dye, auramin. His notebook indicates that by February 1890, he tested hundreds of compounds. In one of such tests, he found that an extract from the tuberculosis bacterium culture dissolved in glycerine could cure tuberculosis in guinea pigs. Based on a series of experiments from April to July 1891, he could conclude that the extract did not kill the tuberculosis bacterium, but destroyed (by necrosis) the infected tissues, thereby depriving bacterial growth. He made a vague announcement in August 1890 at the Tenth International Medical Congress in Berlin, saying,In a communication which I made a few months ago to the International Medical Congress [in London in 1881], I described a substance of which the result is to make laboratory animals insensitive to inoculation of tubercle bacilli, and in the case of already infected animals, to bring the tuberculous process to a halt.\nI can tell [\u2026] that much, that guinea pigs, which are highly susceptible to the disease [tuberculosis], no longer react upon inoculation with tubercle virus [bacterium] when treated with that substance and that in guinea pigs, which are sick (with tuberculosis), the pathological process can be brought to a complete standstill.By November 1890, Koch demonstrated the effectiveness of the extract in treating humans by administering the vaccine through the Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) technique. This absorbs the vaccine through the skin by means of multiple shallow punctures on the skin and many patients and doctors went to Berlin to get Koch's remedy. While this was effective in humans, his experiments also revealed that when the substance was inoculated into his tuberculosis-infected test guinea pigs, they presented with severe symptoms. This outcome, characterized by an exaggerated immune response, coined the term \"Koch\u2019s phenomenon.\" This is known as an extreme skin reaction that manifests itself at the BCG vaccination site within a few days after the vaccine is administered to an individual infected with tuberculosis. When a normal guinea pig was inoculated with pure \"tubercle bacillus\", the wound would close rapidly and heal within several days. Afterwards, the site of the injection would open and form an ulcer until the animal died. However, if the same inoculated culture was injected into a guinea pig that was previously infected with tuberculosis, the site of the injection becomes dark, and eventually heals normally and quickly (Moreland, 2024). The uncertainty in the chemical nature coined the term phenomenon in the name \"Koch\u2019s phenomenon.\"\nKoch published his experiments in the 15 January 1891 issue of \"Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift\", and \"The British Medical Journal\" immediately published the English version simultaneously. The English version was also reproduced in \"Nature\", and \"The Lancet\" in the same month. \"The Lancet\" presented it as \"glad tidings of great joy.\" Koch simply referred to the medication as \"brownish, transparent fluid.\" Josephs Pohl-Pincus had used the name tuberculin in 1844 for tuberculosis culture media, and Koch subsequently adopted as \"tuberkulin.\"\nThe first report on the clinical trial in 1891 was disappointing. By then 1061 patients with tuberculosis of internal organs and of 708 patients with tuberculosis of external tissues were given the treatment. An attempt to use tuberculin as a therapeutic drug is regarded as Koch's \"greatest failure.\" With it his reputation greatly waned. But he devoted the rest of his life trying to make tuberculin as a usable medication. His discovery was not a total failure: the substance is now used to test for hypersensitivity in tuberculosis patients.\nAcquired immunity.\nKoch observed the phenomenon of acquired immunity. On 26 December 1900, he arrived as part of an expedition to German New Guinea, which was then a protectorate of the German Reich. Koch serially examined the Papuan people, the indigenous inhabitants, and their blood samples and noticed they contained \"Plasmodium\" parasites, the cause of malaria, but their bouts of malaria were mild or could not even be noticed, i.e. were subclinical. On the contrary, German settlers and Chinese workers, who had been brought to New Guinea, fell sick immediately. The longer they had stayed in the country, however, the more they too seemed to develop a resistance against it.\nKoch's postulates.\nDuring his time as government advisor, Koch published a report on how he discovered and experimentally showed tuberculosis bacterium as the pathogen of tuberculosis. He described the importance of pure cultures in isolating disease-causing organisms and explained the necessary steps to obtain these cultures, methods which are summarized in Koch's four postulates. Koch's discovery of the causative agent of anthrax led to the formation of a generic set of postulates which can be used in the determination of the cause of most infectious diseases. These postulates, which not only outlined a method for linking cause and effect of an infectious disease but also established the significance of laboratory culture of infectious agents, became the \"gold standard\" in infectious diseases.\nAlthough Koch worked out the principles, he did not formulate the postulates, which were introduced by his assistant Friedrich Loeffler. Loeffler, reporting his discovery of diphtheria bacillus in 1883, stated three postulates as follows:\n1. The organism must always be present in every case of the disease, but not in healthy individuals.\n2. The organism must be isolated from a diseased individual and grown in pure culture.\n3. The pure culture must cause the same disease when inoculated into a healthy, susceptible individual.\nThe fourth postulate was added by an American plant pathologist Erwin Frink Smith in 1905, and is stated as:\n4. The same pathogen must be isolated from the experimentally infected individuals.\nPersonal life.\nIn July 1867, Koch married Emma (Emmy) Adolfine Josephine Fraatz, and the two had a daughter, Gertrude, in 1868. Their marriage ended after 26 years in 1893, and later that same year, he married actress Hedwig Freiberg (1872\u20131945).\nOn 9 April 1910, Koch suffered a heart attack and never made a complete recovery. On 27 May, three days after giving a lecture on his tuberculosis research at the Prussian Academy of Sciences, Koch died in Baden-Baden at the age of 66. Following his death, the Institute named its establishment after him in his honour. He was irreligious.\nAwards and honours.\nKoch was made a Knight Grand Cross in the Prussian Order of the Red Eagle on 19 November 1890, and was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1897. In 1905, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine \"for his investigations and discoveries in relation to tuberculosis.\" In 1906, research on tuberculosis and tropical diseases won him the Order Pour le Merite and in 1908, the Robert Koch Medal, established to honour the greatest living physicians. Emperor Wilhelm I awarded him the Order of the Crown, 100,000 marks and appointment as Privy Imperial Councillor, Surgeon-General of Health Service, and Fellow of the Science Senate of Kaiser Wilhelm Society.\nKoch established the Royal Prussian Institute for Infectious Diseases in Berlin in 1891. After his death, it was renamed Robert Koch Institute in his honour.\nThe World Health Organization has observed \"World Tuberculosis Day\" every 24 March since 1982 to commemorate the day Koch discovered the tuberculosis bacterium.\nKoch's name is one of 23 from the fields of hygiene and tropical medicine featured on the frieze of the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine building in Keppel Street, Bloomsbury.\nA large marble statue of Koch stands in a small park known as Robert Koch Platz, just north of the Charity Hospital, in the Mitte section of Berlin. His life was the subject of a 1939 German-produced motion picture that featured Oscar-winning actor Emil Jannings in the title role. On 10 December 2017, Google showed a Doodle in celebration of Koch's birthday.\nKoch and his relationship to Paul Ehrlich, who developed a mechanism to diagnose TB, were portrayed in the 1940 movie \"Dr. Ehrlich's Magic Bullet\".\nControversies.\nLouis Pasteur.\nAt their first meeting at the Seventh International Medical Congress in London in August 1881, Koch and Pasteur were friendly towards each other. But the rest of their careers followed with scientific disputes. The conflict started when Koch interpreted his discovery of anthrax bacillus in 1876 as causality, that is, the germ caused the anthrax infections. Although his postulates were not yet formulated, he did not establish the bacterium as the cause of the disease: it was an inference. Pasteur therefore argued that Koch's discovery was not the full proof of causality, but Pasteur's anthrax vaccine developed in 1881 was. Koch published his conclusion in 1881 with a statement: \"anthrax never occurs without viable anthrax bacilli or spores. In my opinion no more conclusive proof can be given that anthrax bacilli are the true and only cause of anthrax,\" and that vaccination such as claimed by Pasteur would be impossible. To prove his vaccine, Pasteur sent his assistant Louis Thuillier to Germany for demonstration and disproved Koch's idea. They had a heated public debate at the International Congress for Hygiene in Geneva in 1882, where Koch criticised Pasteur's methods as \"unreliable,\" and claimed they \"are false and [as such ] they inevitably lead to false conclusions.\" Koch later continued to attack Pasteur, saying, \"Pasteur is not a physician, and one cannot expect him to make sound judgments about pathological processes and the symptoms of disease.\"\nTuberculin.\nWhen Koch discovered tuberculin in 1890 as a medication for tuberculosis, he kept the experiment secret and avoided disclosing the source. It was only after a year under public pressure that he publicly announced the experiment and the source. Clinical trials with tuberculin were disastrous and complete failures. Rudolf Virchow's autopsy report of 21 subjects treated with tuberculin to the Berlin Medical Society on 7 January 1891 revealed that instead of healing tuberculosis, the subjects died because of the treatment. One week later, Koch publicised that the drug was a glycerine extract of a pure cultivation of the tuberculosis bacilli. The German official report in late 1891 declared that tuberculosis was not cured with tuberculin. From this moment onwards, Koch's prestige fell apart. The reason for his initial secrecy was due to an ambition for monetary benefits for the new drug, and with that establishment of his own research institute. Since 1885, he had tried to leave government service and create an independent state-run institute of his own. Following the disappointment, he was released from the University of Berlin and forced to work as Director of the Royal Prussian Institute for Infectious Diseases, a newly established institute, in 1891. He was prohibited from working on tuberculin and from claiming patent rights in any of his subsequent works.\nHuman and cattle tuberculosis.\nKoch initially believed that human (\"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\") and cattle tuberculosis bacilli (now called \"Mycobacterium bovis\") were different pathogens when he made the discovery in 1882. Two years later, he revoked that position and asserted that the two bacilli were the same type. This later assumption was taken as a fact in veterinary practice. Based on it, legislations were made in the US for the inspection of meat and milk. In 1898, an American veterinarian Theobald Smith published a detailed comparative study and found that the tuberculosis bacteria are different based on their structure, growth patterns, and pathogenicity. In addition, he also discovered that there were variations in each type. In his conclusion, he made two important points:\nBy that time, there was evidence that cattle tuberculosis was transmitted to humans through meat and milk. Upon these reports, Koch conceded that the two bacilli were different but still advocated that cattle tuberculosis was of no health concern. Speaking at the Third International Congress on Tuberculosis, held in London in July 1901, he said that cattle tuberculosis is not dangerous to humans and there is no need for medical attention. He said, \"I therefore consider it unnecessary to take any measures against this form of TB. The fight against TB clearly has to concentrate on the human \"bacillus.\"\" Chair of the congress, Joseph Lister reprimanded Koch and explained the medical evidence of cattle tuberculosis in humans.\nThe 1902 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.\nThe Nobel Committee selected the 1902 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine to be awarded for the discovery of the transmission of malaria. But it could not make the final decision on whom to give it to \u2014 the British surgeon Ronald Ross or the Italian biologist Giovanni Battista Grassi. Ross had discovered that the human malarial parasite was carried by certain mosquitoes in 1897, and the next year that bird malaria could be transmitted from infected to healthy birds by the bite of a mosquito. Grassi had discovered \"Plasmodium vivax\" and the bird malaria parasite, and towards the end of 1898 the transmission of \"Plasmodium falciparum\" between humans through mosquitoes \"Anopheles claviger\". To the surprise of the Nobel Committee, the two nominees exchanged polemic arguments against each other publicly justifying the importance of their own works. Robert Koch was then appointed as a \"neutral arbitrator\" to make the final decision. To his disadvantage, Grassi had criticised Koch on his malaria research in 1898 during an investigation of the epidemic, while Ross had established a cordial relationship with Koch. Ross was selected for the award, as Koch \"threw the full weight of his considerable authority in insisting that Grassi did not deserve the honour\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13723", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13723", "title": "Heart Wipe", "text": ""}
{"id": "13724", "revid": "480452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13724", "title": "Heart wipe", "text": ""}
{"id": "13726", "revid": "69423", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13726", "title": "Hogshead", "text": "Unit of volume for tobacco, wine or beer\nA hogshead (abbreviated \"hhd\", plural \"hhds\") is a large cask of liquid (or, less often, of a food commercial product) for manufacturing and sale. It refers to a specified volume, measured in either imperial or US customary measures, primarily applied to alcoholic beverages, such as wine, ale, or cider.\nEtymology.\nEnglish philologist Walter William Skeat (1835\u20131912) noted the origin is to be found in the name for a cask or liquid measure appearing in various forms in Germanic languages, in Dutch (modern ), Danish , Old Swedish , etc. The \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" of 1911 conjectured that the word should therefore be \"oxhead\", \"hogshead\" being a mere corruption.\nVarieties and standardisation.\nA tobacco hogshead was used in British and American colonial times to transport and store tobacco. It was a very large wooden barrel. A standardized hogshead measured long and in diameter at the head (at least , depending on the width in the middle). Fully packed with tobacco, it weighed about .\nA hogshead in Britain contains about .\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" (OED) notes that the hogshead was first standardized by an act of Parliament (2 Hen. 6. c. 14) in 1423, though the standards continued to vary by locality and content. For example, the OED cites an 1897 edition of \"Whitaker's Almanack\", which specified the gallons of wine in a hogshead varying most particularly across fortified wines: claret/Madeira , port , sherry . The \"American Heritage Dictionary\" claims that a hogshead can consist of anything from (presumably) . A hogshead of Madeira wine was approximately equal to 45\u201348 gallons (0.205\u20130.218 m3). A hogshead of brandy was approximately equal to 56\u201361 gallons (0.255\u20130.277 m3).\nEventually, a hogshead of wine came to be (or 63 US gallons), while a hogshead of beer or ale came to be 54 gallons (249.54221 L with the pre-1824 beer and ale gallon, or 245.48886 L with the imperial gallon).\nA hogshead was also used as unit of measurement for sugar in Louisiana for most of the 19th century. Plantations were listed in sugar schedules by the number of hogsheads of sugar or molasses produced. Used for sugar in the 18th and 19th centuries in the British West Indies, a hogshead weighed on average . A hogshead was also used for the measurement of herring fished for sardines in Blacks Harbour, New Brunswick and Cornwall.\nWhisky maturation.\nHogsheads are a common form of cask used for maturing Scotch Whisky, typically with a volume of around 250 litres.\nThese casks are usually made from the staves of ex-Bourbon or Tennessee whiskey casks, which are plentiful due to US law requiring a new barrel for each batch of whiskey. The staves will be mated to new, larger heads which results in a higher volume - this means that five whiskey barrels are needed to make four hogsheads as the circumference is greater.\nUsing just the staves means that barrels can be shipped across the Atlantic in their component parts, which is much more space-efficient than shipping barrels whole. The new heads may be of American white oak similar to the recycled staves, or may be of other woods such as European or Mizunara oak.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13727", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13727", "title": "Huallaga", "text": "Huallaga may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "13729", "revid": "45266726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13729", "title": "Honda", "text": "Japanese automotive manufacturer\n commonly known as Honda, is a Japanese multinational conglomerate automotive manufacturer headquartered at the Toranomon Alcea Tower in Toranomon, Minato, Tokyo, Japan.\nFounded in October 1946 by Soichiro Honda, Honda has been the world's largest motorcycle manufacturer since 1959, reaching a production of 500 million as of \u00a02025[ [update]]. It is the world's largest manufacturer of internal combustion engines measured by number of units, producing more than 14 million internal combustion engines each year. Honda became the second-largest Japanese automobile manufacturer in 2001. In 2015, Honda was the eighth largest automobile manufacturer in the world. Honda has built and sold the most produced motor vehicle in history, the Honda Super Cub.\nHonda was the first Japanese automobile manufacturer to release a dedicated luxury brand, Acura, in March 1986. Aside from their core automobile and motorcycle businesses, Honda also manufactures garden equipment, marine engines, personal watercraft, power generators, and other products. Since 1986, Honda has been involved with artificial intelligence/robotics research and released their ASIMO robot in 2000. They have ventured into aerospace with the establishment of GE Honda Aero Engines in 2004 and the Honda HA-420 HondaJet, which began production in 2012. Honda has two joint-ventures in China: Dongfeng Honda and GAC Honda.\nIn 2013, Honda invested about 5.7% (US$6.8 billion) of its revenues into research and development. Also in 2013, Honda became the first Japanese automaker to be a net exporter from the United States, exporting 108,705 Honda and Acura models, while importing only 88,357.\nHistory.\nThroughout his life, Honda's founder, Soichiro Honda (1906\u20131991), had an interest in automobiles. He worked as a mechanic at the Art Shokai garage, where he tuned cars and entered them in races. In 1937, with financing from his acquaintance Kato Shichir\u014d, Honda founded T\u014dkai Seiki (Eastern Sea Precision Machine Company) to make piston rings working out of the Art Shokai garage. After initial failures, T\u014dkai Seiki won a contract to supply piston rings to Toyota, but lost the contract due to the poor quality of their products. After attending engineering school without graduating, and visiting factories around Japan to better understand Toyota's quality control processes known as \"five whys\", by 1941 Honda was able to mass-produce piston rings acceptable to Toyota, using an automated process that could employ even unskilled wartime laborers.\nT\u014dkai Seiki was placed under the control of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (called the Ministry of Munitions after 1943) at the start of World War II, and Soichiro Honda was demoted from president to senior managing director after Toyota took a 40% stake in the company. Honda also aided the war effort by assisting other companies in automating the production of military aircraft propellers. \nThe relationships Honda cultivated with personnel at Toyota, Nakajima Aircraft Company and the Imperial Japanese Navy were instrumental in the postwar period. A US B-29 bomber attack destroyed T\u014dkai Seiki's Yamashita plant in 1944, and the Itawa plant collapsed on 13 January during the 1945 Mikawa earthquake. Soichiro Honda sold the salvageable remains of the company to Toyota after the war for \u00a5450,000 and used the proceeds to found the Honda Technical Research Institute in October 1946.\nWith a staff of 12 men working in a shack, they built and sold improvised motorized bicycles, using a supply of 500 two-stroke \"50\u00a0cc\" Tohatsu war surplus radio generator engines. When the engines ran out, Honda began building their own copy of the Tohatsu engine, and supplying these to customers to attach to their bicycles. This was the Honda A-Type, nicknamed the Bata Bata for the sound the engine made. In 1949, the Honda Technical Research Institute was liquidated for \u00a51,000,000, or about US$5,000 today; these funds were used to incorporate Honda Motor Co., Ltd. At about the same time Honda hired engineer Kihachiro Kawashima, and Takeo Fujisawa who provided indispensable business and marketing expertise to complement Soichiro Honda's technical bent. The close partnership between Soichiro Honda and Fujisawa lasted until they stepped down together in October 1973.\nThe first complete motorcycle with both the frame and engine made by Honda was the 1949 D-Type, the first Honda to go by the name Dream. In 1961, Honda achieved its first Grand Prix victories and World Championships in the 125\u00a0cc and 250\u00a0cc categories. Honda Motor Company grew in a short time to become the world's largest manufacturer of motorcycles by 1964.\nThe first production automobile from Honda was the T360 mini pick-up truck, which went on sale in August 1963. Powered by a small 356\u00a0cc straight-4 gasoline engine, it was classified under the cheaper Kei car tax bracket. The second production car from Honda was the S500 sports car, which followed the T360 into production in October 1963. Its chain-driven rear wheels pointed to Honda's motorcycle origins.\nOver the next few decades, Honda worked to expand its product line, operations and exports to numerous countries around the world. In 1986, Honda introduced the successful Acura brand to the American market in an attempt to gain ground in the luxury vehicle market. The year 1991 saw the introduction of the Honda NSX supercar, the first all-aluminum monocoque vehicle that incorporated a mid-engine V6 with variable-valve timing.\nIn 1990, CEO Tadashi Kume was succeeded by Nobuhiko Kawamoto. Kawamoto was selected over Shoichiro Irimajiri, who oversaw the successful establishment of Honda of America Manufacturing, Inc. in Marysville, Ohio. Irimajiri and Kawamoto shared a friendly rivalry within Honda; owing to health issues, Irimajiri would resign in 1992.\nFollowing the death of Soichiro Honda and the departure of Irimajiri, Honda found itself quickly being outpaced in product development by other Japanese automakers and was caught off-guard by the truck and sport utility vehicle boom of the 1990s, all which took a toll on the profitability of the company. Japanese media reported in 1992 and 1993 that Honda was at serious risk of an unwanted and hostile takeover by Mitsubishi Motors, which at the time was a larger automaker by volume and was flush with profits from its successful Pajero and Diamante models.\nKawamoto acted quickly to change Honda's corporate culture, rushing through market-driven product development that resulted in recreational vehicles such as the first-generation Odyssey and the CR-V, and a refocusing away from some of the numerous sedans and coupes that were popular with the company's engineers but not with the buying public. The most shocking change to Honda came when Kawamoto ended the company's successful participation in Formula One after the 1992 season, citing costs in light of the takeover threat from Mitsubishi as well as the desire to create a more environmentally friendly company image.\nThe Honda Aircraft Company as established in 2006 as a wholly owned subsidiary to manufacture and sell the HondaJet family of aircraft. The first deliveries to customers began in December 2015. In February 2015, Honda announced that CEO and President Takanobu Ito would step down and be replaced by Takahiro Hachigo in June 2015. Additional retirements by senior managers and directors were expected.\nIn October 2019, Honda was reported to be in talks with Hitachi to merge the two companies' car parts businesses, creating a components supplier with almost $17 billion in annual sales.\nIn January 2020, Honda announced that it would be withdrawing employees working in the city of Wuhan, Hubei, China due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On 23 March 2020 due to the global spread of the virus, Honda became the first major automaker with operations in the US to suspend production in its factories. It resumed automobile, engine and transmission production at its US plants on 11 May 2020. Honda and General Motors announced in September 2020 a North American alliance to begin in 2021. According to The Detroit Free Press, \"The proposed alliance will include sharing a range of vehicles, to be sold under each company's distinct brands, as well as cooperation in purchasing, research and development, and connected services.\" In 2021, Honda announced its intention to become the world's first carmaker to sell a vehicle with level 3 self-driving technology.\nIn March 2022, Honda announced it would develop and build electric vehicles in a joint venture with electronics giant Sony. The latter is set to provide its imaging, sensing, network and other technologies while Honda would be responsible for the car manufacturing processes. The Sony Honda Mobility company was officially announced on 13 October 2022 with pre-orders said to open in 2025 and the release of the first EVs scheduled for 2026 in the US under the \"Afeela\" brand.\nIn February 2023, Honda announced a deal with American car company General Motors to produce cars using a new hydrogen fuel system. The aim is to ramp up the hydrogen powered cells in their Electric vehicles as well as trucks, construction machinery, and power stations. In March 2023, Honda recalled 500,000 vehicles in the United States and Canada due to an issue with seat belts in the car not latching correctly. Among the models recalled were the 2017-2020 CR-V, the 2018 and 2019 Accord, the 2018-2020 Odyssey, the 2019 Insight, and the Acura RDX from 2019 and 2020. According to the recall, the seat belts in the front seats would break open on impact increasing the risk of injury in a crash. On 21 December 2023, Honda announced a global recall of about 4.5 million vehicles, including 2.54 million in the US, over fuel pump failures, following earlier recalls in 2021 and 2020 for the same issue.\nAttempted merger with Nissan.\nOn 23 December 2024, Honda announced an MOU had been entered to merge with fellow automaker Nissan, to become the 3rd largest auto company by sales. Mitsubishi Motors, in which Nissan has 24% ownership, also agreed to join the talks of integration. The merger was set with a deadline of 2026. Mitsubishi announced it would make a decision on merging with the new company by the end of January 2025. \nIn February 2025, Honda and Nissan announced that their boards had voted to end talks to merge. Nissan reportedly backed out of the talks with larger rival Honda after negotiations were complicated by growing differences, including Honda's proposal that Nissan become a subsidiary.\nCorporate profile and divisions.\nHonda is headquartered in Minato, Tokyo, Japan. Their shares trade on the Tokyo Stock Exchange and the New York Stock Exchange, as well as exchanges in Osaka, Nagoya, Sapporo, Kyoto, Fukuoka, London, Paris, and Switzerland.\nHonda has assembly plants around the globe. These plants are located in China, the United States, Pakistan, Canada, England, Japan, Belgium, Brazil, M\u00e9xico, New Zealand, Malaysia, Indonesia, India, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam, Turkey, Taiwan, Per\u00fa and Argentina. As of July 2010, 89% of Honda and Acura vehicles sold in the United States were built in North American plants, up from 82.2% a year earlier. This shields profits from the yen's advance to a 15-year high against the dollar.\nAmerican Honda Motor Company is based in Torrance, California. Honda Racing Corporation (HRC) is Honda's motorsport division. Honda Canada Inc. is headquartered in Markham, Ontario, it was originally planned to be located in Richmond Hill, Ontario, but delays led them to look elsewhere. Their manufacturing division, Honda of Canada Manufacturing, is based in Alliston, Ontario. Honda has also created joint ventures around the world, such as Honda Siel Cars and Hero Honda Motorcycles in India, Guangzhou Honda and Dongfeng Honda in China, Boon Siew Honda in Malaysia and Honda Atlas in Pakistan. \nHonda runs a business innovation initiative called Honda Xcelerator, to build relationships with innovators, partner with Silicon Valley startups and entrepreneurs, and help other companies work on prototypes. Xcelerator had worked with reportedly 40 companies as of January 2019. Xcelerator and a developer studio are part of the Honda Innovations group, formed in Spring 2017 and based in Mountain View, California. Through Honda Mobilityland, Honda operates the Suzuka Circuit and Twin Ring Motegi racing tracks.\nFollowing the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami in Japan, Honda announced plans to halve production at its UK plants. The decision was made to put staff at the Swindon plant on a 2-day week until the end of May as the manufacturer struggled to source supplies from Japan. It's thought around 22,500 cars were produced during this period.\nFinances.\nFor the fiscal year 2018, Honda reported earnings of US$9.534 billion, with an annual revenue of US$138.250 billion, an increase of 6.2% over the previous fiscal cycle. Honda's shares traded at over $32 per share, and its market capitalization was valued at US$50.4 billion in October 2018.\nProducts.\nAutomobiles.\nHonda's automotive manufacturing ambitions can be traced back to 1963, with the Honda T360, a Kei truck built for the Japanese market. This was followed by the two-door roadster, the Honda S500 also introduced in 1963. In 1965, Honda built a two-door commercial delivery van, named the Honda L700. Honda's first four-door sedan was not the Honda Accord, but the air-cooled, four-cylinder, gasoline-powered Honda 1300 which was introduced in 1969. The Civic was a hatchback that gained wide popularity internationally, but it wasn't the first two-door hatchback built by Honda. That was the Honda N360, a Kei car that was adapted for international sale as the N600. The Civic, which appeared in 1972 and replaced the N600 also had a smaller sibling that replaced the air-cooled N360, called the Honda Life, which was water-cooled.\nThe Honda Life represented Honda's efforts in competing in the \"kei\" car segment, offering sedan, delivery van and small pick-up platforms on a shared chassis. The Life Step Van had a novel approach that, while not initially a commercial success, appeared to be an influence to vehicles with the front passengers sitting behind the engine, a large cargo area with a flat roof and a liftgate installed in back, and utilizing a transversely installed engine with a front-wheel-drive powertrain.\nAs Honda entered into automobile manufacturing in the late 1960s where Japanese manufacturers such as Toyota and Nissan had been making cars since before WWII, Honda instilled a sense of doing things a little differently than its Japanese competitors. Its mainstay products like the Accord and Civic (with the exception of its USA-market 1993\u201397 Passport which was part of a vehicle exchange program with Isuzu (part of the Subaru-Isuzu joint venture)) have always employed Front-wheel drive powertrain implementation, which is currently a long-held Honda tradition. Honda also installed new technologies into their products, first as optional equipment, then later standard, like anti-lock brakes, speed-sensitive power steering, and multi-port fuel injection in the early 1980s. This desire to be the first to try new approaches is evident with the creation of the first Japanese luxury chain Acura, and was also evident with the all-aluminum, mid-engined sports car, the Honda NSX, which also introduced variable valve timing technology, which Honda calls VTEC.\nThe Civic family is a line of compact cars developed and manufactured by Honda. In North America, the Civic is the second-longest continuously running nameplate from a Japanese manufacturer; only its perennial rival, the Toyota Corolla, introduced in 1966, has been in production longer. The Civic, along with the Accord and Prelude, comprised Honda's vehicles sold in North America until the 1990s, when the model lineup was expanded. Having gone through several generational changes, the Civic has become larger and more upmarket, and it currently slots between the Fit and Accord.\nHonda's first hybrid electric vehicle was the 1999 Insight. The Civic was first offered as a hybrid in 2001, and the Accord followed in 2004. In 2008, the company launched the Clarity, a fuel cell car.\nIn 2008, Honda increased global production to meet the demand for small cars and hybrids in the US and emerging markets. The company shuffled US production to keep factories busy and boost car output while building fewer minivans and sport utility vehicles as light truck sales fell. Its first entrance into the pickup segment, the light-duty Ridgeline, won Truck of the Year from \"Motor Trend\" magazine in 2006. Also in 2006, the redesigned Civic won Car of the Year from the magazine, giving Honda a rare double win of Motor Trend honors. It is reported that Honda plans to increase hybrid sales in Japan to more than 20% of its total sales in the fiscal year 2011, from 14.8% in the previous year.\nFive of United States Environmental Protection Agency's top ten most fuel-efficient cars from 1984 to 2010 come from Honda, more than any other automakers. The five models are: 2000\u20132006 Honda Insight ( combined), 1986\u20131987 Honda Civic Coupe HF ( combined), 1994\u20131995 Honda Civic hatchback VX ( combined), 2006\u2013 Honda Civic Hybrid ( combined), and 2010\u2013 Honda Insight ( combined). The ACEEE has also rated the Civic GX as the greenest car in America for seven consecutive years.\nHonda currently builds vehicles in factories located in Japan, the United States of America, Canada, China, Pakistan, the United Kingdom, Malaysia, Belgium, Brazil, Indonesia, India, Thailand, Turkey, Argentina, Mexico, Taiwan, and the Philippines.\nMotorcycles.\nHonda is the largest motorcycle manufacturer in Japan and has been since it started production in 1955. At its peak in 1982, Honda manufactured almost three million motorcycles annually. By 2006, this figure had been reduced to around 550,000 but was still higher than its three domestic competitors. In 2017, India became the largest motorcycle market for Honda. In India, Honda is leading in the scooters segment, with 59% market share.\nDuring the 1960s when it was a small manufacturer, Honda broke out of the Japanese motorcycle market and began exporting to the United States. Working with the advertising agency Grey Advertising, Honda created an innovative marketing campaign, using the slogan \"You meet the nicest people on a Honda.\" In contrast to the prevailing negative stereotypes of motorcyclists in America as tough, antisocial rebels, this campaign suggested that Honda motorcycles were made for the everyman. The campaign was hugely successful; the ads ran for three years, and by the end of 1963 alone, Honda had sold 90,000 motorcycles.\nTaking Honda's story as an archetype of the smaller manufacturer entering a new market already occupied by highly dominant competitors, the story of their market entry, and their subsequent huge success in the US and around the world has been the subject of some academic controversy. Competing explanations have been advanced to explain Honda's strategy and the reasons for their success.\nThe first of these explanations was put forward when, in 1975, the Boston Consulting Group (BCG) was commissioned by the UK government to write a report explaining why and how the British motorcycle industry had been out-competed by its Japanese competitors. The report concluded that the Japanese firms, including Honda, had sought a very high scale of production (they had made a large number of motorbikes) in order to benefit from economies of scale and learning curve effects. It blamed the decline of the British motorcycle industry on the failure of British managers to invest enough in their businesses to profit from economies of scale and scope.\nThe second explanation was offered in 1984 by Richard Pascale, who had interviewed the Honda executives responsible for the firm's entry into the US market. As opposed to the tightly focused strategy of low cost and high scale that BCG accredited to Honda, Pascale found that their entry into the US market was a story of \"miscalculation, serendipity, and organizational learning\" \u2013 in other words, Honda's success was due to the adaptability and hard work of its staff, rather than any long-term strategy. For example, Honda's initial plan on entering the US market was to compete in large motorcycles, around 300\u00a0cc. Honda's motorcycles in this class suffered performance and reliability problems when ridden the relatively long distances of the US highways. When the team found that the scooters they were using to get themselves around their US base of San Francisco attracted positive interest from consumers they fell back on selling the Super Cub instead.\nThe most recent school of thought on Honda's strategy was put forward by Gary Hamel and C. K. Prahalad in 1989. Creating the concept of core competencies with Honda as an example, they argued that Honda's success was due to its focus on leadership in the technology of internal combustion engines. For example, the high power-to-weight ratio engines Honda produced for its racing bikes provided technology and expertise which was transferable into mopeds. Honda's entry into the US motorcycle market during the 1960s is used as a case study for teaching introductory strategy at business schools worldwide.\nATVs.\nHonda builds utility ATVs under models Recon, Rubicon, Rancher, Foreman and Rincon. Honda also builds sports ATVs under the models TRX 90X, TRX 250X, TRX 400x, TRX 450R and TRX 700.\nPower equipment.\nPower equipment production started in 1953 with H-type engine (prior to motorcycles). Honda power equipment reached record sales in 2007 with 6.4 million units sold annually. By 2010 this figure had decreased to 4.7\u00a0million units. Cumulative production of power products has exceeded 85 million units annually (as of September 2008).\nIn September 2023, Honda ceased sales of gasoline lawn mowers and some other power equipment in the US.\nHonda power equipment includes:\nEngines.\nHonda engines powered the entire 33-car starting field of the 2010 Indianapolis 500 and for the fifth consecutive race, there were no engine-related retirements during the running of the Memorial Day Classic. In the 1980s Honda developed the GY6 engine for use in motor scooters. Although no longer manufactured by Honda, it's still commonly used in many Chinese, Korean and Taiwanese light vehicles.\nHonda, despite being known as an engine company, has never built a V8 engine for passenger vehicles. In the late 1990s, the company resisted considerable pressure from its American dealers for a V8 engine (which would have seen use in top-of-the-line Honda SUVs and Acuras), with American Honda reportedly sending one dealer a shipment of V8 beverages to silence them. Honda considered starting V8 production in the mid-2000s for larger Acura sedans, a new version of the high-end NSX sports car (which previously used DOHC V6 engines with VTEC to achieve its high power output) and possible future ventures into the American full-size truck and SUV segment for both the Acura and Honda brands, but this was canceled in late 2008, with Honda citing environmental and worldwide economic conditions as reasons for the termination of this project.\nRobots.\nASIMO is part of Honda's Research &amp; Development robotics program. It's the eleventh in a line of successive builds starting in 1986 with Honda E0 moving through the ensuing Honda E series and the Honda P series. Weighing 54 kilograms and standing 130 centimeters tall, ASIMO resembles a small astronaut wearing a backpack, and can walk on two feet in a manner resembling human locomotion, at up to . ASIMO is the world's only humanoid robot able to ascend and descend stairs independently. However, human motions such as climbing stairs are difficult to mimic with a machine, which ASIMO has demonstrated by taking two plunges off a staircase.\nASIMO is able to walk, dance and navigate steps. In 2010, Honda developed a machine capable of reading a user's brainwaves to move ASIMO. The system uses a helmet covered with electroencephalography and near-infrared spectroscopy sensors that monitor electrical brainwaves and cerebral blood flow signals that alter slightly during the human thought process. The user thinks of one of the limited number of gestures it wants from the robot, which has been fitted with a Brain-Machine Interface.\nAircraft.\nHonda has also pioneered new technology in its HA-420 HondaJet, manufactured by its subsidiary Honda Aircraft Company, which allows new levels of reduced drag, increased aerodynamics and fuel efficiency thus reducing operating costs.\nMountain bikes.\nHonda has also built a downhill racing bicycle known as the Honda RN-01. It is not available for sale to the public. The bike has a gearbox, which replaces the standard derailleur found on most bikes.\nHonda has hired several people to pilot the bike, among them Greg Minnaar. The team is known as Team G Cross Honda.\nRockets.\nIn 2019, Honda began development of rocket engines. In June 2025, Honda successfully conducted a launch and landing test of an reusable launch vehicle in Taiki, Hokkaido. Honda has stated that they aim to make a sub-orbital spaceflight in 2029.\nFormer products.\nSolar cells.\nHonda's solar cell subsidiary company Honda Soltec (Headquarters: Kikuchi-gun, Kumamoto; President and CEO: Akio Kazusa) started sales throughout Japan of thin-film solar cells for public and industrial use on October 24, 2008, after selling solar cells for residential use in October 2007. Honda announced in the end of October 2013 that Honda Soltec would cease business operations in the Spring of 2014 except for support for existing customers and the subsidiary would be dissolved.\nMotorsports.\nHonda has been active in motorsports, like Formula One, MotoGP and others, since the early years of the company. Since 2022, Honda's general motorsport activities have been managed by its motorsport subsidiary Honda Racing Corporation (HRC). Prior to 2022, Honda's motorcycle racing activities were run by HRC since it was founded in 1982, while its automobile racing activities were run as projects within the Honda Motor Company itself.\nHonda Performance Development (HPD) was established in 1993 as the company's North American motorsport subsidiary, and for 2024 HPD became Honda Racing Corporation USA (HRC US) to form a global motorsports organization. Honda also owns two Japanese race tracks, the Suzuka Circuit and Mobility Resort Motegi (formerly Twin Ring Motegi), which it established in 1962 and 1997, respectively, and which are managed by Honda Mobilityland.\nAutomobiles.\nHonda entered Formula One for the first time in 1964, just one year after starting the production of road cars, making both engine and chassis. Honda achieved their first victory at the 1965 Mexican Grand Prix, and another win at the 1967 Italian Grand Prix, before they withdrew after the 1968 season. They returned to the sport in 1983 as an engine manufacturer, remaining until 1992. This period saw Honda dominate Grand Prix racing, as between 1986 and 1991 they won five consecutive Drivers' Championships with Nelson Piquet, Ayrton Senna and Alain Prost, and six Constructors' titles with Williams and McLaren. A third stint from 2000 to 2008, initially as engine maker and later also as team owner, yielded 17 podiums, including one win, and second place in the 2004 constructors' standings. They returned as a power unit supplier for the second year of the hybrid era in 2015 and initially struggled, but intense development saw them become race winners again by 2019, and in 2021 they won the World Drivers' Championship with Max Verstappen and Red Bull Racing. Honda formally left Formula One after 2021 to focus its resources on carbon neutral technologies, but an arrangement was made for it to extend power unit supply for Red Bull until 2025. While no longer a works team, Red Bull Racing still displayed Honda on their engine cover in this extended deal. As the series introduced more sustainable regulations, Honda announced it will formally rejoin in 2026 to provide power units to Aston Martin as a works team.\nHonda debuted in the CART IndyCar World Series as an engine supplier in 1994, and the company won six consecutive Drivers' Championships and four Manufacturers' Championships between 1996 and 2001. In 2003, Honda transferred its effort to the IRL IndyCar Series. In 2004, Honda won the Indianapolis 500 for the first time and claimed the Drivers' and Manufacturers' Championships, a feat which it repeated in 2005. From 2006 to 2011, Honda was the series' lone manufacturer, before manufacturer competition returned for 2012. Since 2012, Honda's turbocharged V6 engines have won the Indianapolis 500 several times as well as claimed multiple Drivers' and Manufacturers' titles. In the Japanese Super Formula Championship, Honda-powered cars have won the championship numerous times since 1981, with their title tally in the double digits. In Formula Two, Honda engines dominated the premier series in 1966 and scored multiple titles in the early 1980s.\nIn sports car racing, Honda won the 24 Hours of Le Mans in 1995 in the GT2 class, and in 2010 and 2012 they won in the LMP2 category. Honda made their factory debut in the Super GT Series (previously known as the All-Japan GT Championship) in 1997, and in 2000 they won their first championships. Since then, they have won several further titles, uniquely with both mid- and front-engined cars. Through their Acura and HPD divisions, Honda has also competed in sports prototype racing, beginning with the Spice-Acura prototypes that won the IMSA GT Lights championship in 1991, 1992 and 1993. Acura joined the American Le Mans Series in 2007 and won the 12 Hours of Sebring in class on their debut, before winning the championship in both the LMP1 and LMP2 classes in 2009. The cars were rebranded as HPDs for 2010, after which they won multiple titles in the ALMS and also won the FIA World Endurance Championship in the LMP2 class. Acura returned to prototype racing in 2018 in the DPi class of the IMSA SportsCar Championship, winning championship titles in 2019, 2020 and 2022 as well as the 24 Hours of Daytona overall in 2021, 2022, and 2023. Honda's GT3 car won both the IMSA GTD and Super GT GT300 titles.\nDuring the Group A era of the Japanese Touring Car Championship, Honda won seven manufacturers' titles and six drivers' titles in the sub-1,600 cc division between 1986 and 1993. The following Super Touring era of touring car racing saw Honda win the Japanese and North American championships in 1996 and 1997, while in Europe Honda's Super Touring cars claimed over 40 wins across the British, German and European series. After the collapse of the Super Touring regulations in the early 2000s, Honda remained involved in the British Touring Car Championship, where their cars would win multiple championships in the mid-2000s and throughout the 2010s. Honda entered the World Touring Car Championship in late 2012, and in 2013 they won the Manufacturers' World Championship. Honda's TCR car won the global TCR Model of the Year award in 2019, 2020, and 2024.\nMotorcycles.\nHRC combines participation in motorcycle races throughout the world with the development of high-potential racing machines. Its racing activities are an important source for the creation of leading-edge technologies used in the development of Honda motorcycles. HRC also contributes to the advancement of motorcycle sports through a range of activities that include sales of production racing motorcycles, support for satellite teams, and rider education programs.\nSoichiro Honda, being a race driver himself, could not stay out of international motorsport. In 1959, Honda entered five motorcycles into the Isle of Man TT race, the most prestigious motorcycle race in the world. While always having powerful engines, it took until 1961 for Honda to tune their chassis well enough to allow Mike Hailwood to claim their first Grand Prix victories in the 125 and 250\u00a0cc classes. Hailwood would later pick up their first Senior TT wins in 1966 and 1967. Honda's race bikes were known for their \"sleek &amp; stylish design\" and exotic engine configurations, such as the 5-cylinder, 22,000\u00a0rpm, 125\u00a0cc bike and their 6-cylinder 250\u00a0cc and 297\u00a0cc bikes.\nIn 1979, Honda returned to Grand Prix motorcycle racing with the monocoque-framed, four-stroke NR500. The FIM rules limited engines to four cylinders, so the NR500 had non-circular, 'race-track', cylinders, each with 8 valves and two connecting rods, in order to provide sufficient valve area to compete with the dominant two-stroke racers. The experiment failed. For the 1982 season, Honda debuted its first two-stroke race bike, the NS500 and in 1983, Honda won their first 500\u00a0cc Grand Prix World Championship with Freddie Spencer. Since then, Honda has become a dominant marque in motorcycle Grand Prix racing, winning a plethora of top-level titles with riders such as Mick Doohan and Valentino Rossi. Honda also head the number of wins at the Isle of Man TT having notched up 227 victories in the solo classes and Sidecar TT, including Ian Hutchinson's clean sweep at the 2010 races.\nThe outright lap record on the Snaefell Mountain Course was held by Honda, set at the 2015 TT by John McGuinness at an average speed of on a Honda CBR1000RR, bettered the next year by Michael Dunlop on a BMW S1000RR at .\nIn the Motocross World Championship, Honda has claimed seventeen world championships. In the World Enduro Championship, Honda has captured eight titles, most recently with Stefan Merriman in 2003 and with Mika Ahola from 2007 to 2010. In motorcycle trials, Honda has claimed three world championships with Belgian rider Eddy Lejeune.\nElectric and alternative fuel vehicles.\nCompressed natural gas.\nThe Honda Civic GX was for a long time the only purpose-built natural gas vehicle (NGV) commercially available in some parts of the US. The Honda Civic GX first appeared in 1998 as a factory-modified Civic LX that had been designed to run exclusively on compressed natural gas. The car looks and drives just like a contemporary Honda Civic LX, but does not run on gasoline. In 2001, the Civic GX was rated the cleanest-burning internal combustion engine in the world by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).\nFirst leased to the City of Los Angeles, in 2005, Honda started offering the GX directly to the public through factory trained dealers certified to service the GX. Before that, only fleets were eligible to purchase a new Civic GX. In 2006, the Civic GX was released in New York, making it the second state where the consumer is able to buy the car.\nIn June 2015, Honda announced its decision to phase out the commercialization of natural-gas powered vehicles to focus on the development of a new generation of electric vehicles such as hybrids, plug-in electric cars and hydrogen-powered fuel cell vehicles. Since 2008, Honda has sold about 16,000 natural-gas vehicles, mainly to taxi and commercial fleets.\nFlexible-fuel.\nHonda's Brazilian subsidiary launched flexible-fuel versions for the Honda Civic and Honda Fit in late 2006. As other Brazilian flex-fuel vehicles, these models run on any blend of hydrous ethanol (E100) and E20-E25 gasoline. Initially, and in order to test the market preferences, the carmaker decided to produce a limited share of the vehicles with flex-fuel engines, 33 percent of the Civic production and 28 percent of the Fit models. Also, the sale price for the flex-fuel version was higher than the respective gasoline versions, around US$1,000 premium for the Civic, and US$650 for the Fit, despite the fact that all other flex-fuel vehicles sold in Brazil had the same tag price as their gasoline versions. In July 2009, Honda launched in the Brazilian market its third flexible-fuel car, the Honda City.\nDuring the last two months of 2006, both flex-fuel models sold 2,427 cars against 8,546 gasoline-powered automobiles, jumping to 41,990 flex-fuel cars in 2007, and reaching 93,361 in 2008. Due to the success of the flex versions, by early 2009 a hundred percent of Honda's automobile production for the Brazilian market is now flexible-fuel, and only a small percentage of gasoline version is produced in Brazil for exports.\nIn March 2009, Honda introduced the world's first flex-fuel motorcycle in the Brazilian market. Manufactured by its Brazilian subsidiary, Moto Honda da Amaz\u00f4nia, the CG 150 Titan Mix is priced at approximately US$2,700.\nHybrid electric.\nIn late 1999, Honda launched the first commercial hybrid electric car sold in the US market, the Honda Insight, just one month before the introduction of the Toyota Prius, and initially sold for US$20,000. The first-generation Insight was produced from 2000 to 2006 and had a fuel economy of for the EPA's highway rating, the most fuel-efficient mass-produced car at the time. Total global sales for the Insight amounted to only around 18,000 vehicles. Cumulative global sales reached 100,000 hybrids in 2005 and 200,000 in 2007.\nHonda introduced the second-generation Insight in Japan in February 2009, and released it in other markets through 2009 and in the US market in April 2009. At $19,800 as a five-door hatchback it will be the least expensive hybrid available in the US.\nSince 2002, Honda has also been selling the Honda Civic Hybrid (2003 model) in the US market. It was followed by the Honda Accord Hybrid, offered in model years 2005 through 2007. Sales of the Honda CR-Z began in Japan in February 2010, becoming Honda's third hybrid electric car in the market. As of \u00a02011[ [update]], Honda was producing around 200,000 hybrids a year in Japan.\nSales of the Fit Hybrid began in Japan in October 2010, at the time, the lowest price for a gasoline-hybrid electric vehicle sold in the country. The European version, called Honda Jazz Hybrid, was released in early 2011. During 2011 Honda launched three hybrid models available only in Japan, the Fit Shuttle Hybrid, Freed Hybrid and Freed Spike Hybrid.\nHonda's cumulative global hybrid sales passed the 1 million unit milestone at the end of September 2012, 12 years and 11 months after sales of the first generation Insight began in Japan November 1999. A total of 187,851 hybrids were sold worldwide in 2013, and 158,696 hybrids during the first six months of 2014. As of \u00a02014[ [update]], Honda has sold more than 1.35\u00a0million hybrids worldwide.\nHydrogen fuel cell.\nIn Takanezawa, Japan, on 16 June 2008, Honda Motors produced the first assembly-line FCX Clarity, a hybrid hydrogen fuel cell vehicle. More efficient than a gas-electric hybrid vehicle, the FCX Clarity combines hydrogen and oxygen from ordinary air to generate electricity for an electric motor. In July 2014 Honda announced the end of production of the Honda FCX Clarity for the 2015 model. The vehicle itself does not emit any pollutants and its only by-products are heat and water. The FCX Clarity also has an advantage over gas-electric hybrids in that it does not use an internal combustion engine to propel itself. Like a gas-electric hybrid, it uses a lithium ion battery to assist the fuel cell during acceleration and capture energy through regenerative braking, thus improving fuel efficiency. The lack of hydrogen filling stations throughout developed countries will keep production volumes low. Honda will release the vehicle in groups of 150. California is the only US market with infrastructure for fueling such a vehicle, though the number of stations is still limited. Building more stations is expensive, as the California Air Resources Board (CARB) granted $6.8\u00a0million for four H2 fueling stations, costing US$1.7\u00a0million each. Honda views hydrogen fuel cell vehicles as the long-term replacement of piston cars, not battery cars.\nHonda introduced the in February 2024 in the US. It is a plug-in hybrid fuel cell version of the CR-V that is equipped with an electric motor, two high-pressure hydrogen tanks with a total capacity of and a 17.7 kWh battery with plug-in charging capability. It was also launched in Japan as the only version of the CR-V sold in the country, imported from the Marysville, Ohio assembly plant in the US. This model began production on 5 June 2024. The later revealed to includes an H2 credit.\nPlug-in electric vehicles.\nThe all-electric Honda EV Plus was introduced in 1997 as a result of CARB's zero-emissions vehicle mandate and was available only for leasing in California. The EV plus was the first battery electric vehicle from a major automaker with non-lead\u2013acid batteries The EV Plus had an all-electric range of . Around 276 units were sold in the US and production ended in 1999. The all-electric Honda Fit EV was introduced in 2012 and has a range of . The all-electric car was launched in the US to retail customers in July 2012 with initial availability limited to California and Oregon. Production is limited to only 1,100 units over the first three years. A total of 1,007 units have been leased in the US through September 2014. The Fit EV was released in Japan through leasing to local government and corporate customers in August 2012. Availability in the Japanese market is limited to 200 units during its first two years. In July 2014 Honda announced the end of production of the Fit EV for the 2015 model. The Honda Accord Plug-in Hybrid was introduced in 2013 and has an all-electric range of Sales began in the US in January 2013 and the plug-in hybrid is available only in California and New York. A total of 835 units have been sold in the US through September 2014. The Accord PHEV was introduced in Japan in June 2013 and is available only for leasing, primarily to corporations and government agencies. The Honda e was launched in 2020 and has an electric range of . It is an electric supermini that is retro styled, similar to the first-generation Honda Civic. Following this, the was launched in 2023, with an electric range of on the top spec model. It is Honda's first electric SUV. In April 2022, Honda and General Motors announced a joint venture to develop low-cost electric vehicles based on GM's Ultium architecture in order to beat Tesla vehicles in sales.\nIn October 2023, the two companies announced that the joint venture has been cancelled due to slower-than-expected demand of electric vehicles and changing market conditions. Although the upcoming Honda Prologue and Acura ZDX will use the Ultium architecture and will be manufactured by General Motors, future Honda electric vehicles will be designed solely by Honda and will be manufactured in Honda assembly plants.\nBatteries.\nIn August 2022, Honda and LG Energy Solution revealed a joint venture to establish a new lithium-ion battery factory in the United States, specifically for Honda and Acura electric vehicles. The initial goal was to produce 40 gigawatt hours of battery capacity.\nMarketing.\nJapanese marketing.\nStarting in 1978, Honda in Japan decided to diversify its sales distribution channels and created Honda Verno, which sold established products with a higher content of standard equipment and more sporting nature. The establishment of \"Honda Verno\" coincided with its new sports compact, the Honda Prelude. Later, the Honda Vigor, Honda Ballade, and Honda Quint were added to \"Honda Verno\" stores. This approach was implemented due to efforts in place by rival Japanese automakers Toyota and Nissan.\nAs sales progressed, Honda created two more sales channels, called Honda Clio in 1984, and Honda Primo in 1985. The \"Honda Clio\" chain sold products that were traditionally associated with Honda dealerships before 1978, like the Honda Accord, and \"Honda Primo\" sold the Honda Civic, kei cars such as the Honda Today, superminis like the Honda Capa, along with other Honda products, such as farm equipment, lawnmowers, portable generators, and marine equipment, plus motorcycles and scooters like the Honda Super Cub. A styling tradition was established when \"Honda Primo\" and \"Clio\" began operations in that all \"Verno\" products had the rear license plate installed in the rear bumper, while \"Primo\" and \"Clio\" products had the rear license plate installed on the trunk lid or rear door for minivans. The Renault Clio was sold in Japan at Nissan dealerships, but was renamed the Renault Lutecia. Lutecia is derived from the name of \"Lutetia\", an ancient Roman city that was the predecessor of Paris.\nAs time progressed and sales began to diminish partly due to the collapse of the Japanese \"bubble economy\", \"supermini\" and \"kei\" vehicles that were specific to \"Honda Primo\" were \"badge engineered\" and sold at the other two sales channels, thereby providing smaller vehicles that sold better at both \"Honda Verno\" and \"Honda Clio\" locations. As of March 2006, the three sales chains were discontinued, with the establishment of \"Honda Cars\" dealerships. While the network was disbanded, some Japanese Honda dealerships still use the network names, offering all Japanese market Honda cars at all locations.\nHonda sells genuine accessories through a separate retail chain called ' for both their motorcycle, scooter, and automobile products. In cooperation with corporate group partner Pioneer, Honda sells an aftermarket line of audio and in-car navigation equipment that can be installed in any vehicle under the brand name , which is available at Honda Access locations as well as Japanese auto parts retailers, such as Autobacs. Buyers of used vehicles are directed to a specific Honda retail chain that sells only used vehicles called '.\nIn the spring of 2012, Honda in Japan introduced \"Honda Cars Small Store\" which is devoted to compact cars like the Honda Fit, and \"kei\" vehicles like the Honda N-One and Honda S660 roadster.\nAll cars sold at \nAll cars sold at \nAll cars sold at \nInternational marketing.\nIn 2003, Honda released its \"Cog\" advertisement in the UK and on the Internet. To make the ad, the engineers at Honda constructed a Rube Goldberg Machine made entirely out of car parts from a Honda Accord Touring. To the chagrin of the engineers at Honda, all the parts were taken from two of only six hand-assembled pre-production models of the Accord. The advertisement depicted a single cog which sets off a chain of events that ends with the Honda Accord moving and Garrison Keillor speaking the tagline, \"Isn't it nice when things just... work?\" It took 100 takes to create the ad.\nHonda has done humor marketing such as its 1985 four-page \"How to fit six Hondas in a two-car garage\" print ad or \"descending so low in a parking garage, they pass stalagmites and a Gollum-like figure.\"\nIn 2004, they produced the \"Grrr\" advert, usually immediately followed by a shortened version of the 2005 \"Impossible Dream\" advert. In December 2005, Honda released \"The Impossible Dream\" a two-minute panoramic advertisement filmed in New Zealand, Japan, and Argentina which illustrates the founder's dream to build performance vehicles. While singing the song \"Impossible Dream\", a man reaches for his racing helmet, leaves his trailer on a minibike, then rides a succession of vintage Honda vehicles: a motorcycle, then a car, then a powerboat, then goes over a waterfall only to reappear piloting a hot air balloon, with Garrison Keillor saying \"I couldn't have put it better myself\" as the song ends. The song is from the 1960s musical \"Man of La Mancha\", sung by Andy Williams.\nIn 2006, Honda released its \"Choir\" advertisement, for the UK and the internet. This had a 60-person choir who sang the car noises as the film of the Honda Civic is shown.\nIn the mid to late 2000s in the United States, during model close-out sales for the current year before the start of the new model year, Honda's advertising has had an animated character known simply as Mr. Opportunity, voiced by Rob Paulsen. The casual-looking man talked about various deals offered by Honda and ended with the phrase \"I'm Mr. Opportunity, and I'm knockin'\", followed by him \"knocking\" on the television screen or \"thumping\" the speaker at the end of radio ads. In addition, commercials for Honda's international hatchback, the Jazz, are parodies of well-known pop culture images such as \"Tetris\" and Thomas the Tank Engine.\nIn late 2006, Honda released an ad with ASIMO exploring a museum, looking at the exhibits with almost childlike wonderment (spreading out its arms in the aerospace exhibit, waving hello to an astronaut suit that resembles him, etc.), while Garrison Keillor ruminates on progress. It concludes with the tagline: \"More forwards please\". Honda also sponsored ITV's coverage of Formula One in the UK for 2007. However, they had announced that they would not continue in 2008 due to the sponsorship price requested by ITV being too high.\nIn May 2007, focuses on their strengths in racing and the use of the Red H badge \u2013 a symbol of what is termed as \"Hondamentalism\". The campaign highlights the lengths that Honda engineers go to in order to get the most out of an engine, whether it is for bikes, cars, powerboats \u2013 even lawnmowers. Honda released its Hondamentalism campaign. In the TV spot, Garrison Keillor says, \"An engineer once said to build something great is like swimming in honey\", while Honda engineers in white suits walk and run towards a great light, battling strong winds and flying debris, holding on to anything that will keep them from being blown away. Finally one of the engineers walks towards a red light, his hand outstretched. A web address is shown for the Hondamentalism website. The digital campaign aims to show how visitors to the site share many of the Hondamentalist characteristics.\nAt the beginning of 2008, Honda released \u2013 the \"Problem Playground\". The advert outlines Honda's environmental responsibility, demonstrating a hybrid engine, more efficient solar panels, and the FCX Clarity, a hydrogen-powered car. The 90-second advert has large-scale puzzles, involving Rubik's Cubes, large shapes, and a 3-dimensional puzzle. On 29 May 2008, Honda, in partnership with Channel 4, broadcast a live advertisement. It showed skydivers jumping from an airplane over Spain and forming the letters H, O, N, D, and A in mid-air. This live advertisement is generally agreed to be the first of its kind on British television. The ad lasted three minutes.\nIn 2009, American Honda released the \"Dream the Impossible\" documentary series, a collection of 5- to 8-minute web vignettes that focus on the core philosophies of Honda. Current short films include \"Failure: The Secret to Success\", \"Kick Out the Ladder\" and \"Mobility 2088\". They have Honda employees as well as Danica Patrick, Christopher Guest, Ben Bova, Chee Pearlman, Joe Johnston and Orson Scott Card. The film series plays at dreams.honda.com. In the UK, national television ads feature voice-overs from American radio host Garrison Keillor, while in the US the voice of Honda commercials is actor and wrestler John Cena. In the North American market, Honda starts all of its commercials with a two-tone jingle since the mid-2010s.\nSports.\nAyrton Senna, the late F1 driver, once remarked that Honda played a pivotal role in his three world championships. He held deep respect for the company's founder, Soichiro Honda, and maintained a strong relationship with Nobuhiko Kawamoto, the chairman of Honda at the time. Senna even referred to Honda as \"the greatest company in the world.\"\nAs part of its marketing campaign, Honda is an official partner and sponsor of the North American National Hockey League, the Anaheim Ducks of the NHL, and the arena named after it: Honda Center. Honda also sponsored The Honda Classic golf tournament in the United States until 2023 and is a sponsor of the United States Major League Soccer. The \"Honda Player of the Year\" award is presented in United States soccer. The \"Honda Sports Award\" is given to the best female athlete in each of twelve college sports in the United States. One of the twelve Honda Sports Award winners is chosen to receive the Honda-Broderick Cup, as \"Collegiate Woman Athlete of the Year\".\nHonda sponsored La Liga club Valencia CF starting from 2014\u201315 season. Honda has been a presenting sponsor of the Los Angeles Marathon since 2010 in a three-year sponsorship deal, with winners of the LA Marathon receiving a free Honda Accord. Since 1989, the Honda Campus All-Star Challenge has been a quiz bowl tournament for Historically black colleges and universities.\nProduction numbers.\nFor automobiles:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nstyle=\"width:100%\" class=\"wraplinks\""}
