{"id": "14005", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14005", "title": "Hezekiah", "text": "King of Judah\nHezekiah (; ), or Ezekias (born c.\u2009741 BC, sole ruler c.\u2009716/15\u2013687/86), was the son of Ahaz and the thirteenth king of Judah according to the Hebrew Bible. He is described as \"the best-attested figure in biblical history,\" due to the extensive documentation of his reign in biblical texts and external sources (notably Assyrian inscriptions). His reign was marked by his significant religious reforms and his revolt against the Assyrian Empire. He witnessed the destruction of the northern Kingdom of Israel by the Assyrians under Sargon II in c.\u2009722 BC and later faced the Assyrian siege of Jerusalem by King Sennacherib in 701\u00a0BC.\nHezekiah's changes to the official Yahweh worship, especially his centralization of worship in Jerusalem and his efforts to rid Judah of the worship of other cult gods and goddesses, are a major focus of biblical accounts. He is considered a very righteous king in both the Second Book of Kings and the Second Book of Chronicles. His efforts to consolidate worship around the God of Israel and his destruction of other cult objects, such as the bronze serpent made by Moses, are seen as his way of consolidating power and temple resources during a turbulent time. His reign was marked by prophetic activity, with prophets such as Isaiah and Micah delivering their messages during his time.\nWhile Hezekiah's reign is well-documented, the historical accuracy of the events is debated by scholars. He is also one of the more prominent kings of Judah mentioned in the Bible and is one of the kings mentioned in the genealogy of Jesus in the Gospel of Matthew. He lived another fifteen years after the war and brought material prosperity to his kingdom before he died, and his son Manasseh succeeded him. The Bible praises Hezekiah's reliance on God during the Assyrian siege, claiming divine intervention in Jerusalem's survival; according to , \"No king of Judah, among either his predecessors or his successors, could [...] be compared to him\".\nEtymology.\nThe name Hezekiah means \"Yahweh strengthens\" in Hebrew. Alternately it may be translated as \"Yahweh is my strength\".\nBiblical narrative.\nDating of Biblical chronology.\nBased on Edwin R. Thiele's dating, Hezekiah was born in c.\u00a0741\u00a0BC and died in c.\u00a0687\u00a0BC at age 54. Thiele and William F. Albright calculated his regnal years, arriving at figures very close to each other, c.\u00a0715/16 and 686/87 BC. However, Robb Andrew Young dates his reign to 725\u2013696 BC and Gershon Galil to 726\u2013697/6. The Bible states that the fall of Samaria happened in Hezekiah's 6th year of reign, implying that he would have become king in c.\u00a0727\u00a0BC. Nadav Na'aman argues that several late 8th century BC seal impressions from the Kaufman collection, which mention some places later destroyed during Sennacherib's invasion and thus predate this event, corroborate this date as the inscriptions in the seal impressions include dates that go up to the 26th regnal year.\nFamily and life.\nAccording to the Bible, Hezekiah was the son of King Ahaz and Abijah (also called Abi), daughter of the high priest Zechariah. Hezekiah married Hephzibah, died from natural causes in c.\u00a0687\u00a0BC aged 54, and was succeeded by his son, Manasseh.\nReign over Judah.\nAccording to the Biblical narrative, Hezekiah assumed the throne of Judah at age 25 and reigned for 29 years. Some writers have proposed that Hezekiah served as coregent with his father Ahaz for about 14 years. Albright dates his sole reign as 715\u2013687 BC, and by Thiele as 716\u2013687 BC (the last ten years being a co-regency with his son Manasseh).\nRestoration of the Temple.\nAccording to the Bible, Hezekiah purified and repaired the Solomon's Temple, purged its idols, and reformed the priesthood. In an effort to abolish idolatry from his kingdom, he destroyed the high places (or \"bamot\") and the \"bronze serpent\" (or \"Nehushtan\"), recorded as being made by Moses, which had become objects of idolatrous worship. In place of the idolatry, Hezekiah centralized the worship of the sole God at the Temple in Jerusalem. Hezekiah also defeated the Philistines, \"as far as Gaza and its territory\", and resumed the Passover pilgrimage and the tradition of inviting the scattered tribes of Israel to take part in a Passover festival.\nAccording to 2 Chronicles 30 (but not the parallel account in 2\u00a0Kings), Hezekiah sent messengers to Ephraim and Manasseh, inviting them to Jerusalem for a Passover celebration. The messengers were scorned, but a few men of the tribes of Asher, Manasseh, and Zebulun \"were humble enough to come\" to the city. According to the Biblical account, the Passover was celebrated with great solemnity and such rejoicing as had not been seen in Jerusalem since the days of Solomon. The celebration took place during the second month, Iyar, because not enough priests had consecrated themselves in the first month.\nBiblical studies writer H. P. Mathys suggests that Hezekiah, being unable to restore the United Monarchy by political means, used the invitation to the northern tribes as a final religious \"attempt to restore the unity of the cult\". He notes that this account \"is often considered to contain historically reliable elements, especially since negative aspects are also reported on\", although he questions the extent to which it may be considered historically reliable.\nAssyrian invasion.\nIn 701 BC, the recently anointed Assyrian king Sennacherib moved to quash a rebellion in the west of his empire, invading Judah and besieging Jerusalem.\nThe Assyrians recorded that Sennacherib lifted his siege of Jerusalem after Hezekiah paid Sennacherib tribute. The Bible narrates that Hezekiah paid him three hundred talents of silver and thirty of gold as tribute\u2014even sending the doors of the Temple in Jerusalem to produce the promised amount\u2014but, even after the payment was made, Sennacherib renewed his assault on Jerusalem.\nHezekiah's construction.\nKnowing that Jerusalem would eventually be subject to a siege, Hezekiah had been preparing for some time by fortifying the capital's walls, building towers, and constructing a tunnel to bring fresh water to the city from a spring outside its walls. He made at least two major preparations that would help Jerusalem to resist conquest: the construction of the Siloam Tunnel and construction of the Broad Wall.\nBattle with Sennacherib's army.\nDuring the Assyrian siege of Jerusalem, the Bible claims that great losses were inflicted upon the Assyrian army, which Sennacherib's inscriptions do not mention. As Jack Finegan comments: \"In view of the general note of boasting which pervades the inscriptions of the Assyrian kings, ... it is hardly to be expected that Sennacherib would record such a defeat.\" The version of the matter that Sennacherib presents, as found inscribed on what is known as the Sennacherib Prism preserved in the University of Chicago Oriental Institute, in part says: \"As to Hezekiah, the Jew, he did not submit to my yoke ... Hezekiah himself ... did send me, later, to Nineveh, my lordly city, together with 30 talents of gold, 800 talents of silver, ...\"\nHerodotus mentions the Assyrian army of Sennacherib being overrun by mice when attacking Egypt. Josephus gives a quote from Berossus that is quite close to the Biblical account.\nDeath of Sennacherib.\nOf Sennacherib's death, 2 Kings records:\nIt came about as he was worshiping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer killed him [Sennacherib] with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Ararat. And Esarhaddon his son became king in his place.\nAccording to Assyrian records, Sennacherib was assassinated in 681\u00a0BC, twenty years after the 701\u00a0BC invasion of Judah. A Neo-Babylonian letter corroborates with the Biblical account, a sentiment from Sennacherib's sons to assassinate him, an event Assyriologists have reconstructed as historical. The son Arda-Mulissu, who is mentioned in the letter as killing anyone who would reveal his conspiracy, murdered his father in c.\u00a0681\u00a0BC, and was most likely the Adrammelech in 2 Kings, though Sharezer is not known elsewhere.\nAssyriologists posit the murder was motivated by Esarhaddon being chosen as heir to the throne instead of Arda-Mulissu, the next eldest son. Assyrian and Hebrew Biblical history corroborate that Esarhaddon ultimately succeeded the throne. Other Assyriologists assert that Sennacherib was murdered in revenge for his destruction of Babylon, a city sacred to all Mesopotamians, including the Assyrians.\nLater illness.\nLater in his life, the Bible recounts that Hezekiah fell ill. According to the Talmud, this illness arose from a disagreement between him and Isaiah over who should visit whom, as well as Hezekiah's initial reluctance to marry and have children. Ultimately, Hezekiah did marry Isaiah's daughter. Some Talmudists also considered that it might have come about as a way for Hezekiah to purge his sins or due to his arrogance in assuming his righteousness.\nExtra-biblical records.\nExtra-biblical sources specify Hezekiah by name, along with his reign and influence. \"Historiographically, his reign is noteworthy for the convergence of a variety of biblical sources and diverse extrabiblical evidence often bearing on the same events. Significant data concerning Hezekiah appear in the Deuteronomistic History, the Chronicler, Isaiah, Assyrian annals and reliefs, Israelite epigraphy, and, increasingly, stratigraphy\". Archaeologist Amihai Mazar calls the tensions between Assyria and Judah \"one of the best-documented events of the Iron Age\". Hezekiah's story is one of the best to cross-reference with the rest of the Near Eastern world's historical documents.\nArchaeological record.\nStorage jars with the so-called \"LMLK seal\" may \"demonstrate careful preparations to counter Sennacherib's likely route of invasion\" and show \"a notable degree of royal control of towns and cities which would facilitate Hezekiah's destruction of rural sacrificial sites and his centralization of worship in Jerusalem\". Evidence suggests they were used throughout his 29-year reign.\nThere are some bullae from sealed documents that may have belonged to Hezekiah himself. In 2015, Eilat Mazar discovered a bulla bearing an inscription in ancient Hebrew script that translates as: \"Belonging to Hezekiah [son of] Ahaz king of Judah.\" This is the first seal impression of an Israelite or Judean king to come to light in a scientific archaeological excavation. While another, unprovenanced bulla of King Hezekiah was known, this was the first time a seal impression of Hezekiah had been discovered in situ in the course of actual excavations.\nArchaeological findings like the Hezekiah seal led scholars to surmise that the ancient Judahite kingdom had a highly developed administrative system. In 2018, Mazar published a report discussing the discovery of a bulla which she says may have to have belonged to Isaiah. She believes the fragment to have been part of a seal whose complete text might have read \"Belonging to Isaiah the prophet.\" Several other biblical archaeologists, including George Washington University's Christopher Rollston, have pointed to the bulla being incomplete and the present inscription not enough to necessarily refer to the Biblical figure.\nIncrease in the power of Judah.\nAccording to the work of archaeologists and philologists, the reign of Hezekiah saw a notable increase in the power of the Judean state. At this time, Judah was the strongest nation on the Assyrian\u2013Egyptian frontier. There were increases in literacy and in the production of literary works. The massive construction of the Broad Wall was made during his reign, the city was enlarged to accommodate a large influx, and Jerusalem's population increased to an estimated 25,000, \"five times the population under Solomon.\" Mazar explains, \"Jerusalem was a virtual city-state where the majority of the state's population was concentrated,\" compared to the rest of Judah's cities.\nArchaeologist Israel Finkelstein says, \"The key phenomenon\u2014which cannot be explained solely against the background of economic prosperity\u2014was the sudden growth of the population of Jerusalem in particular, and of Judah in general.\" He says the cause of this growth must be a large influx of Israelites fleeing from the Assyrian destruction of the northern state. It is \"[t]he only reasonable way to explain this unprecedented demographic development.\" This, according to Finkelstein, set the stage for motivations to compile and reconcile Hebrew history into a text at that time. Mazar questions this explanation since, she argues, it is \"no more than an educated guess.\"\nSiloam inscription.\nThe Siloam Tunnel was chiseled through 533 meters (1,750 feet) of solid rock to provide Jerusalem underground access to the waters of the Gihon Spring or Siloam Pool, which lay outside the city.\nThe Siloam Inscription from the Siloam Tunnel is now in the Istanbul Archaeology Museum. It \"commemorates the dramatic moment when the two original teams of tunnelers, digging with picks from opposite ends of the tunnel, met each other\". It is \"[o]ne of the most important ancient Hebrew inscriptions ever discovered.\" Finkelstein and Mazar cite this tunnel as an example of Jerusalem's impressive state-level power at the time.\nArchaeologists like William G. Dever have pointed at archaeological evidence for the iconoclasm during the period of Hezekiah's reign. The central cult room of the temple at Arad, a royal Judean fortress, was deliberately and carefully dismantled, \"with the altars and massebot\" concealed \"beneath a Str. 8 plaster floor\". This stratum correlates with the late 8th century; Dever concludes that \"the deliberate dismantling of the temple and its replacement by another structure in the days of Hezekiah is an archeological fact. I see no reason for skepticism here.\"\nLachish relief.\nUnder Rehoboam, Lachish became the second-most important city of the kingdom of Judah. During King Hezekiah's revolt against Assyria, Sennacherib captured it despite determined resistance (see Siege of Lachish).\nAs the Lachish relief attests, Sennacherib began his siege of the city of Lachish in 701\u00a0BC. The Lachish Relief graphically depicts the battle and the city's defeat, including Assyrian archers marching up a ramp and Judahites pierced through on mounted stakes. \"The reliefs on these slabs\" discovered in the Assyrian palace at Nineveh \"originally formed a single, continuous work, measuring 8 feet ... tall by 80 feet ... long, which wrapped around the room\". Visitors \"would have been impressed not only by the magnitude of the artwork itself but also by the magnificent strength of the Assyrian war machine.\"\nSennacherib's Prism of Nineveh.\nSennacherib's Prism was found buried in the foundations of the Nineveh palace. It was written in cuneiform, the Mesopotamian form of writing of the day. The prism records the conquest of 46 strong towns and \"uncountable smaller places,\" along with the siege of Jerusalem where Sennacherib says he just \"shut him up ... like a bird in a cage,\" subsequently enforcing a larger tribute upon him.\nThe Hebrew Bible states that during the night, the angel of YHWH (Hebrew: \u05d9\u05d4\u05d5\u05d4) brought death to 185,000 Assyrians troops, forcing the army to abandon the siege. Yet, it also records a tribute paid to Sennacherib of 300 silver talents following the siege. There is no account of the supernatural event in the prism. Sennacherib's account records his levying of a tribute from Hezekiah, a payment of 800 silver talents, which suggests a capitulation to end the siege. However, inscriptions describing Sennacherib's defeat of the Ethiopian forces have been discovered. These say: \"As to Hezekiah, the Jew, he did not submit to my yoke, I laid siege to 46 of his strong cities ... and conquered (them). ... Himself I made a prisoner in Jerusalem, his royal residence, like a bird in a cage.\"\nHe does not claim to have captured the city. This is consistent with the Bible account of Hezekiah's revolt against Assyria in that neither account indicates that Sennacherib ever entered or formally captured the city. In this inscription, Sennacherib claims that Hezekiah paid for tribute 800 talents of silver, in contrast with the Bible's 300. However, this could be due to boastful exaggeration, which was common among kings of the period. The annals record a list of booty sent from Jerusalem to Nineveh. In the inscription, Sennacherib claims that Hezekiah accepted servitude, and some theorize that Hezekiah remained on his throne as a vassal ruler. The campaign is recorded with differences in the Assyrian records and in the Biblical Books of Kings; there is agreement that the Assyrians have a propensity for exaggeration.\nOne theory that takes the biblical view posits that a defeat was caused by \"possibly an outbreak of the bubonic plague\". Another that this is a composite text which makes use of a 'legendary motif' analogous to that of the Exodus story.\nOther records.\nThe Greek historian Herodotus (c.\u00a0484\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u00a0425\u00a0BC) wrote of the invasion and acknowledges many Assyrian deaths, which he claims were the result of a plague of mice. The Jewish historian Josephus followed the writings of Herodotus. These historians record Sennacherib's failure to take Jerusalem as \"uncontested\".\nHistoricity.\nWhile extrabiblical sources corroborate King Hezekiah's existence, the historicity of some biblical accounts of his reign is debated among scholars, particularly regarding his religious reforms and the Assyrian invasion. While Hezekiah is traditionally credited with centralizing worship in Jerusalem and removing cultic sites, some argue these reforms were influenced by his successor, King Josiah, or may have been more about consolidating royal power than religious overhaul. Other scholars argue that archaeological discoveries at Tel Arad, Beersheba, Tel Motza, Lachish and the City of David may provide evidence for the existence of Hezekiah's reforms. The biblical account of the Assyrian siege led by King Sennacherib is also contested, with some scholars suggesting exaggeration or blending of multiple events. Disagreements over the chronology of Hezekiah\u2019s reign and the timing of his death further complicate the understanding of his historical legacy, with Assyrian inscriptions and biblical texts remaining key sources in these discussions.\nRabbinic literature.\nAbijah saved the life of her son Hezekiah, whom her husband, Ahaz, had designated as an offering to Moloch. By anointing him with the blood of the salamander, she enabled him to pass through the fire of Moloch unscathed (Sanhedrin 63b).\nHezekiah is considered the model of those who put their trust in the Lord. Only during his sickness did he waver in his hitherto unshaken trust and require a sign, for which he was blamed by Isaiah (\"Lamentations Rabbah\" 1). The Hebrew name \u1e24iz\u1e33iyyah is considered by the Talmudists to be a surname, meaning either \"strengthened by Yhwh\" or \"he who made a firm alliance between the Israelites and Yhwh\"; his eight other names are enumerated in Isaiah 9:5, according to Sanhedrin 94a. He is called the \"restorer of the study of \"Halakha\"\" in the schools and is said to have planted a sword at the door of the \"beth midrash\", declaring that he who would not study \"Halakha\" should be struck with the weapon. As a result, no boy or girl in the kingdom of Judah was unfamiliar with the laws of impurity and purity (Sanhedrin 94b).\nHezekiah's piety, which, according to the Talmudists, alone occasioned the destruction of the Assyrian army and the signal deliverance of the Israelites when Sennacherib attacked Jerusalem, caused him to be considered by some as the Messiah (Sanhedrin 99a). According to Bar Kappara, Hezekiah was destined to be the Messiah, but the attribute of justice (\"middat ha-din\") protested against this, saying that as David, who sang so much of the glory of God, had not been made the Messiah, still less should Hezekiah, for whom so many miracles had been performed (and who did not sing the praise of God). It is also reported that Hezekiah missed this opportunity because he did not sing and give thanks for Sennacherib's downfall.\nMenachot 109b tells of Hezekiah encouraging others to keep their faith:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"After the fall of Sancheriv, Hezekiah encountered princes sitting in golden wagons [presumably the rich folks getting out of town] he made them promise not to worship stars [i.e., not to engage in idolatry]\".\nThe Talmudists attribute to Hezekiah the redaction of the books of Isaiah, Proverbs, Song of Solomon, and Ecclesiastes in Bava Batra 15a.\nChronological interpretation.\nUnderstanding the biblically recorded sequence of events in Hezekiah's life as chronological or not is critical to the contextual interpretation of his reign. According to scholar Stephen L. Harris, chapter 20 of 2 Kings does not follow the events of chapters 18 and 19. Rather, the Babylonian envoys precede the Assyrian invasion and siege. Chapter 20 would have been added during the exile, and Harris says it \"evidently took place before Sennacherib's invasion\" when Hezekiah was \"trying to recruit Babylon as an ally against Assyria.\" Consequently, \"Hezekiah ends his long reign impoverished and ruling over only a tiny scrap of his former domain.\"\nLikewise, the \"Archaeological Study Bible\" says, \"The presence of these riches' that Hezekiah shows to the Babylonians \"indicates that this event took place before Hezekiah's payment of tribute to Sennacherib in 701\u00a0BC\". Again, \"though the king's illness and the subsequent Babylonian mission are described at the end of the accounts of his reign, they must have occurred before the war with Assyria.\nAcademic debate.\nThere has been considerable academic debate about the actual dates of the Israelite kings' reigns. Scholars have endeavored to synchronize the chronology of events in the Hebrew Bible with those derived from other external sources. In the case of Hezekiah, scholars have noted that the apparent inconsistencies are resolved by accepting the evidence that Hezekiah, like his predecessors for four generations in the kings of Judah, had a coregency with his father, and this coregency began in 729\u00a0BC.\nAs an example of the reasoning that finds inconsistencies in calculations when co-regencies are \"a priori\" ruled out, 2\u00a0Kings 18:10 dates the fall of Samaria (the Northern Kingdom) to the 6th year of Hezekiah's reign. Albright has dated the fall of the Kingdom of Israel to 721\u00a0BC, while Thiele calculates the date as 723\u00a0BC. If Albright's or Thiele's dating is correct, Hezekiah's reign would begin in 729 or 727\u00a0BC. On the other hand, 2\u00a0Kings 18:13 states that Sennacherib invaded Judah in the 14th year of Hezekiah's reign. Dating based on Assyrian records date this invasion to 701\u00a0BC, and Hezekiah's reign would therefore begin in 716/715 BC.\nSince Albright and Friedman, several scholars have explained these dating problems based on a coregency between Hezekiah and his father Ahaz between 729 and 716/715 BC. Assyriologists and Egyptologists recognize that coregency was a practice both in Assyria and Egypt. After noting that coregencies were only used sporadically in the northern kingdom (Israel), Nadav Na'aman writes,\nIn the kingdom of Judah, on the other hand, the nomination of a co-regent was the common procedure, beginning from David who, before his death, elevated his son Solomon to the throne. When taking into account the permanent nature of the co-regency in Judah from the time of Joash, one may dare to conclude that dating the co-regencies accurately is indeed the key for solving the problems of biblical chronology in the eighth century BC.\nAmong the numerous scholars who have recognized the coregency between Ahaz and Hezekiah is Kenneth Kitchen in his various writings, Leslie McFall, and Jack Finegan. McFall, in his 1991 article, argues that if 729\u00a0BC\u2014that is, the Judean regnal year beginning in Tishri of 729\u2014is taken as the start of the Ahaz/Hezekiah coregency, and 716/715 BC as the date of the death of Ahaz, then all the extensive chronological data for Hezekiah and his contemporaries in the late eighth century BC are in harmony. Further, McFall found that no textual emendations are required among the numerous dates, reign lengths, and synchronisms given in the Hebrew Bible for this period.\nScholars who accept the principle of coregencies note that abundant evidence for their use is found in the Biblical material itself. The agreement of scholarship built on these principles with both Biblical and secular texts was such that the Thiele/McFall chronology was accepted as the best chronology for the kingdom period in Jack Finegan's encyclopedic \"Handbook of Biblical Chronology\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "14006", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14006", "title": "Haemophilia", "text": "Genetic disease involving blood clotting\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nHaemophilia (British English), or hemophilia (American English) (from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'blood' and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'love of'), is a mostly inherited genetic disorder that impairs the body's ability to make blood clots, a process needed to stop bleeding. This results in people bleeding for a longer time after an injury, easy bruising, and an increased risk of bleeding inside joints or the brain. Those with a mild case of the disease may have symptoms only after an accident or during surgery. Bleeding into a joint can result in permanent damage while bleeding in the brain can result in long term headaches, seizures, or an altered level of consciousness.\nThere are two main types of haemophilia: haemophilia A, which occurs due to low amounts of clotting factor VIII, and haemophilia B, which occurs due to low levels of clotting factor IX. They are typically inherited from one's parents through an X chromosome carrying a nonfunctional gene. Most commonly found in men, haemophilia can affect women too, though very rarely. A woman would need to inherit two affected X chromosomes to be affected, whereas a man would only need one X chromosome affected. It is possible for a new mutation to occur during early development, or haemophilia may develop later in life due to antibodies forming against a clotting factor. \nOther types include haemophilia C, which occurs due to low levels of factor XI, Von Willebrand disease, which occurs due to low levels of a substance called von Willebrand factor, and parahaemophilia, which occurs due to low levels of factor V. Haemophilia A, B, and C prevent the intrinsic pathway from functioning properly; this clotting pathway is necessary when there is damage to the endothelium of a blood vessel. Acquired haemophilia is associated with cancers, autoimmune disorders, and pregnancy. Diagnosis is by testing the blood for its ability to clot and its levels of clotting factors.\nPrevention may occur by removing an egg, fertilising it, and testing the embryo before transferring it to the uterus. Human embryos in research can be regarded as the technical object/process. Missing blood clotting factors are replaced to treat haemophilia. This may be done on a regular basis or during bleeding episodes. Replacement may take place at home or in hospital. The clotting factors are made either from human blood or by recombinant methods. Up to 20% of people develop antibodies to the clotting factors which makes treatment more difficult. The medication desmopressin may be used in those with mild haemophilia A. Gene therapy treatment was in clinical trials as of 2022[ [update]], with some approaches and products having received conditional approval.\nHaemophilia A affects about 1 in 5,000\u201310,000, while haemophilia B affects about 1 in 40,000 males at birth. As haemophilia A and B are both X-linked recessive disorders, females are rarely severely affected. Some females with a nonfunctional gene on one of the X chromosomes may be mildly symptomatic. Haemophilia C occurs equally in both sexes and is mostly found in Ashkenazi Jews. In the 1800s haemophilia B was common within the royal families of Europe. The difference between haemophilia A and B was determined in 1952.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nCharacteristic symptoms vary with severity. In general symptoms are internal or external bleeding episodes, which are called \"bleeds\". People with more severe haemophilia experience more severe and more frequent bleeds, while people with mild haemophilia usually experience more minor symptoms except after surgery or serious trauma. In cases of moderate haemophilia symptoms are variable which manifest along a spectrum between severe and mild forms.\nIn both haemophilia A and B, there is spontaneous bleeding but a normal bleeding time, normal prothrombin time, normal thrombin time, but prolonged partial thromboplastin time. Internal bleeding is common in people with severe haemophilia and some individuals with moderate haemophilia. The most characteristic type of internal bleed is a joint bleed where blood enters into the joint spaces. This is most common with severe haemophiliacs and can occur spontaneously (without evident trauma). If not treated promptly, joint bleeds can lead to permanent joint damage and disfigurement. Bleeding into soft tissues such as muscles and subcutaneous tissues is less severe but can lead to damage and requires treatment.\nChildren with mild to moderate haemophilia may not have any signs or symptoms at birth, especially if they do not undergo circumcision. Their first symptoms are often frequent and large bruises and haematomas from frequent bumps and falls as they learn to walk. Swelling and bruising from bleeding in the joints, soft tissue, and muscles may also occur. Children with mild haemophilia may not have noticeable symptoms for many years. Often, the first sign in very mild haemophiliacs is heavy bleeding from a dental procedure, an accident, or surgery. Females who are carriers usually have enough clotting factors from their one normal gene to prevent serious bleeding problems, though some may present as mild haemophiliacs.\nComplications.\nSevere complications are much more common in cases of severe and moderate haemophilia. Complications may arise from the disease itself or from its treatment:\nHaemophilic arthropathy is characterised by chronic proliferative synovitis and cartilage destruction. If an intra-articular bleed is not drained early, it may cause apoptosis of chondrocytes and affect the synthesis of proteoglycans. The hypertrophied and fragile synovial lining while attempting to eliminate excessive blood may be more likely to easily rebleed, leading to a vicious cycle of hemarthrosis-synovitis-hemarthrosis. In addition, iron deposition in the synovium may induce an inflammatory response activating the immune system and stimulating angiogenesis, resulting in cartilage and bone destruction.\nGenetics.\nTypically, females possess two X-chromosomes, and males have one X and one Y-chromosome. Since the mutations causing the disease are X-linked recessive, a female carrying the defect on one of her X-chromosomes may not be affected by it, as the equivalent dominant allele on her other chromosome should express itself to produce the necessary clotting factors, due to X inactivation. Therefore, heterozygous females are just carriers of this genetic disposition. However, the Y-chromosome in the male has no gene for factors VIII or IX. If the genes responsible for production of factor VIII or factor IX present on a male's X-chromosome are deficient there is no equivalent on the Y-chromosome to cancel it out, so the deficient gene is not masked and the disorder will develop.\nSince a male receives his single X-chromosome from his mother, the son of a healthy female silently carrying the deficient gene will have a 50% chance of inheriting that gene from her and with it the disease; and if his mother is affected with haemophilia, he will have a 100% chance of being a haemophiliac. In contrast, for a female to inherit the disease, she must receive two deficient X-chromosomes, one from her mother and the other from her father (who must therefore be a haemophiliac himself). Hence, haemophilia is expressed far more commonly among males than females, while females, who must have two deficient X-chromosomes in order to have haemophilia, are far more likely to be silent carriers, survive childhood and to submit each of her genetic children to an at least 50% risk of receiving the deficient gene. However, it is possible for female carriers to become mild haemophiliacs due to lyonisation (inactivation) of the X-chromosomes. Haemophiliac daughters are more common than they once were, as improved treatments for the disease have allowed more haemophiliac males to survive to adulthood and become parents. Adult females may experience menorrhagia (heavy periods) due to the bleeding tendency. The pattern of inheritance is X-linked recessive. This type of pattern is also seen in colour blindness.\nA mother who is a carrier has a 50% chance of passing the faulty X-chromosome to her daughter, while an affected father will always pass on the affected gene to his daughters. A son cannot inherit the defective gene from his father. Genetic testing and genetic counselling is recommended for families with haemophilia. Prenatal testing, such as amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling are available to pregnant women who may be carriers of the condition.\nAs with all genetic disorders, it is also possible for a human to acquire it spontaneously through mutation, rather than inheriting it, because of a new mutation in one of their parents' gametes. Spontaneous mutations account for about 33% of all cases of haemophilia A. The most common mutation that causes severe cases of haemophilia A is an inversion within intron 22 of the factor VIII gene (F8) which is located near the tip of the X chromosome, leading to an abnormal crossover during meiosis. About 30% of cases of haemophilia B are the result of a spontaneous gene mutation.\nIf a female gives birth to a haemophiliac son, either the female is a carrier for the blood disorder or the haemophilia was the result of a spontaneous mutation. Until modern direct DNA testing, however, it was impossible to determine if a female with only healthy children was a carrier or not.\nIf a male has the disease and has children with a female who is not a carrier, his daughters will be carriers of haemophilia. His sons, however, will not be affected with the disease. The disease is X-linked and the father cannot pass haemophilia through the Y-chromosome. Males with the disorder are then no more likely to pass on the gene to their children than carrier females, though all daughters they sire will be carriers and all sons they father will not have haemophilia (unless the mother is a carrier)\nSeverity.\nThere are numerous different mutations which cause each type of haemophilia. Due to differences in changes to the genes involved, people with haemophilia often have some level of active clotting factor. Individuals with less than 1% active factor are classified as having severe haemophilia, those with 1\u20135% active factor have moderate haemophilia, and those with mild haemophilia have between 5% and 40% of normal levels of active clotting factor.\nDiagnosis.\nHaemophilia can be diagnosed before, during or after birth if there is a family history of the condition. Several options are available to parents. If there is no family history of haemophilia, it is usually only diagnosed when a child begins to walk or crawl. Affected children may experience joint bleeds or easy bruising.\nMild haemophilia may only be discovered later, usually after an injury or a dental or surgical procedure.\nBefore pregnancy.\nGenetic testing and counselling are available to help determine the risk of passing the condition onto a child. This may involve testing a sample of tissue or blood to look for signs of the genetic mutation that causes haemophilia.\nDuring pregnancy.\nA pregnant woman with a history of haemophilia in her family can test for the haemophilia gene. Such tests include:\nThere is a small risk of these procedures causing problems such as miscarriage or premature labour, so the woman may discuss this with the doctor in charge of her care.\nAfter birth.\nIf haemophilia is suspected after a child has been born, a blood test can usually confirm the diagnosis. Blood from the umbilical cord can be tested at birth if there's a family history of haemophilia. A blood test will also be able to identify whether a child has haemophilia A or B, and how severe it is.\nClassification.\nThere are several types of haemophilia: haemophilia A, haemophilia B, haemophilia C, \"parahaemophilia\", \"acquired haemophilia A\", and \"acquired haemophilia B\".\nHaemophilia A is a recessive X-linked genetic disorder resulting in a deficiency of functional clotting Factor VIII. Haemophilia B is also a recessive X-linked genetic disorder involving a lack of functional clotting Factor IX. Haemophilia C is an autosomal genetic disorder involving a lack of functional clotting Factor XI. Haemophilia C is not completely recessive, as heterozygous individuals also show increased bleeding.\nThe type of haemophilia known as \"parahaemophilia\" is a mild and rare form and is due to a deficiency in factor V. This type can be inherited or acquired.\nA non-genetic form of haemophilia is caused by autoantibodies against factor VIII and so is known as \"acquired haemophilia A\". It is a rare but potentially life-threatening bleeding disorder caused by the development of autoantibodies (inhibitors) directed against plasma coagulation factors. Acquired haemophilia can be associated with cancers, autoimmune disorders and following childbirth.\nManagement.\nThere is no long-term cure. Treatment and prevention of bleeding episodes is done primarily by replacing the missing blood clotting factors.\nClotting factors.\nClotting factors are usually not needed in mild haemophilia. In moderate haemophilia clotting factors are typically only needed when bleeding occurs or to prevent bleeding with certain events. In severe haemophilia preventive use is often recommended two or three times a week and may continue for life. Rapid treatment of bleeding episodes decreases damage to the body.\nFactor VIII is used in haemophilia A and factor IX in haemophilia B. Factor replacement can be either isolated from human plasma, recombinant, or a combination of the two. Some people develop antibodies (inhibitors) against the replacement factors given to them, so the amount of the factor has to be increased or non-human replacement products must be given, such as porcine factor VIII.\nIf a person becomes refractory to replacement coagulation factor as a result of high levels of circulating inhibitors, this may be partially overcome with recombinant human factor VIII.\nIn 2008, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved an anti-haemophilic drug completely free of albumin, which made it the first anti-haemophilic drug in the US to use an entirely synthetic purification process. Since 1993 recombinant factor products (which are typically cultured in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) tissue culture cells and involve little, if any human plasma products) have been available and have been widely used in wealthier western countries. While recombinant clotting factor products offer higher purity and safety, they are, like concentrate, extremely expensive, and not generally available in the developing world. In many cases, factor products of any sort are difficult to obtain in developing countries.\nClotting factors are either given preventively or on-demand. Preventive use involves the infusion of clotting factor on a regular schedule in order to keep clotting levels sufficiently high to prevent spontaneous bleeding episodes. On-demand (or episodic) treatment involves treating bleeding episodes once they arise. In 2007, a trial comparing on-demand treatment of boys (&lt; 30 months) with haemophilia A with prophylactic treatment (infusions of 25 IU/kg body weight of Factor VIII every other day) in respect to its effect on the prevention of joint-diseases. When the boys reached 6 years of age, 93% of those in the prophylaxis group and 55% of those in the episodic-therapy group had a normal index joint-structure on MRI. Preventative treatment, however, resulted in average costs of $300,000 per year. The author of an editorial published in the same issue of the \"NEJM\" supports the idea that prophylactic treatment not only is more effective than on demand treatment but also suggests that starting after the first serious joint-related haemorrhage may be more cost effective than waiting until the fixed age to begin. Most haemophiliacs in third world countries have limited or no access to commercial blood clotting factor products.\nFitusiran (Qfitlia) was approved for medical use in the United States in March 2025.\nOther.\nDesmopressin (DDAVP) may be used in those with mild haemophilia A. Tranexamic acid or epsilon aminocaproic acid may be given along with clotting factors to prevent breakdown of clots.\nPain medicines, steroids, and physical therapy may be used to reduce pain and swelling in an affected joint. In those with severe haemophilia A already receiving FVIII, emicizumab may provide some benefit. Different treatments are used to help those with an acquired form of haemophilia in addition to the normal clotting factors. Often the most effective treatment is corticosteroids which remove the auto-antibodies in half of people. As a secondary route of treatment, cyclophosphamide and cyclosporine are used and are proven effective for those who did not respond to the steroid treatments. In rare cases a third route or treatment is used, high doses of intravenous immunoglobulin or immunosorbent that works to help control bleeding instead of battling the auto-antibodies.\nContraindications.\nAnticoagulants such as heparin and warfarin are contraindicated for people with haemophilia as these can aggravate clotting difficulties. Also contraindicated are those drugs which have \"blood thinning\" side effects. For instance, medicines which contain aspirin, ibuprofen, or naproxen sodium should not be taken because they are well known to have the side effect of prolonged bleeding.\nAlso contraindicated are activities with a high likelihood of trauma, such as motorcycling and skateboarding. Popular sports with very high rates of physical contact and injuries such as American football, hockey, boxing, wrestling, and rugby should be avoided by people with haemophilia. Other active sports like soccer, baseball, and basketball also have a high rate of injuries, but have overall less contact and should be undertaken cautiously and only in consultation with a doctor.\nPrognosis.\nLike most aspects of the disorder, life expectancy varies with severity and adequate treatment. People with severe haemophilia who do not receive adequate, modern treatment have greatly shortened lifespans and often do not reach maturity. Prior to the 1960s when effective treatment became available, average life expectancy was only 11 years. By the 1980s the life span of the average haemophiliac receiving appropriate treatment was 50\u201360 years. Today with appropriate treatment, males with haemophilia typically have a near normal quality of life with an average lifespan approximately 10 years shorter than an unaffected male.\nSince the 1980s the primary leading cause of death of people with severe haemophilia has shifted from haemorrhage to HIV/AIDS acquired through treatment with contaminated blood products. The second leading cause of death related to severe haemophilia complications is intracranial haemorrhage which today accounts for one third of all deaths of people with haemophilia. Two other major causes of death include hepatitis infections causing cirrhosis and obstruction of air or blood flow due to soft tissue haemorrhage.\nEpidemiology.\nHaemophilia frequency is about 1 instance in every 10,000 births (or 1 in 5,000 male births) for haemophilia A and 1 in 50,000 births for haemophilia B. About 18,000 people in the United States have haemophilia. Each year in the US, about 400 babies are born with the disorder. Haemophilia usually occurs in males and less often in females. It is estimated that about 2,500 Canadians have haemophilia A, and about 500 Canadians have haemophilia B.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAbout seventy or eighty years ago, a woman by name of Smith, settled in the vicinity of Plymouth, New Hampshire, and transmitted the following idiosyncrasy to her descendants. It is one, she observed, to which her family is unfortunately subject, and had been the source not only of great solicitude, but frequently the cause of death. If the least scratch is made on the skin of some of them, as mortal a hemorrhagy will eventually ensue as if the largest wound is inflicted. (...) So assured are the members of this family of the terrible consequences of the least wound, that they will not suffer themselves to be bled on any consideration, having lost a relation by not being able to stop the discharge occasioned by this operation.\nJohn C. Otto, 1803\nScientific discovery.\nThe excessive bleeding was known to ancient people. The Talmud instructs that a boy must not be circumcised if he had two brothers who died due to complications arising from their circumcisions, and Maimonides says that this excluded paternal half-brothers. This may have been due to a concern about haemophilia. The tenth-century Arab surgeon Al-Zahrawi noted cases of excessive bleeding among men in a village. Several similar references to the disease later known as haemophilia appear throughout historical writings, though no term for inherited abnormal bleeding tendencies existed until the nineteenth century.\nIn 1803, John Conrad Otto, a Philadelphian physician, wrote an account about \"a hemorrhagic disposition existing in certain families\" in which he called the affected males \"bleeders\". He recognised that the disorder was hereditary and that it affected mostly males and was passed down by healthy females. His paper was the second paper to describe important characteristics of an X-linked genetic disorder (the first paper being a description of colour blindness by John Dalton who studied his own family). Otto was able to trace the disease back to a woman who settled near Plymouth, New Hampshire, in 1720. The idea that affected males could pass the trait onto their unaffected daughters was not described until 1813 when John F. Hay published an account in \"The New England Journal of Medicine\".\nIn 1924, a Finnish doctor discovered a hereditary bleeding disorder similar to haemophilia localised in \u00c5land, southwest of Finland. This bleeding disorder is called \"Von Willebrand Disease\".\nThe term \"haemophilia\" is derived from the term \"haemorrhaphilia\" which was used in a description of the condition written by Friedrich Hopff in 1828, while he was a student at the University of Zurich. In 1937, Patek and Taylor, two doctors from Harvard University, discovered anti-haemophilic globulin. In 1947, Alfredo Pavlovsky, a doctor from Buenos Aires, found haemophilia A and haemophilia B to be separate diseases by doing a lab test. This test was done by transferring the blood of one haemophiliac to another haemophiliac. The fact that this corrected the clotting problem showed that there was more than one form of haemophilia.\nEuropean royalty.\nHaemophilia has featured prominently in European royalty and thus is sometimes known as 'the royal disease'. Queen Victoria passed the mutation for haemophilia B to her son Leopold and, through two of her daughters, Alice and Beatrice, to various royals across the continent, including the royal families of Spain, Germany, and Russia. In Russia, Tsarevich Alexei, the son and heir of Tsar Nicholas II, famously had haemophilia, which he had inherited from his mother, Empress Alexandra, one of Queen Victoria's granddaughters. The haemophilia of Alexei would result in the rise to prominence of the Russian mystic Grigori Rasputin at the imperial court.\nIt was claimed that Rasputin was successful at treating Tsarevich Alexei's haemophilia. At the time, a common treatment administered by professional doctors was to use aspirin, which worsened rather than lessened the problem. It is believed that, by simply advising against the medical treatment, Rasputin could bring visible and significant improvement to the condition of Tsarevich Alexei.\nIn Spain, Queen Victoria's youngest daughter, Princess Beatrice, had a daughter Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg, who later became Queen of Spain. Two of her sons were haemophiliacs and both died from minor car accidents. Her eldest son, Prince Alfonso of Spain, Prince of Asturias, died at the age of 31 from internal bleeding after his car hit a telephone booth. Her youngest son, Infante Gonzalo, died at age 19 from abdominal bleeding following a minor car accident in which he and his sister hit a wall while avoiding a cyclist. Neither appeared injured or sought immediate medical care and Gonzalo died two days later from internal bleeding.\nTreatment.\nThe method for the production of an antihaemophilic factor was discovered by Judith Graham Pool from Stanford University in 1964, and approved for commercial use in 1971 in the United States under the name \"Cryoprecipitated AHF\". Together with the development of a system for transportation and storage of human plasma in 1965, this was the first time an efficient treatment for haemophilia became available.\nBlood contamination.\nUp until late 1985 many people with haemophilia received clotting factor products that posed a risk of HIV and hepatitis C infection. The plasma used to create the products was not screened or tested, nor had most of the products been subject to any form of viral inactivation.\nTens of thousands worldwide were infected as a result of contaminated factor products including more than 10,000 people in the United States, 3,500 British, 1,400 Japanese, 700 Canadians, 250 Irish, and 115 Iraqis.\nInfection via the tainted factor products had mostly stopped by 1986 by which time viral inactivation methods had largely been put into place, although some products were shown to still be dangerous in 1987.\nResearch.\nGene therapy.\nIn those with severe haemophilia, gene therapy may reduce symptoms to those that a person with mild or moderate haemophilia might have. The best results have been found in haemophilia B. In 2016 early stage human research was ongoing with a few sites recruiting participants. In 2017 a gene therapy trial on nine people with haemophilia A reported that high doses did better than low doses. It is not currently an accepted treatment for haemophilia.\nIn July 2022 results of a gene therapy candidate for haemophilia B called FLT180 were announced. The method works using an adeno-associated virus (AAV) to restore the clotting factor IX (FIX) protein, normal levels of the protein were observed with low doses of the therapy but immunosuppression was necessitated to decrease the risk of vector-related immune responses.\nIn November 2022, the first gene therapy treatment for haemophilia B was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, called Hemgenix. It is a single-dose treatment that gives the patient the genetic information required to produce Factor IX.\nIn June 2023, the FDA approved the first gene therapy treatment for haemophilia A, called Roctavian. It was only approved for patients with severe cases, but it has been shown to reduce yearly bleeding episodes by 50%. It works similarly to Hemgenix, being administered by intravenous infusion that contains a gene for Factor VIII.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14007", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14007", "title": "Hemophilia", "text": ""}
{"id": "14008", "revid": "19839598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14008", "title": "Hickory (disambiguation)", "text": "Hickory is a type of tree (\"Carya\" species) found in North America and East Asia.\nHickory may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "14009", "revid": "1319061567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14009", "title": "Hemicellulose", "text": "Class of plant cell wall polysaccharides\nA hemicellulose (also known as polyose) is one of a number of heteropolymers (matrix polysaccharides), such as arabinoxylans, present along with cellulose in almost all terrestrial plant cell walls. Cellulose is crystalline, strong, and resistant to hydrolysis. Hemicelluloses are branched, shorter in length than cellulose, and also show a propensity to crystallize. They can be hydrolyzed by dilute acid or base as well as a myriad of hemicellulase enzymes.\nComposition.\nDiverse kinds of hemicelluloses are known. Important examples include xylan, glucuronoxylan, arabinoxylan, glucomannan, and xyloglucan.\nHemicelluloses are polysaccharides often associated with cellulose, but with distinct compositions and structures. Whereas cellulose is derived exclusively from glucose, hemicelluloses are composed of diverse sugars, and can include the five-carbon sugars xylose and arabinose, the six-carbon sugars glucose, mannose and galactose, and the six-carbon deoxy sugar fucose. Hemicelluloses contain most of the D-pentose sugars, and occasionally small amounts of L-sugars as well. Xylose is in most cases the sugar monomer present in the largest amount, although in softwoods mannose can be the most abundant sugar. Not only regular sugars can be found in hemicellulose, but also their acidified forms, for instance glucuronic acid can be present.\nStructural comparison to cellulose.\nUnlike cellulose, hemicelluloses consist of shorter chains \u2013 500\u20133,000 sugar units. In contrast, each polymer of cellulose comprises 7,000\u201315,000 glucose molecules. In addition, hemicelluloses may be branched polymers, while cellulose is unbranched. Hemicelluloses are embedded in the cell walls of plants, sometimes in chains that form a 'ground' \u2013 they bind with pectin to cellulose to form a network of cross-linked fibres.\nBased on the structural difference, like backbone linkages and side groups, as well as other factors, like abundance and distributions in plants, hemicelluloses can be categorized into four groups as following: 1) xylans, 2) mannans; 3) mixed linkage \u03b2-glucans; 4) xyloglucans.\nXylans.\nXylans usually consist of a backbone of \u03b2-(1\u21924)-linked xylose residues and can be further divided into homoxylans and heteroxylans. Homoxylans have a backbone of D-xylopyranose residues linked by \u03b2(1\u21924) glycosidic linkages. Homoxylans mainly have structural functions. Heteroxylans such as glucuronoxylans, glucuronoarabinoxylans, and complex heteroxylans, have a backbone of D-xylopyranose and short carbohydrate branches. For example, glucuronoxylan has a substitution with \u03b1-(1\u21922)-linked glucuronosyl and 4-O-methyl glucuronosyl residues. Arabinoxylans and glucuronoarabinoxylans contain arabinose residues attached to the backbone\nMannans.\nThe mannan-type hemicellulose can be classified into two types based on their main chain difference, galactomannans and glucomannans. Galactomannans have only \u03b2-(1\u21924) linked D-mannopyranose residues in linear chains. Glucomannans consist of both \u03b2-(1\u21924) linked D-mannopyranose and \u03b2-(1\u21924) linked D-glucopyranose residues in the main chains. As for the side chains, D-galactopyranose residues tend to be 6-linked to both types as the single side chains with various amount.\nMixed linkage \u03b2-glucans.\nThe conformation of the mixed linkage glucan chains usually contains blocks of \u03b2-(1\u21924) D-Glucopyranose separated by single \u03b2-(1\u21923) D-Glucopyranose. The population of \u03b2-(1\u21924) and \u03b2-(1\u21923) are about 70% and 30%. These glucans primarily consist of cellotriosyl (C18H32O16) and cellotraosyl (C24H42O21)segments in random order. There are some study show the molar ratio of cellotriosyl/cellotraosyl for oat (2.1-2.4), barley (2.8-3.3), and wheat (4.2-4.5).\nXyloglucans.\nXyloglucans have a backbone similar to cellulose with \u03b1-D-xylopyranose residues at position 6. To better describe different side chains, a single letter code notation is used for each side chain type. G -- unbranched Glc residue; X -- \u03b1-d-Xyl-(1\u21926)-Glc. L -- \u03b2-Gal , S -- \u03b1-l-Araf, F-- \u03b1-l-Fuc. These are the most common side chains.\nThe two most common types of xyloglucans in plant cell walls are identified as XXXG and XXGG.\nBiosynthesis.\nHemicelluloses are synthesised from sugar nucleotides in the cell's Golgi apparatus. Two models explain their synthesis: 1) a '2 component model' where modification occurs at two transmembrane proteins, and 2) a '1 component model' where modification occurs only at one transmembrane protein. After synthesis, hemicelluloses are transported to the plasma membrane via Golgi vesicles.\nEach kind of hemicellulose is biosynthesized by specialized enzymes.\nMannan chain backbones are synthesized by cellulose synthase-like protein family A (CSLA) and possibly enzymes in cellulose synthase-like protein family D (CSLD). Mannan synthase, a particular enzyme in CSLA, is responsible for the addition of mannose units to the backbone. The galactose side-chains of some mannans are added by galactomannan galactosyltransferase. Acetylation of mannans is mediated by a mannan O-acetyltransferase, however, this enzyme has not been definitively identified.\nXyloglucan backbone synthesis is mediated by cellulose synthase-like protein family C (CSLC), particularly glucan synthase, which adds glucose units to the chain. Backbone synthesis of xyloglucan is also mediated in some way by xylosyltransferase, but this mechanism is separate to its transferase function and remains unclear. Xylosyltransferase in its transferase function is, however, utilized for the addition of xylose to the side-chain. Other enzymes utilized for side-chain synthesis of xyloglucan include galactosyltransferase (which is responsible for the addition of [galactose and of which two different forms are utilized), fucosyltransferase (which is responsible for the addition of fucose), and acetyltransferase (which is responsible for acetylation).\nXylan backbone synthesis, unlike that of the other hemicelluloses, is not mediated by any cellulose synthase-like proteins. Instead, xylan synthase is responsible for backbone synthesis, facilitating the addition of xylose. Several genes for xylan synthases have been identified. Several other enzymes are utilized for the addition and modification of the side-chain units of xylan, including glucuronosyltransferase (which adds [glucuronic acid units), xylosyltransferase (which adds additional xylose units), arabinosyltransferase (which adds arabinose), methyltransferase (responsible for methylation), and acetyltransferase] (responsible for acetylation). Given that mixed-linkage glucan is a non-branched homopolymer of glucose, there is no side-chain synthesis, only the addition of glucose to the backbone in two linkages, \u03b21-3 and \u03b21-4. Backbone synthesis is mediated by enzymes in cellulose synthase-like protein families F and H (CSLF and CSLH), specifically glucan synthase. Several forms of glucan synthase from CSLF and CSLH have been identified. All of them are responsible for addition of glucose to the backbone and all are capable of producing both \u03b21-3 and \u03b21-4 linkages, however, it is unknown how much each specific enzyme contributes to the distribution of \u03b21-3 and \u03b21-4 linkages.\nApplications.\nIn the sulfite pulp process, hemicellulose is largely hydrolysed by the acid pulping liquor ending up in the brown liquor where the fermentable hexose sugars (around 2%) can be used for producing ethanol. This process was primarily applied to calcium sulfite brown liquors.\nThe films based on xylan show low oxygen permeability and thus are of potential interest as packaging for oxygen-sensitive products.\nMixed-linkage glucans (industrially known as '\u03b2-glucans') have an important role in food supplements, while they also show promise in treating health-related issues, especially in immune reactions and the treatment of cancer.\n Various (gluco/galacto)mannans such as konjac, locust bean gum, and guar gum, are frequently used as food additives, where they act as thickeners, stabilisers, and emulsifiers.\nHemicellulose is also abundantly found in cereal hull/husk, bran, and straw. A number of proposed processes aim to break it down into the above-mentioned parts for utilization.\nNatural functions.\nAs a polysaccharide compound in plant cell walls similar to cellulose, hemicellulose helps cellulose in the strengthening of plant cell walls. Hemicellulose interacts with the cellulose by providing cross-linking of cellulose microfibrils: hemicellulose will search for voids in the cell wall during its formation and provide support around cellulose fibrils in order to equip the cell wall with the maximum possible strength it can provide. Hemicellulose dominates the middle lamella of the plant cell, unlike cellulose which is primarily found in the secondary layers. This allows for hemicellulose to provide middle-ground support for the cellulose on the outer layers of the plant cell. In few cell walls, hemicellulose will also interact with lignin to provide structural tissue support of more vascular plants.\nExtraction.\nThere are many ways to obtain hemicellulose; all of these rely on extraction methods through hardwood or softwood trees milled into smaller samples. In hardwoods the main hemicellulose extract is glucuronoxlyan (acetylated xylans), while galactoglucomannan is found in softwoods. Prior to extraction the wood typically must be milled into wood chips of various sizes depending on the reactor used. Following this, a hot water extraction process, also known as autohydrolysis or hydrothermal treatment, is utilized with the addition of acids and bases to change the yield size and properties. The main advantage to hot water extraction is that it offers a method where the only chemical that is needed is water, making this environmentally friendly and cheap.\nThe goal of hot water treatment is to remove as much hemicellulose from the wood as possible. This is done through the hydrolysis of the hemicellulose to achieve smaller oligomers and xylose. Xylose when dehydrated becomes furfural. When xylose and furfural are the goal, acid catalysts, such as formic acid, are added to increase the transition of polysaccharide to monosaccharides. This catalyst also has been shown to also utilize a solvent effect to be aid the reaction.\nOne method of pretreatment is to soak the wood with diluted acids (with concentrations around 4%). This converts the hemicellulose into monosaccharides. When pretreatment is done with bases (for instance sodium or potassium hydroxide) this destroys the structure of the lignin. This changes the structure from crystalline to amorphous. Hydrothermal pretreatment is another method. This offers advantages such as no toxic or corrosive solvents are needed, nor are special reactors, and no extra costs to dispose of hazardous chemicals.\nThe hot water extraction process is done in batch reactors, semi-continuous reactors, or slurry continuous reactors. For batch and semi-continuous reactors wood samples can be used in conditions such as chips or pellets while a slurry reactor must have particles as small as 200 to 300 micrometers. While the particle size decreases the yield production decreases as well. This is due to the increase of cellulose.\nThe hot water process is operated at a temperature range of 160 to 240 degrees Celsius in order to maintain the liquid phase. This is done above the normal boiling point of water to increase the solubilization of the hemicellulose and the depolymerization of polysaccharides. This process can take several minutes to several hours depending on the temperature and pH of the system. Higher temperatures paired with higher extraction times lead to higher yields. A maximum yield is obtained at a pH of 3.5. If below, the extraction yield exponentially decreases. In order to control pH, sodium bicarbonate is generally added. The sodium bicarbonate inhibits the autolysis of acetyl groups as well as inhibiting glycosyl bonds. Depending on the temperature and time the hemicellulose can be further converted into oligomers, monomers and lignin.\nSolid bits of wood remain after autohydrolysis, as the lignin is largely untouched. A proper degree of autohydrolysis can preserve the lignin well enough to be used for paper production. This is useful for the Kraft process, which normally does not recover wood hemicellulose into useful products.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14010", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14010", "title": "Hillbillies", "text": ""}
{"id": "14011", "revid": "326639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14011", "title": "Hillbilly", "text": "Stereotype of some rural Americans\nHillbilly is a term historically used for White people who dwell in rural, mountainous areas in the United States, primarily in the Appalachian region and Ozarks. As people migrated out of the region during the Great Depression, the term spread northward and westward with them.\nThe usage of the term \"hillbilly\" as a descriptor receives mixed perceptions, often in part due to the nature in which it is used. It may be used in in-groups as a point of pride, while others consider its usage derogatory, especially when used as an insult, forming part of a type of discrimination against people from rural areas.\nThe first known instances of \"hillbilly\" in print were in \"The Railroad Trainmen's Journal\" (vol. ix, July 1892), an 1899 photograph of men and women in West Virginia labeled \"Camp Hillbilly\", and a 1900 \"New York Journal\" article containing the definition: \"a Hill-Billie is a free and untrammeled white citizen of Alabama, who lives in the hills, has no means to speak of, dresses as he can, talks as he pleases, drinks whiskey when he gets it, and fires off his revolver as the fancy takes him.\" The stereotype is twofold in that it incorporates both positive and negative traits: \"Hillbillies\" are often considered independent and self-reliant individuals who resist the modernization of society but, at the same time, they are also defined as uneducated, backward and violent. Scholars argue this duality is reflective of the split ethnic identities in white America. The term's later usage extended beyond solely white communities, exemplified with the \"Hispanic hillbillies of northern New Mexico\", in reference to the Hispanos of New Mexico.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"hillbilly\" is Scottish in origin but is not derived from its dialect. In Scotland, the term \"hill-folk\" referred to people who preferred isolation from the greater society, and \"billy\" meant \"comrade\" or \"companion\". The words \"hill-folk\" and \"Billie\" were combined and applied to the Cameronians who followed the teachings of a militant Presbyterian named Richard Cameron. These Scottish Covenanters fled to the hills of southern Scotland in the late 17th century to avoid persecution for their religious beliefs.\nMany of the early settlers of the Thirteen Colonies were from Scotland and Ulster, and were followers of William of Orange, the Protestant king of England, Ireland and Scotland. In 17th century Ireland, during the Williamite War, Protestant supporters of William III (\"King Billy\") were referred to as \"Billy's Boys\" because 'Billy' is a diminutive of 'William' (common across both Britain and Ireland). In time the term hillbilly became synonymous with the Williamites who settled in the hills of North America.\nSome scholars disagree with this theory. Michael Montgomery's \"From Ulster to America: The Scotch-Irish Heritage of American English\" states, \"In Ulster in recent years it has sometimes been supposed that [hillbilly] was coined to refer to followers of King William III and brought to America by early Ulster emigrants, but this derivation is almost certainly incorrect. ... In America \"hillbilly\" was first attested only in 1898, which suggests a later, independent development.\"\nHistory.\nThe Appalachian Mountains were settled in the 18th century by settlers primarily from England, lowland Scotland, and the province of Ulster in Ireland. The settlers from Ulster were mainly Protestants who migrated to Ireland from Lowland Scotland and Northern England during the Plantation of Ulster in the 17th century. Many further migrated to the American colonies beginning in the 1730s, and in America became known as the Scots-Irish although this term is inaccurate as they were also of Northern English descent.\nThe term \"hillbilly\" spread in the years following the American Civil War. At this time, the country was developing both technologically and socially, but the Appalachian region was falling behind. Before the war, Appalachia was not distinctively different from other rural areas of the country. Post-war, although the frontier pushed farther west, the region retained frontier characteristics. The Appalachian people were perceived as backward, quick to violence, and inbred in their isolation. Fueled by news stories of mountain feuds such as that in the 1880s between the Hatfields and McCoys, the hillbilly stereotype developed in the late 19th to early 20th century.\nThe term \"hillbilly\" was used by members of the Planter's Protection Association, a tobacco farmers union that formed in the Black Patch region of Kentucky, to refer to non-union scab farmers who did not join the organization.\nThe \"classic\" hillbilly stereotype reached its current characterization during the years of the Great Depression. The period of Appalachian out-migration, roughly from the 1930s through the 1950s, saw many mountain residents moving north to the Midwestern industrial cities of Chicago, Cleveland, Akron, and Detroit.\nThis movement to Northern society, which became known as the \"Hillbilly Highway\", brought these previously isolated communities into mainstream United States culture. In response, poor white mountaineers became central characters in newspapers, pamphlets, and eventually, motion pictures. Authors at the time were inspired by historical figures such as Davy Crockett and Daniel Boone. The mountaineer image transferred over to the 20th century where the \"hillbilly\" stereotype emerged.\nIn popular culture.\nPop culture has perpetuated the \"hillbilly\" stereotype. Scholarly works suggest that the media has exploited both the Appalachian region and people by classifying them as \"hillbillies\". These generalizations do not match the cultural experiences of Appalachians. Appalachians, like many other groups, do not subscribe to a single identity. One of the issues associated with stereotyping is that it is profitable. When \"hillbilly\" became a widely used term, entrepreneurs saw a window for potential revenue. They \"recycled\" the image and brought it to life through various forms of media.\nThe comics portrayed hillbilly stereotypes, notably in two strips, \"Li'l Abner\" and \"Snuffy Smith\". Both characters were introduced in 1934.\n\"\" (2016) is a memoir by JD Vance about the Appalachian values of his upbringing and their relationship to the social problems of his hometown, Middletown, Ohio. The book topped \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list in August 2016.\nA family of \"Hill People\", who are employed as migrant workers on a farm in 1952 Arkansas, have a major role in John Grisham's book \"A Painted House\", with Grisham trying to avoid stereotypes.\nFilm and television.\nTelevision and film have portrayed \"hillbillies\" in both derogatory and sympathetic terms. Films such as \"Sergeant York\" or the Ma and Pa Kettle series portrayed the \"hillbilly\" as wild but good-natured. Television programs of the 1960s such as \"The Real McCoys\", \"The Andy Griffith Show\", and especially \"The Beverly Hillbillies\", portrayed the \"hillbilly\" as backwards but with enough wisdom to outwit more sophisticated city folk. \"Gunsmoke\"'s Festus Haggen was portrayed as intelligent and quick-witted (but lacking \"education\").\nThe popular 1970s television variety show \"Hee Haw\" regularly lampooned the stereotypical \"hillbilly\" lifestyle. A darker negative image of the hillbilly was introduced to another generation in the film \"Deliverance\" (1972), based on a novel of the same name by James Dickey, which depicted some \"hillbillies\" as genetically deficient, inbred, and murderous.\n\"The Texas Chainsaw Massacre\" and its sequels has Leatherface and his family, the Sawyers, portray a particularly violent \"Hillbilly\" stereotype that is common in horror films. The Texas Chainsaw Massacre movie series is thought to have paved\u00a0the\u00a0way\u00a0for\u00a0the countless\u00a0horror\u00a0films featuring deranged\u00a0and\u00a0often cannibalistic\u00a0\"Hillbillies\" that\u00a0have since\u00a0become\u00a0a\u00a0staple\u00a0of\u00a0the horror genre.\nSimilar \"evil hillbilly people\"-type have also been seen in a more comical light in the 1988 horror film \"The Moonlight Sonata\", but the 2010 horror comedy film \"Tucker &amp; Dale vs. Evil\" even parodies hillbilly stereotyping. More recently, the TV series \"Justified\" (2010\u20132015) was centered around deputy U. S. Marshal Raylan Givens who was reassigned to his hometown in Harlan, Kentucky where he was in conflict with Boyd Crowder, a drug dealer who had grown up with Raylan. The show's plots often included \"hillbilly\" tropes such as dimwitted and easily manipulated men, use of homemade drugs, and snake-handling revivalists.\n\"Hillbillies\" became a frequent gimmick in professional wrestling, usually portrayed as simple but amiable fan favourites. An early example of this character was Whiskers Savage (born Edward Civil, 1899\u20131967) who was promoted as a \"bumpkin\" persona as early as 1928. During the 1960s and 1970s, two superheavyweight wrestlers (and frequent tag team partners) Haystacks Calhoun and Man Mountain Mike both portrayed \"country boys\" in overalls and carrying lucky horseshoes. In the WWF in the 1980s, Hillbilly Jim, depicted as a proteg\u00e9 of Hulk Hogan, led a faction of \"hillbillies\" including Uncle Elmer, Cousin Luke and Cousin Junior.\n\"Hillbillies\" were at the center of reality television in the 21st century. Network television shows such as \"The Real Beverly Hillbillies\", \"High Life\", and \"The Simple Life\" displayed the \"hillbilly\" lifestyle for viewers in the United States. This sparked protests across the country with rural-minded individuals gathering to fight the stereotype. The Center for Rural Strategies started a nationwide campaign stating the stereotype was \"politically incorrect\". The Kentucky-based organization engaged political figures in the movement such as Robert Byrd and Mike Huckabee. Both protestors argued that the discrimination of any other group in United States would not be tolerated, so neither should the discrimination against rural U.S. citizens. A 2003 piece published by \"The Cincinnati Enquirer\" read, \"In this day of hypersensitivity to diversity and political correctness, Appalachians have been a group that it is still socially acceptable to demean and joke about... But rural folks have spoken up and said 'enough' to the Hollywood mockers.\"\nMusic.\n\"Hillbilly music\" was at one time considered an acceptable label for what is now known as country music. The label, coined in 1925 by country pianist Al Hopkins, persisted until the 1950s.\nThe \"hillbilly music\" categorization covers a wide variety of musical genres including bluegrass, country, western, and gospel. Appalachian folk song existed long before the \"hillbilly\" label. When the commercial industry was combined with \"traditional Appalachian folksong\", \"hillbilly music\" was formed. Some argue this is a \"High Culture\" issue where sophisticated individuals may see something considered \"unsophisticated\" as \"trash\".\nIn the early-20th century, artists began to utilize the \"hillbilly\" label. The term gained momentum due to Ralph Peer, the recording director of OKeh Records, who heard it being used among Southerners when he went down to Virginia to record the music and labeled all Southern country music as so from then on. The York Brothers entitled one of their songs \"Hillbilly Rose\" and the Delmore Brothers followed with their song \"Hillbilly Boogie\". In 1927, the Gennett studios in Richmond, Indiana, made a recording of black fiddler Jim Booker. The recordings were labeled \"made for Hillbilly\" in the Gennett files and were marketed to a white audience. Columbia Records had much success with the \"Hill Billies\" featuring Al Hopkins and Fiddlin' Charlie Bowman.\nBy the late-1940s, radio stations started to use the \"hillbilly music\" label. Originally, \"hillbilly\" was used to describe fiddlers and string bands, but now it was used to describe traditional Appalachian music. Appalachians had never used this term to describe their own music. Popular songs whose style bore characteristics of both hillbilly and African American music were referred to as \"hillbilly boogie\" and \"rockabilly\". Elvis Presley was a prominent player of rockabilly and was known early in his career as the \"Hillbilly Cat\".\nWhen the Country Music Association was founded in 1958, the term \"hillbilly music\" gradually fell out of use. The music industry merged hillbilly music, Western swing, and Cowboy music, to form the current category C&amp;W, Country and Western.\nSome artists (notably Hank Williams) and fans were offended by the \"hillbilly music\" label. While the term is not used as frequently today, it is still used on occasion to refer to old-time music or bluegrass. For example, WHRB broadcasts a popular weekly radio show entitled \"Hillbilly at Harvard\". The show is devoted to playing a mix of old-time music, bluegrass, and traditional country and western.\nVideo games.\nMany video games feature plots, subplots or characters that utilize the Hillbilly stereotype for narrative purposes and cultural signifiers. Some notable examples of this include the \"Silent Hill\" video game series, \"Fallout 3\", \"Fallout 76\", \"Dead by Daylight\", \"Grand Theft Auto V\", \"Red Dead Redemption 2\", and \"\".\nCultural implications.\nThe hillbilly stereotype is considered to have had a traumatizing effect on some in the Appalachian region. Feelings of shame, self-hatred, and detachment are cited as a result of \"culturally transmitted traumatic stress syndrome\". Appalachian scholars say that the large-scale stereotyping has rewritten Appalachian history, making Appalachians feel particularly vulnerable. \"Hillbilly\" has now become part of Appalachian identity and some Appalachians feel they are constantly defending themselves against this image.\nThe stereotyping also has political implications for the region. There is a sense of \"perceived history\" that prevents many political issues from receiving adequate attention. Appalachians are often blamed for economic struggles. \"Moonshiners, welfare cheats, and coal miners\" are stereotypes stemming from the greater hillbilly stereotype in the region. This prejudice has been said to serve as a barrier for addressing some serious issues such as the economy and the environment.\nDespite the political and social difficulties associated with stereotyping, Appalachians have organized to enact change. The war on poverty is sometimes considered to be an example of one effort that allowed for Appalachian community organization. Grassroots movements, protests, and strikes are common in the area, though not always successful.\nIntragroup versus intergroup usage.\nThe Springfield, Missouri Chamber of Commerce once presented dignitaries visiting the city with an \"Ozark Hillbilly Medallion\" and a certificate proclaiming the honoree a \"hillbilly of the Ozarks\". On June 7, 1952, President Harry S. Truman received the medallion after a breakfast speech at the Shrine Mosque for the 35th Division Association. Other recipients included US Army generals Omar Bradley and Matthew Ridgway, J. C. Penney, Johnny Olson, and Ralph Story.\nHillbilly Days is an annual festival held in mid-April in Pikeville, Kentucky celebrating the best of Appalachian culture. The event began by local Shriners as a fundraiser to support the Shriners Children's Hospital. It has grown since its beginning in 1976 and now is the second largest festival held in the state of Kentucky. Artists and craftspeople showcase their talents and sell their works on display. Nationally renowned musicians as well as the best of the regional mountain musicians share six different stages located throughout the downtown area of Pikeville. Aspiring hillbillies from across the nation compete to come up with the wildest Hillbilly outfit. The event has earned its name as the Mardi Gras of the Mountains. Fans of \"mountain music\" come from around the United States to hear this annual concentrated gathering of talent.\nThe term \"Hillbilly\" has been used with pride by a number of people within the region as well as famous persons, such as singer Dolly Parton, chef Sean Brock, and comedian Minnie Pearl. Positive self-identification with the term generally includes identification with a set of \"hillbilly values\" including love and respect for nature, strong work ethic, generosity toward neighbors and those in need, family ties, self-reliance, resiliency, and a simple lifestyle.\nHowever, the term has also been used repeatedly by outsiders to systematically denigrate Appalachian natives and other rural people. To many native Appalachians, an outsider calling them \"hillbilly\" is highly offensive and the term is one of the oldest epithets in use in the United States.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14012", "revid": "41625025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14012", "title": "Host", "text": "A host is a person responsible for guests at an event or for providing hospitality during it.\nHost may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "14013", "revid": "7652558", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14013", "title": "Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s", "text": "Spanish conquistador (1485\u20131547)\nHern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s de Monroy y Pizarro Altamirano, 1st Marquis of the Valley of Oaxaca (December 1485 \u2013 2 December 1547) was a Spanish \"conquistador\" who led an expedition that caused the fall of the Aztec Empire and brought large portions of what is now mainland Mexico under the rule of the King of Castile in the early 16th century. Cort\u00e9s was part of the generation of Spanish explorers and conquistadors who began the first phase of the Spanish colonization of the Americas.\nBorn in Medell\u00edn, Spain, to a family of lesser nobility, Cort\u00e9s chose to pursue adventure and riches in the New World. He went to Hispaniola and later to Cuba, where he received an \"encomienda\" (the right to the labour of certain subjects). For a short time, he served as \"alcalde\" (magistrate) of the second Spanish town founded on the island. In 1519, he was elected captain of the third expedition to the mainland, which he partly funded. His enmity with the governor of Cuba, Diego Vel\u00e1zquez de Cu\u00e9llar, resulted in the recall of the expedition at the last moment, an order which Cort\u00e9s ignored.\nArriving on the continent, Cort\u00e9s executed a successful strategy of allying with some indigenous people against others. He also used a native woman, Do\u00f1a Marina, as an interpreter. She later gave birth to his first son. When the governor of Cuba sent emissaries to arrest Cort\u00e9s, he fought them and won, using the extra troops as reinforcements. Cort\u00e9s wrote letters directly to the king asking to be acknowledged for his successes instead of being punished for mutiny. After he overthrew the Aztec Empire, Cort\u00e9s was awarded the title of \"marqu\u00e9s del Valle de Oaxaca\", while the more prestigious title of viceroy was given to a high-ranking nobleman, Antonio de Mendoza. In 1541, Cort\u00e9s returned to Spain, where he died six years later of natural causes.\nName.\nCort\u00e9s himself used the form \"Hernando\" or \"Fernando\" for his first name, as seen in the contemporary archive documents, his signature and the title of an early portrait. William Hickling Prescott's \"Conquest of Mexico\" (1843) also refers to him as Hernando Cort\u00e9s. At some point, writers began using the shortened form of \"Hern\u00e1n\" more generally.\nPhysical appearance.\nIn addition to the illustration by the German artist Christoph Weiditz in his \"Trachtenbuch\", there are three known portraits of Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s which were likely made during his lifetime, though only copies of them have survived. All of these portraits show Cort\u00e9s in the later years of his life. The account of the conquest of the Aztec Empire written by Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo, gives a detailed description of Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s's physical appearance:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He was of good stature and body, well proportioned and stocky, the color of his face was somewhat grey, not very cheerful, and a longer face would have suited him more. His eyes seemed at times loving and at times grave and serious. His beard was black and sparse, as was his hair, which at the time he sported in the same way as his beard. He had a high chest, a well shaped back and was lean with little belly.\u2014\u200a\nEarly life.\nCort\u00e9s was born in 1485 in the town of Medell\u00edn, then a village in the Kingdom of Castile, now a municipality of the modern-day province of Badajoz in Extremadura, Spain. His father, Mart\u00edn Cort\u00e9s de Monroy, born in 1449 to Rodrigo or Ruy Fern\u00e1ndez de Monroy and his wife Mar\u00eda Cort\u00e9s, was an infantry captain of distinguished ancestry but slender means. Hern\u00e1n's mother was Catal\u00edna Pizarro Altamirano.\nThrough his mother, Hern\u00e1n was a second cousin once removed of Francisco Pizarro, who later conquered the Inca Empire of modern-day Peru (and not to be confused with another Francisco Pizarro, who joined Cort\u00e9s to conquer the Aztecs). Cort\u00e9s' maternal grandmother, Leonor S\u00e1nchez Pizarro Altamirano, was a first cousin of Pizarro's father, Gonzalo Pizarro y Rodriguez. Through his father, Hern\u00e1n was related to Nicol\u00e1s de Ovando, the third governor of Hispaniola. His paternal great-grandfather was Rodrigo de Monroy y Almaraz, 5th Lord of Monroy.\nAccording to his biographer and chaplain, Francisco L\u00f3pez de G\u00f3mara, Cort\u00e9s was pale and sickly as a child. At the age of 14, he was sent to study Latin under an uncle in Salamanca. Later historians have misconstrued this personal tutoring as time spent enrolled at the University of Salamanca.\nAfter two years, Cort\u00e9s returned home to Medell\u00edn, much to the irritation of his parents, who had hoped to see him equipped for a profitable legal career. However, those two years in Salamanca, plus his long period of training and experience as a notary, first in Valladolid and later in Hispaniola, gave him knowledge of the legal codes of Castile that he applied to help justify his unauthorized conquest of Mexico.\nAt this point in his life, Cort\u00e9s was described by G\u00f3mara as ruthless, haughty, and mischievous. The 16-year-old youth had returned home to feel constrained by life in his small provincial town. By this time, news of the exciting discoveries of Christopher Columbus in the New World was streaming back to Spain.\nEarly career in the New World.\nPlans were made for Cort\u00e9s to sail to the Americas with a family acquaintance and distant relative, Nicol\u00e1s de Ovando, the newly appointed Governor of Hispaniola. (This island is now divided between Haiti and the Dominican Republic). Cort\u00e9s suffered an injury and was prevented from travelling. He spent the next year wandering the country, probably spending most of his time in Spain's southern ports of C\u00e1diz, Palos, Sanlucar, and Seville. He finally left for Hispaniola in 1504 and became a colonist.\nArrival.\nCort\u00e9s reached Hispaniola in a ship commanded by Alonso Quintero, who tried to deceive his superiors and reach the New World before them in order to secure personal advantages. Quintero's mutinous conduct may have served as a model for Cort\u00e9s in his subsequent career.\nUpon his arrival in 1504 in Santo Domingo, the capital of Hispaniola, the 18-year-old Cort\u00e9s registered as a citizen; this entitled him to a building plot and land to farm. Soon afterwards, Governor Nicol\u00e1s de Ovando granted him an \"encomienda\" and appointed him as a notary of the town of Azua de Compostela. His next five years seemed to help establish him in the colony; in 1506, Cort\u00e9s took part in the conquests of Hispaniola and Cuba. The expedition leader awarded him a large estate of land and Ta\u00edno slaves for his efforts.\nCuba (1511\u20131519).\nIn 1511, Cort\u00e9s accompanied Diego Vel\u00e1zquez de Cu\u00e9llar, an aide of the Governor of Hispaniola, in his expedition to conquer Cuba. Afterwards, Vel\u00e1zquez was appointed Governor of Cuba. At the age of 26, Cort\u00e9s was made clerk to the treasurer with the responsibility of ensuring that the Crown received the \"quinto\", or customary one-fifth of the profits from the expedition.\nVel\u00e1zquez was so impressed with Cort\u00e9s that he secured a high political position for him in the colony. He became secretary for Governor Vel\u00e1zquez. Cort\u00e9s was twice appointed municipal magistrate (\"alcalde\") of Santiago. In Cuba, Cort\u00e9s became a man of substance with an \"encomienda\" to provide Indian labour for his mines and cattle. This new position of power also made him the new source of leadership, which opposing forces in the colony could then turn to. In 1514, Cort\u00e9s led a group which demanded that more Indians be assigned to the settlers.\nAs time went on, relations between Cort\u00e9s and Governor Vel\u00e1zquez became strained. Cort\u00e9s found time to become romantically involved with Catalina Xu\u00e1rez (or Ju\u00e1rez), the sister-in-law of Governor Vel\u00e1zquez. Part of Vel\u00e1zquez's displeasure seems to have been based on a belief that Cort\u00e9s was trifling with Catalina's affections. Cort\u00e9s was temporarily distracted by one of Catalina's sisters, but finally married Catalina, reluctantly, under pressure from Governor Vel\u00e1zquez. However, by doing so, he hoped to secure the goodwill of both her family and that of Vel\u00e1zquez.\nIt was not until he had been almost 15 years in the Indies that Cort\u00e9s began to look beyond his substantial status as mayor of the capital of Cuba and as a man of affairs in the thriving colony. He missed the first two expeditions, under the orders of Francisco Hern\u00e1ndez de C\u00f3rdoba and then Juan de Grijalva, sent by Diego Vel\u00e1zquez to Mexico in 1518. News reached Vel\u00e1zquez that Juan de Grijalva had established a colony on the mainland where there was a bonanza of silver and gold, and Vel\u00e1zquez decided to send him help. Cort\u00e9s was appointed captain-general of this new expedition in October 1518, but was advised to move fast before Vel\u00e1zquez changed his mind.\nWith Cort\u00e9s's experience as an administrator, knowledge gained from many failed expeditions, and his impeccable rhetoric, he was able to gather six ships and 300 men within a month. Vel\u00e1zquez's jealousy exploded and he decided to put the expedition in other hands. However, Cort\u00e9s quickly gathered more men and ships in other Cuban ports.\nConquest of Aztec Empire (1519\u20131521).\nIn 1518, Vel\u00e1zquez put Cort\u00e9s in command of an expedition to explore and secure the interior of Mexico for colonization. At the last minute, due to the old argument between the two, Vel\u00e1zquez changed his mind and revoked Cort\u00e9s's charter. Cort\u00e9s ignored the orders and, in an act of open mutiny, went anyway in February 1519. He stopped in Trinidad, Cuba, to hire more soldiers and obtain more horses. Accompanied by about 11 ships, 500 men (including seasoned slaves), 13 horses, and a small number of cannon, Cort\u00e9s landed on the Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula in Maya territory. There he encountered Geronimo de Aguilar, a Spanish Franciscan priest who had survived a shipwreck followed by a period in captivity with the Maya, before escaping. Aguilar had learned the Chontal Maya language and was able to translate for Cort\u00e9s.\nCort\u00e9s's military experience was almost nonexistent, but he proved to be an effective leader of his small army and won early victories over the coastal Indians. In March 1519, Cort\u00e9s formally claimed the land for the Spanish crown. Then he proceeded to Tabasco, where he met with resistance and won a battle against the natives. He received twenty young indigenous women from the vanquished natives, and he converted them all to Christianity.\nAmong these women was La Malinche, his future mistress and mother of his son Mart\u00edn. Malinche knew both the Nahuatl language and Chontal Maya, thus enabling Cort\u00e9s to communicate with the Aztecs through Aguilar. At San Juan de Ul\u00faa on Easter Sunday 1519, Cort\u00e9s met with Moctezuma II's Aztec Empire governors Tendile and Pitalpitoque.\nIn July 1519, his men took over Veracruz. By this act, Cort\u00e9s dismissed the authority of the governor of Cuba to place himself directly under the orders of King Charles. To eliminate any ideas of retreat, Cort\u00e9s scuttled his ships.\nMarch on Tenochtitl\u00e1n.\nIn Veracruz, he met some of the tributaries of the Aztecs and asked them to arrange a meeting with Moctezuma II, the \"tlatoani\" (ruler) of the Aztec Empire. Moctezuma repeatedly turned down the meeting, but Cort\u00e9s was determined. Leaving a hundred men in Veracruz, Cort\u00e9s marched on Tenochtitl\u00e1n in mid-August 1519, along with 600 soldiers, 15 horsemen, 15 cannons, and hundreds of indigenous carriers and warriors.\nOn the way to Tenochtitl\u00e1n, Cort\u00e9s made alliances with indigenous peoples such as the Totonacs of Cempoala and the Nahuas of Tlaxcala. The Otomis initially, and then the Tlaxcalans clashed with the Spanish in a series of three battles from 2 to 5 September 1519, and at one point, Diaz remarked, \"they surrounded us on every side\". After Cort\u00e9s continued to release prisoners with messages of peace, and realizing the Spanish were enemies of Moctezuma, Xicotencatl the Elder and Maxixcatzin persuaded the Tlaxcalan warleader, Xicotencatl the Younger, that it would be better to ally with the newcomers than to kill them.\nIn October 1519, Cort\u00e9s and his men, accompanied by about 1,000 Tlaxcalteca, marched to Cholula, the second-largest city in central Mexico. Cort\u00e9s, either in a pre-meditated effort to instill fear upon the Aztecs waiting for him at Tenochtitlan or (as he later claimed, when he was being investigated) wishing to make an example when he feared native treachery, massacred thousands of unarmed members of the nobility gathered at the central plaza, then partially burned the city.\nBy the time he arrived in Tenochtitl\u00e1n, the Spaniards had a large army. On November 8, 1519, they were peacefully received by Moctezuma II. Moctezuma deliberately let Cort\u00e9s enter the Aztec capital, the island city of Tenochtitl\u00e1n, hoping to get to know their weaknesses better and to crush them later.\nMoctezuma gave lavish gifts of gold to the Spaniards, which, rather than placating them, excited their ambitions for plunder. In his letters to King Charles, Cort\u00e9s claimed to have learned at this point that he was considered by the Aztecs to be either an emissary of the feathered serpent god Quetzalcoatl or Quetzalcoatl himself\u2014a belief which has been contested by a few modern historians. But quickly Cort\u00e9s learned that several Spaniards on the coast had been killed by Aztecs while supporting the Totonacs, and decided to take Moctezuma as a hostage in his palace, indirectly ruling Tenochtitl\u00e1n through him.\nMeanwhile, Vel\u00e1zquez sent another expedition, led by P\u00e1nfilo de Narv\u00e1ez, to oppose Cort\u00e9s, arriving in Mexico in April 1520 with 1,100 men. Cort\u00e9s left 200 men in Tenochtitl\u00e1n and took the rest to confront Narv\u00e1ez. He overcame Narv\u00e1ez, despite his numerical inferiority, and convinced the rest of Narv\u00e1ez's men to join him. In Mexico, one of Cort\u00e9s's lieutenants Pedro de Alvarado, committed the \"massacre in the Great Temple\", triggering a local rebellion.\nCort\u00e9s speedily returned to Tenochtitl\u00e1n. On 1 July 1520, Moctezuma was killed (he was stoned to death by his own people, as reported in Spanish accounts; although some claim he was murdered by the Spaniards once they realized his inability to placate the locals). Faced with a hostile population, Cort\u00e9s decided to flee to Tlaxcala. During the \"Noche Triste\" (30 June \u2013 1 July 1520), the Spaniards managed a narrow escape from Tenochtitl\u00e1n across the Tlacopan causeway, while their rearguard was being massacred. Much of the treasure looted by Cort\u00e9s was lost (as well as his artillery) during this panicked escape from Tenochtitl\u00e1n.\nDestruction of Tenochtitl\u00e1n.\nAfter a battle in Otumba, they managed to reach Tlaxcala, having lost 870 men. With the assistance of their allies, Cort\u00e9s's men finally prevailed, with reinforcements arriving from Cuba. Cort\u00e9s began a policy of attrition towards Tenochtitl\u00e1n, cutting off supplies and subduing the Aztecs' allied cities. During the siege, he would construct brigantines in the lake and slowly destroy blocks of the city to avoid fighting in an urban setting. The Mexicas would fall back to Tlatelolco and even succeed in ambushing the pursuing Spanish forces, inflicting heavy losses, but would ultimately be the last portion of the island that resisted the conquistadores. The siege of Tenochtitlan ended with Spanish victory and the destruction of the city.\nIn January 1521, Cort\u00e9s countered a conspiracy against him, headed by Antonio de Villafana, who was hanged for the offence. Finally, with the capture of Cuauht\u00e9moc, the \"tlatoani\" (ruler) of Tenochtitl\u00e1n, on 13 August 1521, the Aztec Empire was captured, and Cort\u00e9s was able to claim it for Spain, thus renaming the city Mexico City. From 1521 to 1524, Cort\u00e9s personally governed Mexico.\nAppointment to the governorship of New Spain and internal dissensions.\nMany historical sources have conveyed an impression that Cort\u00e9s was unjustly treated by the Spanish Crown, and that he received nothing but ingratitude for his role in establishing New Spain. This picture is the one Cort\u00e9s presents in his letters and in the later biography written by Francisco L\u00f3pez de G\u00f3mara. However, there may be more to the picture than this. Cort\u00e9s's own sense of accomplishment, entitlement, and vanity may have played a part in his deteriorating position with the king:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Cort\u00e9s personally was not ungenerously rewarded, but he speedily complained of insufficient compensation to himself and his comrades. Thinking himself beyond the reach of restraint, he disobeyed many of the orders of the Crown, and, what was more imprudent, said so in a letter to the emperor, dated October 15, 1524 (Ycazbalceta, \"Documentos para la Historia de M\u00e9xico\", Mexico, 1858, I). In this letter, Cort\u00e9s, besides recalling in a rather abrupt manner that the conquest of Mexico was due to him alone, deliberately acknowledges his disobedience in terms which could not fail to create a most unfavourable impression.\nKing Charles appointed Cort\u00e9s as governor, captain general and chief justice of the newly conquered territory, dubbed \"New Spain of the Ocean Sea\". But also, much to the dismay of Cort\u00e9s, four royal officials were appointed at the same time to assist him in his governing\u2014in effect, submitting him to close observation and administration. Cort\u00e9s initiated the construction of Mexico City, destroying Aztec temples and buildings and then rebuilding on the Aztec ruins what soon became the most important European city in the Americas.\nCort\u00e9s managed the founding of new cities and appointed men to extend Spanish rule to all of New Spain, imposing the \"encomienda\" system in 1524. He reserved many encomiendas for himself and for his retinue, which they considered just rewards for their accomplishment in conquering central Mexico. However, later arrivals and members of factions antipathetic to Cort\u00e9s complained of the favouritism that excluded them.\nIn 1523, the Crown (possibly influenced by Cort\u00e9s's enemy, Bishop Fonseca), sent a military force under the command of Francisco de Garay to conquer and settle the northern part of Mexico, the region of P\u00e1nuco. This was another setback for Cort\u00e9s, who mentioned this in his fourth letter to the King in which he describes himself as the victim of a conspiracy by his archenemies Diego Vel\u00e1zquez de Cu\u00e9llar, Diego Columbus and Bishop Fonseca as well as Francisco Garay. The influence of Garay was effectively stopped by this appeal to the King, who sent out a decree forbidding Garay to interfere in the politics of New Spain, causing him to give up without a fight.\nRoyal grant of arms (1525).\nAlthough Cort\u00e9s had flouted the authority of Diego Vel\u00e1zquez in sailing to the mainland and then leading an expedition of conquest, Cort\u00e9s's spectacular success was rewarded by the crown with a coat of arms, a mark of high honour, following the conqueror's request. The document granting the coat of arms summarizes Cort\u00e9s's accomplishments in the conquest of Mexico. The proclamation of the king says in part:\nWe, respecting the many labors, dangers, and adventures which you underwent as stated above, and so that there might remain a perpetual memorial of you and your services and that you and your descendants might be more fully honored ... it is our will that besides your coat of arms of your lineage, which you have, you may have and bear as your coat of arms, known and recognized, a shield ...\nThe grant specifies the iconography of the coat of arms, the central portion divided into quadrants. In the upper portion, there is a \"black eagle with two heads on a white field, which are the arms of the empire\". Below that is a \"golden lion on a red field, in memory of the fact that you, the said Hernando Cort\u00e9s, by your industry and effort brought matters to the state described above\" (i.e., the conquest). The specificity of the other two quadrants is linked directly to Mexico, with one quadrant showing three crowns representing the three Aztec emperors of the conquest era, Moctezuma, Cuitlahuac, and Cuauhtemoc and the other showing the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan. Encircling the central shield are symbols of the seven city-states around the lake and their lords that Cort\u00e9s defeated, with the lords \"to be shown as prisoners bound with a chain which shall be closed with a lock beneath the shield\".\nDeath of his first wife and remarriage.\nCort\u00e9s's wife, Catalina S\u00faarez, arrived in New Spain around the summer of 1522, along with her sister and brother. His marriage to Catalina was at this point extremely awkward, since she was a kinswoman of the governor of Cuba, Diego Vel\u00e1zquez, whose authority Cort\u00e9s had thrown off and who was therefore now his enemy. Catalina lacked the noble title of \"do\u00f1a,\" so at this point, his marriage with her no longer raised his status. Their marriage had been childless. Since Cort\u00e9s had sired children with a variety of indigenous women, including a son around 1522 by his cultural translator, Do\u00f1a Marina, Cort\u00e9s knew he was capable of fathering children. Cort\u00e9s's only male heir at this point was illegitimate, but nonetheless named after Cort\u00e9s's father, Mart\u00edn Cort\u00e9s. This son Mart\u00edn Cort\u00e9s was also popularly called \"El Mestizo\".\nCatalina Su\u00e1rez died under mysterious circumstances the night of November 1\u20132, 1522. There were accusations at the time that Cort\u00e9s had murdered his wife. There was an investigation into her death, interviewing a variety of household residents and others. The documentation of the investigation was published in the nineteenth century in Mexico, and these archival documents were uncovered in the twentieth century. The death of Catalina Su\u00e1rez produced a scandal and investigation, but Cort\u00e9s was now free to marry someone of high status more appropriate to his wealth and power. In 1526, he built an imposing residence for himself, the Palace of Cort\u00e9s in Cuernavaca, in a region close to the capital where he had extensive encomienda holdings. In 1529, he had been accorded the noble designation of \"don\", but more importantly, was given the noble title of Marquess of the Valley of Oaxaca and married the Spanish noblewoman Do\u00f1a Juana de Z\u00fa\u00f1iga. The marriage produced three children, including another son, who was also named Mart\u00edn. As the first-born legitimate son, Don Mart\u00edn Cort\u00e9s y Z\u00fa\u00f1iga was now Cort\u00e9s's heir and succeeded him as holder of the title and estate of the Marquessate of the Valley of Oaxaca. Cort\u00e9s's legitimate daughters were Do\u00f1a Maria, Do\u00f1a Catalina, and Do\u00f1a Juana.\nCort\u00e9s and the \"Spiritual Conquest\" of the Aztec Empire.\nSince the conversion to Christianity of indigenous peoples was an essential and integral part of the extension of Spanish power, making formal provisions for that conversion once the military conquest was completed was an important task for Cort\u00e9s. During the Age of Discovery, the Catholic Church had seen early attempts at conversion in the Caribbean islands by Spanish friars, particularly the mendicant orders. Cort\u00e9s made a request to the Spanish monarch to send Franciscan and Dominican friars to Mexico to convert the vast indigenous populations to Christianity. In his fourth letter to the king, Cort\u00e9s pleaded for friars rather than diocesan or secular priests because those clerics were, in his view, a serious danger to the Indians' conversion.\nIf these people [Indians] were now to see the affairs of the Church and the service of God in the hands of canons or other dignitaries, and saw them indulge in the vices and profanities now common in Spain, knowing that such men were the ministers of God, it would bring our Faith into much harm that I believe any further preaching would be of no avail.\nHe wished the mendicants to be the main evangelists. Mendicant friars did not usually have full priestly powers to perform all the sacraments needed for the conversion of the Indians and the growth of the neophytes in the Christian faith, so Cort\u00e9s laid out a solution to this to the king.\nYour Majesty should likewise beseech His Holiness [the pope] to grant these powers to the two principal persons in the religious orders that are to come here, and that they should be his delegates, one from the Order of St. Francis and the other from the Order of St. Dominic. They should bring the most extensive powers Your Majesty is able to obtain, for, because these lands are so far from the Church of Rome, and we, the Christians who now reside here and shall do so in the future, are so far from the proper remedies of our consciences and, as we are human, so subject to sin, it is essential that His Holiness should be generous with us and grant to these persons most extensive powers, to be handed down to persons actually in residence here whether it be given to the general of each order or to his provincials.\nThe Franciscans arrived in May 1524, a symbolically powerful group of twelve known as the Twelve Apostles of Mexico, led by Fray Mart\u00edn de Valencia. Franciscan Geronimo de Mendieta claimed that Cort\u00e9s's most important deed was the way he met this first group of Franciscans. The conqueror himself was said to have met the friars as they approached the capital, kneeling at the feet of the friars who had walked from the coast. This story was told by Franciscans to demonstrate Cort\u00e9s's piety and humility and was a powerful message to all, including the Indians, that Cort\u00e9s's earthly power was subordinate to the spiritual power of the friars. However, one of the first twelve Franciscans, Fray Toribio de Benavente Motolinia does not mention it in his history. Cort\u00e9s and the Franciscans had a particularly strong alliance in Mexico, with Franciscans seeing him as \"the new Moses\" for conquering Mexico and opening it to Christian evangelization. In Motolinia's 1555 response to Dominican Bartolom\u00e9 de Las Casas, he praises Cort\u00e9s.\nAnd as to those who murmur against the Marqu\u00e9s del Valle [Cort\u00e9s], God rest him, and who try to blacken and obscure his deeds, I believe that before God their deeds are not as acceptable as those of the Marqu\u00e9s. Although as a human he was a sinner, he had faith and works of a good Christian, and a great desire to employ his life and property in widening and augmenting the fair of Jesus Christ, and dying for the conversion of these gentiles ... Who has loved and defended the Indians of this new world like Cort\u00e9s? ... Through this captain, God opened the door for us to preach his holy gospel and it was he who caused the Indians to revere the holy sacraments and respect the ministers of the church.\nIn Fray Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan's 1585 revision of the conquest narrative first codified as Book XII of the Florentine Codex, there are laudatory references to Cort\u00e9s that do not appear in the earlier text from the indigenous perspective. Whereas Book XII of the Florentine Codex concludes with an account of Spaniards' search for gold, in Sahag\u00fan's 1585 revised account, he ends with praise of Cort\u00e9s for requesting the Franciscans be sent to Mexico to convert the Indians.\nExpedition to Honduras and aftermath (1524\u20131541).\nExpedition to Honduras (1524\u20131526).\nFrom 1524 to 1526, Cort\u00e9s headed an expedition to Honduras where he defeated Crist\u00f3bal de Olid, who had claimed Honduras as his own under the influence of the Governor of Cuba, Diego Vel\u00e1zquez. Fearing that Cuauht\u00e9moc might head an insurrection in Mexico, he brought him with him to Honduras. In a controversial move, Cuauht\u00e9moc was executed during the journey. Raging over Olid's treason, Cort\u00e9s issued a decree to arrest Vel\u00e1zquez, whom he was sure was behind Olid's actions. This, however, only served to further estrange the Crown of Castile and the Council of the Indies, both of which were already beginning to feel anxious about Cort\u00e9s's rising power.\nCort\u00e9s's fifth letter to King Charles attempts to justify his conduct, concludes with a bitter attack on \"various and powerful rivals and enemies\" who have \"obscured the eyes of your Majesty\". Charles, who was also Holy Roman Emperor, had little time for distant colonies (much of Charles's reign was taken up with wars with France, the German Protestants and the expanding Ottoman Empire), except insofar as they contributed to finance his wars. In 1521, the year of the Conquest, Charles was attending to matters in his German domains, and Bishop Adrian of Utrecht functioned as regent in Spain.\nVel\u00e1zquez and Fonseca persuaded the regent to appoint a commissioner (a \"Juez de residencia\", Luis Ponce de Le\u00f3n) with powers to investigate Cort\u00e9s's conduct and even arrest him. Cort\u00e9s was once quoted as saying that it was \"more difficult to contend against [his] own countrymen than against the Aztecs.\" Governor Diego Vel\u00e1zquez continued to be a thorn in his side, teaming up with Bishop Juan Rodr\u00edguez de Fonseca, chief of the Spanish colonial department, to undermine him in the Council of the Indies.\nBefore leaving for Honduras, on October 12, 1524, Cort\u00e9s had left in charge three of the five officials that made up the \"Tribunal de Cuentas\" set up by Charles V to oversee Cort\u00e9s' rule: Alonso de Estrada; Rodrigo de Albornoz; and Alonso de Zuazo. The other two Gonzalo de Salazar and Pedro Alm\u00edndez Chirino (aka 'Peralm\u00edndez'), accompanied him on campaign.\nWhile en route, word reached Cort\u00e9s that disagreements between Albornoz and Estrada were becoming violent to the point of swordplay. He therefore ordered Salazar and Alm\u00edndez Chirino back to Mexico City to rejoin the government, which they did on December 29, 1524.\nSalazar and Alm\u00edndez Chirino spread a rumour that Cort\u00e9s had died, and in May 1525 assumed all power for themselves, including seizing Cort\u00e9s' property and torturing his majordomo, Cort\u00e9s' cousin, Rodrigo de Paz, to reveal the whereabouts of his alleged treasure. Zuazo was forced into exile.\nAt the end of January 1526, Cort\u00e9s got a message back to his supporters that he was still alive. Salazar and Alm\u00edndez Chirino were deposed and arrested, and Albornoz and Estrada resumed office. Cort\u00e9s himself took another five months to return from his expedition, reaching Mexico City on 19 June, whereupon he rested up in the Franciscan monastery for 5 nights.\nA day or so later, Ponce de Le\u00f3n finally arrived in Mexico City to take over from Cort\u00e9s as governor of New Spain and begin the juez de residencia. The Licentiate then fell ill and died shortly after his arrival, appointing Marcos de Aguilar as \"alcalde mayor\". In February 1527, the aged Aguilar fell ill in his turn and, before his death, appointed Alonso de Estrada to the position of governor, in which function he was confirmed by royal decree in August 1527. Cort\u00e9s, suspected of poisoning the two men, refrained from taking over the government.\nAlbornoz, who had sailed for Spain shortly after Ponce de Le\u00f3n's arrival in 1526, persuaded the Council of the Indies on his arrival in Seville to release Salazar and Alm\u00edndez Chirino, against Cort\u00e9s' wishes.\nIn August 1527, Estrada was confirmed as governor by royal decree. When Cort\u00e9s protested to Estrada for having one of his adherents' hands cut off without a trial as punishment for his involvement in a brawl, Estrada ordered Cort\u00e9s exiled to his country estate.\nHis authority circumscribed, his persecutors unpunished, while yet his retinue suffered from arbitrary punishments and was exiled from the city he'd founded, Cort\u00e9s sailed for Spain in early 1528 to appeal to his Emperor, Charles V.\nFirst return to Spain (1528) and Marquessate of the Valley of Oaxaca.\nIn May 1528, Cort\u00e9s arrived in Spain with treasures and 40 Aztecs to impress and to appeal to the justice of his master, Charles V. Juan Altamirano and Alonso Valiente stayed in Mexico and acted as Cort\u00e9s's representatives during his absence. Cort\u00e9s presented himself with great splendour before Charles V's court. By this time, Charles had returned, and Cort\u00e9s forthrightly responded to his enemy's charges. Denying he had held back on gold due to the crown, he showed that he had contributed more than the quinto (one-fifth) required. Indeed, he had spent lavishly to build the new capital of Mexico City on the ruins of the Aztec capital of Tenochtitl\u00e1n, levelled during the siege that brought down the Aztec empire.\nHe was received by Charles with every distinction and decorated with the order of Santiago. In return for his efforts in expanding the still young Spanish Empire, Cort\u00e9s was rewarded in 1529 by being accorded the noble title of \"don\" but more importantly named the \"Marqu\u00e9s del Valle de Oaxaca\" (Marquess of the Valley of Oaxaca) and married the Spanish noblewoman Do\u00f1a Juana Z\u00fa\u00f1iga, after the 1522 death of his much less distinguished first wife, Catalina Su\u00e1rez. The noble title and senorial estate of the Marquesado were passed down to his descendants until 1811. The Oaxaca Valley was one of the wealthiest regions of New Spain, and Cort\u00e9s had 23,000 vassals in 23 named encomiendas in perpetuity.\nAlthough confirmed in his land holdings and vassals, he was not reinstated as governor and was never again given any important office in the administration of New Spain. During his travel to Spain, his property was mismanaged by abusive colonial administrators. He sided with local natives in a lawsuit. The natives documented the abuses in the Huexotzinco Codex.\nThe entailed estate and title passed to his legitimate son Don Mart\u00edn Cort\u00e9s upon Cort\u00e9s's death in 1547, who became the Second Marquess. Don Mart\u00edn's association with the so-called Encomenderos' Conspiracy endangered the entailed holdings, but they were restored and remained the continuing reward for Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s's family through the generations.\nReturn to the New World (1530) and appointment of a viceroy (1535).\nCort\u00e9s returned to Mexico in 1530 with new titles and honours. Although Cort\u00e9s still retained military authority and permission to continue his conquests, Don Antonio de Mendoza was appointed in 1535 as a viceroy to administer New Spain's civil affairs. This division of power led to continual dissension and caused the failure of several enterprises in which Cort\u00e9s was engaged. On returning to Mexico, Cort\u00e9s found the country in a state of anarchy. There was a strong suspicion in court circles of an intended rebellion by Cort\u00e9s.\nAfter reasserting his position and reestablishing some sort of order, Cort\u00e9s retired to his estates at Cuernavaca, about south of Mexico City. There, he concentrated on the building of his palace and on Pacific exploration. Remaining in Mexico between 1530 and 1541, Cort\u00e9s quarrelled with Nu\u00f1o Beltr\u00e1n de Guzm\u00e1n and disputed the right to explore the territory that is today California with Antonio de Mendoza, the first viceroy.\nCort\u00e9s acquired several silver mines in Zumpango del Rio in 1534. By the early 1540s, he owned 20 silver mines in Sultepec, 12 in Taxco, and 3 in Zacualpan. Earlier, Cort\u00e9s had claimed the silver in the Tamazula area.\nIn 1536, Cort\u00e9s explored the northwestern part of Mexico and discovered the Baja California peninsula. Cort\u00e9s also spent time exploring the Pacific coast of Mexico. The Gulf of California was originally named the \"Sea of Cort\u00e9s\" by its discoverer Francisco de Ulloa in 1539. This was the last major expedition by Cort\u00e9s.\nLater life and death.\nSecond return to Spain.\nAfter his exploration of Baja California, Cort\u00e9s returned to Spain in 1541, hoping to confound his angry civilians, who had brought many lawsuits against him (for debts, abuse of power, etc.). On his return, he went through a crowd to speak to the emperor, who demanded of him who he was. \"I am a man,\" replied Cort\u00e9s, \"who has given you more provinces than your ancestors left you cities.\"\nExpedition against Algiers.\nThe emperor finally permitted Cort\u00e9s to join him and his fleet commanded by Andrea Doria at the great expedition against Algiers in the Barbary Coast in 1541, which was then part of the Ottoman Empire. During this campaign, Cort\u00e9s was almost drowned in a storm that hit his fleet while he was pursuing the Pasha of Algiers.\nLast years, death, and remains.\nHaving spent a great deal of his own money to finance expeditions, he was now heavily in debt. In February 1544, he made a claim on the royal treasury, but was ignored for the next three years. Disgusted, he decided to return to Mexico in 1547. When he reached Seville, he was stricken with dysentery. He died in Castilleja de la Cuesta, Seville province, on December 2, 1547, from a case of pleurisy at the age of 62.\nHe left his many mestizo and white children well cared for in his will, along with every one of their mothers. He requested in his will that his remains eventually be buried in Mexico. Before he died he had the Pope remove the \"natural\" status of four of his children (legitimizing them in the eyes of the church), including Mart\u00edn, the son he had with Do\u00f1a Marina (also known as La Malinche), said to be his favourite. His daughter, Do\u00f1a Catalina, however, died shortly after her father's death.\nAfter his death, his body was moved more than eight times for several reasons. On 4 December 1547, he was buried in the mausoleum of the Duke of Medina in the church of San Isidoro del Campo, Sevilla. Three years later (1550), due to the space being required by the duke, his body was moved to the altar of Santa Catarina in the same church. In his testament, Cort\u00e9s asked for his body to be buried in the monastery he had ordered to be built in Coyoacan in M\u00e9xico, ten years after his death, but the monastery was never built. So in 1566, his body was sent to New Spain and buried in the church of San Francisco de Texcoco, where his mother and one of his sisters were buried.\nIn 1629, Cort\u00e9s's last male descendant, Don Pedro Cort\u00e9s, fourth Marquez del Valle, died. The viceroy decided to move the bones of Cort\u00e9s, along with those of his descendant, to the Franciscan church in M\u00e9xico. This was delayed for nine years, while his body stayed in the main room of the palace of the viceroy. Eventually, it was moved to the Sagrario of the Franciscan church, where it stayed for 87 years. In 1716, it was moved to another place in the same church. In 1794, his bones were moved to the \"Hospital de Jesus\" (founded by Cort\u00e9s), where a statue by Tols\u00e1 and a mausoleum were made. There was a public ceremony and all the churches in the city rang their bells.\nIn 1823, after the independence of M\u00e9xico, it seemed imminent that his body would be desecrated, so the mausoleum was removed, the statue and the coat of arms were sent to Palermo, Sicily, to be protected by the Duke of Terranova. The bones were hidden, and everyone thought that they had been sent out of M\u00e9xico. In 1836, his bones were moved to another place in the same building.\nIt was not until 24 November 1946, that they were rediscovered, thanks to the discovery of a secret document by Lucas Alam\u00e1n. His bones were put in the charge of the Instituto Nacional de Antropolog\u00eda e Historia (INAH). The remains were authenticated by INAH. They were then restored to the same place, this time with a bronze inscription and his coat of arms. When the bones were first rediscovered, the supporters of the Hispanic tradition in Mexico were excited, but one supporter of an indigenist vision of Mexico \"proposed that the remains be publicly burned in front of the statue of Cuauhtemoc, and the ashes flung into the air\". Following the discovery and authentication of Cort\u00e9s's remains, there was a discovery of what were described as the bones of Cuauht\u00e9moc, resulting in a \"battle of the bones\".\nOn 16 December 1560, the lawsuits related to vassals of the Cortes estate were resolved by a royal order issued by Philip II.\nTaxa named after Cort\u00e9s.\nCort\u00e9s is commemorated in the scientific name of a subspecies of Mexican lizard, \"Phrynosoma orbiculare cortezii\".\nDisputed interpretation of his life.\nThere are relatively few sources on the early life of Cort\u00e9s; his fame arose from his participation in the conquest of Mexico, and it was only after this that people became interested in reading and writing about him.\nProbably the best source is his letters to the king, which he wrote during the campaign in Mexico, but they are written with the specific purpose of putting his efforts in a favourable light and so must be read critically. Another main source is the biography written by Cort\u00e9s's private chaplain Lopez de G\u00f3mara, which was written in Spain several years after the conquest. G\u00f3mara never set foot in the Americas and knew only what Cort\u00e9s had told him, and he had an affinity for knightly romantic stories, which he incorporated richly in the biography. The third major source is written as a reaction to what its author calls \"the lies of Gomara\", the eyewitness account written by the Conquistador Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo which does not paint Cort\u00e9s as a romantic hero, but rather tries to emphasize that Cort\u00e9s's men should also be remembered as important participants in the undertakings in Mexico.\nIn the years following the conquest, more critical accounts of the Spanish arrival in Mexico were written. The Dominican friar Bartolom\u00e9 de Las Casas wrote his \"A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies\" which raises strong accusations of brutality and heinous violence towards the Indians; accusations against both the conquistadors in general and Cort\u00e9s in particular. The accounts of the conquest given in the Florentine Codex by the Franciscan Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan and his native informants are also less than flattering towards Cort\u00e9s. The scarcity of these sources has led to a sharp division in the description of Cort\u00e9s's personality and a tendency to describe him as either a vicious and ruthless person or a noble and honourable cavalier.\nRepresentations in Mexico.\nIn M\u00e9xico, there are few representations of Cort\u00e9s. However, many landmarks still bear his name, from the castle Palacio de Cort\u00e9s in the city of Cuernavaca to some street names throughout the republic.\nThe pass between the volcanoes Iztacc\u00edhuatl and Popocat\u00e9petl, where Cort\u00e9s took his soldiers on their march to Mexico City, is known as the Paso de Cort\u00e9s.\nThe muralist Diego Rivera painted several representations of him, but the most famous one depicts him as a powerful and ominous figure along with Malinche in a mural in the National Palace in Mexico City.\nIn 1981, President Lopez Portillo tried to bring Cort\u00e9s to public recognition. First, he made public a copy of the bust of Cort\u00e9s made by Manuel Tols\u00e1 in the Hospital de Jes\u00fas Nazareno with an official ceremony, but soon a nationalist group tried to destroy it, so it had to be taken out of the public. Today the copy of the bust is in the \"Hospital de Jes\u00fas Nazareno\" while the original is in Naples, Italy, in the Villa Pignatelli.\nLater, another monument, known as \"Monumento al Mestizaje\" by Juli\u00e1n Mart\u00ednez y M. Maldonado (1982), was commissioned by Mexican president Jos\u00e9 L\u00f3pez Portillo to be put in the \"Z\u00f3calo\" (Main square) of Coyoacan, near the place of his country house, but it had to be moved to a little-known park, Jard\u00edn Xicot\u00e9ncatl, Barrio de San Diego Churubusco, to quell protests. The statue depicts Cort\u00e9s, Malinche and their son Mart\u00edn.\nThere is another statue by Sebasti\u00e1n Aparicio, in Cuernavaca, which was in a hotel \"El casino de la selva\". Cort\u00e9s is barely recognizable, so it sparked little interest. The hotel was closed to make a commercial centre, and the statue was put out of public display by Costco, the builder of the commercial centre.\nCultural depictions.\nHern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s is a character in the opera \"La Conquista\" (2005) by Italian composer Lorenzo Ferrero, which depicts the major episodes of the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire in 1521.\nWritings: the \"Cartas de Relaci\u00f3n\".\nCort\u00e9s's personal account of the conquest of Mexico is narrated in his five letters addressed to Charles V. These five letters, the \"cartas de relaci\u00f3n\", are Cort\u00e9s's only surviving writings. See \"Letters and Dispatches of Cort\u00e9s\", translated by George Folsom (New York, 1843); Prescott's \"Conquest of Mexico\" (Boston, 1843); and Sir Arthur Helps's \"Life of Hernando Cortes\" (London, 1871).\nHis first letter was considered lost, and the one from the municipality of Veracruz has to take its place. It was published for the first time in volume IV of \"Documentos para la Historia de Espa\u00f1a\", and subsequently reprinted.\nThe \"Segunda Carta de Relacion\", bearing the date of October 30, 1520, appeared in print at Seville in 1522. The third letter, dated May 15, 1522, appeared at Seville in 1523. The fourth, October 20, 1524, was printed at Toledo in 1525. The fifth, on the Honduras expedition, is contained in volume IV of the \"Documentos para la Historia de Espa\u00f1a\".\nChildren.\nThe children of Don Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s born out of wedlock were:\nCort\u00e9s married twice, firstly in Cuba to Catalina Su\u00e1rez Marcaida, who died at Coyoac\u00e1n in 1522 without issue, and secondly in 1529 to \"do\u00f1a\" Juana Ram\u00edrez de Arellano de Z\u00fa\u00f1iga, daughter of \"don\" Carlos Ram\u00edrez de Arellano, 2nd Count of Aguilar, and his wife, the Countess \"do\u00f1a\" Juana de Z\u00fa\u00f1iga. The children of Cort\u00e9s and \"do\u00f1a\" Juana Ram\u00edrez de Arellano de Z\u00fa\u00f1iga were:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "14014", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14014", "title": "Hernando Cortes", "text": ""}
{"id": "14015", "revid": "49979755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14015", "title": "Herstory", "text": "Term for women emphasized history\nHerstory is a term for history written from a feminist perspective and emphasizing the role of women, or told from a woman's point of view. It originated as an alteration of the word \"history\", as part of a feminist critique of conventional historiography, which in their opinion is traditionally written as \"his story\", i.e., from the male point of view. The term is a neologism and a deliberate play on words; the word \"history\"\u2014via Latin \"historia\" from the Ancient Greek word \u1f31\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03c1\u03af\u03b1, a noun meaning 'knowledge obtained by inquiry'\u2014is etymologically unrelated to the possessive pronoun \"his\".\nUsage.\nLiterature scholar Fritz Fleischmann marks \"the first documented instance of the word-play with His-Story/Her-Story\" as the title page of the 1817 novel \"Keep Cool\" by early feminist John Neal. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" credits Dr. F.H.K. Green with first using the term \"herstory\" in print.\nDuring the 1970s and 1980s, second-wave feminists saw the study of history as a male-dominated intellectual enterprise and presented \"herstory\" as a means of compensation. The term, intended to be both serious and comic, became a rallying cry used on T-shirts and buttons as well as in academia.\nIn 2017, Hridith Sudev, an inventor, environmentalist and social activist associated with various youth movements, launched 'The Herstory Movement,' an online platform to \"celebrate lesser known great persons; female, queer or otherwise marginalized, who helped shape the modern World History.\" It is intended as an academic platform to feature stories of female historic persons and thus help facilitate more widespread knowledge about 'Great Women' History.\nNon-profit organizations Global G.L.O.W and LitWorld created a joint initiative called the \"HerStory Campaign\". This campaign works with 25 other countries to share girl's lives and stories. They encourage others to join the campaign and to \"raise our voices on behalf of all world's girls\".\nThe herstory movement has spawned women-centered presses, such as Virago Press in 1973, which publishes fiction and non-fiction by noted women authors like Janet Frame and Sarah Dunant.\nThis movement has led to an increase in activity in other female-centric disciplines such as \"femistry\" and \"galgebra\".\nCriticism.\nChristina Hoff Sommers has been a vocal critic of the concept of herstory, and presented her argument against the movement in her 1994 book \"Who Stole Feminism?\" Sommers defined herstory as an attempt to infuse education with ideology at the expense of knowledge. The \"gender feminists\", as she called them, were the group of feminists responsible for the movement, which she felt amounted to negationism. She regarded most attempts to make historical studies more female-inclusive as being artificial in nature and an impediment to progress.\nProfessor and author Devoney Looser has criticized the concept of herstory for overlooking the contributions that some women made as historians before the twentieth century. Author Richard Dawkins also described his criticism in \"The God Delusion\", arguing that \"the word history has not been influenced by the male pronoun\". Critics also highlight that herstory, while aiming to prioritize women\u2019s narratives, sometimes excludes non-Western perspectives, pointing out the importance of reconstructing feminist genealogies from a southern perspective, advocating for inclusivity in representing subaltern women\u2019s histories and experiences.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14017", "revid": "1318278272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14017", "title": "House of Cards (British TV series)", "text": "1990 British television serial\nHouse of Cards is a 1990 British political thriller television serial in four episodes, set after the end of Margaret Thatcher's tenure as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. It was televised by the BBC from 18 November to 9 December 1990. Released to critical and popular acclaim for its writing, direction, and performances, it is considered one of the greatest British television shows ever made.\nThe story is centred on the sudden and manipulative rise to power of the chief whip of the Conservative Party, Francis Urquhart, a ruthless and Machiavellian politician. Urquhart, on the party's right wing, is frustrated over his lack of promotion in the wake of Margaret Thatcher's resignation and the moderate government which succeeds it. He conceives a calculated and meticulous plan to bring down the new prime minister and succeed him, on the same lines as William Shakespeare's play \"Richard III\" (which Urquhart often quotes). During this drawn-out and ruthless coup, his life is complicated by his relationship with a young female reporter named Mattie Storin, whom he uses to leak sensitive information in confidence. The question of whether the serial's ending is a tragedy (in the same vein as Shakespeare's \"Macbeth\") is left to the viewer.\nAndrew Davies adapted the story from the 1989 novel of the same name by Michael Dobbs, a former chief of staff at Conservative Party headquarters. Neville Teller also dramatised Dobbs's novel for the BBC World Service in 1996, and it had two television sequels (\"To Play the King\" and \"The Final Cut\"). The opening and closing theme music for this TV series is entitled \"Francis Urquhart's March\", by Jim Parker.\n\"House of Cards\" was ranked 84th in the British Film Institute list of the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes in 2000. In 2013, the serial and the Dobbs novel were the basis for an American adaptation set in Washington, D.C., commissioned and released by Netflix as the first ever major streaming service television show. This version was also entitled \"House of Cards\", and starred Kevin Spacey and Robin Wright.\nOverview.\nThe antihero of \"House of Cards\" is Francis Urquhart, a fictional Chief Whip of the Conservative Party, played by Ian Richardson. The plot follows his amoral and manipulative scheme to become leader of the governing party and, thus, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.\nMichael Dobbs did not envisage writing the second and third books, as Urquhart dies at the end of the first novel. The screenplay of the BBC's dramatisation of \"House of Cards\" differs from the book, and hence allows future series. Dobbs wrote two following books, \"To Play the King\" and \"The Final Cut\", which were televised in 1993 and 1995, respectively.\n\"House of Cards\" was said to draw from Shakespeare's plays \"Macbeth\" and \"Richard III\", both of which feature main characters who are corrupted by power and ambition. Richardson has a Shakespearean background and said he based his characterisation of Urquhart on Shakespeare's portrayal of Richard III.\nUrquhart frequently talks through the camera to the audience, breaking the fourth wall.\nPlot.\nThe ruling Conservative Party is about to elect a new leader. Francis Urquhart, the Government Chief Whip in the House of Commons, introduces viewers to the contestants, before Henry Collingridge, the Secretary of State for the Environment, emerges victorious. Urquhart is contemptuous of Collingridge, who embodies the Thatcher-era rise of the lower-middle classes. Urquhart feigns respect and expects promotion to a senior position in the Cabinet. After the general election, the party narrowly retains power. Urquhart makes suggestions for a hard-right reshuffle, including his own desired promotion to Home Secretary. However, Collingridge effects no changes at all, relying entirely on the advice of his party chairman, Lord \"Teddy\" Billsborough. Urquhart resolves to oust Collingridge.\nUrquhart begins an affair with Mattie Storin, a junior political reporter at a Conservative-leaning tabloid, \"The Chronicle\". This allows Urquhart to manipulate Mattie and skew her coverage of events in his favour. Another pawn is Roger O'Neill, the party's cocaine-addicted public relations consultant, whom Urquhart blackmails into leaking planned budget cuts, thereby humiliating Collingridge during Prime Minister's Questions. Later, Urquhart blames Billsborough for leaking a poll showing the Conservatives' declining rate in voting intentions, leading Collingridge to sack Billsborough.\nAs Collingridge's image suffers, Urquhart encourages Patrick Woolton, the boorish and lecherous Foreign Secretary, and the equally unpleasant \"Chronicle\" owner Benjamin Landless to support his removal. He also impersonates Collingridge's alcoholic brother to trade shares and benefit from advance information confidential to the government. Collingridge becomes falsely accused of insider trading and resigns partly to save face, partly to care for his brother after he suffers a guilt-induced decline in his health.\nIn the ensuing leadership race, Urquhart feigns unwillingness to stand before announcing his candidacy. Urquhart makes sure his competitors drop out of the race: Health Secretary Peter MacKenzie accidentally runs his car over a protester at a demonstration staged by Urquhart and withdraws, while Education Secretary Harold Earle is blackmailed into withdrawing when Urquhart anonymously sends pictures of him in the company of a rent boy whom Earle had paid for sex.\nThe first ballot leaves Urquhart to face Woolton and Michael Samuels, the moderate Environment Secretary. Urquhart eliminates Woolton by a prolonged scheme: at the party conference, he pressures O'Neill into persuading his lover, Penny Guy, to sleep with Woolton in his suite, which Urquhart records via a bugged ministerial red box. The recording reveals Woolton ignoring Guy's pleas to stop, with Woolton ostensibly raping her. When the tape is sent to Woolton, he is led to assume that Samuels is behind the scheme and backs Urquhart in the contest. Urquhart also receives support from Collingridge, who is unaware of Urquhart's role in his own downfall. Samuels is forced out of the running when the tabloids reveal that he backed leftist causes as a student.\nSeeing contradictions in the allegations against Collingridge and his brother, Mattie begins to dig deeper, while falling in love with Urquhart and blinding herself to his possible role. On Urquhart's orders, O'Neill vandalises her car and throws a brick with a threatening letter through her window. O'Neill becomes increasingly uneasy with what he is being asked to do, and his addiction adds to his instability. When he threatens to go to the police, Urquhart invites him to his home in Hampshire, promising O'Neill a knighthood. There, O'Neill becomes completely inebriated before passing out. Urquhart mixes O'Neill's cocaine with rat poison, causing him to die after he takes the cocaine in a toilet at a nearby motorway service station.\nMattie's colleague, John Krajewski, insists that Urquhart was the only one with the means, motive and opportunity. Knowing that Urquhart as Chief Whip was adroit at gaining information sensitive enough to blackmail almost anyone, Mattie realises that he is responsible for O'Neill's death and the downfall of his rivals. She confronts Urquhart on the roof garden of the Houses of Parliament, demanding to know if he killed Roger O\u2019Neill. He admits to everything, then throws her off the roof to her death. She lands on the roof of a van parked below. An unseen person picks up Mattie's tape recorder, which she had been using to record her conversations with Urquhart. The series ends with Urquhart, who has defeated Samuels in the second leadership ballot, being driven to Buckingham Palace to be invited to form a government.\nDeviations from the novel in the series.\nIn the first novel, but not in the television series:\nBefore the series was reissued in 2013 to coincide with the release of the American version of \"House of Cards\", Dobbs rewrote portions of the novel to bring the series in line with the television series and restore continuity among the three novels. In the 2013 version:\nReception.\nThe first installment of the TV series coincidentally aired two days before the Conservative Party leadership election. During a time of \"disillusionment with politics\", the series \"caught the nation's mood\".\nIan Richardson won the British Academy Television Award for Best Actor in 1991 for his role as Urquhart, and Andrew Davies won an Emmy for outstanding writing in a miniseries.\nThe series ranked 84th in the British Film Institute list of the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes.\nAmerican adaptation.\nThe Urquhart trilogy has been adapted in the United States as \"House of Cards\". The show stars Kevin Spacey as Francis \"Frank\" Underwood, the Majority Whip of the Democratic caucus in the U.S. House of Representatives, who schemes and murders his way to becoming President of the United States. It is produced by David Fincher and Spacey's Trigger Street Productions, with the initial episodes directed by Fincher.\nThe series, produced and financed by independent studio Media Rights Capital, was one of Netflix's first forays into original programming. Series one was made available online on 1 February 2013. The series was filmed in Baltimore, Maryland. The first series was critically acclaimed and earned four Golden Globe Nominations, including Best Drama, actor, actress and supporting actor, with Robin Wright winning best actress. It also earned nine Primetime Emmy Award nominations, winning three, and was the first show to earn nominations that was broadcast solely via an internet streaming service.\nIn popular culture.\nThe drama introduced and popularised the phrase: \"You might very well think that; I couldn't possibly comment\". It was a non-confirmation confirmative statement, used by Urquhart whenever he could not be seen to agree with a leading statement; with the emphasis on either the \"I\" or the \"possibly\", depending on the situation. The phrase was even used in the House of Commons, House of Lords, and Parliamentary Committees following the series. Prince Charles (as he was known at the time) himself said the phrase in response to a provocative question from a journalist in 2014.\nA variation on the phrase was written into the TV adaptation of Terry Pratchett's \"Hogfather\" for the character Death, as an in-joke based on the fact that he was voiced by Richardson.\nDuring the first Gulf War, a British reporter speaking from Baghdad\u2014conscious of the possibility of censorship\u2014used the code phrase \"You might very well think that; I couldn't possibly comment\" to answer a BBC presenter's question.\nA further variation was used by Nicola Murray, a fictional government minister, in the third series finale of \"The Thick of It\".\nIn the American adaptation, the phrase is used by Frank Underwood in the first episode during his initial meeting with Zoe Barnes, the American counterpart of Mattie Storin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14018", "revid": "26248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14018", "title": "Helen Gandy", "text": "American civil servant (1897\u20131988)\nHelen Wilburforce Gandy (April 8, 1897 \u2013 July 7, 1988) was the American longtime secretary to Federal Bureau of Investigation director J. Edgar Hoover, who called her \"indispensable\". Serving in that role for 54 years she exercised great behind-the-scenes influence on Hoover and the operations of the Bureau. Following Hoover's death in 1972, she spent weeks destroying his \"Personal File,\" thought to contain the most incriminating material Hoover used to manipulate or blackmail the most powerful figures in Washington.\nEarly life.\nHelen Gandy was born in Rockville, New Jersey, one of three children (two daughters and a son) born to Franklin Dallas and Annie (n\u00e9e Williams) Gandy. She grew up in New Jersey in Fairton or the Port Norris section of Commercial Township (sources differ) and graduated from Bridgeton High School in Bridgeton, New Jersey. In 1918, aged 21, she moved to Washington, D.C., where she later took classes at Strayer Business College and George Washington University Law School.\nCareer.\nGandy briefly worked in a department store in Washington before finding a job as a file clerk at the Justice Department in 1918. Within weeks, she went to work as a typist for Hoover, effective March 25, 1918, having told Hoover in her interview she had \"no immediate plans to marry\". She, like Hoover, would never marry; both were completely devoted to the Bureau.\nWhen Hoover went to the Bureau of Investigation (its original title; it became the FBI in 1935) as its assistant director on August 22, 1921, he specifically requested Gandy return from vacation to help him in the new post. Hoover became director of the Bureau in 1924, and Gandy continued in his service. She was promoted to \"office assistant\" on August 23, 1937, and \"executive assistant\" on October 1, 1939. Though she would receive promotions in her civil service grade subsequently, she retained her title as executive assistant until her retirement on May 2, 1972, the day Hoover died. Hoover said of her: \"if there is anyone in this Bureau whose services are indispensable, I consider Miss Gandy to be that person.\" Despite this, Curt Gentry wrote:\nTheirs was a rigidly formal relationship. He always called her \"Miss Gandy\" (when angry, barking it out as one word). In all those fifty-four years he never once called her by her first name.\nHoover biographers Theoharis and Cox would say \"her stern face recalled Cerberus at the gate\", a view echoed by Anthony Summers in his life of Hoover, who also pictured Gandy as Hoover's first line of defense against the outside world. When Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, Hoover's superior, had a direct telephone line installed between their offices, Hoover refused to answer the phone. \"Put that damn thing on Miss Gandy's desk where it belongs\", Hoover would declare.\nGentry described Gandy's influence:\nHer genteel manner and pleasant voice contrasted sharply with this domineering presence. Yet behind the politeness was a resolute firmness not unlike his, and no small amount of influence. Many a career in the Bureau had been quietly manipulated by her. Even those who disliked him praised her, most often commenting on her remarkable ability to get along with all kinds of people. That she held her position for fifty-four years was the best evidence of this, for it was a Bureau tradition that the closer you were to him, the more demanding he was.\nWilliam C. Sullivan, an agent with the Bureau for three decades, reported in his memoir that when he worked in the public relations section answering mail from the public, he gave a correspondent the wrong measurements for Hoover's personal popover recipe, relying on memory rather than the files. Gandy, ever protective of her boss, caught the error and brought it to Hoover's attention. The director then placed an official letter of reprimand in Sullivan's file for the lapse. Mark Felt, deputy associate director of the FBI, wrote in his memoir that Gandy \"was bright and alert and quick-tongued\u2014and completely dedicated to her boss, whose interests she constantly protected\".\nFiles.\nHoover died during the night of May 1\u20132, 1972. According to Curt Gentry, who wrote the 1991 book \"J Edgar Hoover: The Man and the Secrets\", Hoover's body was not discovered by his live-in cook and general housekeeper, Annie Fields; rather, it was discovered by James Crawford, who had been Hoover's chauffeur for 37 years. Crawford then yelled out to Fields and Tom Moton (Hoover's new chauffeur after Crawford had retired in January 1972). Fields first called Hoover's personal physician, Dr. Robert Choisser, then used another phone to call Clyde Tolson's private number. Tolson then called Gandy's private number with the news of Hoover's death along with orders to begin destroying the files. Within an hour, the \"D List\" (\"d\" standing for destruction) was being distributed, and the destruction of files began. However, \"The New York Times\" quoted an anonymous FBI source in spring 1975, who said: \"Gandy had begun the destruction of files almost a year before Mr. Hoover's death and was instructed to purge the files that were presently in his office.\"\nAnthony Summers reported that G. Gordon Liddy had said of his sources in the FBI: \"by the time Gray went in to get the files, Miss Gandy had already got rid of them.\" The day after Hoover died, L. Patrick Gray, who had been named acting director by President Richard Nixon upon Tolson's resignation from that position, went to Hoover's office. Gandy paused from her work to give Gray a tour. He found file cabinets open and packing boxes being filled with papers. She informed him the boxes contained personal papers of Hoover's. Gandy stated Gray flipped through a few files and approved her work, but Gray was to deny he looked at any papers. Gandy also told Gray it would be a week before she could clear Hoover's effects out so Gray could move into the suite.\nGray reported to Nixon that he had secured Hoover's office and its contents. However, he had sealed only Hoover's personal inner office, where no files were stored, not the entire suite of offices. Since 1957, Hoover's \"Official/Confidential\" files, containing material too sensitive to include in the FBI's central files, had been kept in the outer office, where Gandy sat. Gentry reported that Gray would not have known where to look in Gandy's office for the files, as her office was lined floor to ceiling with filing cabinets; moreover, without her index to the files, he would not have been able to locate incriminating material, for files were deliberately mislabeled, e.g., President Nixon's file was labeled \"Obscene Matters\".\nOn May 4, Gandy transferred 12 boxes labelled \"Official/Confidential\", containing 167 files and 17,750 pages, to Mark Felt. Many of them contained inflammatory and derogatory information. Gray told the press that afternoon that \"there are no dossiers or secret files. There are just general files, and I took steps to preserve their integrity.\" Yet, Gandy retained the \"Personal File.\"\nGandy went through Hoover's \"Personal File\" in the office until May 12. She then transferred at least 32 file drawers of material to the basement recreation room of Hoover's Washington home at 4936 Thirtieth Place, NW, where she continued her work from May 13 to July 17. Gandy later testified in court that nothing official had been removed from the FBI's offices, \"not even Mr. Hoover's badge.\" At Hoover's residence, the destruction was overseen by John P. Mohr, the third highest-ranking official in the FBI after Hoover and Tolson. They were aided by James Jesus Angleton, the Central Intelligence Agency's counterintelligence chief, whom Hoover's neighbors saw removing boxes from Hoover's home. Mohr would claim the boxes Angleton removed were cases of spoiled wine.\nIn 1975, when the House Committee on Government Oversight investigated the FBI's illegal COINTELPRO program of spying on and harassment of Martin Luther King Jr. and others, Gandy was summoned to testify regarding the \"Personal Files.\" \"I tore them up, put them in boxes, and they were taken away to be shredded,\" she told the congressmen about the papers. The FBI Washington field office had FBI drivers transport the material to Hoover's home, then once Gandy had gone through the material, the drivers transported it back to the field office in the Old Post Office Building on Pennsylvania Avenue, where it was shredded and burned.\nGandy stated that Hoover had left standing instructions to destroy his personal papers upon his death, and this instruction was confirmed by Tolson and Gray. She also stated that she destroyed no official papers; that everything was personal papers of Hoover's. The staff of the subcommittee did not believe her, but she told the committee: \"I have no reason to lie.\" Representative Andrew Maguire (D-New Jersey), a freshman member of the 94th Congress, said \"I find your testimony very difficult to believe.\" Gandy held her ground: \"That is your privilege.\"\n\"I can give you my word. I know what there was\u2014letters to and from friends, personal friends, a lot of letters,\" she testified. Gandy also said the files she took to Hoover's home included his financial papers, such as tax returns and investment statements, the deed to his home, and papers relating to his dogs' pedigrees.\nCurt Gentry wrote:\nHelen Gandy must have felt quite safe in testifying as she did, for who could contradict her? Only one other person knew exactly what the files contained, and he was dead.\nIn \"J. Edgar Hoover: The Man and His Secrets\", Gentry describes the nature of the files: \"their contents included blackmail material on the patriarch of an American political dynasty, his sons, their wives, and other women; allegations of two homosexual arrests which Hoover leaked to help defeat a witty, urbane Democratic presidential candidate; the surveillance reports on one of America's best-known first ladies and her alleged lovers, both male and female, white and black; the child molestation documentation the director used to control and manipulate one of the Red-baiting proteges; a list of the Bureau's spies in the White House during the eight administrations when Hoover was FBI director; the forbidden fruit of hundreds of illegal wiretaps and bugs, containing, for example, evidence that an attorney general, Tom C. Clark, who later became Supreme Court justice, had received payoffs from the Chicago syndicate; as well as celebrity files, with all the unsavory gossip Hoover could amass on some of the biggest names in show business.\"\nPersonal life and death.\nGandy lived for decades with Margaret E. Morrow. Morrow died on April 16, 1986.\nGandy died of a heart attack on July 7, 1988, either in DeLand (as indicated by her \"New York Times\" obituary) or in nearby Orange City, Florida, (as stated in her \"Washington Post\" obituary).\nLater years.\nHoover left Gandy $5,000 in his will.\nIn 1961, she and her sister, Lucy G. Rodman, donated a portrait of their mother by Thomas Eakins to the Smithsonian American Art Museum. Gandy lived in Washington until 1986, when she moved to DeLand, Florida, in Volusia County, where a niece lived. Gandy was an avid trout fisher.\nIn popular culture.\nGandy has been portrayed by actresses Lee Kessler in \"J. Edgar Hoover\" (1987), Naomi Watts in \"J. Edgar\" (2011), and Rebecca Toolan in \"Bad Times at the El Royale\" (2018).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14019", "revid": "140154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14019", "title": "Horsepower", "text": "Unit of power with different values\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nHorsepower (hp) is a unit of measurement of power, or the rate at which work is done, usually in reference to the output of engines or motors. There are many different standards and types of horsepower. Two common definitions used today are the imperial horsepower, abbreviated \"hp\" or \"bhp\", which is about , and the metric horsepower, also represented as \"cv\" or \"PS\", which is approximately . The electric horsepower, \"hpE\", is exactly , while the boiler horsepower is 9809.5 or 9811 watts, depending on the exact year.\nThe term was adopted in the late 18th century by Scottish engineer James Watt to compare the output of steam engines with the power of draft horses. It was later expanded to include the output power of other power-generating machinery such as piston engines, turbines, and electric motors. The definition of the unit varied among geographical regions. Most countries now use the SI unit watt for measurement of power. With the implementation of the EU Directive 80/181/EEC on 1 January 2010, the use of horsepower in the EU is permitted only as a supplementary unit.\nHistory.\nThe development of the steam engine provided a reason to compare the output of horses with that of the engines that could replace them. In 1702, Thomas Savery wrote in \"The Miner's Friend\":\nSo that an engine which will raise as much water as two horses, working together at one time in such a work, can do, and for which there must be constantly kept ten or twelve horses for doing the same. Then I say, such an engine may be made large enough to do the work required in employing eight, ten, fifteen, or twenty horses to be constantly maintained and kept for doing such a work...\nThe idea was later used by James Watt to help market the Watt steam engine, an improved Newcomen steam engine. He had previously agreed to take royalties of one-third of the savings in coal from the older Newcomen steam engines. This royalty scheme did not work with customers who did not have existing steam engines but used horses instead.\nWatt determined that a horse could turn a mill wheel 144 times in an hour (or 2.4 times a minute). The wheel was in radius; therefore, the horse travelled 2.4 \u00d7 2\u03c0 \u00d7 12 feet in one minute. Watt judged that the horse could pull with a force of . So:\nformula_1\n\"Engineering in History\" recounts that John Smeaton initially estimated that a horse could produce per minute. John Desaguliers had previously suggested per minute, and Thomas Tredgold suggested per minute. \"Watt found by experiment in 1782 that a 'brewery horse' could produce per minute.\" James Watt and Matthew Boulton standardized that figure at per minute the next year.\nA common legend states that the unit was created when one of Watt's first customers, a brewer, specifically demanded an engine that would match a horse, and chose the strongest horse he had and driving it to the limit. In that legend, Watt accepted the challenge and built a machine that was actually even stronger than the figure achieved by the brewer, and the output of that machine became the horsepower.\nIn 1993, R. D. Stevenson and R. J. Wassersug published correspondence in \"Nature\" summarizing measurements and calculations of peak and sustained work rates of a horse. Citing measurements made at the 1925 Iowa State Fair, they reported that the peak power over a few seconds has been measured to be as high as and also observed that for sustained activity, a work rate of about per horse is consistent with agricultural advice from both the 19th and 20th centuries and also consistent with a work rate of about four times the basal rate expended by other vertebrates for sustained activity.\nWhen considering human-powered equipment, a healthy human can produce about briefly (see orders of magnitude) and sustain about indefinitely; trained athletes can manage up to about briefly\nand for a period of several hours. The Jamaican sprinter Usain Bolt produced a maximum of 0.89 seconds into his 9.58 second sprint world record in 2009.\nIn 2023 a group of engineers modified a dynamometer to be able to measure how much power a horse can produce. This horse was measured to .\nCalculating power.\nWhen torque T is in pound-foot units, rotational speed N is in rpm, the resulting power in horsepower is\n formula_2\nThe constant 5252 is the rounded value of (33,000\u00a0ft\u22c5lbf/min)/(2\u03c0\u00a0rad/rev).\nWhen torque T is in inch-pounds,\n formula_3\nThe constant 63,025 is the approximation of\n formula_4\nDefinitions.\nImperial horsepower.\nAssuming the third CGPM (1901, CR 70) definition of standard gravity, \"g\"n = 9.80665 m/s2, is used to define the pound-force as well as the kilogram force, and the international avoirdupois pound (1959), one imperial horsepower is:\nOr given that 1\u00a0hp = 550\u00a0ft\u22c5lbf/s, 1\u00a0ft = 0.3048\u00a0m, 1\u00a0lbf\u00a0\u2248 4.448\u00a0N, 1\u00a0J = 1\u00a0N\u22c5m, 1\u00a0W = 1\u00a0J/s: 1\u00a0hp \u2248 745.7\u00a0W\nMetric horsepower (PS, KM, cv, hk, pk, k, ks, ch).\nThe various units used to indicate this definition (\"PS\", \" KM\", \"cv\", \"hk\", \"pk\", \"k\", \"ks\" and \"ch\") all translate to \"horsepower\" in English. British manufacturers often intermix metric horsepower and mechanical horsepower depending on the origin of the engine in question.\nDIN 66036 defines one metric horsepower (Pferdest\u00e4rke, or PS) as the power to raise a mass of 75 kilograms against the Earth's gravitational force over a distance of one metre in one second: 75\u00a0kg \u00d7 9.80665\u00a0m/s2 \u00d7 1\u00a0m / 1\u00a0s = 75\u00a0kgf\u22c5m/s = 1\u00a0PS. This is equivalent to 735.49875\u00a0W, or 98.6% of an imperial horsepower. In 1972, the PS was replaced by the kilowatt as the official power-measuring unit in EEC directives.\nOther names for the metric horsepower are the Italian , Dutch , the French , the Spanish and Portuguese , the Russian , the Swedish , the Finnish , the Estonian , the Norwegian and Danish , the Hungarian , the Czech and Slovak or ), the Serbo-Croatian , the Bulgarian , the Macedonian , the Polish (lit.\u2009'mechanical horse'), Slovenian , the Ukrainian , the Romanian , and the German .\nIn the 19th century, revolutionary-era France had its own unit used to replace the \"cheval vapeur\" (horsepower); based on a 100 kgf\u22c5m/s standard, it was called the poncelet and was abbreviated \"p\".\nTax horsepower.\nTax, or fiscal, horsepower is a non-linear rating of a motor vehicle for tax purposes. Tax-horsepower ratings were originally more or less directly related to engine displacements, but, as of 2000[ [update]], many countries have changed over to systems based on CO2 emissions so the current systems are not directly comparable to old tax horsepower. The Citro\u00ebn 2CV is named for its French fiscal horsepower rating, (2CV).\nElectrical horsepower.\nNameplates on electrical motors show their available shaft power output, not the electrical power input. This power output is ordinarily stated in watts or kilowatts. In the United States, the power output is stated in horsepower.\nHydraulic horsepower.\n\"Hydraulic horsepower\" can be the power available within hydraulic machinery or power through the down-hole nozzle of a drilling rig, or it can be used as an estimate of the mechanical power needed to generate a given hydraulic flow rate.\nIt may be calculated as\n formula_5\nwhere pressure is in psi and flow rate is in US gallons per minute.\nDrilling rigs are powered mechanically by rotating the drill pipe from above. Hydraulic power is still needed, though, as are required to push mud through the drill bit to clear waste rock. Additional hydraulic power may also be used to drive a down-hole mud motor to power directional drilling.\nWhen using SI units, the equation becomes coherent and there is no dividing constant.\n formula_6\nwhere pressure is in pascals (Pa), and flow rate is in cubic metres per second (m3).\nBoiler horsepower.\nBoiler horsepower is a boiler's capacity to deliver steam to a steam engine and is not the same unit of power as the 550\u00a0ft\u22c5lb/s definition. One boiler horsepower is equal to the thermal energy rate required to evaporate of fresh water at in one hour. In the early days of steam use, the boiler horsepower was roughly comparable to the horsepower of engines fed by the boiler.\nThe term \"boiler horsepower\" was originally developed at the Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition in 1876, where the best steam engines of that period were tested. The average steam consumption of those engines (per output horsepower) was determined to be the evaporation of of water per hour, based on feed water at , and saturated steam generated at . This original definition is equivalent to a boiler heat output of . A few years later in 1884, the ASME re-defined the boiler horsepower as the thermal output equal to the evaporation of 34.5 pounds per hour of water \"from and at\" . This considerably simplified boiler testing, and provided more accurate comparisons of the boilers at that time. This revised definition is equivalent to a boiler heat output of . Present industrial practice is to define \"boiler horsepower\" as a boiler thermal output equal to , which is very close to the original and revised definitions.\nBoiler horsepower is still used to measure boiler output in industrial boiler engineering in the US. Boiler horsepower is abbreviated \"BHP\", which is also used in many places to symbolize brake horsepower.\nDrawbar power.\nDrawbar power (dbp) is the power a railway locomotive has available to haul a train or an agricultural tractor to pull an implement. This is a measured figure rather than a calculated one. A special railway car called a dynamometer car coupled behind a locomotive keeps a continuous record of drawbar tension and speed. From these, the power generated can be calculated. To determine the maximum power available, a controllable load is required; it is normally a second locomotive with its brakes applied, in addition to a static load.\nIf the drawbar force (F) is measured in pounds-force (lbf) and speed (v) is measured in miles per hour (mph), then the drawbar power (P) in horsepower (hp) is\nformula_7\nExample: How much power is needed to pull a drawbar load of 2,025 pounds-force at 5 miles per hour?\nformula_8\nThe constant 375 is because 1\u00a0hp = 375\u00a0lbf\u22c5mph. If other units are used, the constant is different. When using coherent SI units (watts, newtons, and metres per second), no constant is needed, and the formula becomes \"P\" = \"Fv\".\nThis formula may also be used to calculate the power of a jet engine, using the speed of the jet and the thrust required to maintain that speed.\nExample: how much power is generated with a thrust of 4000 pounds at 400 miles per hour?\nformula_9\nRAC horsepower (taxable horsepower).\nThis measure was instituted by the Royal Automobile Club and was used to denote the power of early 20th-century British cars. Many cars took their names from this figure (hence the Austin Seven and Riley Nine), while others had names such as \"40/50 hp\", which indicated the RAC figure followed by the true measured power.\nTaxable horsepower does not reflect developed horsepower; rather, it is a calculated figure based on the engine's bore size, number of cylinders, and a (now archaic) presumption of engine efficiency. As new engines were designed with ever-increasing efficiency, it was no longer a useful measure, but was kept in use by UK regulations, which used the rating for tax purposes. The United Kingdom was not the only country that used the RAC rating; many states in Australia used RAC hp to determine taxation. The RAC formula was sometimes applied in British colonies as well, such as Kenya (British East Africa).\n formula_10\nwhere\n \"D\" is the diameter (or bore) of the cylinder in inches,\n \"n\" is the number of cylinders.\nSince taxable horsepower was computed based on bore and number of cylinders, not based on actual displacement, it gave rise to engines with \"undersquare\" dimensions (bore smaller than stroke), which tended to impose an artificially low limit on rotational speed, hampering the potential power output and efficiency of the engine.\nThe situation persisted for several generations of four- and six-cylinder British engines: For example, Jaguar's 3.4-litre XK engine of the 1950s had six cylinders with a bore of and a stroke of , where most American automakers had long since moved to oversquare (large bore, short stroke) V8 engines. See, for example, the early .\nMeasurement.\nThe power of an engine may be measured or estimated at several points in the transmission of the power from its generation to its application. A number of names are used for the power developed at various stages in this process, but none is a clear indicator of either the measurement system or definition used.\nIn general:\nnominal horsepower is derived from the size of the engine and the piston speed and is only accurate at a steam pressure of ;\nindicated or gross horsepower is the theoretical capability of the engine [PLAN/ 33000];\nbrake/net/crankshaft horsepower (power delivered directly to and measured at the engine's crankshaft) equals\nindicated horsepower minus frictional losses within the engine (bearing drag, rod and crankshaft windage losses, oil film drag, etc.);\nshaft horsepower (power delivered to and measured at the output shaft of the transmission, when present in the system) equals\ncrankshaft horsepower minus frictional losses in the transmission (bearings, gears, oil drag, windage, etc.);\neffective or true (thp), commonly referred to as wheel horsepower (whp), equals\nshaft horsepower minus frictional losses in the universal joint/s, differential, wheel bearings, tire and chain, (if present).\nAll the above assumes that no power inflation factors have been applied to any of the readings.\nEngine designers use expressions other than horsepower to denote objective targets or performance, such as brake mean effective pressure (BMEP). This is a coefficient of theoretical brake horsepower and cylinder pressures during combustion.\nNominal horsepower.\nNominal horsepower (nhp) is an early 19th-century rule of thumb used to estimate the power of steam engines. It assumed a steam pressure of .\nNominal horsepower = 7 \u00d7 area of piston in square inches \u00d7 equivalent piston speed in feet per minute/33,000.\nFor paddle ships, the Admiralty rule was that the piston speed in feet per minute was taken as 129.7 \u00d7 (stroke)1/3.38. For screw steamers, the intended piston speed was used.\nThe stroke (or length of stroke) was the distance moved by the piston measured in feet.\nFor the nominal horsepower to equal the actual power it would be necessary for the mean steam pressure in the cylinder during the stroke to be and for the piston speed to be that generated by the assumed relationship for paddle ships.\nThe French Navy used the same definition of nominal horsepower as the Royal Navy.\nIndicated horsepower.\nIndicated horsepower (ihp) is the theoretical power of a reciprocating engine if it is completely frictionless in converting the expanding gas energy (piston pressure \u00d7 displacement) in the cylinders. It is calculated from the pressures developed in the cylinders, measured by a device called an \"engine indicator\" \u2013 hence indicated horsepower. As the piston advances throughout its stroke, the pressure against the piston generally decreases, and the indicator device usually generates a graph of pressure vs stroke within the working cylinder. From this graph the amount of work performed during the piston stroke may be calculated.\nIndicated horsepower was a better measure of engine power than nominal horsepower (nhp) because it took account of steam pressure. But unlike later measures such as shaft horsepower (shp) and brake horsepower (bhp), it did not take into account power losses due to the machinery internal frictional losses, such as a piston sliding within the cylinder, plus bearing friction, transmission and gear box friction, etc.\nBrake horsepower.\nBrake horsepower (bhp) is the power measured using a brake type (load) dynamometer at a specified location, such as the crankshaft, output shaft of the transmission, rear axle or rear wheels.\nIn Europe, the DIN 70020 standard tests the engine fitted with all ancillaries and the exhaust system as used in the car. The older American standard (SAE gross horsepower, referred to as \"bhp\") used an engine without alternator, water pump, and other auxiliary components such as power steering pump, muffled exhaust system, etc., so the figures were higher than the European figures for the same engine. The newer American standard (referred to as \"SAE net horsepower\") tests an engine with all the auxiliary components (detailed in Engine power test standards).\n\"Brake\" refers to the device which is used to provide an equal braking force, load to balance, or equal an engine's output force and hold it at a desired rotational speed. During testing, the output torque and rotational speed are measured to determine the brake horsepower. Horsepower was originally measured and calculated by use of the \"indicator diagram\" (a James Watt invention of the late 18th century), and later by means of a Prony brake connected to the engine's output shaft. Modern dynamometers use any of several braking methods to measure the engine's brake horsepower, the actual output of the engine itself, before losses to the drivetrain.\nShaft horsepower.\nShaft horsepower (shp) is the power delivered to a propeller or turbine shaft. Shaft horsepower is a common rating for turboshaft and turboprop engines, industrial turbines, and some marine applications.\nEquivalent shaft horsepower (eshp) is sometimes used to rate turboprop engines. It includes the equivalent power derived from residual jet thrust from the turbine exhaust. of residual jet thrust is estimated to be produced from one unit of horsepower.\nEngine power test standards.\nThere exist a number of different standards determining how the power and torque of an automobile engine is measured and corrected. Correction factors are used to adjust power and torque measurements to standard atmospheric conditions, to provide a more accurate comparison between engines as they are affected by the pressure, humidity, and temperature of ambient air. Some standards are described below.\nSociety of Automotive Engineers/SAE International.\nEarly \"SAE horsepower\".\nIn the early twentieth century, a so-called \"SAE horsepower\" was sometimes quoted for U.S. automobiles. This long predates the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) horsepower measurement standards and was another name for the industry standard ALAM or NACC horsepower figure and the same as the British RAC horsepower also used for tax purposes. Alliance for Automotive Innovation is the current successor of ALAM and NACC.\nSAE gross power.\nPrior to the 1972 model year, American automakers rated and advertised their engines in brake horsepower, \"bhp\", which was a version of brake horsepower called SAE gross horsepower because it was measured according to Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) standards (J245 and J1995) that call for a stock test engine without accessories (such as dynamo/alternator, radiator fan, water pump), and sometimes fitted with long tube test headers in lieu of the OEM exhaust manifolds. This contrasts with both SAE net power and DIN 70020 standards, which account for engine accessories (but not transmission losses). The atmospheric correction standards for barometric pressure, humidity and temperature for SAE gross power testing were relatively idealistic.\nSAE net power.\nIn the United States, the term \"bhp\" fell into disuse in 1971\u20131972, as automakers began to quote power in terms of SAE net horsepower in accord with SAE standard J1349. Like SAE gross and other brake horsepower protocols, SAE net hp is measured at the engine's crankshaft, and so does not account for transmission losses. However, similar to the DIN 70020 standard, SAE net power testing protocol calls for standard production-type belt-driven accessories, air cleaner, emission controls, exhaust system, and other power-consuming accessories. This produces ratings in closer alignment with the power produced by the engine as it is actually configured and sold.\nSAE certified power.\nIn 2005, the SAE introduced \"SAE Certified Power\" with SAE J2723. To attain certification the test must follow the SAE standard in question, take place in an ISO 9000/9002 certified facility and be witnessed by an SAE approved third party.\nA few manufacturers such as Honda and Toyota switched to the new ratings immediately. The rating for Toyota's Camry 3.0\u00a0L \"1MZ-FE\" V6 fell from . The company's Lexus ES 330 and Camry SE V6 (3.3\u00a0L V6) were previously rated at but the ES 330 dropped to while the Camry declined to . The first engine certified under the new program was the 7.0\u00a0L LS7 used in the 2006 Chevrolet Corvette Z06. Certified power rose slightly from .\nWhile Toyota and Honda are retesting their entire vehicle lineups, other automakers generally are retesting only those with updated powertrains. For example, the 2006 Ford Five Hundred is rated at , the same as that of 2005 model. However, the 2006 rating does not reflect the new SAE testing procedure, as Ford did not opt to incur the extra expense of retesting its existing engines. Over time, most automakers are expected to comply with the new guidelines.\nSAE tightened its horsepower rules to eliminate the opportunity for engine manufacturers to manipulate factors affecting performance such as how much oil was in the crankcase, engine control system calibration, and whether an engine was tested with high octane fuel. In some cases, such can add up to a change in horsepower ratings.\n\"Deutsches Institut f\u00fcr Normung\" 70020 (DIN 70020).\nDIN 70020 is a German DIN standard for measuring road vehicle horsepower. DIN hp is measured at the engine's output shaft as a form of metric horsepower rather than mechanical horsepower. Similar to SAE net power rating, and unlike SAE gross power, DIN testing measures the engine as installed in the vehicle, with cooling system, charging system and stock exhaust system all connected. DIN\u00a0hp is often abbreviated as \"PS\", derived from the German word Pferdest\u00e4rke (literally, \"horse strength\").\nCUNA.\nA test standard by Italian CUNA (\"Commissione Tecnica per l'Unificazione nell'Automobile\", Technical Commission for Automobile Unification), a federated entity of standards organisation UNI, was formerly used in Italy.\nCUNA prescribed that the engine be tested with all accessories necessary to its running fitted (such as the water pump), while all others \u2013 such as alternator/dynamo, radiator fan, and exhaust manifold \u2013 could be omitted. All calibration and accessories had to be as on production engines.\nEconomic Commission for Europe R24.\nECE R24 is a UN standard for the approval of compression ignition engine emissions, installation and measurement of engine power. It is similar to DIN 70020 standard, but with different requirements for connecting an engine's fan during testing causing it to absorb less power from the engine.\nEconomic Commission for Europe R85.\nECE R85 is a UN standard for the approval of internal combustion engines with regard to the measurement of the net power.\n80/1269/EEC.\n80/1269/EEC of 16 December 1980 is a European Union standard for road vehicle engine power.\nInternational Organization for Standardization.\nThe International Organization for Standardization (ISO) publishes several standards for measuring engine horsepower.\nJapanese Industrial Standard (JIS) D 1001.\nJIS D 1001 is a Japanese net, and gross, engine power test code for automobiles or trucks having a spark ignition, diesel engine, or fuel injection engine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14020", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14020", "title": "History of London", "text": "Historical development of London\nThe history of London, the capital city of England and the United Kingdom, extends over 2000 years. In that time, it has become one of the world's most significant financial and cultural centres. It has withstood plague, devastating fire, civil war, aerial bombardment, terrorist attacks, and riots.\nThe City of London is the historic core of the Greater London metropolis, and is today its primary financial district, though it represents only a small part of the wider metropolis.\nFoundations and prehistory.\nSome recent discoveries indicate probable very early settlements near the Thames in the London area. At the Fulham Palace site in Fulham in modern West London, evidence of prehistoric activity dating from the late Mesolithic and early Neolithic age was uncovered by various archaeological investigations undertaken there since the early 1970s, depicting the use of struck flint. The site appears to have been an isolated eyot within the braided river channel of the River Thames. Later prehistoric activity dating to the Bronze Age, was revealed in the form of a possible barrow, whilst there is limited evidence for a late Iron Age occupation.\nIn 1993, the remains of a Bronze Age bridge were found on the Thames's south foreshore, upstream of Vauxhall Bridge. This bridge either crossed the Thames or went to a now-lost island in the river. Dendrology dated the timbers to between 1750 BC and 1285 BC. In 2001, a further dig found that the timbers were driven vertically into the ground on the south bank of the Thames west of Vauxhall Bridge.\nIn 2010, the foundations of a large timber structure, dated to between 4800 BC and 4500 BC were found, again on the foreshore south of Vauxhall Bridge. The function of the Mesolithic structure is not known. All these structures are on the south bank at a natural crossing point where the River Effra flows into the Thames.\nThe archaeologist Leslie Wallace notes, \"Because no LPRIA [Late pre-Roman Iron Age] settlements or significant domestic refuse have been found in London, despite extensive archaeological excavation, arguments for a purely Roman foundation of London are now common and uncontroversial.\"\nEarly history.\nRoman London (AD\u00a047\u2013410).\n\"Londinium\" was established as a civilian town by the Romans about four years after the invasion of AD\u00a043. London, like Rome, was founded on the point of the river where it was narrow enough to bridge and the strategic location of the city provided easy access to much of Europe. Early Roman London occupied a relatively small area, roughly equivalent to the size of Hyde Park. In around AD\u00a060, it was destroyed by the Iceni led by their queen Boudica. The city was quickly rebuilt as a planned Roman town and recovered after perhaps 10 years; the city grew rapidly over the following decades.\nAlthough some sources claim that during the 2nd century AD \"Londinium\" replaced Colchester as the capital of Roman Britain (Britannia) there is no surviving evidence to prove it was ever the capital of Roman Britain. Its population was around 60,000 inhabitants. It boasted major public buildings, including the largest basilica north of the Alps, temples, bath houses, an amphitheatre and a large fort for the city garrison. Political instability and recession from the 3rd century onwards led to a slow decline.\nAt some time between 180 and 225, the Romans built the defensive London Wall around the landward side of the city. The wall was about long, high, and thick. The wall would survive for another 1,600 years and define the City of London's perimeters for centuries to come. The perimeters of the present City are roughly defined by the line of the ancient wall.\nLondinium was an ethnically diverse city with inhabitants from across the Roman Empire, including natives of Britannia, continental Europe, the Middle East, and North Africa.\nIn the late 3rd century, Londinium was raided on several occasions by Saxon pirates. This led, from around 255 onwards, to the construction of an additional riverside wall. Six of the traditional seven city gates of London are of Roman origin, namely: Ludgate, Newgate, Aldersgate, Cripplegate, Bishopsgate and Aldgate (Moorgate is the exception, being of medieval origin).\nBy the 5th century, the Roman Empire was in rapid decline and in 410, the Roman occupation of Britannia came to an end. Following this, the Roman city also went into rapid decline and by the end of the 5th century was practically abandoned.\nAnglo-Saxon London (5th century \u2013 1066).\nUntil recently it was believed that Anglo-Saxon settlements initially avoided the area immediately around Londinium. However, the discovery in 2008 of an Anglo-Saxon cemetery at Covent Garden indicates that the incomers had begun to settle there at least as early as the 6th century and possibly in the 5th. The main focus of this settlement was outside the Roman walls, clustering a short distance to the west along what is now the Strand, between the Aldwych and Trafalgar Square. It was known as \"Lundenwic\", the \"-wic\" suffix here denoting a trading settlement. Recent excavations have also highlighted the population density and relatively sophisticated urban organisation of this earlier Anglo-Saxon London, which was laid out on a grid pattern and grew to house a likely population of 10,000 to 12,000.\nEarly Anglo-Saxon London belonged to a people known as the Middle Saxons, from whom the name of the county of Middlesex is derived, but who probably also occupied the approximate area of modern Hertfordshire and Surrey. However, by the early 7th century the London area had been incorporated into the kingdom of the East Saxons. In 604 King S\u00e6berht of Essex converted to Christianity and London received Mellitus, its first post-Roman bishop.\nAt this time Essex was under the overlordship of King \u00c6thelberht of Kent, and it was under \u00c6thelberht's patronage that Mellitus founded the first St. Paul's Cathedral, traditionally said to be on the site of an old Roman Temple of Diana (although Christopher Wren found no evidence of this). It would have only been a modest church at first and may well have been destroyed after he was expelled from the city by Saeberht's pagan successors.\nThe permanent establishment of Christianity in the East Saxon kingdom took place during the reign of King Sigeberht II in the 650s. During the 8th century, the kingdom of Mercia extended its dominance over south-eastern England, initially through overlordship which at times developed into outright annexation. London seems to have come under direct Mercian control in the 730s.\nViking attacks dominated most of the 9th century, becoming increasingly common from around 830 onwards. London was sacked in 842 and again in 851. The Danish \"Great Heathen Army\", which had rampaged across England since 865, wintered in London in 871. The city remained in Danish hands until 886, when it was captured by the forces of King Alfred the Great of Wessex and reincorporated into Mercia, then governed under Alfred's sovereignty by his son-in-law Ealdorman \u00c6thelred.\nAround this time the focus of settlement moved within the old Roman walls for the sake of defence, and the city became known as \"Lundenburh\". The Roman walls were repaired and the defensive ditch re-cut, while the bridge was probably rebuilt at this time. A second fortified borough was established on the south bank at Southwark, the \"Su\u00feringa Geworc\" (defensive work of the men of Surrey). The old settlement of \"Lundenwic\" became known as the \"eald wic\" or \"old settlement\", a name which survives today as Aldwych.\nFrom this point, the City of London began to develop its own unique local government. Following \u00c6thelred's death in 911 it was transferred to Wessex, preceding the absorption of the rest of Mercia in 918. Although it faced competition for political pre-eminence in the united Kingdom of England from the traditional West Saxon centre of Winchester, London's size and commercial wealth brought it a steadily increasing importance as a focus of governmental activity. King Athelstan held many meetings of the \"witan\" in London and issued laws from there, while King \u00c6thelred the Unready issued the Laws of London there in 978.\nFollowing the resumption of Viking attacks in the reign of \u00c6thelred, London was unsuccessfully attacked in 994 by an army under King Sweyn Forkbeard of Denmark. As English resistance to the sustained and escalating Danish onslaught finally collapsed in 1013, London repulsed an attack by the Danes and was the last place to hold out while the rest of the country submitted to Sweyn, but by the end of the year it too capitulated and \u00c6thelred fled abroad. Sweyn died just five weeks after having been proclaimed king and \u00c6thelred was restored to the throne, but Sweyn's son Cnut returned to the attack in 1015.\nAfter \u00c6thelred's death at London in 1016 his son Edmund Ironside was proclaimed king there by the \"witangemot\" and left to gather forces in Wessex. London was then subjected to a systematic siege by Cnut but was relieved by King Edmund's army; when Edmund again left to recruit reinforcements in Wessex the Danes resumed the siege but were again unsuccessful. However, following his defeat at the Battle of Assandun Edmund ceded to Cnut all of England north of the Thames, including London, and his death a few weeks later left Cnut in control of the whole country.\nA Norse saga tells of a battle when King \u00c6thelred returned to attack Danish-occupied London. According to the saga, the Danes lined London Bridge and showered the attackers with spears. Undaunted, the attackers pulled the roofs off nearby houses and held them over their heads in the boats. Thus protected, they were able to get close enough to the bridge to attach ropes to the piers and pull the bridge down, thus ending the Viking occupation of London. This story presumably relates to \u00c6thelred's return to power after Sweyn's death in 1014, but there is no strong evidence of any such struggle for control of London on that occasion.\nFollowing the extinction of Cnut's dynasty in 1042 English rule was restored under Edward the Confessor. He was responsible for the foundation of Westminster Abbey and spent much of his time upstream of the City at Westminster, which from this time steadily supplanted the City itself as the centre of government. Edward's death at Westminster in 1066 without a clear heir led to a succession dispute and the Norman conquest of England. Earl Harold Godwinson was elected king by the \"witangemot\" and crowned at Westminster Abbey, but was defeated and killed by William II, Duke of Normandy at the Battle of Hastings. The surviving members of the \"witan\" met in London and elected King Edward's young nephew Edgar the \u00c6theling as king.\nThe Normans advanced to the south bank of the Thames opposite London, where they defeated an English attack and burned Southwark, but were unable to storm the bridge. They moved upstream and crossed the river at Wallingford before advancing on London from the north-west. The resolve of the English leadership to resist collapsed and the chief citizens of London went out together with the leading members of the Church and aristocracy to submit to William at Berkhamsted, although according to some accounts there was a subsequent violent clash when the Normans reached the city. Having occupied London, William was crowned king in Westminster Abbey.\nNorman and Medieval London (1066 \u2013 late 15th century).\nThe new Norman regime established new fortresses within the city to dominate the native population. By far the most important of these was the Tower of London at the eastern end of the city, where the initial timber fortification was rapidly replaced by the construction of the first stone castle in England. The smaller forts of Baynard's Castle and Montfichet's Castle were also established along the waterfront. King William also granted a charter in 1067 confirming the city's existing rights, privileges and laws. London was a centre of England's nascent Jewish population, the first of whom arrived in about 1070. Its growing self-government was consolidated by the election rights granted by King John in 1199 and 1215.\nOn 17 October 1091 a tornado rated T8 on the TORRO scale (equivalent to an F4 on the Fujita scale) hit London; it directly struck the church of St. Mary-le-Bow; four rafters long were said to have been buried so deep into the ground that only was visible. Other churches in the area were destroyed as well; it was reported to have also destroyed over 600 houses (although most of them were primarily wood) and hit the London Bridge, after the tornado the bridge was rebuilt in stone. The tornado caused two deaths and an unknown number of injuries; this tornado is mentioned in chronicles by Florence of Worcester and William of Malmesbury, the latter of the two describing it as \"a great spectacle for those watching from afar, but a terrifying experience for those standing near\".\nIn 1097, William Rufus, the son of William the Conqueror, began the construction of Westminster Hall, which became the focus of the Palace of Westminster.\nIn 1176, construction began of the most famous incarnation of London Bridge (completed in 1209), which was built on the site of several earlier timber bridges. This bridge would last for 600 years, and remained London's only bridge across the River Thames until 1739.\nAntisemitic violence against Jews took place in 1190, after it was rumoured that the new King had ordered their massacre after they had presented themselves at his coronation.\nIn 1216, during the First Barons' War London was occupied by Prince Louis of France, who had been called in by the baronial rebels against King John and was acclaimed as King of England in St Paul's Cathedral. However, following John's death in 1217 Louis's supporters reverted to their Plantagenet allegiance, rallying round John's son Henry III, and Louis was forced to withdraw from England.\nIn 1224, after an accusation of ritual murder, the Jewish community was subjected to a steep punitive levy. Then in 1232, Henry III confiscated the principal synagogue of the London Jewish community because he claimed their chanting was audible in a neighbouring church. In 1264, during the Second Barons' War, Simon de Montfort's rebels occupied London and killed 500 Jews while attempting to seize records of debts.\nLondon's Jewish community was forced to leave England by the Edict of Expulsion issued by King Edward I in 1290. They left for France, Holland and farther afield; their property was seized, and many suffered robbery and murder as they departed.\nOver the following centuries, London would shake off the heavy French cultural and linguistic influence which had been there since the times of the Norman conquest. The city would figure heavily in the development of Early Modern English.\nDuring the Peasants' Revolt of 1381, London was invaded by rebels led by Wat Tyler. A group of peasants stormed the Tower of London and executed the Lord Chancellor, Archbishop Simon Sudbury, and the Lord Treasurer. The peasants looted the city and set fire to numerous buildings. Tyler was stabbed to death by the Lord Mayor William Walworth in a confrontation at Smithfield and the revolt collapsed.\nTrade increased steadily during the Middle Ages, and London grew heavily as a result. In 1100, London's population was somewhat more than 15,000. By 1300, it had grown to roughly 80,000. London lost at least half of its population during the Black Death in the mid-14th century, but its economic and political importance stimulated a quick recovery despite further epidemics. Trade in London was organised into various craft guilds, which effectively controlled the city, and elected the Lord Mayor of the City of London.\nMedieval London was made up of narrow and twisting streets, and most of the buildings were made from combustible materials such as timber and straw, which made fire a constant threat, while sanitation in cities was of low-quality.\nModern history.\nTudor London (1485\u20131604).\nIn 1475, the Hanseatic League set up its main English trading base (\"kontor\") in London, called \"Stalhof\" or \"Steelyard\". It existed until 1853, when the Hanseatic cities of L\u00fcbeck, Bremen and Hamburg sold the property to South Eastern Railway. Woollen cloth was shipped undyed and undressed from 14th/15th century London to the nearby shores of the Low Countries, where it was considered indispensable.\nDuring the English Reformation, London was the principal early centre of Protestantism in England. Its close commercial connections with the Protestant heartlands in northern continental Europe, large foreign mercantile communities, disproportionately large number of literate inhabitants and role as the centre of the English print trade all contributed to the spread of the new ideas of religious reform. Before the Reformation, more than half of the area of London was the property of monasteries, nunneries and other religious houses.\nKing Henry VIII's \"Dissolution of the Monasteries\" had a profound effect on the city as nearly all of this property changed hands. The process started in the mid-1530s, and by 1538 most of the larger monastic houses had been abolished. Holy Trinity Aldgate went to Lord Audley, and the Marquess of Winchester built himself a house in part of its precincts. The Charterhouse went to Lord North, Blackfriars to , the leper hospital of St Giles to Lord Dudley, while the king took for himself the leper hospital of St James, which was rebuilt as St James's Palace.\nThe period saw London rapidly rising in importance among Europe's commercial centres. Trade expanded beyond Western Europe to Russia, the Levant, and the Americas. This was the period of mercantilism and monopoly trading companies such as the Muscovy Company (1555) and the British East India Company (1600) were established in London by royal charter. The latter, which ultimately came to rule India, was one of the key institutions in London, and in Britain as a whole, for two and a half centuries. Immigrants arrived in London not just from all over England and Wales, but from abroad as well, for example Huguenots from France; the population rose from an estimated 50,000 in 1530 to about 225,000 in 1605. The growth of the population and wealth of London was fuelled by a vast expansion in the use of coastal shipping.\nThe late 16th and early 17th century saw the great flourishing of drama in London whose preeminent figure was the poet and playwright William Shakespeare. During the mostly calm later years of Elizabeth's reign, some of her courtiers and some of the wealthier citizens of London built themselves country residences in Middlesex, Essex and Surrey. This was an early stirring of the villa movement, the taste for residences which were neither of the city nor on an agricultural estate, but at the time of Elizabeth's death in 1603, London was still relatively compact.\nXenophobia was rampant in London, and increased after the 1580s. Many immigrants became disillusioned by routine threats of violence and molestation, attempts at expulsion of foreigners, and the great difficulty in acquiring English citizenship. Dutch cities proved more hospitable, and many left London permanently. Foreigners are estimated to have made up 4,000 of the 100,000 residents of London by 1600, many being Dutch and German workers and traders.\nStuart London (1603\u20131714).\nLondon's expansion beyond the boundaries of the City was decisively established in the 17th century. In the opening years of that century the immediate environs of the City, with the principal exception of the aristocratic residences in the direction of Westminster, were still considered not conducive to health. Immediately to the north was Moorfields, which had recently been drained and laid out in walks, but it was frequented by beggars and travellers, who crossed it in order to get into London. Adjoining Moorfields were Finsbury Fields, a favourite practising ground for the archers, Mile End, then a common on the Great Eastern Road and famous as a rendezvous for the troops.\nThe preparations for King James I\u2019s accession to the throne were interrupted by a severe plague epidemic, which may have killed over thirty thousand people. The Lord Mayor's Show, which had been discontinued for some years, was revived by order of the king in 1609. The dissolved monastery of the Charterhouse, which had been bought and sold by the courtiers several times, was purchased by Thomas Sutton for \u00a313,000. The new hospital, chapel, and schoolhouse were begun in 1611. Charterhouse School was to be one of the principal public schools in London until it moved to Surrey in the Victorian era, and the site is still used as a medical school.\nThe general meeting-place of Londoners in the day-time was the nave of Old St. Paul's Cathedral. Merchants conducted business in the aisles, and used the font as a counter upon which to make their payments; lawyers received clients at their particular pillars; and the unemployed looked for work. St Paul's Churchyard was the centre of the book trade and Fleet Street was a centre of public entertainment. Under James I the theatre, which established itself so firmly in the latter years of Elizabeth, grew further in popularity. The performances at the public theatres were complemented by elaborate masques at the royal court and at the inns of court.\nCharles I acceded to the throne in 1625. During his reign, aristocrats began to inhabit the West End in large numbers. In addition to those who had specific business at court, increasing numbers of country landowners and their families lived in London for part of the year simply for the social life. This was the beginning of the \"London season\". Lincoln's Inn Fields was built about 1629. The piazza of Covent Garden, designed by England's first classically trained architect Inigo Jones followed in about 1632. The neighbouring streets were built shortly afterwards, and the names of Henrietta, Charles, James, King and York Streets were given after members of the royal family.\nIn January 1642 five members of the Parliament of England whom the King wished to arrest were granted refuge in the City. In August of the same year the King raised his banner at Nottingham, and during the English Civil War London took the side of the parliament. Initially the king had the upper hand in military terms and in November he won the Battle of Brentford a few miles to the west of London. The City organised a new makeshift army and Charles hesitated and retreated.\nSubsequently, an extensive system of fortifications was built to protect London from a renewed attack by the Royalists. This comprised a strong earthen rampart, enhanced with bastions and redoubts. It was well beyond the City walls and encompassed the whole urban area, including Westminster and Southwark. London was not seriously threatened by the royalists again, and the financial resources of the City made an important contribution to the Parliamentarians' victory in the war.\nThe unsanitary and overcrowded City of London has suffered numerous outbreaks of the plague many times over the centuries, but in Britain it is the last major outbreak which is remembered as the \"Great Plague\". It occurred in 1665 and 1666 and killed around 60,000 people, which was one-fifth of the population. Samuel Pepys chronicled the epidemic in his diary. On 4 September 1665 he wrote \"I have stayed in the city till above 7400 died in one week, and of them about 6000 of the plague, and little noise heard day or night but tolling of bells.\"\nGreat Fire of London (1666).\nThe Great Plague was immediately followed by another catastrophe, albeit one which helped to put an end to the plague. On the Sunday, 2 September 1666 the Great Fire of London broke out at one o'clock in the morning at a bakery in Pudding Lane in the southern part of the City. Fanned by an eastern wind the fire spread, and efforts to arrest it by pulling down houses to make firebreaks were disorganised to begin with. On Tuesday night the wind fell somewhat, and on Wednesday the fire slackened. On Thursday it was extinguished, but on the evening of that day the flames again burst forth at the Temple. Some houses were at once blown up by gunpowder, and thus the fire was finally mastered. The Monument was built to commemorate the fire: for over a century and a half it bore an inscription attributing the conflagration to a \"popish frenzy\".\nThe fire destroyed about 60% of the City, including Old St Paul's Cathedral, 87 parish churches, 44 livery company halls and the Royal Exchange. However, the number of lives lost was surprisingly small; it is believed to have been 16 at most. Within a few days of the fire, three plans were presented to the king for the rebuilding of the city, by Christopher Wren, John Evelyn and Robert Hooke.\nWren proposed to build main thoroughfares north and south, and east and west, to insulate all the churches in conspicuous positions, to form the most public places into large piazzas, to unite the halls of the 12 chief livery companies into one regular square annexed to the Guildhall, and to make a fine quay on the bank of the river from Blackfriars to the Tower of London. Wren wished to build the new streets straight and in three standard widths of thirty, sixty and ninety feet. Evelyn's plan differed from Wren's chiefly in proposing a street from the church of St Dunstan's in the East to the St Paul's, and in having no quay or terrace along the river. These plans were not implemented, and the rebuilt city generally followed the streetplan of the old one, and most of it has survived into the 21st century.\nNonetheless, the new City was different from the old one. Many aristocratic residents never returned, preferring to take new houses in the West End, where fashionable new districts such as St. James's were built close to the main royal residence, which was the Palace of Whitehall until it was destroyed by fire in the 1690s, and thereafter St. James's Palace. The rural lane of Piccadilly sprouted courtiers mansions such as Burlington House. Thus the separation between the middle class mercantile City of London, and the aristocratic world of the court in Westminster became complete.\nIn the City itself there was a move from wooden buildings to stone and brick construction to reduce the risk of fire. Parliament's Rebuilding of London Act 1666 stated \"building with brick [is] not only more comely and durable, but also more safe against future perils of fire\". From then on only doorcases, window-frames and shop fronts were allowed to be made of wood.\nChristopher Wren's plan for a new model London came to nothing, but he was appointed to rebuild the ruined parish churches and to replace St Paul's Cathedral. His domed baroque cathedral was the primary symbol of London for at least a century and a half. As city surveyor, Robert Hooke oversaw the reconstruction of the City's houses. The East End, that is the area immediately to the east of the city walls, also became heavily populated in the decades after the Great Fire. London's docks began to extend downstream, attracting many working people who worked on the docks themselves and in the processing and distributive trades. These people lived in Whitechapel, Wapping, Stepney, and Limehouse, generally in slum conditions.\nIn the winter of 1683\u20131684, a frost fair was held on the Thames. The frost, which began about seven weeks before Christmas and continued for six weeks after, was the greatest on record. The Revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685 led to a large migration of Huguenots to London. They established a silk industry at Spitalfields.\nAt this time the Bank of England was founded, and the British East India Company was expanding its influence. Lloyd's of London also began to operate in the late 17th century. In 1700, London handled 80% of England's imports, 69% of its exports and 86% of its re-exports. Many of the goods were luxuries from the Americas and Asia such as silk, sugar, tea, and tobacco. The last figure emphasises London's role as an entrepot: while it had many craftsmen in the 17th century, and would later acquire some large factories, its economic prominence was never based primarily on industry. Instead it was a great trading and redistribution centre. Goods were brought to London by England's increasingly dominant merchant navy, not only to satisfy domestic demand, but also for re-export throughout Europe and beyond.\nWilliam III, a Dutchman, cared little for London, the smoke of which gave him asthma, and after the first fire at the Palace of Whitehall in 1691, he purchased Nottingham House and transformed it into Kensington Palace. Kensington was then an insignificant village, but the arrival of the court soon caused it to grow in importance. The palace was rarely favoured by future monarchs, but its construction was another step in the expansion of the bounds of London. During the same reign Greenwich Hospital, then well outside the boundary of London, but now comfortably inside it, was begun; it was the naval complement to the Chelsea Hospital for former soldiers, which had been founded in 1681. During the reign of Queen Anne an act was passed authorising the building of 50 new churches to serve the greatly increased population living outside the boundaries of the City of London.\n18th century.\nThe 18th century was a period of rapid growth for London, reflecting an increasing national population, the early stirrings of the Industrial Revolution, and London's role at the centre of the evolving British Empire.\nIn 1707, an Act of Union was passed merging the Scottish and the English Parliaments, thus establishing the Kingdom of Great Britain. A year later, in 1708 Christopher Wren's masterpiece, St Paul's Cathedral was completed on his birthday. However, the first service had been held on 2nd of December 1697; more than 10 years earlier. This Cathedral replaced the original St. Paul's which had been completely destroyed by the Great Fire of London. This building is considered one of the finest in Britain and a fine example of Baroque architecture.\nMany tradesmen from different countries came to London to trade goods and merchandise. Also, more immigrants moved to London making the population greater. More people also moved to London for work and for business making London an altogether bigger and busier city. Britain's victory in the Seven Years' War increased the country's international standing and opened large new markets to British trade, further boosting London's prosperity.\nDuring the Georgian period London spread beyond its traditional limits at an accelerating pace. This is shown in a series of detailed maps, particularly John Rocque's 1741\u201345 map \"(see below)\" and his 1746 Map of London. New districts such as Mayfair were built for the rich in the West End, new bridges over the Thames encouraged an acceleration of development in South London and in the East End, the Port of London expanded downstream from the City.\nIn 1780, the Tower of London held its only American prisoner, Henry Laurens, a former president of the Continental Congress and a Founding Father. In 1779, he was the Congress's representative of Holland, and got the country's support for the Revolution. On his return voyage back to America, he was captured by the Royal Navy and charged with treason after they had found evidence of a reason of war between Great Britain and the Netherlands. He was released from the Tower on 21 December 1781 in exchange for General Charles Cornwallis.\nIn 1762, King George III acquired Buckingham Palace (then called Buckingham House) from the Duke of Buckingham. It was enlarged over the next 75 years by architects including John Nash.\nA phenomenon of the era was the coffeehouse, which became a popular place to debate ideas. Growing literacy and the development of the printing press meant that news became widely available. Fleet Street became the centre of the embryonic national press during the century.\n18th-century London was dogged by crime. The Bow Street Runners were established in 1750 as a professional police force. Penalties for crime were harsh, with the death penalty being applied for fairly minor crimes. Public hangings were common in London, and were popular public events.\nIn 1780, London was rocked by the Gordon Riots, an uprising by Protestants against Roman Catholic emancipation led by Lord George Gordon. Severe damage was caused to Catholic churches and homes, and 285 rioters were killed.\nUp until 1750, London Bridge was the only crossing over the Thames, but in that year Westminster Bridge was opened and, for the first time in history, London Bridge, in a sense, had a rival. In 1798, Frankfurt banker Nathan Mayer Rothschild arrived in London and set up a banking house in the city, with a large sum of money given to him by his father, Amschel Mayer Rothschild. The Rothschilds also had banks in Paris and Vienna. The bank financed numerous large-scale projects, especially regarding railways around the world and the Suez Canal.\nThe 18th century saw the breakaway of the American colonies and many other unfortunate events in London, but also great change and Enlightenment. This all led into the beginning of modern times, the 19th century.\n19th century.\nDuring the 19th century, London was transformed into the world's largest city and capital of the British Empire. Its population expanded from 1\u00a0million in 1800 to 6.7\u00a0million a century later. During this period, London became a global political, financial, and trading capital. In this position, it was largely unrivalled until the latter part of the century, when Paris and New York City began to threaten its dominance.\nWhile the city grew wealthy as Britain's holdings expanded, 19th-century London was also a city of poverty, where millions lived in overcrowded and unsanitary slums. Life for the poor was immortalised by Charles Dickens in such novels as Oliver Twist.\nIn 1829, the then Home Secretary (and future prime minister) Robert Peel established the Metropolitan Police as a police force covering the entire urban area. The force gained the nickname of \"bobbies\" or \"peelers\" named after Robert Peel.\n19th-century London was transformed by the coming of the railways. A new network of metropolitan railways allowed for the development of suburbs in neighbouring counties from which middle-class and wealthy people could commute to the centre. While this spurred the massive outward growth of the city, the growth of greater London also exacerbated the class divide, as the wealthier classes emigrated to the suburbs, leaving the poor to inhabit the inner city areas.\nThe first railway to be built in London was a line from London Bridge to Greenwich, which opened in 1836. This was soon followed by the opening of great rail termini which eventually linked London to every corner of Great Britain, including Euston station (1837), Paddington station (1838), Fenchurch Street station (1841), Waterloo station (1848), King's Cross station (1850), and St Pancras station (1863). From 1863, the first lines of the London Underground were constructed.\nThe urbanised area continued to grow rapidly, spreading into Islington, Paddington, Belgravia, Holborn, Finsbury, Shoreditch, Southwark and Lambeth. Towards the middle of the century, London's antiquated local government system, consisting of ancient parishes and vestries, struggled to cope with the rapid growth in population. In 1855, the Metropolitan Board of Works (MBW) was created to provide London with adequate infrastructure to cope with its growth. One of its first tasks was addressing London's sanitation problems. At the time, raw sewage was pumped straight into the River Thames. This culminated in The Great Stink of 1858.\nParliament finally gave consent for the MBW to construct a large system of sewers. The engineer put in charge of building the new system was Joseph Bazalgette. In what was one of the largest civil engineering projects of the 19th century, he oversaw construction of over 2100\u00a0km of tunnels and pipes under London to take away sewage and provide clean drinking water. When the London sewerage system was completed, the death toll in London dropped dramatically, and epidemics of cholera and other diseases were curtailed. Bazalgette's system is still in use today.\nOne of the most famous events of 19th-century London was the Great Exhibition of 1851. Held at The Crystal Palace, the fair attracted 6\u00a0million visitors from across the world and displayed Britain at the height of its Imperial dominance.\nAs the capital of a massive empire, London became a magnet for immigrants from the colonies and poorer parts of Europe. A large Irish population settled in the city during the Victorian period, with many of the newcomers refugees from the Great Famine (1845\u20131849). At one point, Catholic Irish made up about 20% of London's population; they typically lived in overcrowded slums. London also became home to a sizable Jewish community, which was notable for its entrepreneurship in the clothing trade and merchandising.\nIn 1888, the new County of London was established, administered by the London County Council. This was the first elected London-wide administrative body, replacing the earlier Metropolitan Board of Works, which had been made up of appointees. The County of London covered broadly what was then the full extent of the London conurbation, although the conurbation later outgrew the boundaries of the county. In 1900, the county was sub-divided into 28 metropolitan boroughs, which formed a more local tier of administration than the county council.\nMany famous buildings and landmarks of London were constructed during the 19th century including:\n20th century.\n1900 to 1939.\nLondon entered the 20th century at the height of its influence as the capital of one of the largest empires in history, but the new century was to bring many challenges.\nLondon's population continued to grow rapidly in the early decades of the century, and public transport was greatly expanded. A large tram network was constructed by the London County Council, through the LCC Tramways; the first motorbus service began in the 1900s. Improvements to London's overground and underground rail network, including large scale electrification were progressively carried out.\nDuring World War I, London experienced its first bombing raids carried out by German zeppelin airships; these killed around 700 people and caused great terror, but were merely a foretaste of what was to come. The city of London would experience many more terrors as a result of both World Wars. The largest explosion in London occurred during World War I: the Silvertown explosion, when a munitions factory containing 50 tons of TNT exploded, killing 73 and injuring 400.\nThe period between the two World Wars saw London's geographical extent growing more quickly than ever before or since. A preference for lower density suburban housing, typically semi-detached, by Londoners seeking a more \"rural\" lifestyle, superseded Londoners' old predilection for terraced houses. This was facilitated not only by a continuing expansion of the rail network, including trams and the Underground, but also by slowly widening car ownership. London's suburbs expanded outside the boundaries of the County of London, into the neighbouring counties of Essex, Hertfordshire, Kent, Middlesex, and Surrey.\nLike the rest of the country, London suffered severe unemployment during the Great Depression of the 1930s. In the East End during the 1930s, politically extreme parties of both right and left flourished. The Communist Party of Great Britain and the British Union of Fascists both gained serious support. Clashes between right and left culminated in the Battle of Cable Street in 1936. The population of London reached an all-time peak of 8.6\u00a0million in 1939.\nLarge numbers of Jewish immigrants fleeing from Nazi Germany settled in London during the 1930s, mostly in the East End.\nThe Labour Party politician Herbert Morrison was a dominant figure in local government in the 1920s and 1930s. He became mayor of Hackney and a member of the London County Council in 1922, and for a while was Minister of Transport in Ramsay MacDonald's cabinet. When Labour gained power in London in 1934, Morrison unified the bus, tram and trolleybus services with the Underground, by the creation of the London Passenger Transport Board (known as London Transport) in 1933., He led the effort to finance and build the new Waterloo Bridge. He designed the Metropolitan Green Belt around the suburbs and worked to clear slums, build schools, and reform public assistance.\nIn World War II.\nDuring World War II, London, as many other British cities, suffered severe damage, being bombed extensively by the \"Luftwaffe\" as a part of the Blitz. Prior to the bombing, hundreds of thousands of children in London were evacuated to the countryside to avoid the bombing. Civilians took shelter from the air raids in underground stations.\nThe heaviest bombing took place during The Blitz between 7 September 1940 and 10 May 1941. During this period, London was subjected to 71 separate raids receiving over 18,000 tonnes of high explosive. One raid in December 1940, which became known as the Second Great Fire of London, saw a firestorm engulf much of the City of London and destroy many historic buildings. St Paul's Cathedral, however, remained unscathed; a photograph showing the cathedral shrouded in smoke became a famous image of the war.\nHaving failed to defeat Britain, Adolf Hitler, the dictator of Nazi Germany, turned his attention to the Eastern front and regular bombing raids ceased. They began again, but on a smaller scale with the \"Little Blitz\" in early 1944. Towards the end of the war, during 1944/45 London again came under heavy attack by pilotless V-1 flying bombs and V-2 rockets, which were fired from Nazi occupied Europe. These attacks only came to an end when their launch sites were captured by advancing Allied forces.\nLondon suffered severe damage and heavy casualties, the worst hit part being the Docklands area. By the war's end, just under 30,000 Londoners had been killed by the bombing, and over 50,000 seriously injured, tens of thousands of buildings were destroyed, and hundreds of thousands of people were made homeless.\n1945\u20132000.\nThree years after the war, the 1948 Summer Olympics were held at the original Wembley Stadium, at a time when the city had barely recovered from the war. London's rebuilding was slow to begin. However, in 1951 the Festival of Britain was held, which marked an increasing mood of optimism and forward looking.\nIn the immediate postwar years housing was a major issue in London, due to the large amount of housing which had been destroyed in the war. The authorities decided upon high-rise blocks of flats as the answer to housing shortages. During the 1950s and 1960s the skyline of London altered dramatically as tower blocks were erected, although these later proved unpopular. In a bid to reduce the number of people living in overcrowded housing, a policy was introduced of encouraging people to move into newly built new towns surrounding London. Living standards also rose, with real earnings rising by approximately 70% in the 20 years after the end of the war.\nThrough the 19th and in the early half of the 20th century, Londoners used coal for heating their homes, which produced large amounts of smoke. In combination with climatic conditions this often caused a characteristic smog, and London became known for its typical \"London Fog\", also known as \"Pea Soupers\". London was sometimes referred to as \"The Smoke\" because of this. In 1952, this culminated in the disastrous Great Smog of 1952 which lasted for five days and killed between 10,000 and 12,000 people (according to modern estimates; government estimates at the time put the death toll at 4,000). In response to this, the Clean Air Act 1956 was passed, mandating the creating of \"smokeless zones\" where the use of \"smokeless\" fuels was required (this was at a time when most households still used open fires); the Act was effective.\nStarting in the mid-1960s, and partly as a result of the success of such musicians as the Beatles and the Rolling Stones, London became a centre for the worldwide youth culture, exemplified by the Swinging London subculture which made Carnaby Street a household name of youth fashion around the world. London's role as a trendsetter for youth fashion continued strongly in the 1980s during the new wave and punk eras and into the mid-1990s with the emergence of the Britpop era.\nFrom the 1950s onwards London experienced an increase in immigration, largely from Commonwealth countries such as Jamaica, India, Bangladesh and Pakistan. However, the integration of the new immigrants was not always easy. Racial tensions emerged in events such as the Brixton Riots between 10 and 12 April 1981 in the early 1980s.\nFrom the beginning of \"The Troubles\" in Northern Ireland in the early 1970s until the mid-1990s, London was subjected to repeated terrorist attacks by the Provisional IRA.\nThe outward expansion of London was slowed by the war, and the introduction of the Metropolitan Green Belt. Due to this outward expansion, in 1965 the old County of London (which by now only covered part of the London conurbation) and the London County Council were abolished, and the much larger area of Greater London was established with a new Greater London Council (GLC) to administer it, along with 32 new London boroughs.\nGreater London's population declined steadily in the decades after World War II, from an estimated peak of 8.6\u00a0million in 1939 to around 6.8\u00a0million in the 1980s. However, it then began to increase again in the late 1980s, encouraged by strong economic performance and an increasingly positive image.\nLondon's traditional status as a major port declined dramatically in the post-war decades as the old Docklands could not accommodate large modern container ships. The principal ports for London moved downstream to the ports of Felixstowe and Tilbury. The docklands area had become largely derelict by the 1980s, but was redeveloped into flats and offices from the mid-1980s onwards. The Thames Barrier was completed in the 1980s to protect London against tidal surges from the North Sea.\nIn the early 1980s political disputes between the GLC run by Ken Livingstone and the Conservative Party government of Margaret Thatcher led to the GLC's abolition in 1986, with most of its powers relegated to the London boroughs. This left London as the only large metropolis in the world without a central administration.\nIn 2000, London-wide government was restored, with the creation of the Greater London Authority (GLA) by Tony Blair's government, covering the same area of Greater London. The new authority had similar powers to the old GLC, but was made up of a directly elected Mayor and a London Assembly. The first election took place on 4 May, with Ken Livingstone comfortably regaining his previous post, becoming first elected mayor of London. London was recognised as one of the nine regions of England. In global perspective, it was emerging as a World city widely compared to New York City and Tokyo.\n21st century.\nAround the start of the 21st century, London hosted the much-derided Millennium Dome at Greenwich, to mark the new century. Other Millennium projects were more successful. One was the largest observation wheel in the world, the \"Millennium Wheel\", or the London Eye, which was erected as a temporary structure, but soon became a fixture, and draws four million visitors a year. The National Lottery also released a flood of funds for major enhancements to existing attractions, for example the roofing of the Great Court at the British Museum.\nThe London Plan, published by the Mayor of London in 2004, estimated that the population would reach 8.1\u00a0million by 2016, and continue to rise thereafter. This was reflected in a move towards denser, more urban styles of building, including a greatly increased number of tall buildings, and proposals for major enhancements to the public transport network. However, funding for projects such as Crossrail remained a struggle.\nOn 6 July 2005 London won the right to host the 2012 Olympics and Paralympics, making it the first city to host the modern games three times. However, celebrations were cut short the following day when the city was rocked by a series of terrorist attacks. More than 50 were killed and 750 injured in three bombings on London Underground trains and a fourth on a double decker bus near King's Cross.\nLondon was the starting point for countrywide riots which occurred in August 2011, when thousands of people rioted in several city boroughs and in towns across England. They were the biggest riots in modern English history. In 2011, the population grew over 8 million people for the first time in decades. White British formed less than half of the population for the first time.\nThere was some ambivalence among the public leading up to the 2012 Summer Olympics in the city, though public sentiment changed strongly in their favour following a successful opening ceremony and when the anticipated organisational and transport problems never occurred.\nBoris Johnson, later Prime Minister, was elected Mayor of London in May 2008 and re-elected in 2012. He was succeeded by Sadiq Khan, the first Muslim mayor of a major Western capital city, who was elected in 2016, was re-elected in 2021, and won a historic third term in 2024.\nIn the 2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum, London was the only region in England, where Remain won the highest share of the vote. The voter turnout was the highest in London since the 1950 general election. However, Britain\u2019s exit from the European Union (EU) in early 2021 (Brexit) only marginally weakened London\u2019s position as an international financial center (IFC).\nIn 2022, the Elizabeth line railway opened, connecting Heathrow and Reading to Shenfield and Abbey Wood through a tunnel in the city between Paddington and Liverpool Street, revolutionising east-west travel in London.\nOn 6 May 2023, the coronation of King Charles III and Queen Camilla as King and Queen of the United Kingdom and the other Commonwealth realms took place at Westminster Abbey.\nAs of 9 May 2023, London had received around 18,000 refugees from Ukraine, because of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nHistorical sites of note.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n https://, https://, https://, https://, https://, https://."}
{"id": "14021", "revid": "765510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14021", "title": "History of astronomy", "text": "The history of astronomy focuses on the efforts of civilizations to understand the universe beyond earth's atmosphere.\nAstronomy is one of the oldest natural sciences, achieving a high level of success in the second half of the first millennium. Astronomy has origins in the religious, mythological, cosmological, calendrical, and astrological beliefs and practices of prehistory. Early astronomical records date back to the Babylonians around 1000 BC. There is also astronomical evidence of interest from early Chinese, Central American and North European cultures.\nAstronomy was used by early cultures for timekeeping, navigation, spiritual and religious practices, and agricultural planning. Ancient astronomers observed and charted the skies in an effort to learn about the workings of the universe. During the Renaissance Period, revolutionary ideas emerged about astronomy. One such idea was contributed in 1543 by Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus, who developed a heliocentric model that depicted the planets orbiting the sun. This was the start of the Copernican Revolution, with the invention of the telescope in 1608 playing a key part. Later developments included the reflecting telescope, astronomical photography, astronomical spectroscopy, radio telescopes, cosmic ray astronomy, infrared telescopes, space telescopes,ultraviolet astronomy, X-ray astronomy, gamma-ray astronomy, space probes, neutrino astronomy, and gravitational-wave astronomy.\nThe success of astronomy, compared to other sciences, was achieved for several reasons. Astronomy was the first science to have a mathematical foundation. Standardized measuring instruments such as armillary spheres and quadrants provided a solid base for collecting, verifying and communicating data.\nThroughout the years, astronomy has broadened into multiple subfields such as astrophysics, observational astronomy, theoretical astronomy, and astrobiology.\nEarly history.\nEarly cultures identified celestial objects with gods and spirits. They related these objects (and their movements) to phenomena such as rain, drought, seasons, and tides. It is generally believed that the first astronomers were priests who believed celestial objects and events to be manifestations of the divine, hence the connection to what is now called astrology. A 32,500-year-old carved ivory mammoth tusk could contain the oldest known star chart (resembling the constellation Orion). It has also been suggested that drawings on the wall of the Lascaux caves in France dating from 33,000 to 10,000 years ago could be a graphical representation of the Pleiades, the Summer Triangle, and the Northern Crown. Ancient structures with possibly astronomical alignments (such as Stonehenge) probably fulfilled astronomical, religious, and social functions.\nCalendars of the world have often been set by observations of the Sun and Moon (marking the day, month, and year) and were important to agricultural societies, in which the harvest depended on planting at the correct time of year. The nearly full moon was also the only lighting for night-time travel into city markets.\nThe common modern calendar is based on the Roman calendar. Although originally a lunar calendar, it broke the traditional link of the month to the phases of the Moon and divided the year into twelve almost-equal months, that mostly alternated between thirty and thirty-one days. Julius Caesar instigated calendar reform in 46\u00a0BC and introduced what is now called the Julian calendar, based upon the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;365+1\u20444 day year length originally proposed by the 4th\u00a0century\u00a0BC Greek astronomer Callippus.\nPrehistoric Europe.\nAncient astronomical artifacts have been found throughout Europe. The artifacts demonstrate that Neolithic and Bronze Age Europeans had a sophisticated knowledge of mathematics and astronomy.\nAmong the discoveries are:\nAncient times.\nMesopotamia.\nThe origins of astronomy can be found in Mesopotamia, the \"land between the rivers\" Tigris and Euphrates, where the ancient kingdoms of Sumer, Assyria, and Babylonia were located. A form of writing known as cuneiform emerged among the Sumerians around 3500\u20133000 BC. Our knowledge of Sumerian astronomy is indirect, via the earliest Babylonian star catalogues dating from about 1200\u00a0BC. The fact that many star names appear in Sumerian suggests a continuity reaching into the Early Bronze Age. Astral theology, which gave planetary gods an important role in Mesopotamian mythology and religion, began with the Sumerians. They also used a sexagesimal (base 60) place-value number system, which simplified the task of recording very large and very small numbers. The modern practice of dividing a circle into 360 degrees, or an hour into 60 minutes, began with the Sumerians. For more information, see the articles on Babylonian numerals and mathematics.\nMesopotamia is worldwide the place of the earliest known astronomer and poet by name: Enheduanna, Akkadian high priestess to the lunar deity Nanna/Sin and princess, daughter of Sargon the Great (c.\u20092334 \u2013 c.\u20092279 BCE). She had the Moon tracked in her chambers and wrote poems about her divine Moon.\nClassical sources frequently use the term Chaldeans for the astronomers of Mesopotamia, who were originally a people, before being identified with priest-scribes specializing in astrology and other forms of divination.\nThe first evidence of recognition that astronomical phenomena are periodic and of the application of mathematics to their prediction is Babylonian. Tablets dating back to the Old Babylonian period document the application of mathematics to the variation in the length of daylight over a solar year. Centuries of Babylonian observations of celestial phenomena are recorded in the series of cuneiform tablets known as the \"En\u016bma Anu Enlil\". The oldest significant astronomical text that we possess is Tablet 63 of the \"En\u016bma Anu Enlil\", the Venus tablet of Ammi-saduqa, which lists the first and last visible risings of Venus over a period of about 21 years and is the earliest evidence that the phenomena of a planet were recognized as periodic. The MUL.APIN contains catalogues of stars and constellations as well as schemes for predicting heliacal risings and the settings of the planets, lengths of daylight measured by a water clock, gnomon, shadows, and intercalations. The Babylonian GU text arranges stars in 'strings' that lie along declination circles and thus measure right-ascensions or time-intervals, and also employs the stars of the zenith, which are also separated by given right-ascensional differences.\nA significant increase in the quality and frequency of Babylonian observations appeared during the reign of Nabonassar (747\u2013733 BC). The systematic records of ominous phenomena in Babylonian astronomical diaries that began at this time allowed for the discovery of a repeating 18-year cycle of lunar eclipses, for example. The Greek astronomer Ptolemy later used Nabonassar's reign to fix the beginning of an era, since he felt that the earliest usable observations began at this time.\nThe last stages in the development of Babylonian astronomy took place during the time of the Seleucid Empire (323\u201360 BC). In the 3rd century BC, astronomers began to use \"goal-year texts\" to predict the motions of the planets. These texts compiled records of past observations to find repeating occurrences of ominous phenomena for each planet. About the same time, or shortly afterwards, astronomers created mathematical models that allowed them to predict these phenomena directly, without consulting records. A notable Babylonian astronomer from this time was Seleucus of Seleucia, who was a supporter of the heliocentric model.\nBabylonian astronomy was the basis for much of what was done in Greek and Hellenistic astronomy, in classical Indian astronomy, in Sassanian Iran, in Byzantium, in Syria, in Islamic astronomy, in Central Asia, and in Western Europe.\nIndia.\nAstronomy in the Indian subcontinent dates back to the period of Indus Valley Civilisation during 3rd millennium BC, when it was used to create calendars. As the Indus Valley Civilization did not leave behind written documents, the oldest extant Indian astronomical text is the Vedanga Jyotisha, dating from the Vedic period. The Vedanga Jyotisha is attributed to Lagadha and has an internal date of approximately 1350\u00a0BC, and describes rules for tracking the motions of the Sun and the Moon for the purposes of ritual. It is available in two recensions, one belonging to the Rig Veda, and the other to the Yajur Veda. According to the Vedanga Jyotisha, in a \"yuga\" or \"era\", there are 5 solar years, 67 lunar sidereal cycles, 1,830 days, 1,835 sidereal days, and 62 synodic months. During the sixth century, astronomy was influenced by the Greek and Byzantine astronomical traditions.\nAryabhata (476\u2013550), in his magnum opus \"Aryabhatiya\" (499), propounded a computational system based on a planetary model in which the Earth was taken to be spinning on its axis and the periods of the planets were given with respect to the Sun. He accurately calculated many astronomical constants, such as the periods of the planets, times of the solar and lunar eclipses, and the instantaneous motion of the Moon. Early followers of Aryabhata's model included Var\u0101hamihira, Brahmagupta, and Bh\u0101skara II.\nAstronomy was advanced during the Shunga Empire, and many star catalogues were produced during this time. The Shunga period is known as the \"Golden age of astronomy in India\".\nIt saw the development of calculations for the motions and places of various planets, their rising and setting, conjunctions, and the calculation of eclipses.\nBy the sixth century, Indian astronomers believed that comets were celestial bodies that re-appeared periodically. This was the view expressed in the sixth century by the astronomers Varahamihira and Bhadrabahu. The tenth-century astronomer Bhattotpala listed the names and estimated periods of certain comets, but it is not known how these figures were calculated or how accurate they were.\nGreece and Hellenistic world.\nThe Ancient Greeks developed astronomy, which they treated as a branch of mathematics, to a highly sophisticated level. The first geometrical, three-dimensional models to explain the apparent motion of the planets were developed in the 4th century BC by Eudoxus of Cnidus and Callippus of Cyzicus. Their models were based on nested homocentric spheres centered upon the Earth. Their younger contemporary Heraclides Ponticus proposed that the Earth rotates around its axis.\nA different approach to celestial phenomena was taken by natural philosophers such as Plato and Aristotle. They were less concerned with developing mathematical predictive models than with developing an explanation of the reasons for the motions of the Cosmos. In his \"Timaeus\", Plato described the universe as a spherical body divided into circles carrying the planets and governed according to harmonic intervals by a world soul. Aristotle, drawing on the mathematical model of Eudoxus, proposed that the universe was made of a complex system of concentric spheres, whose circular motions combined to carry the planets around the Earth. This basic cosmological model prevailed, in various forms, until the 16th century.\nIn the 3rd century BC Aristarchus of Samos was the first to suggest a heliocentric system, although only fragmentary descriptions of his idea survive. Eratosthenes estimated the circumference of the Earth with great accuracy (see also: history of geodesy).\nGreek geometrical astronomy developed away from the model of concentric spheres to employ more complex models in which an eccentric circle would carry around a smaller circle, called an epicycle which in turn carried around a planet. The first such model is attributed to Apollonius of Perga and further developments in it were carried out in the 2nd century BC by Hipparchus of Nicea. Hipparchus made a number of other contributions, including the first measurement of precession and the compilation of the first star catalog in which he proposed our modern system of apparent magnitudes.\nThe Antikythera mechanism, an ancient Greek astronomical observational device for calculating the movements of the Sun and the Moon, possibly the planets, dates from about 150\u2013100 BC, and was the first ancestor of an astronomical computer. It was discovered in an ancient shipwreck off the Greek island of Antikythera, between Kythera and Crete. The device became famous for its use of a differential gear, previously believed to have been invented in the 16th century, and the miniaturization and complexity of its parts, comparable to a clock made in the 18th century. The original mechanism is displayed in the Bronze collection of the National Archaeological Museum of Athens, accompanied by a replica.\nPtolemaic system.\nDepending on the historian's viewpoint, the acme or corruption of Classical physical astronomy is seen with Ptolemy, a Greco-Roman astronomer from Alexandria of Egypt, who wrote the classic comprehensive presentation of geocentric astronomy, the \"Megale Syntaxis\" (Great Synthesis), better known by its Arabic title \"Almagest\", which had a lasting effect on astronomy up to the Renaissance. In his \"Planetary Hypotheses\", Ptolemy ventured into the realm of cosmology, developing a physical model of his geometric system, in a universe many times smaller than the more realistic conception of Aristarchus of Samos four centuries earlier.\nEgypt.\nThe precise orientation of the Egyptian pyramids affords a lasting demonstration of the high degree of technical skill in watching the heavens attained in the 3rd millennium BC. It has been shown the Pyramids were aligned towards the pole star, which, because of the precession of the equinoxes, was at that time Thuban, a faint star in the constellation of Draco. Evaluation of the site of the temple of Amun-Re at Karnak, taking into account the change over time of the obliquity of the ecliptic, has shown that the Great Temple was aligned on the rising of the midwinter Sun. The length of the corridor down which sunlight would travel would have limited illumination at other times of the year. The Egyptians also found the position of Sirius (the dog star), who they believed was Anubis, their jackal-headed god, moving through the heavens. Its position was critical to their civilisation as when it rose heliacal in the east before sunrise it foretold the flooding of the Nile. It is also the origin of the phrase \"dog days of summer\".\nAstronomy played a considerable part in religious matters for fixing the dates of festivals and determining the hours of the night. The titles of several temple books are preserved recording the movements and phases of the Sun, Moon, and stars. The rising of Sirius (Egyptian: Sopdet, Greek: Sothis) at the beginning of the inundation was a particularly important point to fix in the yearly calendar.\nWriting in the Roman era, Clement of Alexandria gives some idea of the importance of astronomical observations to the sacred rites:\nAnd after the Singer advances the Astrologer (\u1f61\u03c1\u03bf\u03c3\u03ba\u03cc\u03c0\u03bf\u03c2), with a \"horologium\" (\u1f61\u03c1\u03bf\u03bb\u03cc\u03b3\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd) in his hand, and a \"palm\" (\u03c6\u03bf\u03af\u03bd\u03b9\u03be), the symbols of astrology. He must know by heart the Hermetic astrological books, which are four in number. Of these, one is about the arrangement of the fixed stars that are visible; one on the positions of the Sun and Moon and five planets; one on the conjunctions and phases of the Sun and Moon; and one concerns their risings.\nThe Astrologer's instruments (\"horologium\" and \"palm\") are a plumb line and sighting instrument. They have been identified with two inscribed objects in the Berlin Museum; a short handle from which a plumb line was hung, and a palm branch with a sight-slit in the broader end. The latter was held close to the eye, the former in the other hand, perhaps at arm's length. The \"Hermetic\" books which Clement refers to are the Egyptian theological texts, which probably have nothing to do with Hellenistic Hermetism.\nFrom the tables of stars on the ceiling of the tombs of Rameses\u00a0VI and Rameses\u00a0IX it seems that for fixing the hours of the night a man seated on the ground faced the Astrologer in such a position that the line of observation of the pole star passed over the middle of his head. On the different days of the year each hour was determined by a fixed star culminating or nearly culminating in it, and the position of these stars at the time is given in the tables as in the centre, on the left eye, on the right shoulder, etc. According to the texts, in founding or rebuilding temples the north axis was determined by the same apparatus, and we may conclude that it was the usual one for astronomical observations. In careful hands it might give results of a high degree of accuracy.\nChina.\nThe astronomy of East Asia began in China. Solar term was completed in Warring States period. The knowledge of Chinese astronomy was introduced into East Asia.\nAstronomy in China has a long history. Detailed records of astronomical observations were kept from about the 6th century BC, until the introduction of Western astronomy and the telescope in the 17th century. Chinese astronomers were able to precisely predict eclipses.\nMuch of early Chinese astronomy was for the purpose of timekeeping. The Chinese used a lunisolar calendar, but because the cycles of the Sun and the Moon are different, astronomers often prepared new calendars and made observations for that purpose.\nAstrological divination was also an important part of astronomy. Astronomers took careful note of \"guest stars\" () which suddenly appeared among the fixed stars. They were the first to record a supernova, in the Astrological Annals of the Houhanshu in 185\u00a0AD. Also, the supernova that created the Crab Nebula in 1054 is an example of a \"guest star\" observed by Chinese astronomers, although it was not recorded by their European contemporaries. Ancient astronomical records of phenomena like supernovae and comets are sometimes used in modern astronomical studies.\nThe world's first star catalogue was made by Gan De, a , in the 4th century BC.\nMesoamerica.\nMaya astronomical codices include detailed tables for calculating phases of the Moon, the recurrence of eclipses, and the appearance and disappearance of Venus as morning and evening star. The Maya based their calendrics in the carefully calculated cycles of the Pleiades, the Sun, the Moon, Venus, Jupiter, Saturn, Mars, and also they had a precise description of the eclipses as depicted in the Dresden Codex, as well as the ecliptic or zodiac, and the Milky Way was crucial in their Cosmology. A number of important Maya structures are believed to have been oriented toward the extreme risings and settings of Venus. To the ancient Maya, Venus was the patron of war and many recorded battles are believed to have been timed to the motions of this planet. Mars is also mentioned in preserved astronomical codices and early mythology.\nAlthough the Maya calendar was not tied to the Sun, John Teeple has proposed that the Maya calculated the solar year to somewhat greater accuracy than the Gregorian calendar. Both astronomy and an intricate numerological scheme for the measurement of time were vitally important components of Maya religion.\nThe Maya believed that the Earth was the center of all things, and that the stars, moons, and planets were gods. They believed that their movements were the gods traveling between the Earth and other celestial destinations. Many key events in Maya culture were timed around celestial events, in the belief that certain gods would be present.\nMiddle Ages.\nMiddle East.\nThe Arabic and the Persian world under Islam had become highly cultured, and many important works of knowledge from Greek astronomy, Indian astronomy, and Persian astronomy were translated into Arabic, which were then used and stored in libraries throughout the area. An important contribution by Islamic astronomers was their emphasis on observational astronomy. This led to the emergence of the first astronomical observatories in the Muslim world by the early 9th century. Zij star catalogues were produced at these observatories.\nIn the ninth century, Persian astrologer Albumasar was thought to be one of the greatest astrologer at that time. His practical manuals for training astrologers profoundly influenced Muslim intellectual history and, through translations, that of western Europe and Byzantium In the 10th century, Albumasar's \"Introduction\" was one of the most important sources for the recovery of Aristotle for medieval European scholars. Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi (Azophi) carried out observations on the stars and described their positions, magnitudes, brightness, and colour and drawings for each constellation in his \"Book of Fixed Stars\". He also gave the first descriptions and pictures of \"A Little Cloud\" now known as the Andromeda Galaxy. He mentions it as lying before the mouth of a Big Fish, an Arabic constellation. This \"cloud\" was apparently commonly known to the Isfahan astronomers, very probably before 905\u00a0AD. The first recorded mention of the Large Magellanic Cloud was also given by al-Sufi. In 1006, Ali ibn Ridwan observed SN 1006, the brightest supernova in recorded history, and left a detailed description of the temporary star.\nIn the late tenth century, a huge observatory was built near Tehran, Iran, by the astronomer Abu-Mahmud al-Khujandi who observed a series of meridian transits of the Sun, which allowed him to calculate the tilt of the Earth's axis relative to the Sun. He noted that measurements by earlier (Indian, then Greek) astronomers had found higher values for this angle, possible evidence that the axial tilt is not constant but was in fact decreasing. In 11th-century Persia, Omar Khayy\u00e1m compiled many tables and performed a reformation of the calendar that was more accurate than the Julian and came close to the Gregorian.\nOther Muslim advances in astronomy included the collection and correction of previous astronomical data, resolving significant problems in the Ptolemaic model, the development of the universal latitude-independent astrolabe by Arzachel, the invention of numerous other astronomical instruments, Ja'far Muhammad ibn M\u016bs\u0101 ibn Sh\u0101kir's belief that the heavenly bodies and celestial spheres were subject to the same physical laws as Earth, and the introduction of empirical testing by Ibn al-Shatir, who produced the first model of lunar motion which matched physical observations.\nNatural philosophy (particularly Aristotelian physics) was separated from astronomy by Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) in the 11th century, by Ibn al-Shatir in the 14th century, and Qushji in the 15th century.\nIndia.\nBh\u0101skara II (1114\u20131185) was the head of the astronomical observatory at Ujjain, continuing the mathematical tradition of Brahmagupta. He wrote the \"Siddhantasiromani\" which consists of two parts: \"Goladhyaya\" (sphere) and \"Grahaganita\" (mathematics of the planets). He also calculated the time taken for the Sun to orbit the Earth to nine decimal places. The Buddhist University of Nalanda at the time offered formal courses in astronomical studies.\nOther important astronomers from India include Madhava of Sangamagrama, Nilakantha Somayaji and Jyeshtadeva, who were members of the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics from the 14th century to the 16th century. Nilakantha Somayaji, in his \"Aryabhatiyabhasya\", a commentary on Aryabhata's \"Aryabhatiya\", developed his own computational system for a partially heliocentric planetary model, in which Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn orbit the Sun, which in turn orbits the Earth, similar to the Tychonic system later proposed by Tycho Brahe in the late 16th century. Nilakantha's system, however, was mathematically more efficient than the Tychonic system, due to correctly taking into account the equation of the centre and latitudinal motion of Mercury and Venus. Most astronomers of the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics who followed him accepted his planetary model.\nWestern Europe.\nAfter the significant contributions of Greek scholars to the development of astronomy, it entered a relatively static era in Western Europe from the Roman era through the 12th century. This lack of progress has led some astronomers to assert that nothing happened in Western European astronomy during the Middle Ages. Recent investigations, however, have revealed a more complex picture of the study and teaching of astronomy in the period from the 4th to the 16th centuries.\nWestern Europe entered the Middle Ages with great difficulties that affected the continent's intellectual production. The advanced astronomical treatises of classical antiquity were written in Greek, and with the decline of knowledge of that language, only simplified summaries and practical texts were available for study. The most influential writers to pass on this ancient tradition in Latin were Macrobius, Pliny, Martianus Capella, and Calcidius. In the 6th century Bishop Gregory of Tours noted that he had learned his astronomy from reading Martianus Capella, and went on to employ this rudimentary astronomy to describe a method by which monks could determine the time of prayer at night by watching the stars.\nIn the 7th century the English monk Bede of Jarrow published an influential text, \"On the Reckoning of Time\", providing churchmen with the practical astronomical knowledge needed to compute the proper date of Easter using a procedure called the \"computus\". This text remained an important element of the education of clergy from the 7th century until well after the rise of the Universities in the 12th century.\nThe range of surviving ancient Roman writings on astronomy and the teachings of Bede and his followers began to be studied in earnest during the revival of learning sponsored by the emperor Charlemagne. By the 9th century rudimentary techniques for calculating the position of the planets were circulating in Western Europe; medieval scholars recognized their flaws, but texts describing these techniques continued to be copied, reflecting an interest in the motions of the planets and in their astrological significance.\nBuilding on this astronomical background, in the 10th century European scholars such as Gerbert of Aurillac began to travel to Spain and Sicily to seek out learning which they had heard existed in the Arabic-speaking world. There they first encountered various practical astronomical techniques concerning the calendar and timekeeping, most notably those dealing with the astrolabe. Soon scholars such as Hermann of Reichenau were writing texts in Latin on the uses and construction of the astrolabe and others, such as Walcher of Malvern, were using the astrolabe to observe the time of eclipses in order to test the validity of computistical tables.\nBy the 12th century, scholars were traveling to Spain and Sicily to seek out more advanced astronomical and astrological texts, which they translated into Latin from Arabic and Greek to further enrich the astronomical knowledge of Western Europe. The arrival of these new texts coincided with the rise of the universities in medieval Europe, in which they soon found a home. Reflecting the introduction of astronomy into the universities, John of Sacrobosco wrote a series of influential introductory astronomy textbooks: the Sphere, a Computus, a text on the Quadrant, and another on Calculation.\nIn the 14th century, Nicole Oresme, later bishop of Liseux, showed that neither the scriptural texts nor the physical arguments advanced against the movement of the Earth were demonstrative and adduced the argument of simplicity for the theory that the Earth moves, and \"not\" the heavens. However, he concluded \"everyone maintains, and I think myself, that the heavens do move and not the earth: For God hath established the world which shall not be moved.\" In the 15th century, Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa suggested in some of his scientific writings that the Earth revolved around the Sun, and that each star is itself a distant sun.\nRenaissance and Early Modern Europe.\nCopernican Revolution.\nDuring the renaissance period, astronomy began to undergo a revolution in thought known as the Copernican Revolution, which gets the name from the astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus, who proposed a heliocentric system, in which the planets revolved around the Sun and not the Earth. His \"De revolutionibus orbium coelestium\" was published in 1543. While in the long term this was a very controversial claim, in the very beginning it only brought minor controversy. The theory became the dominant view because many figures, most notably Galileo Galilei, Johannes Kepler and Isaac Newton championed and improved upon the work. Other figures also aided this new model despite not believing the overall theory, like Tycho Brahe, with his well-known observations.\nBrahe, a Danish noble, was an essential astronomer in this period. He came on the astronomical scene with the publication of \"De nova stella\", in which he disproved conventional wisdom on the supernova SN 1572 (As bright as Venus at its peak, SN 1572 later became invisible to the naked eye, disproving the Aristotelian doctrine of the immutability of the heavens.) He also created the Tychonic system, where the Sun and Moon and the stars revolve around the Earth, but the other five planets revolve around the Sun. This system blended the mathematical benefits of the Copernican system with the \"physical benefits\" of the Ptolemaic system. This was one of the systems people believed in when they did not accept heliocentrism, but could no longer accept the Ptolemaic system. He is most known for his highly accurate observations of the stars and the planets. Later he moved to Prague and continued his work. In Prague he was at work on the Rudolphine Tables, that were not finished until after his death. The Rudolphine Tables was a star map designed to be more accurate than either the Alfonsine tables, made in the 1300s, and the Prutenic Tables, which were inaccurate. He was assisted at this time by his assistant Johannes Kepler, who would later use his observations to finish Brahe's works and for his theories as well.\nAfter the death of Brahe, Kepler was deemed his successor and was given the job of completing Brahe's uncompleted works, like the Rudolphine Tables. He completed the Rudolphine Tables in 1624, although it was not published for several years. Like many other figures of this era, he was subject to religious and political troubles, like the Thirty Years' War, which led to chaos that almost destroyed some of his works. Kepler was, however, the first to attempt to derive mathematical predictions of celestial motions from assumed physical causes. He discovered the three Kepler's laws of planetary motion that now carry his name, those laws being as follows:\nWith these laws, he managed to improve upon the existing heliocentric model. The first two were published in 1609. Kepler's contributions improved upon the overall system, giving it more credibility because it adequately explained events and could cause more reliable predictions. Before this, the Copernican model was just as unreliable as the Ptolemaic model. This improvement came because Kepler realized the orbits were not perfect circles, but ellipses.\nGalileo.\n The invention of the telescope in 1608 revolutionized the study of astronomy. Galileo Galilei was among the first to use a telescope to observe the sky, after constructing a 20x refractor telescope. He discovered the four largest moons of Jupiter in 1610, which are now collectively known as the Galilean moons, in his honor. This discovery was the first known observation of satellites orbiting another planet. He also found that the Moon had craters and observed, and correctly explained sunspots, and that Venus exhibited a full set of phases resembling lunar phases. Galileo argued that these facts demonstrated incompatibility with the Ptolemaic model, which could not explain the phenomenon and would even contradict it. With Jupiter's moons, he demonstrated that the Earth does not have to have everything orbiting it and that other bodies could orbit another planet, such as the Earth orbiting the Sun. In the Ptolemaic system the celestial bodies were supposed to be perfect so such objects should not have craters or sunspots. The phases of Venus could only happen in the event that Venus orbits around the Sun, which did not happen in the Ptolemaic system. He, as the most famous example, had to face challenges from church officials, more specifically the Roman Inquisition. They accused him of heresy because these beliefs went against the teachings of the Roman Catholic Church and were challenging the Catholic church's authority when it was at its weakest. While he was able to avoid punishment for a little while he was eventually tried and pled guilty to heresy in 1633. Although this came at some expense, his book was banned, and he was put under house arrest until he died in 1642. Sir Isaac Newton developed further ties between physics and astronomy through his law of universal gravitation. Realizing that the same force that attracts objects to the surface of the Earth held the Moon in orbit around the Earth, Newton was able to explain \u2013 in one theoretical framework \u2013 all known gravitational phenomena. In his \"Philosophi\u00e6 Naturalis Principia Mathematica\", he derived Kepler's laws from first principles. Those first principles are as follows:\nThus while Kepler explained how the planets moved, Newton accurately managed to explain why the planets moved the way they do. Newton's theoretical developments laid many of the foundations of modern physics.\nCompleting the Solar System.\nOutside of England, Newton's theory took some time to become established. Ren\u00e9 Descartes' theory of vortices held sway in France, and Christiaan Huygens, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and Jacques Cassini accepted only parts of Newton's system, preferring their own philosophies. Voltaire published a popular account in 1738. In 1748, the French Academy of Sciences offered a reward for solving the question of the perturbations of Jupiter and Saturn, which was eventually done by Euler and Lagrange. Laplace completed the theory of the planets, publishing from 1798 to 1825. The early origins of the solar nebular model of planetary formation had begun.\nEdmond Halley succeeded John Flamsteed as Astronomer Royal in England and succeeded in predicting the return of the comet that bears his name in 1758. William Herschel found the first new planet, Uranus, to be observed in modern times in 1781. The gap between the planets Mars and Jupiter disclosed by the Titius\u2013Bode law was filled by the discovery of the asteroids Ceres and Pallas in 1801 and 1802 with many more following.\nAt first, astronomical thought in America was based on Aristotelian philosophy, but interest in the new astronomy began to appear in Almanacs as early as 1659.\nStellar astronomy.\nCosmic pluralism is the name given to the idea that the stars are distant suns, perhaps with their own planetary systems.\nIdeas in this direction were expressed in antiquity, by Anaxagoras and by Aristarchus of Samos, but did not find mainstream acceptance. The first astronomer of the European Renaissance to suggest that the stars were distant suns was Giordano Bruno in his \"De l'infinito universo et mondi\" (1584). This idea, together with a belief in intelligent extraterrestrial life, was among the charges brought against him by the Inquisition.\nThe idea became mainstream in the later 17th century, especially following the publication of \"Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds\" by Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle (1686), and by the early 18th century it was the default working assumptions in stellar astronomy.\nThe Italian astronomer Geminiano Montanari recorded observing variations in luminosity of the star Algol in 1667. Edmond Halley published the first measurements of the proper motion of a pair of nearby \"fixed\" stars, demonstrating that they had changed positions since the time of the ancient Greek astronomers Ptolemy and Hipparchus. William Herschel was the first astronomer to attempt to determine the distribution of stars in the sky. During the 1780s, he established a series of gauges in 600 directions and counted the stars observed along each line of sight. From this he deduced that the number of stars steadily increased toward one side of the sky, in the direction of the Milky Way core. His son John Herschel repeated this study in the southern hemisphere and found a corresponding increase in the same direction. In addition to his other accomplishments, William Herschel is noted for his discovery that some stars do not merely lie along the same line of sight, but are physical companions that form binary star systems.\nModern astronomy.\n19th century.\nPre-photography, data recording of astronomical data was limited by the human eye. In 1840, John W. Draper, a chemist, created the earliest known astronomical photograph of the Moon. And by the late 19th century thousands of photographic plates of images of planets, stars, and galaxies were created. Most photography had lower quantum efficiency (i.e. captured less of the incident photons) than human eyes but had the advantage of long integration times (100 ms for the human eye compared to hours for photos). This vastly increased the data available to astronomers, which led to the rise of human computers, famously the Harvard Computers, to track and analyze the data.\nScientists began discovering forms of light which were invisible to the naked eye: X-rays, gamma rays, radio waves, microwaves, ultraviolet radiation, and infrared radiation. This had a major impact on astronomy, spawning the fields of infrared astronomy, radio astronomy, x-ray astronomy and finally gamma-ray astronomy. With the advent of spectroscopy it was proven that other stars were similar to the Sun, but with a range of temperatures, masses and sizes.\nThe science of stellar spectroscopy was pioneered by Joseph von Fraunhofer and Angelo Secchi. By comparing the spectra of stars such as Sirius to the Sun, they found differences in the strength and number of their absorption lines\u2014the dark lines in stellar spectra caused by the atmosphere's absorption of specific frequencies. In 1865, Secchi began classifying stars into spectral types. The first evidence of helium was observed on August 18, 1868, as a bright yellow spectral line with a wavelength of 587.49 nanometers in the spectrum of the chromosphere of the Sun. The line was detected by French astronomer Jules Janssen during a total solar eclipse in Guntur, India.\nThe first direct measurement of the distance to a star (61 Cygni at 11.4 light-years) was made in 1838 by Friedrich Bessel using the parallax technique. Parallax measurements demonstrated the vast separation of the stars in the heavens. Observation of double stars gained increasing importance during the 19th century. In 1834, Friedrich Bessel observed changes in the proper motion of the star Sirius and inferred a hidden companion. Edward Pickering discovered the first spectroscopic binary in 1899 when he observed the periodic splitting of the spectral lines of the star Mizar in a 104-day period. Detailed observations of many binary star systems were collected by astronomers such as Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve and S. W. Burnham, allowing the masses of stars to be determined from the computation of orbital elements. The first solution to the problem of deriving an orbit of binary stars from telescope observations was made by Felix Savary in 1827.\nIn 1847, Maria Mitchell discovered a comet using a telescope.\n20th century.\nWith the accumulation of large sets of astronomical data, teams like the Harvard Computers rose in prominence which led to many female astronomers, previously relegated as assistants to male astronomers, gaining recognition in the field. The United States Naval Observatory (USNO) and other astronomy research institutions hired human \"computers\", who performed the tedious calculations while scientists performed research requiring more background knowledge. A number of discoveries in this period were originally noted by the women \"computers\" and reported to their supervisors. Henrietta Swan Leavitt discovered the cepheid variable star period-luminosity relation which she further developed into a method of measuring distance outside of the Solar System.\nA veteran of the Harvard Computers, Annie J. Cannon developed the modern version of the stellar classification scheme in during the early 1900s (O B A F G K M, based on color and temperature), manually classifying more stars in a lifetime than anyone else (around 350,000).\nThe twentieth century saw increasingly rapid advances in the scientific study of stars.\nKarl Schwarzschild discovered that the color of a star and, hence, its temperature, could be determined by comparing the visual magnitude against the photographic magnitude. The development of the photoelectric photometer allowed precise measurements of magnitude at multiple wavelength intervals. In 1921 Albert A. Michelson made the first measurements of a stellar diameter using an interferometer on the Hooker telescope at Mount Wilson Observatory.\nImportant theoretical work on the physical structure of stars occurred during the first decades of the twentieth century. In 1913, the Hertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram was developed, propelling the astrophysical study of stars.\nIn Potsdam in 1906, the Danish astronomer Ejnar Hertzsprung published the first plots of color versus luminosity for these stars. These plots showed a prominent and continuous sequence of stars, which he named the Main Sequence.\nAt Princeton University, Henry Norris Russell plotted the spectral types of these stars against their absolute magnitude, and found that dwarf stars followed a distinct relationship. This allowed the real brightness of a dwarf star to be predicted with reasonable accuracy.\nSuccessful models were developed to explain the interiors of stars and stellar evolution. Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin first proposed that stars were made primarily of hydrogen and helium in her 1925 doctoral thesis. The spectra of stars were further understood through advances in quantum physics. This allowed the chemical composition of the stellar atmosphere to be determined.\nAs evolutionary models of stars were developed during the 1930s, Bengt Str\u00f6mgren introduced the term Hertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram to denote a luminosity-spectral class diagram.\nA refined scheme for stellar classification was published in 1943 by William Wilson Morgan and Philip Childs Keenan.\nThe existence of the Milky Way, Earth's home galaxy, as a separate group of stars was only proven in the 20th century, as was the knowledge that other galaxies exist and that most of them are moving away from each other. The \"Great Debate\" between Harlow Shapley and Heber Curtis, in the 1920s, concerned the nature of the Milky Way, spiral nebulae, and the dimensions of the universe.\nWith the advent of quantum physics, spectroscopy was further refined.\nThe Sun was found to be part of a galaxy made up of more than 1010 stars (10 billion stars). The existence of other galaxies, one of the matters of \"the great debate\", was settled by Edwin Hubble, who identified the Andromeda nebula as a different galaxy, and many others at large distances and receding, moving away from our galaxy.\nPhysical cosmology, a discipline that has a large intersection with astronomy, made huge advances during the 20th century, with the model of the hot Big Bang heavily supported by the evidence provided by astronomy and physics, such as the redshifts of very distant galaxies and radio sources, the cosmic microwave background radiation, Hubble's law and cosmological abundances of elements.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14022", "revid": "50624542", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14022", "title": "Haber process", "text": "Industrial process for ammonia production\nThe Haber process, also called the Haber\u2013Bosch process, is the main industrial procedure for the production of ammonia. It converts atmospheric nitrogen (N2) to ammonia (NH3) by a reaction with hydrogen (H2) using finely divided iron metal as a catalyst:\nformula_1\nThis reaction is exothermic but disfavored in terms of entropy because four equivalents of reactant gases are converted into two equivalents of product gas. As a result, sufficiently high pressures and temperatures are needed to drive the reaction forward. \nThe German chemists Fritz Haber and Carl Bosch developed the process in the first decade of the 20th century, and its improved efficiency over existing methods such as the Birkeland-Eyde and Frank-Caro processes was a major advancement in the industrial production of ammonia.\nThe Haber process can be combined with steam reforming to produce ammonia with just three chemical inputs: water, natural gas, and atmospheric nitrogen. Both Haber and Bosch were eventually awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry: Haber in 1918 for ammonia synthesis specifically, and Bosch in 1931 for related contributions to high-pressure chemistry.\nHistory.\nDuring the 19th century, the demand rapidly increased for nitrates and ammonia for use as fertilizers, which supply plants with the nutrients they need to grow, and for industrial feedstocks. The main source was mining niter deposits and guano from tropical islands. At the beginning of the 20th century these reserves were thought insufficient to satisfy future demands, and research into new potential sources of ammonia increased. Although atmospheric nitrogen (N2) is abundant, comprising ~78% of the air, it is exceptionally stable and does not readily react with other chemicals.\nHaber, with his assistant Robert Le Rossignol, developed the high-pressure devices and catalysts needed to demonstrate the Haber process at a laboratory scale. They demonstrated their process in the summer of 1909 by producing ammonia from the air, drop by drop, at the rate of about per hour. The process was purchased by the German chemical company BASF, which assigned Carl Bosch the task of scaling up Haber's tabletop machine to industrial scale. He succeeded in 1910. Haber and Bosch were later awarded Nobel Prizes, in 1918 and 1931 respectively, for their work in overcoming the chemical and engineering problems of large-scale, continuous-flow, high-pressure technology.\nAmmonia was first manufactured using the Haber process on an industrial scale in 1913 in BASF's Oppau plant in Germany, reaching 20 tonnes/day in 1914. During World War I, the production of munitions required large amounts of nitrate. The Allied powers had access to large deposits of sodium nitrate in Chile (Chile saltpetre) controlled by British companies. India had large supplies too, but it was also controlled by the British. Moreover, even if German commercial interests had nominal legal control of such resources, the Allies controlled the sea lanes and imposed a highly effective blockade which would have prevented such supplies from reaching Germany. The Haber process proved so essential to the German war effort that it is considered virtually certain Germany would have been defeated in a matter of months without it. Synthetic ammonia from the Haber process was used for the production of nitric acid, a precursor to the nitrates used in explosives.\nThe original Haber\u2013Bosch reaction chambers used osmium as the catalyst, but this was available in extremely small quantities. Haber noted that uranium was almost as effective and easier to obtain than osmium. In 1909, BASF researcher Alwin Mittasch discovered a much less expensive iron-based catalyst that is still used. A major contributor to the discovery of this catalysis was Gerhard Ertl. The most popular catalysts are based on iron promoted with K2O, CaO, SiO2, and Al2O3.\nDuring the interwar years, alternative processes were developed, most notably the Casale process, the Claude process, and the Mont-Cenis process developed by the Friedrich Uhde Ingenieurb\u00fcro. Luigi Casale and Georges Claude proposed to increase the pressure of the synthesis loop to , thereby increasing the single-pass ammonia conversion and making nearly complete liquefaction at ambient temperature feasible. Claude proposed to have three or four converters with liquefaction steps in series, thereby avoiding recycling. Most plants continue to use the original Haber process ( and ), albeit with improved single-pass conversion and lower energy consumption due to process and catalyst optimization.\nProcess.\nCombined with the energy needed to produce hydrogen and purified atmospheric nitrogen, ammonia production is energy-intensive, accounting for 1% to 2% of global energy consumption, 3% of global carbon emissions, and 3% to 5% of natural gas consumption. Hydrogen required for ammonia synthesis is most often produced through gasification of hydrocarbons, mostly natural gas, but other potential hydrogen sources include coal, petroleum, peat, biomass, or waste. As of 2012, the global production of ammonia produced from natural gas using the steam reforming process was 72%, however in China as of 2022 natural gas and coal were responsible for 20% and 75% respectively. Hydrogen can also be produced from water and electricity using electrolysis: at one time, most of Europe's ammonia was produced from the Hydro plant at Vemork. Other possibilities include biological hydrogen production or photolysis, but at present, steam reforming of natural gas is the most economical means of mass-producing hydrogen.\nThe choice of catalyst is important for synthesizing ammonia. In 2012, Hideo Hosono's group found that Ru-loaded calcium-aluminium oxide C12A7: electride works well as a catalyst and pursued more efficient formation. This method is implemented in a small plant for ammonia synthesis in Japan. In 2019, Hosono's group found another catalyst, a novel perovskite oxynitride-hydride , that works at lower temperature and without costly ruthenium.\nHydrogen production.\nThe major source of hydrogen is methane. Steam reforming of natural gas extracts hydrogen from methane in a high-temperature and pressure tube inside a reformer with a nickel catalyst. Other fossil fuel sources include coal, heavy fuel oil and naphtha.\nGreen hydrogen is produced without fossil fuels or carbon dioxide emissions from biomass, water electrolysis and thermochemical (solar or another heat source) water splitting.\nStarting with a natural gas (CH4) feedstock, the steps are as follows;\n&lt;chem&gt;H2 + RSH -&gt; RH + H2S&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem&gt;H2S + ZnO -&gt; ZnS + H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem&gt;CH4 + H2O -&gt; CO + 3 H2&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem&gt;CO + H2O -&gt; CO2 + H2&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem&gt; CO + 3 H2 -&gt; CH4 + H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem&gt; CO2 + 4 H2 -&gt; CH4 + 2 H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nAmmonia production.\nThe hydrogen is catalytically reacted with nitrogen (derived from air separation) to form anhydrous liquid ammonia. It is difficult and expensive, as lower temperatures result in slower reaction kinetics (hence a slower reaction rate) and high pressure requires high-strength pressure vessels that resist hydrogen embrittlement. Diatomic nitrogen is bound together by a triple bond, which makes it relatively inert. Yield and efficiency are low, meaning that the ammonia must be extracted and the gases reprocessed for the reaction to proceed at an acceptable pace.\nThis step is known as the ammonia synthesis loop:\n&lt;chem&gt;3 H2 + N2 -&gt; 2 NH3&lt;/chem&gt;\nThe gases (nitrogen and hydrogen) are passed over four beds of catalyst, with cooling between each pass to maintain a reasonable equilibrium constant. On each pass, only about 15% conversion occurs, but unreacted gases are recycled, and eventually conversion of 97% is achieved.\nDue to the nature of the (typically multi-promoted magnetite) catalyst used in the ammonia synthesis reaction, only low levels of oxygen-containing (especially CO, CO2 and H2O) compounds can be tolerated in the hydrogen/nitrogen mixture. Relatively pure nitrogen can be obtained by air separation, but additional oxygen removal may be required.\nBecause of relatively low single pass conversion rates (typically less than 20%), a large recycle stream is required. This can lead to the accumulation of inerts in the gas.\nNitrogen gas (N2) is unreactive because the atoms are held together by triple bonds. The Haber process relies on catalysts that accelerate the scission of these bonds.\nTwo opposing considerations are relevant: the equilibrium position and the reaction rate. At room temperature, the equilibrium is in favor of ammonia, but the reaction does not proceed at a detectable rate due to its high activation energy. Because the reaction is exothermic, the equilibrium constant decreases with increasing temperature following Le Ch\u00e2telier's principle. It becomes unity at around .\nAbove this temperature, the equilibrium quickly becomes unfavorable at atmospheric pressure, according to the Van 't Hoff equation. Lowering the temperature is unhelpful because the catalyst requires a temperature of at least 400\u00a0\u00b0C to be efficient.\nIncreased pressure favors the forward reaction because 4\u00a0moles of reactant produce 2\u00a0moles of product, and the pressure used () alters the equilibrium concentrations to give a substantial ammonia yield. The reason for this is evident in the equilibrium relationship:\nformula_2\nwhere formula_3 is the fugacity coefficient of species formula_4, formula_5 is the mole fraction of the same species, formula_6 is the reactor pressure, and formula_7 is standard pressure, typically .\nEconomically, reactor pressurization is expensive: pipes, valves, and reaction vessels need to be strong enough, and safety considerations affect operating at 20\u00a0MPa. Compressors take considerable energy, as work must be done on the (compressible) gas. Thus, the compromise used gives a single-pass yield of around 15%.\nWhile removing the ammonia from the system increases the reaction yield, this step is not used in practice, since the temperature is too high; instead it is removed from the gases leaving the reaction vessel. The hot gases are cooled under high pressure, allowing the ammonia to condense and be removed as a liquid. Unreacted hydrogen and nitrogen gases are returned to the reaction vessel for another round. While most ammonia is removed (typically down to 2\u20135\u00a0mol.%), some ammonia remains in the recycle stream. In academic literature, a more complete separation of ammonia has been proposed by absorption in metal halides, metal-organic frameworks or zeolites. Such a process is called an \"absorbent-enhanced Haber process\" or \"adsorbent-enhanced Haber\u2013Bosch process\".\nPressure/temperature.\nThe steam reforming, shift conversion, carbon dioxide removal, and methanation steps each operate at absolute pressures of about 25 to 35 bar, while the ammonia synthesis loop operates at temperatures of and pressures ranging from 60 to 180 bar depending upon the method used. The resulting ammonia must then be separated from the residual hydrogen and nitrogen at temperatures of .\nCatalysts.\nThe Haber\u2013Bosch process relies on catalysts to accelerate N2 hydrogenation. The catalysts are heterogeneous solids that interact with gaseous reagents.\nThe catalyst typically consists of finely divided iron bound to an iron oxide carrier containing promoters possibly including aluminium oxide, potassium oxide, calcium oxide, potassium hydroxide, molybdenum, and magnesium oxide.\nIron-based catalysts.\nThe iron catalyst is obtained from finely ground iron powder, which is usually obtained by reduction of high-purity magnetite (Fe3O4). The pulverized iron is oxidized to give magnetite or w\u00fcstite (FeO, ferrous oxide) particles of a specific size. The magnetite (or w\u00fcstite) particles are then partially reduced, removing some of the oxygen. The resulting catalyst particles consist of a core of magnetite, encased in a shell of w\u00fcstite, which in turn is surrounded by an outer shell of metallic iron. The catalyst maintains most of its bulk volume during the reduction, resulting in a highly porous high-surface-area material, which enhances its catalytic effectiveness. Minor components include calcium and aluminium oxides, which support the iron catalyst and help it maintain its surface area. These oxides of Ca, Al, K, and Si are unreactive to reduction by hydrogen.\nThe production of the catalyst requires a particular melting process in which used raw materials must be free of catalyst poisons and the promoter aggregates must be evenly distributed in the magnetite melt. Rapid cooling of the magnetite, which has an initial temperature of about 3500\u00a0\u00b0C, produces the desired precursor. Unfortunately, the rapid cooling ultimately forms a catalyst of reduced abrasion resistance. Despite this disadvantage, the method of rapid cooling is often employed.\nThe reduction of the precursor magnetite to \u03b1-iron is carried out directly in the production plant with synthesis gas. The reduction of the magnetite proceeds via the formation of w\u00fcstite (FeO) so that particles with a core of magnetite become surrounded by a shell of w\u00fcstite. The further reduction of magnetite and w\u00fcstite leads to the formation of \u03b1-iron, which forms together with the promoters the outer shell. The involved processes are complex and depend on the reduction temperature: At lower temperatures, w\u00fcstite disproportionates into an iron phase and a magnetite phase; at higher temperatures, the reduction of the w\u00fcstite and magnetite to iron dominates.\nThe \u03b1-iron forms primary crystallites with a diameter of about 30 nanometers. These crystallites form a bimodal pore system with pore diameters of about 10 nanometers (produced by the reduction of the magnetite phase) and of 25 to 50 nanometers (produced by the reduction of the w\u00fcstite phase). With the exception of cobalt oxide, the promoters are not reduced.\nDuring the reduction of the iron oxide with synthesis gas, water vapor is formed. This water vapor must be considered for high catalyst quality as contact with the finely divided iron would lead to premature aging of the catalyst through recrystallization, especially in conjunction with high temperatures. The vapor pressure of the water in the gas mixture produced during catalyst formation is thus kept as low as possible, target values are below 3 gm\u22123. For this reason, the reduction is carried out at high gas exchange, low pressure, and low temperatures. The exothermic nature of the ammonia formation ensures a gradual increase in temperature.\nThe reduction of fresh, fully oxidized catalyst or precursor to full production capacity takes four to ten days. The w\u00fcstite phase is reduced faster and at lower temperatures than the magnetite phase (Fe3O4). After detailed kinetic, microscopic, and X-ray spectroscopic investigations it was shown that w\u00fcstite reacts first to metallic iron. This leads to a gradient of iron(II) ions, whereby these diffuse from the magnetite through the w\u00fcstite to the particle surface and precipitate there as iron nuclei. A high-activity novel catalyst based on this phenomenon was discovered in the 1980s at the Zhejiang University of Technology and commercialized by 2003.\nPre-reduced, stabilized catalysts occupy a significant market share. They are delivered showing the fully developed pore structure, but have been oxidized again on the surface after manufacture and are therefore no longer pyrophoric. The reactivation of such pre-reduced catalysts requires only 30 to 40 hours instead of several days. In addition to the short start-up time, they have other advantages such as higher water resistance and lower weight.\nCatalysts other than iron.\nMany efforts have been made to improve the Haber\u2013Bosch process. Many metals were tested as catalysts. The requirement for suitability is the dissociative adsorption of nitrogen (i. e. the nitrogen molecule must be split into nitrogen atoms upon adsorption). If the binding of the nitrogen is too strong, the catalyst is blocked and the catalytic ability is reduced (self-poisoning). The elements in the periodic table to the left of the iron group show such strong bonds. Further, the formation of surface nitrides makes, for example, chromium catalysts ineffective. Metals to the right of the iron group, in contrast, adsorb nitrogen too weakly for ammonia synthesis. Haber initially used catalysts based on osmium and uranium. Uranium reacts to its nitride during catalysis, while osmium oxide is rare.\nAccording to theoretical and practical studies, improvements over pure iron are limited. The activity of iron catalysts is increased by the inclusion of cobalt.\nRuthenium.\nRuthenium forms highly active catalysts. Allowing milder operating pressures and temperatures, Ru-based materials are referred to as second-generation catalysts. Such catalysts are prepared by the decomposition of triruthenium dodecacarbonyl on graphite. A drawback of activated-carbon-supported ruthenium-based catalysts is the methanation of the support in the presence of hydrogen. Their activity is strongly dependent on the catalyst carrier and the promoters. A wide range of substances can be used as carriers, including carbon, magnesium oxide, aluminium oxide, zeolites, spinels, and boron nitride.\nRuthenium-activated carbon-based catalysts have been used industrially in the KBR Advanced Ammonia Process (KAAP) since 1992. The carbon carrier is partially degraded to methane; however, this can be mitigated by a special treatment of the carbon at 1500\u00a0\u00b0C, thus prolonging the catalyst lifetime. In addition, the finely dispersed carbon poses a risk of explosion. For these reasons and due to its low acidity, magnesium oxide has proven to be a good choice of carrier. Carriers with acidic properties extract electrons from ruthenium, make it less reactive, and have the undesirable effect of binding ammonia to the surface.\nCatalyst poisons.\nCatalyst poisons lower catalyst activity. They are usually impurities in the synthesis gas. Permanent poisons cause irreversible loss of catalytic activity, while temporary poisons lower the activity while present. Sulfur compounds, phosphorus compounds, arsenic compounds, and chlorine compounds are permanent poisons. Oxygenic compounds like water, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and oxygen are temporary poisons.\nAlthough chemically inert components of the synthesis gas mixture such as noble gases or methane are not strictly poisons, they accumulate through the recycling of the process gases and thus lower the partial pressure of the reactants, which in turn slows conversion.\nIndustrial production.\nSynthesis parameters.\nThe reaction is:\nformula_8\nThe reaction is an exothermic equilibrium reaction in which the gas volume is reduced. The equilibrium constant Keq of the reaction (see table) and obtained from:\n formula_9\nSince the reaction is exothermic, the equilibrium of the reaction shifts at lower temperatures to the ammonia side. Furthermore, four volumetric units of the raw materials produce two volumetric units of ammonia. According to Le Chatelier's principle, higher pressure favours ammonia. High pressure is necessary to ensure sufficient surface coverage of the catalyst with nitrogen. For this reason, a ratio of nitrogen to hydrogen of 1 to 3, a pressure of 250 to 350 bar, a temperature of 450 to 550\u00a0\u00b0C and \u03b1 iron are optimal.\nThe catalyst ferrite (\u03b1-Fe) is produced in the reactor by the reduction of magnetite with hydrogen. The catalyst has its highest efficiency at temperatures of about 400 to 500\u00a0\u00b0C. Even though the catalyst greatly lowers the activation energy for the cleavage of the triple bond of the nitrogen molecule, high temperatures are still required for an appropriate reaction rate. At the industrially used reaction temperature of 450 to 550\u00a0\u00b0C an optimum between the decomposition of ammonia into the starting materials and the effectiveness of the catalyst is achieved. The formed ammonia is continuously removed from the system. The volume fraction of ammonia in the gas mixture is about 20%.\nThe inert components, especially the noble gases such as argon, should not exceed a certain content in order not to reduce the partial pressure of the reactants too much. To remove the inert gas components, part of the gas is removed and the argon is separated in a gas separation plant. The extraction of pure argon from the circulating gas is carried out using the Linde process.\nLarge-scale implementation.\nModern ammonia plants produce more than 3000 tons per day in one production line. The following diagram shows the set-up of a modern (designed in the early 1960s by Kellogg) \"single-train\" Haber\u2013Bosch plant:\nDepending on its origin, the synthesis gas must first be freed from impurities such as hydrogen sulfide or organic sulfur compounds, which act as a catalyst poison. High concentrations of hydrogen sulfide, which occur in synthesis gas from carbonization coke, are removed in a wet cleaning stage such as the sulfosolvan process, while low concentrations are removed by adsorption on activated carbon. Organosulfur compounds are separated by pressure swing adsorption together with carbon dioxide after CO conversion.\nTo produce hydrogen by steam reforming, methane reacts with water vapor using a nickel oxide-alumina catalyst in the primary reformer to form carbon monoxide and hydrogen. The energy required for this, the enthalpy \u0394H, is 206 kJ/mol.\nformula_10\nThe methane gas reacts in the primary reformer only partially. To increase the hydrogen yield and keep the content of inert components (i. e. methane) as low as possible, the remaining methane gas is converted in a second step with oxygen to hydrogen and carbon monoxide in the secondary reformer. The secondary reformer is supplied with air as the oxygen source. Also, the required nitrogen for the subsequent ammonia synthesis is added to the gas mixture.\nformula_11\nIn the third step, the carbon monoxide is oxidized to carbon dioxide, which is called CO conversion or water-gas shift reaction.\nformula_12\nCarbon monoxide and carbon dioxide would form carbamates with ammonia, which would clog (as solids) pipelines and apparatus within a short time. In the following process step, the carbon dioxide must therefore be removed from the gas mixture. In contrast to carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide can easily be removed from the gas mixture by gas scrubbing with triethanolamine. The gas mixture then still contains methane and noble gases such as argon, which, however, behave inertly.\nThe gas mixture is then compressed to operating pressure by turbo compressors. The resulting compression heat is dissipated by heat exchangers; it is used to preheat raw gases.\nThe actual production of ammonia takes place in the ammonia reactor. The first reactors were bursting under high pressure because the atomic hydrogen in the carbonaceous steel partially recombined into methane and produced cracks in the steel. Bosch, therefore, developed tube reactors consisting of a pressure-bearing steel tube in which a low-carbon iron lining tube was inserted and filled with the catalyst. Hydrogen that diffused through the inner steel pipe escaped to the outside via thin holes in the outer steel jacket, the so-called Bosch holes. A disadvantage of the tubular reactors was the relatively high-pressure loss, which had to be applied again by compression. The development of hydrogen-resistant chromium-molybdenum steels made it possible to construct single-walled pipes.\nModern ammonia reactors are designed as multi-storey reactors with a low-pressure drop, in which the catalysts are distributed as fills over about ten storeys one above the other. The gas mixture flows through them one after the other from top to bottom. Cold gas is injected from the side for cooling. A disadvantage of this reactor type is the incomplete conversion of the cold gas mixture in the last catalyst bed.\nAlternatively, the reaction mixture between the catalyst layers is cooled using heat exchangers, whereby the hydrogen-nitrogen mixture is preheated to the reaction temperature. Reactors of this type have three catalyst beds. In addition to good temperature control, this reactor type has the advantage of better conversion of the raw material gases compared to reactors with cold gas injection.\nUhde has developed and is using an ammonia converter with three radial flow catalyst beds and two internal heat exchangers instead of axial flow catalyst beds. This further reduces the pressure drop in the converter.\nThe reaction product is continuously removed for maximum yield. The gas mixture is cooled to 450\u00a0\u00b0C in a heat exchanger using water, freshly supplied gases, and other process streams. The ammonia also condenses and is separated in a pressure separator. Unreacted nitrogen and hydrogen are then compressed back to the process by a circulating gas compressor, supplemented with fresh gas, and fed to the reactor. In a subsequent distillation, the product ammonia is purified.\nMechanism.\nElementary steps.\nThe mechanism of ammonia synthesis contains the following seven elementary steps:\nTransport and diffusion (the first and last two steps) are fast compared to adsorption, reaction, and desorption because of the shell structure of the catalyst. It is known from various investigations that the rate-determining step of the ammonia synthesis is the dissociation of nitrogen. In contrast, exchange reactions between hydrogen and deuterium on the Haber\u2013Bosch catalysts still take place at temperatures of at a measurable rate; the exchange between deuterium and hydrogen on the ammonia molecule also takes place at room temperature. Since the adsorption of both molecules is rapid, it cannot determine the speed of ammonia synthesis.\nIn addition to the reaction conditions, the adsorption of nitrogen on the catalyst surface depends on the microscopic structure of the catalyst surface. Iron has different crystal surfaces, whose reactivity is very different. The Fe(111) and Fe(211) surfaces have by far the highest activity. The explanation for this is that only these surfaces have so-called C7 sites \u2013 these are iron atoms with seven closest neighbours.\nThe dissociative adsorption of nitrogen on the surface follows the following scheme, where S* symbolizes an iron atom on the surface of the catalyst:\n N2 \u2192 S*\u2013N2 (\u03b3-species) \u2192 S*\u2013N2\u2013S* (\u03b1-species) \u2192 2 S*\u2013N (\u03b2-species, \"surface nitride\")\nThe adsorption of nitrogen is similar to the chemisorption of carbon monoxide. On a Fe(111) surface, the adsorption of nitrogen first leads to an adsorbed \u03b3-species with an adsorption energy of 24 kJmol\u22121 and an N-N stretch vibration of 2100\u00a0cm\u22121. Since the nitrogen is isoelectronic to carbon monoxide, it adsorbs in an on-end configuration in which the molecule is bound perpendicular to the metal surface at one nitrogen atom. This has been confirmed by photoelectron spectroscopy.\nAb-initio-MO calculations have shown that, in addition to the \u03c3 binding of the free electron pair of nitrogen to the metal, there is a \u03c0 binding from the d orbitals of the metal to the \u03c0* orbitals of nitrogen, which strengthens the iron-nitrogen bond. The nitrogen in the \u03b1 state is more strongly bound with 31 kJmol\u22121. The resulting N\u2013N bond weakening could be experimentally confirmed by a reduction of the wave numbers of the N\u2013N stretching oscillation to 1490\u00a0cm\u22121.\nFurther heating of the Fe(111) area covered by \u03b1-N2 leads to both desorption and the emergence of a new band at 450\u00a0cm\u22121. This represents a metal-nitrogen oscillation, the \u03b2 state. A comparison with vibration spectra of complex compounds allows the conclusion that the N2 molecule is bound \"side-on\", with an N atom in contact with a C7 site. This structure is called \"surface nitride\". The surface nitride is very strongly bound to the surface. Hydrogen atoms (Hads), which are very mobile on the catalyst surface, quickly combine with it.\nInfrared spectroscopically detected surface imides (NHad), surface amides (NH2,ad) and surface ammoniacates (NH3,ad) are formed, the latter decay under NH3 release (desorption). The individual molecules were identified or assigned by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS) and Ir Spectroscopy.\nOn the basis of these experimental findings, the reaction mechanism is believed to involve the following steps (see also figure):\nReaction 5 occurs in three steps, forming NH, NH2, and then NH3. Experimental evidence points to reaction 2 as being the slow, rate-determining step. This is not unexpected, since that step breaks the nitrogen triple bond, the strongest of the bonds broken in the process.\nAs with all Haber\u2013Bosch catalysts, nitrogen dissociation is the rate-determining step for ruthenium-activated carbon catalysts. The active center for ruthenium is a so-called B5 site, a 5-fold coordinated position on the Ru(0001) surface where two ruthenium atoms form a step edge with three ruthenium atoms on the Ru(0001) surface. The number of B5 sites depends on the size and shape of the ruthenium particles, the ruthenium precursor and the amount of ruthenium used. The reinforcing effect of the basic carrier used in the ruthenium catalyst is similar to the promoter effect of alkali metals used in the iron catalyst.\nEnergy diagram.\nAn energy diagram can be created based on the Enthalpy of Reaction of the individual steps. The energy diagram can be used to compare homogeneous and heterogeneous reactions: Due to the high activation energy of the dissociation of nitrogen, the homogeneous gas phase reaction is not realizable. The catalyst avoids this problem as the energy gain resulting from the binding of nitrogen atoms to the catalyst surface overcompensates for the necessary dissociation energy so that the reaction is finally exothermic. Nevertheless, the dissociative adsorption of nitrogen remains the rate-determining step: not because of the activation energy, but mainly because of the unfavorable pre-exponential factor of the rate constant. Although hydrogenation is endothermic, this energy can easily be applied by the reaction temperature (about 700 K).\nEconomic and environmental aspects.\nWhen first invented, the Haber process competed against another industrial process, the cyanamide process. However, the cyanamide process consumed large amounts of electrical power and was more labor-intensive than the Haber process.\nAs of 2018, the Haber process produced 230 million tonnes of anhydrous ammonia per year. The ammonia is used mainly as a nitrogen fertilizer as ammonia itself, in the form of ammonium nitrate, and as urea. The Haber process consumes 3\u20135% of the world's natural gas production (around 1\u20132% of the world's energy supply). In combination with advances in breeding, herbicides, and pesticides, these fertilizers have helped to increase the productivity of agricultural land:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nThe energy-intensity of the process contributes to climate change and other environmental problems such as the leaching of nitrates into groundwater, rivers, ponds, and lakes; expanding dead zones in coastal ocean waters, resulting from recurrent eutrophication; atmospheric deposition of nitrates and ammonia affecting natural ecosystems; higher emissions of nitrous oxide (N2O), now the third most important greenhouse gas following CO2 and CH4. The Haber\u2013Bosch process is one of the largest contributors to a buildup of reactive nitrogen in the biosphere, causing an anthropogenic disruption to the nitrogen cycle.\nSince nitrogen use efficiency is typically less than 50%, farm runoff from heavy use of fixed industrial nitrogen disrupts biological habitats.\nNearly 50% of the nitrogen found in human tissues originated from the Haber\u2013Bosch process. Thus, the Haber process serves as the \"detonator of the population explosion\", enabling the global population to increase from 1.6 billion in 1900 to 7.7 billion by November 2018.\nReverse fuel cell technology converts electric energy, water and nitrogen into ammonia without a separate hydrogen electrolysis process.\nThe use of synthetic nitrogen fertilisers reduces the incentive for farmers to use more sustainable crop rotations which include legumes for their natural nitrogen-fixing ability.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14023", "revid": "45451554", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14023", "title": "Hot or Not", "text": "Rating website\nHot or Not was a rating site that allowed users to submit photos of themselves to be rated by other users on a scale of 1 to 10, with the average becoming the photo's score. The site also offered a matchmaking engine called 'Meet Me' and an extended profile feature called \"Hotlists\". The domain hotornot.com is currently owned by Hot or Not Limited, and was previously owned by Avid Life Media. 'Hot or Not' was a significant influence on the people who went on to create social media sites like YouTube.\nHistory.\nThe site was founded in October 2000 by James Hong and Jim Young, two friends and Silicon Valley\u2013based engineers. Both graduated from the University of California, Berkeley, in electrical engineering, with Young pursuing a Ph.D. at the time. It was inspired by some other developers' ideas.\nThe site was a technical solution to a disagreement the founders had one day over a passing woman's attractiveness. The site was originally called \"Am I Hot or Not\". Within a week of launching, it had reached almost two million page views per day. Within a few months, the site was immediately behind CNET and NBCi on NetNielsen Rating's Top 25 advertising domains. To keep up with rising costs Hong and Young added a matchmaking component to their website called \"Meet Me at Hot or Not\". The matchmaking service has been especially successful, and the site continues to generate most of its revenue through subscriptions. In the December 2006 issue of \"Time\" magazine, the founders of YouTube stated that they originally set out to make a version of Hot or Not with Video before developing their more inclusive site.\nHot or Not was sold for a rumored $20 million on February 8, 2008, to Avid Life Media, owners of Ashley Madison. Annual revenue reached $7.5 million, with net profits of $5.5 million. They initially started off $60,000 in debt due to tuition fees James paid for his MBA. On July 31, 2008, Hot or Not launched Hot or Not Gossip and a Baresi rate box (a \"hot meter\") \u2013 a subdivision to expand their market, run by former radio DJ turned celebrity blogger Zack Taylor.\nIn 2012, Hot or Not was purchased by Badoo, which is owned by Bumble Inc. The app is currently rebranded as Chat &amp; Date which uses a similar user interface to Badoo and shares user accounts between both sites.\nPredecessors and spin-offs.\nHot or Not was preceded by other rating sites, like RateMyFace, which was registered a year earlier in the summer of 1999, and AmIHot.com, which was registered in January 2000 by MIT freshman Daniel Roy. Regardless, despite any head starts of its predecessors, Hot or Not quickly became the most popular. Since AmIHotOrNot.com's launch, the concept has spawned many imitators. The concept always remained the same, but the subject matter varied greatly. The concept has also been integrated with a wide variety of dating and matchmaking systems. In 2007 BecauseImHot.com launched and deleted anyone with a rating below seven after a voting audit or the first 50 votes (whichever is first).\nThe binary concept has been used in a variety of dating apps where users can swipe right or left on a user, to decide whether to match or ignore them (respectively), a similar mechanism to deciding whether a user is \"hot\".\nResearch.\nIn 2005, as an example of using image morphing methods to study the effects of averageness, imaging researcher Pierre Tourigny created a composite of about 30 faces to find out the current standard of good looks on the Internet. On the Hot or Not web site, people rate others' attractiveness on a scale of 1 to 10. An average score based on hundreds or even thousands of individual ratings take only a few days to emerge. To make this hot-or-not palette of morphed images, photos from the site were sorted by rank and used SquirlzMorph to create multi-morph composites from them. Unlike projects like Face of Tomorrow, where the subjects are posed for the purpose, the portraits are blurry because the source images are of low resolution with differences in variables such as posture, hair styles and glasses, so that in this instance images could use only 36 control points for the morphs. A similar study was done with Miss Universe contestants, as shown in the averageness article, as well as one for age, as shown in youthfulness article.\nA 2006 \"hot or not\"-style study, involving 264 women and 18 men, at the Washington University School of Medicine, as published online in the journal \"Brain Research\", indicates that a person's brain determines whether an image is erotically appealing long before the viewer is even aware they are seeing the picture. Moreover, according to these researchers, one of the basic functions of the brain is to classify images into a hot-or-not type categorization. The study's researchers also discovered that sexy shots induce a uniquely powerful reaction in the brain, equal in effect for both men and women, and that erotic images produced a strong reaction in the hypothalamus.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14024", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14024", "title": "H.263", "text": "Video compression standard\nH.263 is a video compression standard originally designed as a low-bit-rate compressed format for videotelephony. It was standardized by the ITU-T Video Coding Experts Group (VCEG) in a project ending in 1995/1996. It is a member of the H.26x family of video coding standards in the domain of the ITU-T.\nLike the previous H.26x standards, H.263 is a block-based hybrid video coding scheme using 16\u00d716 macroblocks of YCbCr color sample arrays, motion-compensated prediction, an 8\u00d78 discrete cosine transform for prediction differences, zig-zag scanning of transform coefficients, scalar quantization, run-length transform coefficient symbols, and variable-length coding (basically like Huffman coding but with structured coding tables). The first (1995) version of H.263 included some optional features including overlapped block motion compensation and variable block-size motion compensation, and the spec was later extended to add various additional enhanced features in 1998 and 2000. Smaller additions were also made in 1997 and 2001, and a unified edition was produced in 2005.\nHistory and background.\nThe H.263 standard was first designed to be utilized in H.324 based systems (PSTN and other circuit-switched network videoconferencing and videotelephony), but it also found use in H.323 (RTP/IP-based videoconferencing), H.320 (ISDN-based videoconferencing, where it became the most widely used video compression standard), RTSP (streaming media) and SIP (IP-based videoconferencing) solutions.\nH.263 is a required video coding format in ETSI 3GPP technical specifications for IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS), Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS) and Transparent end-to-end Packet-switched Streaming Service (PSS). In 3GPP specifications, H.263 video is usually used in 3GP container format.\nH.263 also found many applications on the internet: much Flash Video content (as used on sites such as YouTube, Google Video, and MySpace) used to be encoded in Sorenson Spark format (an incomplete implementation of H.263). The original version of the RealVideo codec was based on H.263 until the release of RealVideo 8.\nH.263 was developed as an evolutionary improvement based on experience from H.261 and H.262 (aka MPEG-2 Video), the previous ITU-T standards for video compression, and the MPEG-1 standard developed in ISO/IEC. The first version of H.263 was completed in 1995 and provided a suitable replacement for H.261 at all bit rates. It was further enhanced in projects known as H.263v2 (also known as H.263+ or H.263 1998) and H.263v3 (also known as H.263++ or H.263 2000). It was also used as the basis for the development of MPEG-4 Part 2. MPEG-4 Part 2 is H.263 compatible in the sense that basic \"baseline\" H.263 bitstreams are correctly decoded by an MPEG-4 Video decoder.\nThe next enhanced format developed by ITU-T VCEG (in partnership with MPEG) after H.263 was the H.264 standard, also known as AVC and MPEG-4 part 10. As H.264 provides a significant improvement in capability beyond H.263, the H.263 standard is now considered a legacy design that is only used for compatibility with older products. Newer videoconferencing products now include H.264 as well as, or instead of, H.263 and H.261 capabilities. Even newer standard formats, HEVC and VVC, have also been developed by VCEG and MPEG, and have begun to replace H.264 in some applications.\nVersions.\nSince the original ratification of H.263 in March 1996 (approving a document that was produced in November 1995), there have been two subsequent additions which improved on the original standard by additional optional extensions (for example, the H.263v2 project added a deblocking filter in its Annex J).\nVersion 1 and Annex I.\nThe original version of H.263 specified the following annexes:\nThe first version of H.263 supported a limited set of picture sizes:\nIn March 1997, an informative Appendix I describing Error Tracking \u2013 an encoding technique for providing improved robustness to data losses and errors, was approved to provide information for the aid of implementers having an interest in such techniques.\nH.263v2 (H.263+).\nH.263v2 (also known as \"H.263+\", or as \"the 1998 version of H.263\") is the informal name of the second edition of the ITU-T H.263 international video coding standard. It retained the entire technical content of the original version of the standard, but enhanced H.263 capabilities by adding several annexes which can substantially improve encoding efficiency and provide other capabilities (such as enhanced robustness against data loss in the transmission channel). The H.263+ project was ratified by the ITU in February 1998. It added the following Annexes:\nH.263v2 also added support for flexible customized picture formats and custom picture clock frequencies. As noted above, the only picture formats previously supported in H.263 had been Sub-QCIF, QCIF, CIF, 4CIF, and 16CIF, and the only picture clock frequency had been 30000/1001 (approximately 29.97) clock ticks per second.\nH.263v2 specified a set of recommended modes in an informative appendix (Appendix II, since deprecated):\nH.263v3 (H.263++) and Annex X.\nThe definition of H.263v3 (also known as H.263++ or as the 2000 version of H.263) added three annexes. These annexes and an additional annex that specified profiles (approved the following year) were originally published as separate documents from the main body of the standard itself. The additional annexes specified are:\nThe prior informative Appendix II (recommended optional enhancement) was obsoleted by the creation of the normative Annex X.\nIn June 2001, another informative appendix (Appendix III, Examples for H.263 encoder/decoder implementations) was approved. It describes techniques for encoding and for error/loss concealment by decoders.\nIn January 2005, a unified H.263 specification document was produced (with the exception of Appendix III, which remains as a separately-published document).\nIn August 2005, an implementors' guide was approved to correct a small error in the seldom-used Annex Q reduced-resolution update mode.\nPatent rights and open-source implementation.\nH.263 was developed under the \"reasonable and non-discriminatory\" patent licensing policy of ITU-T, although in practice, the licensing for patent rights on the standard did not become the subject of substantial litigation. Due to the age of the standard, most or all relevant patents would currently be expired\u00a0\u2013 at least for patents that would apply to the early versions of the standard.\nOpen-source implementations include the LGPL-licensed libavcodec library (part of the FFmpeg project) which is used by programs such as ffdshow, VLC media player and MPlayer.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14025", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14025", "title": "H.263v2", "text": ""}
{"id": "14026", "revid": "1147246950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14026", "title": "House of Orange (disambiguation)", "text": "The House of Orange is a branch of the House of Nassau active in European politics.\nHouse of Orange may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "14027", "revid": "1292981", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14027", "title": "Hierarchical relationship", "text": ""}
{"id": "14029", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14029", "title": "Histone", "text": "Protein family around which DNA winds to form nucleosomes\nIn biology, histones are highly basic proteins abundant in lysine and arginine residues that are found in eukaryotic cell nuclei and in most Archaeal phyla. They act as spools around which DNA winds to create structural units called nucleosomes. Nucleosomes in turn are wrapped into 30-nanometer fibers that form tightly packed chromatin. Histones prevent DNA from becoming tangled and protect it from DNA damage. In addition, histones play important roles in gene regulation and DNA replication. Without histones, unwound DNA in chromosomes would be very long. For example, each human cell has about 1.8 meters of DNA if completely stretched out; however, when wound about histones, this length is reduced to about 9 micrometers (0.009\u00a0mm) of 30\u00a0nm diameter chromatin fibers.\nThere are five families of histones, which are designated H1/H5 (linker histones), H2, H3, and H4 (core histones). The nucleosome core is formed of two H2A-H2B dimers and a H3-H4 tetramer. The tight wrapping of DNA around histones, is to a large degree, a result of electrostatic attraction between the positively charged histones and negatively charged phosphate backbone of DNA.\nHistones may be chemically modified through the action of enzymes to regulate gene transcription. The most common modifications are the methylation of arginine or lysine residues or the acetylation of lysine. Methylation can affect how other proteins such as transcription factors interact with the nucleosomes. Lysine acetylation eliminates a positive charge on lysine thereby weakening the electrostatic attraction between histone and DNA, resulting in partial unwinding of the DNA, making it more accessible for gene expression.\nClasses and variants.\nFive major families of histone proteins exist: H1/H5, H2A, H2B, H3, and H4. Histones H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 are known as the core or nucleosomal histones, while histones H1/H5 are known as the linker histones.\nThe core histones all exist as dimers, which are similar in that they all possess the histone fold domain: three alpha helices linked by two loops. It is this helical structure that allows for interaction between distinct dimers, particularly in a head-tail fashion (also called the handshake motif). The resulting four distinct dimers then come together to form one octameric nucleosome core, approximately 63 Angstroms in diameter (a solenoid (DNA)-like particle). Around 146 base pairs (bp) of DNA wrap around this core particle 1.65 times in a left-handed super-helical turn to give a particle of around 100 Angstroms across. The linker histone H1 binds the nucleosome at the entry and exit sites of the DNA, thus locking the DNA into place and allowing the formation of higher order structure. The most basic such formation is the 10\u00a0nm fiber or beads on a string conformation. This involves the wrapping of DNA around nucleosomes with approximately 50 base pairs of DNA separating each pair of nucleosomes (also referred to as linker DNA). Higher-order structures include the 30\u00a0nm fiber (forming an irregular zigzag) and 100\u00a0nm fiber, these being the structures found in normal cells. During mitosis and meiosis, the condensed chromosomes are assembled through interactions between nucleosomes and other regulatory proteins.\nHistones are subdivided into canonical replication-dependent histones, whose genes are expressed during the S-phase of the cell cycle and replication-independent histone variants, expressed during the whole cell cycle. In mammals, genes encoding canonical histones are typically clustered along chromosomes in 4 different highly-conserved loci, lack introns and use a stem loop structure at the 3' end instead of a polyA tail. Genes encoding histone variants are usually not clustered, have introns and their mRNAs are regulated with polyA tails. Complex multicellular organisms typically have a higher number of histone variants providing a variety of different functions. Functionally, histone variants contribute to transcriptional control, epigenetic memory, and DNA repair, serving specialized functions beyond nucleosome packaging which plays distinct roles in chromatin dynamics. For example, H2A.Z is enriched at regulatory elements and promoters of actively transcribed genes, where it modulates nucleosome stability and transcription factor binding. In contrast, H3.3, a replacement variant of Histone H3, is associated with active transcription and is preferentially deposited at enhancer elements and transcribed gene bodies. Another critical variant, CENPA, replaces H3 in centromeric nucleosomes, providing a structural foundation essential for chromosome segregation.\nVariants also play essential roles in DNA repair. Variants such as H2A.X are phosphorylated at sites of DNA damage, marking regions for recruitment of repair proteins. This modification, commonly referred to as \u03b3H2A.X, serves as a key signal in the cellular response to double-strand breaks, facilitating efficient DNA repair processes. Defects in histone variant regulation have been linked to genome instability, a hallmark of many cancers and age-related diseases. \nRecent data are accumulating about the roles of diverse histone variants highlighting the functional links between variants and the delicate regulation of organism development. Histone variants proteins from different organisms, their classification and variant specific features can be found in https:// database. Several pseudogenes have also been discovered and identified in very close sequences of their respective functional ortholog genes.\nThe following is a list of human histone proteins, genes and pseudogenes:\nStructure.\nThe nucleosome core is formed of two H2A-H2B dimers and a H3-H4 tetramer, forming two nearly symmetrical halves by tertiary structure (C2 symmetry; one macromolecule is the mirror image of the other). The H2A-H2B dimers and H3-H4 tetramer also show pseudodyad symmetry. The 4 'core' histones (H2A, H2B, H3 and H4) are relatively similar in structure and are highly conserved through evolution, all featuring a 'helix turn helix turn helix' motif (DNA-binding protein motif that recognize specific DNA sequence). They also share the feature of long 'tails' on one end of the amino acid structure - this being the location of post-translational modification (see below).\nArchaeal histone only contains a H3-H4 like dimeric structure made out of a single type of unit. Such dimeric structures can stack into a tall superhelix (\"hypernucleosome\") onto which DNA coils in a manner similar to nucleosome spools. Only some archaeal histones have tails.\nThe distance between the spools around which eukaryotic cells wind their DNA has been determined to range from 59 to 70 \u00c5.\nIn all, histones make five types of interactions with DNA:\nThe highly basic nature of histones, aside from facilitating DNA-histone interactions, contributes to their water solubility.\nHistones are subject to post translational modification by enzymes primarily on their N-terminal tails, but also in their globular domains. Such modifications include methylation, citrullination, acetylation, phosphorylation, SUMOylation, ubiquitination, and ADP-ribosylation. This affects their function of gene regulation.\nIn general, genes that are active have less bound histone, while inactive genes are highly associated with histones during interphase. It also appears that the structure of histones has been evolutionarily conserved, as any deleterious mutations would be severely maladaptive. All histones have a highly positively charged N-terminus with many lysine and arginine residues.\nEvolution and species distribution.\nCore histones are found in the nuclei of eukaryotic cells and in most Archaeal phyla, but not in bacteria. The unicellular algae known as dinoflagellates were previously thought to be the only eukaryotes that completely lack histones, but later studies showed that their DNA still encodes histone genes. Unlike the core histones, homologs of the lysine-rich linker histone (H1) proteins are found in bacteria, otherwise known as nucleoprotein HC1/HC2.\nIt has been proposed that core histone proteins are evolutionarily related to the helical part of the extended AAA+ ATPase domain, the C-domain, and to the N-terminal substrate recognition domain of Clp/Hsp100 proteins. Despite the differences in their topology, these three folds share a homologous helix-strand-helix (HSH) motif. It's also proposed that they may have evolved from ribosomal proteins (RPS6/RPS15), both being short and basic proteins.\nArchaeal histones may well resemble the evolutionary precursors to eukaryotic histones. Histone proteins are among the most highly conserved proteins in eukaryotes, emphasizing their important role in the biology of the nucleus. In contrast mature sperm cells largely use protamines to package their genomic DNA, most likely because this allows them to achieve an even higher packaging ratio.\nThere are some \"variant\" forms in some of the major classes. They share amino acid sequence homology and core structural similarity to a specific class of major histones but also have their own feature that is distinct from the major histones. These \"minor histones\" usually carry out specific functions of the chromatin metabolism. For example, histone H3-like CENPA is associated with only the centromere region of the chromosome. Histone H2A variant H2A.Z is associated with the promoters of actively transcribed genes and also involved in the prevention of the spread of silent heterochromatin. Furthermore, H2A.Z has roles in chromatin for genome stability. Another H2A variant H2A.X is phosphorylated at S139 in regions around double-strand breaks and marks the region undergoing DNA repair. Histone H3.3 is associated with the body of actively transcribed genes.\nFunction.\nCompacting DNA strands.\nHistones act as spools around which DNA winds. This enables the compaction necessary to fit the large genomes of eukaryotes inside cell nuclei: the compacted molecule is 40,000 times shorter than an unpacked molecule.\nTranscription.\nThe effect of histones on transcription was established already in the late 1980s. Specifically, when histones are mutated or depleted a substantial activation of transcription occurs and is independent of other transcription factors (or suggesting that the latter displace histones).\nChromatin regulation.\nHistones undergo posttranslational modifications that alter their interaction with DNA and nuclear proteins. The H3 and H4 histones have long tails protruding from the nucleosome, which can be covalently modified at several places. Modifications of the tail include methylation, acetylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitination, SUMOylation, citrullination, and ADP-ribosylation. The core of the histones H2A and H2B can also be modified. Combinations of modifications, known as \"histone marks\", are thought to constitute a code, the so-called \"histone code\". Histone modifications act in diverse biological processes such as gene regulation, DNA repair, chromosome condensation (mitosis) and spermatogenesis (meiosis).\nThe common nomenclature of histone modifications is:\nSo H3K4me1 denotes the monomethylation of the 4th residue (a lysine) from the start (i.e., the N-terminal) of the H3 protein.\nModification.\nA huge catalogue of histone modifications have been described, but a functional understanding of most is still lacking. Collectively, it is thought that histone modifications may underlie a histone code, whereby combinations of histone modifications have specific meanings. However, most functional data concerns individual prominent histone modifications that are biochemically amenable to detailed study.\nChemistry.\nLysine methylation.\nThe addition of one, two, or many methyl groups to lysine has little effect on the chemistry of the histone; methylation leaves the charge of the lysine intact and adds a minimal number of atoms so steric interactions are mostly unaffected. However, proteins containing Tudor, chromo or PHD domains, amongst others, can recognise lysine methylation with exquisite sensitivity and differentiate mono, di and tri-methyl lysine, to the extent that, for some lysines (e.g.: H4K20) mono, di and tri-methylation appear to have different meanings. Because of this, lysine methylation tends to be a very informative mark and dominates the known histone modification functions.\nGlutamine serotonylation.\nRecently it has been shown, that the addition of a serotonin group to the position 5 glutamine of H3, happens in serotonergic cells such as neurons. This is part of the differentiation of the serotonergic cells. This post-translational modification happens in conjunction with the H3K4me3 modification. The serotonylation potentiates the binding of the general transcription factor TFIID to the TATA box.\nArginine methylation.\nWhat was said above of the chemistry of lysine methylation also applies to arginine methylation, and some protein domains\u2014e.g., Tudor domains\u2014can be specific for methyl arginine instead of methyl lysine. Arginine is known to be mono- or di-methylated, and methylation can be symmetric or asymmetric, potentially with different meanings.\nArginine citrullination.\nEnzymes called peptidylarginine deiminases (PADs) hydrolyze the imine group of arginines and attach a keto group, so that there is one less positive charge on the amino acid residue. This process has been involved in the activation of gene expression by making the modified histones less tightly bound to DNA and thus making the chromatin more accessible. PADs can also produce the opposite effect by removing or inhibiting mono-methylation of arginine residues on histones and thus antagonizing the positive effect arginine methylation has on transcriptional activity.\nLysine acetylation.\nAddition of an acetyl group has a major chemical effect on lysine as it neutralises the positive charge. This reduces electrostatic attraction between the histone and the negatively charged DNA backbone, loosening the chromatin structure; highly acetylated histones form more accessible chromatin and tend to be associated with active transcription. Lysine acetylation appears to be less precise in meaning than methylation, in that histone acetyltransferases tend to act on more than one lysine; presumably this reflects the need to alter multiple lysines to have a significant effect on chromatin structure. The modification includes H3K27ac.\nSerine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation.\nAddition of a negatively charged phosphate group can lead to major changes in protein structure, leading to the well-characterised role of phosphorylation in controlling protein function. It is not clear what structural implications histone phosphorylation has, but histone phosphorylation has clear functions as a post-translational modification, and binding domains such as BRCT have been characterised.\nEffects on transcription.\nHistone modifications are involved in control of transcription.\nActively transcribed genes.\nTwo histone modifications are particularly associated with active transcription:\nRepressed genes.\nThree histone modifications are particularly associated with repressed genes:\nBivalent promoters.\nAnalysis of histone modifications in embryonic stem cells (and other stem cells) revealed many gene promoters carrying both H3K4Me3 and H3K27Me3, in other words these promoters display both activating and repressing marks simultaneously. This peculiar combination of modifications marks genes that are poised for transcription; they are not required in stem cells, but are rapidly required after differentiation into some lineages. Once the cell starts to differentiate, these bivalent promoters are resolved to either active or repressive states depending on the chosen lineage.\nOther functions.\nDNA damage repair.\nMarking sites of DNA damage is an important function for histone modifications. Without a repair marker, DNA would get destroyed by damage accumulated from sources such as the ultraviolet radiation of the sun.\nH3K36me3 has the ability to recruit the MSH2-MSH6 (hMutS\u03b1) complex of the DNA mismatch repair pathway. Consistently, regions of the human genome with high levels of H3K36me3 accumulate less somatic mutations due to mismatch repair activity.\nAddiction.\nEpigenetic modifications of histone tails in specific regions of the brain are of central importance in addictions. Once particular epigenetic alterations occur, they appear to be long lasting \"molecular scars\" that may account for the persistence of addictions.\nCigarette smokers (about 15% of the US population) are usually addicted to nicotine. After 7 days of nicotine treatment of mice, acetylation of both histone H3 and histone H4 was increased at the FosB promoter in the nucleus accumbens of the brain, causing 61% increase in FosB expression. This would also increase expression of the splice variant Delta FosB. In the nucleus accumbens of the brain, Delta FosB functions as a \"sustained molecular switch\" and \"master control protein\" in the development of an addiction.\nAbout 7% of the US population is addicted to alcohol. In rats exposed to alcohol for up to 5 days, there was an increase in histone 3 lysine 9 acetylation in the pronociceptin promoter in the brain amygdala complex. This acetylation is an activating mark for pronociceptin. The nociceptin/nociceptin opioid receptor system is involved in the reinforcing or conditioning effects of alcohol.\nMethamphetamine addiction occurs in about 0.2% of the US population. Chronic methamphetamine use causes methylation of the lysine in position 4 of histone 3 located at the promoters of the \"c-fos\" and the \"C-C chemokine receptor 2 (ccr2)\" genes, activating those genes in the nucleus accumbens (NAc). c-fos is well known to be important in addiction. The \"ccr2\" gene is also important in addiction, since mutational inactivation of this gene impairs addiction.\nHistone chaperones.\nHistone chaperones are specialized proteins that assist in the proper handling, transport, and assembly of histones, preventing their aggregation and ensuring their appropriate deposition onto DNA. These proteins play a crucial role in regulating nucleosome assembly and disassembly, influencing transcriptional activity, DNA replication, and repair. Unlike enzymatic chromatin remodeling, histone chaperones function by binding histones in a regulated manner, modulating chromatin structure without direct catalytic activity. \nOne key function of histone chaperones is maintaining a reservoir of histones, regulating their supply to ensure proper chromatin formation. During DNA replication and transcription, histone chaperones such as ASF1 and FACT facilitate nucleosome reassembly, ensuring the preservation of histone modifications that define cellular identity. Moreover, histone chaperones contribute to nucleosome disassembly in response to cellular stress or DNA damage, thereby allowing access to repair machinery.\nHistone chaperones also participate in the selective deposition of histone variants, which are functionally distinct from canonical histones. For example, HIRA is a chaperone that specifically deposits the histone variant H3.3, a marker of active chromatin regions. Similarly, CAF-1 is responsible for incorporating H3.1 and H3.2 into newly replicated DNA, highlighting the functional specialization within chaperone networks.\nGiven their critical roles, misregulation of histone chaperones has been implicated in diseases such as cancer. Aberrant chaperone activity can lead to improper histone deposition, genome instability, and altered gene expression, contributing to tumorigenesis. Current research is exploring histone chaperones as potential therapeutic targets, particularly in cancers characterized by disrupted chromatin landscapes.\nChaperone networks.\nThe coordinated action of multiple histone chaperones forms an intricate network responsible for histone transport, Chromatin assembly factor 1, and genome maintenance. Chaperone networks facilitate the transport of histones which are synthesized in the cytoplasm and must be escorted to the cell nucleus. This network ensures histones are deposited at the appropriate genomic locations, maintaining chromatin integrity and function.\nHistone chaperones play a crucial role in responding to DNA damage by regulating chromatin accessibility. For example, in response to double strand breaks, chaperones such as FACT and ASF1 help disassemble nucleosomes at damage sites, allowing repair factors to access the lesion. Once repair is completed, these chaperones facilitate the reassembly of nucleosomes, restoring chromatin structure and ensuring epigenetic information is maintained. \nIn addition to their role in genome stability, histone chaperones contribute to epigenetic inheritance. During cell division, chromatin states must be faithfully propagated to daughter cells. Chaperones help distribute parental histones onto newly synthesized DNA strands, preserving histone modifications and ensuring continuity of cellular identity. Disruptions in these processes can lead to epigenetic abnormalities associated with developmental disorders.\nSynthesis.\nThe first step of chromatin structure duplication is the synthesis of histone proteins: H1, H2A, H2B, H3, H4. These proteins are synthesized during S phase of the cell cycle. There are different mechanisms which contribute to the increase of histone synthesis.\nYeast.\nYeast carry one or two copies of each histone gene, which are not clustered but rather scattered throughout chromosomes. Histone gene transcription is controlled by multiple gene regulatory proteins such as transcription factors which bind to histone promoter regions. In budding yeast, the candidate gene for activation of histone gene expression is SBF. SBF is a transcription factor that is activated in late G1 phase, when it dissociates from its repressor Whi5. This occurs when Whi5 is phosphorylated by Cdc8 which is a G1/S Cdk. Suppression of histone gene expression outside of S phases is dependent on Hir proteins which form inactive chromatin structure at the locus of histone genes, causing transcriptional activators to be blocked.\nMetazoan.\nIn metazoans the increase in the rate of histone synthesis is due to the increase in processing of pre-mRNA to its mature form as well as decrease in mRNA degradation; this results in an increase of active mRNA for translation of histone proteins. The mechanism for mRNA activation has been found to be the removal of a segment of the 3' end of the mRNA strand, and is dependent on association with stem-loop binding protein (SLBP). SLBP also stabilizes histone mRNAs during S phase by blocking degradation by the 3'hExo nuclease. SLBP levels are controlled by cell-cycle proteins, causing SLBP to accumulate as cells enter S phase and degrade as cells leave S phase. SLBP are marked for degradation by phosphorylation at two threonine residues by cyclin dependent kinases, possibly cyclin A/ cdk2, at the end of S phase. Metazoans also have multiple copies of histone genes clustered on chromosomes which are localized in structures called Cajal bodies as determined by genome-wide chromosome conformation capture analysis (4C-Seq).\nLink between cell-cycle control and synthesis.\nNuclear protein ataxia-telangiectasia (NPAT), also known as nuclear protein coactivator of histone transcription, is a transcription factor which activates histone gene transcription on chromosomes 1 and 6 of human cells. NPAT is also a substrate of cyclin E-Cdk2, which is required for the transition between G1 phase and S phase. NPAT activates histone gene expression only after it has been phosphorylated by the G1/S-Cdk cyclin E-Cdk2 in early S phase. This shows an important regulatory link between cell-cycle control and histone synthesis.\nHistory.\nHistones were discovered in 1884 by Albrecht Kossel. The word \"histone\" dates from the late 19th century and is derived from the German word \"histon\", a word itself of uncertain origin, perhaps from Ancient Greek \"\u1f35\u03c3\u03c4\u03b7\u03bc\u03b9\" (h\u00edst\u0113mi, \"make stand\") or \"\u1f31\u03c3\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2\" (hist\u00f3s, \"loom\").\nIn the early 1960s, before the types of histones were known and before histones were known to be highly conserved across taxonomically diverse organisms, James F. Bonner and his collaborators began a study of these proteins that were known to be tightly associated with the DNA in the nucleus of higher organisms. Bonner and his postdoctoral fellow Ru Chih C. Huang showed that isolated chromatin would not support RNA transcription in the test tube, but if the histones were extracted from the chromatin, RNA could be transcribed from the remaining DNA. Their paper became a citation classic. Paul T'so and James Bonner had called together a World Congress on Histone Chemistry and Biology in 1964, in which it became clear that there was no consensus on the number of kinds of histone and that no one knew how they would compare when isolated from different organisms. Bonner and his collaborators then developed methods to separate each type of histone, purified individual histones, compared amino acid compositions in the same histone from different organisms, and compared amino acid sequences \u00a0of the same histone from different organisms in collaboration with Emil Smith from UCLA. For example, they found Histone IV sequence to be highly conserved between peas and calf thymus. However, their work on the biochemical characteristics of individual histones did not reveal how the histones interacted with each other or with DNA to which they were tightly bound.\nAlso in the 1960s, Vincent Allfrey and Alfred Mirsky had suggested, based on their analyses of histones, that acetylation and methylation of histones could provide a transcriptional control mechanism, but did not have available the kind of detailed analysis that later investigators were able to conduct to show how such regulation could be gene-specific. Until the early 1990s, histones were dismissed by most as inert packing material for eukaryotic nuclear DNA, a view based in part on the models of Mark Ptashne and others, who believed that transcription was activated by protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions on largely naked DNA templates, as is the case in bacteria.\nDuring the 1980s, Yahli Lorch and Roger Kornberg showed that a nucleosome on a core promoter prevents the initiation of transcription in vitro, and Michael Grunstein demonstrated that histones repress transcription in vivo, leading to the idea of the nucleosome as a general gene repressor. Relief from repression is believed to involve both histone modification and the action of chromatin-remodeling complexes. Vincent Allfrey and Alfred Mirsky had earlier proposed a role of histone modification in transcriptional activation, regarded as a molecular manifestation of epigenetics. Michael Grunstein and David Allis found support for this proposal, in the importance of histone acetylation for transcription in yeast and the activity of the transcriptional activator Gcn5 as a histone acetyltransferase.\nThe discovery of the H5 histone appears to date back to the 1970s, and it is now considered an isoform of Histone H1.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14031", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14031", "title": "Hierarchical organization", "text": "Type of organizational structure\nA hierarchical organization or hierarchical organisation (see spelling differences) is an organizational structure where every entity in the organization, except one, is subordinate to a single other entity. This arrangement is a form of hierarchy. In an organization, this hierarchy usually consists of a singular/group of power at the top with subsequent levels of power beneath them. This is the dominant mode of organization among large organizations; most corporations, governments, criminal enterprises, and organized religions are hierarchical organizations with different levels of management power or authority. For example, the broad, top-level overview of the hierarchy of the Catholic Church consists of the Pope, then the Cardinals, then the Archbishops, and so on. Another example is the hierarchy between the four castes in the Hindu caste system, which arises from the religious belief \"that each is derived from a different part of the creator God\u2019s (Brahma) body, descending from the head downwards.\"\nMembers of hierarchical organizational structures mainly communicate with their immediate superior and their immediate subordinates. Structuring organizations in this way is useful, partly because it reduces the communication overhead costs by limiting information flows.\nVisualization.\nA hierarchy is typically visualized as a pyramid, where the height of the ranking or person depicts their power status and the width of that level represents how many people or business divisions are at that level relative to the whole\u2014the highest-ranking people are at the apex, and there are very few of them, and in many cases only one; the base may include thousands of people who have no subordinates. These hierarchies are typically depicted with a tree or triangle diagram, creating an organizational chart or organogram. Those nearest the top have more power than those nearest the bottom, and there being fewer people at the top than at the bottom. As a result, superiors in a hierarchy generally have higher status and obtain higher salaries and other rewards than their subordinates.\nAlthough the image of organizational hierarchy as a pyramid is widely used, strictly speaking such a pyramid (or organizational chart as its representation) draws on two mechanisms: hierarchy and division of labour. As such, a hierarchy can, for example, also entail a boss with a single employee. When such a simple hierarchy grows by subordinates specialising (e.g. in production, sales, and accounting) and subsequently also establishing and supervising their own (e.g. production, sales, accounting) departments, the typical pyramid arises. This specialisation process is called division of labour.\nCommon social manifestations.\nGovernmental organizations and most companies feature similar hierarchical structures. Traditionally, the monarch stood at the pinnacle of the state. In many countries, feudalism and manorialism provided a formal social structure that established hierarchical links pervading every level of society, with the monarch at the top.\nIn modern post-feudal states the nominal top of the hierarchy still remains a head of state \u2013 sometimes a president or a constitutional monarch, although in many modern states the powers of the head of state are delegated among different bodies. Below or alongside this head there is commonly a senate, parliament or congress; such bodies in turn often delegate the day-to-day running of the country to a prime minister, who may head a cabinet. In many democracies, constitutions theoretically regard \"the people\" as the notional top of the hierarchy, above the head of state; in reality, the people's influence is often restricted to voting in elections or referendums.\nIn business, the business owner traditionally occupies the pinnacle of the organization. Most modern large companies lack a single dominant shareholder and for most purposes delegate the collective power of the business owners to a board of directors, which in turn delegates the day-to-day running of the company to a managing director or CEO. Again, although the shareholders of the company nominally rank at the top of the hierarchy, in reality many companies are run at least in part as personal fiefdoms by their management. Corporate governance rules attempt to mitigate this tendency.\nOrigins and development of social hierarchical organization.\nSmaller and more informal social units \u2013 families, bands, tribes, special interest groups \u2013 which may form spontaneously, have little need for complex hierarchies \u2013 or indeed for any hierarchies. They may rely on self-organizing tendencies.\nA conventional view ascribes the growth of hierarchical social habits and structures to increased complexity;\nthe religious syncretism\nand issues of tax-gathering\nin expanding empires played a role here.\nHowever, others have observed that simple forms of hierarchical leadership naturally emerge from interactions in both human and non-human primate communities. For instance, this occurs when a few individuals obtain more status in their tribe, (extended) family or clan, or when competences and resources are unequally distributed across individuals.\nStudies.\nThe organizational development theorist Elliott Jaques identified a special role for hierarchy in his concept of requisite organization. \nThe iron law of oligarchy, introduced by Robert Michels, describes the inevitable tendency of hierarchical organizations to become oligarchic in their decision making.\nThe Peter Principle is a term coined by Laurence J. Peter in which the selection of a candidate for a position in an hierarchical organization is based on the candidate's performance in their current role, rather than on abilities relevant to the intended role. Thus, employees only stop being promoted once they can no longer perform effectively, and managers in an hierarchical organization \"rise to the level of their incompetence.\"\nHierarchiology is another term coined by Laurence J. Peter, described in his humorous book of the same name, to refer to the study of hierarchical organizations and the behavior of their members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Having formulated the Principle, I discovered that I had inadvertently founded a new science, hierarchiology, the study of hierarchies. The term hierarchy was originally used to describe the system of church government by priests graded into ranks. The contemporary meaning includes any organization whose members or employees are arranged in order of rank, grade or class. Hierarchiology, although a relatively recent discipline, appears to have great applicability to the fields of public and private administration.\u2014\u200a\nDavid Andrews' book \"The IRG Solution: Hierarchical Incompetence and how to Overcome it\" argued that hierarchies were inherently incompetent, and were only able to function due to large amounts of informal lateral communication fostered by private informal networks.\nTypes of hierarchy.\nHierarchical organization is a phenomenon with many faces. To understand and map this diversity, various typologies have been developed. Formal versus informal hierarchy is a well-known typology, but one can also\ndistinguish four hierarchy types.\nTwo types of hierarchy: Formal and informal.\nA well-known distinction is between formal and informal hierarchy in organizational settings. According to Max Weber, the formal hierarchy is the vertical sequence of official positions within one explicit organizational structure, whereby each position or office is under the control and supervision of a higher one. The \"formal hierarchy\" can thus be defined as \"an official system of unequal person-independent roles and positions which are linked via lines of top-down command-and-control.\" By contrast, an \"informal hierarchy\" can be defined as person-dependent social relationships of dominance and subordination, emerging from social interaction and becoming persistent over time through repeated social processes. The informal hierarchy between two or more people can be based on difference in, for example, seniority, experience or social status.\nThe formal and informal hierarchy may complement each other in any specific organization and therefore tend to co-exist in any organization. But the general pattern observed in many organizations is that when the formal hierarchy decreases (over time), the informal hierarchy increases, or vice versa.\nFour types of hierarchy.\nA more elaborate typology of hierarchy in social systems entails four types: hierarchy as a ladder of formal authority, ladder of achieved status, self-organized ladder of responsibility, and an ideology-based ladder. The first two types can be equated with the formal and informal hierarchy, as previously defined. Accordingly, this typology extends the formal and informal hierarchy with two other types.\nHierarchy as ladder of formal authority.\nThis type of hierarchy is defined as a sequence of levels of formal authority, that is, the authority to make decisions. This results in a ladder that systematically differentiates the authority to make decisions. A typical authority-based hierarchy in companies is: the board of directors, CEO, departmental managers, team leaders, and other employees. The authority-based hierarchy, also known as the formal hierarchy, to a large extent arises from the legal structure of the organization: for example, the owner of the firm is also the CEO or appoints the CEO, who in turn appoints and supervises departmental managers, and so forth.\nHierarchy as ladder of achieved status.\nAlso known as the informal hierarchy (defined earlier), this type of hierarchy draws on unofficial mechanisms for ranking people. It involves differences in status, other than those arising from formal authority. Status is one's social standing or professional position, relative to those of others. In anthropology and sociology, this notion of status is also known as achieved status, the social position that is earned instead of being ascribed. The underlying mechanism is social stratification, which draws on shared cultural beliefs (e.g. regarding expertise and seniority as drivers of status) that can make status differences between people appear natural and fair. A ladder of achieved status is socially constructed, which makes it fundamentally different from the ladder of authority that (largely) arises from an underlying legal structure. The social-constructivist nature of status also implies that ladders of achieved status especially arise in groups of people that frequently interact\u2014for example, a work unit, team, family, or neighbourhood.\nHierarchy as self-organized ladder of responsibility.\nIn the literature on organization design and agility, hierarchy is conceived as a requisite structure that emerges in a self-organized manner from operational activities. For example, a small firm composed of only three equivalent partners can initially operate without any hierarchy; but substantial growth in terms of people and their tasks will create the need for coordination and related managerial activities; this implies, for example, that one of the partners starts doing these coordination activities. Another example involves organizations adopting holacracy or sociocracy, with people at all levels self-organizing their responsibilities; that is, they exercise \"real\" rather than formal authority. In this respect, responsibility is an expression of self-restraint and intrinsic obligation. Examples of self-organized ladders of responsibility have also been observed in (the early stages of) worker cooperatives, like Mondragon, in which hierarchy is created in a bottom-up manner.\nHierarchy as ladder of ideology.\nIn a hierarchy driven by ideology, people establish themselves as legitimate leaders by invoking some (e.g., religious, spiritual or political) idea to justify the hierarchical relationship between higher and lower levels. Ideological hierarchies have a long history, for example in the administrative hierarchies headed by pharaohs in ancient Egypt or those headed by kings in medieval Europe. The main legitimacy of any pharaoh or king arose from the strong belief in the idea that the pharaoh/king acts as the intermediary between the gods and the people, and thus deputizes for the gods. Another example is the hierarchy prevailing until today in the Balinese community, which is strongly connected to the rice cycle that is believed to constitute a hierarchical relationship between gods and humans, both of whom must play their parts to secure a good crop; the same ideology also legitimizes the hierarchical relationship between high and low castes in Bali. Ideological ladders have also long sustained the way the Catholic church and the Hindu caste system operates. Hierarchies of ideology also exist in many other settings, for instance, those driven by prevailing values and beliefs about how the (e.g. business) world should operate. An example is the ideology of \"maximizing shareholder value\", which is widely used in publicly traded companies. This ideology helps in creating and sustaining the image of a clear hierarchy from shareholders to employees\u2014although, in practice, the separation of legal ownership and actual control implies that the CEO together with the Board of Directors are at the top of the corporate hierarchy. Given that public corporations (primarily) thrive on ladders of authority; this example also demonstrates how ladders of authority and ideology can complement and reinforce each other.\nCriticism and alternatives.\nThe work of diverse theorists such as William James (1842\u20131910), Michel Foucault (1926\u20131984) and Hayden White (1928\u20132018) makes important critiques of hierarchical epistemology. James famously asserts in his work on radical empiricism that clear distinctions of type and category are a constant but unwritten goal of scientific reasoning, so that when they are discovered, success is declared. But if aspects of the world are organized differently, involving inherent and intractable ambiguities, then scientific questions are often considered unresolved. A hesitation to declare success upon the discovery of ambiguities leaves heterarchy at an artificial and subjective disadvantage in the scope of human knowledge. This bias is an artifact of an aesthetic or pedagogical preference for hierarchy, and not necessarily an expression of objective observation.\nHierarchies and hierarchical thinking have been criticized by many people, including Susan McClary (born 1946), and by one political philosophy which vehemently opposes hierarchical organization: anarchism. Heterarchy, the most commonly proposed alternative to hierarchy, has been combined with responsible autonomy by Gerard Fairtlough in his work on triarchy theory. The most beneficial aspect of a hierarchical organization is the clear command-structure that it establishes. However, hierarchy may become dismantled by abuse of power.\nMatrix organizations became a trend (or management fad) in the second half of the 20th century.\nAmidst constant innovation in information and communication technologies, hierarchical authority structures are giving way to greater decision-making latitude for individuals and more flexible definitions of job activities; and this new style of work presents a challenge to existing organizational forms, with some research studies contrasting traditional organizational forms with groups that operate as online communities that are characterized by personal motivation and the satisfaction of making one's own decisions.\nWhen all levels of a hierarchical organization have access to information and communication via digital means, power structures may align more as a wirearchy, enabling the flow of power and authority to be based not on hierarchical levels, but on information, trust, credibility, and a focus on results.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14033", "revid": "48025927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14033", "title": "Harry Secombe", "text": "Welsh entertainer (1921\u20132001)\nSir Harry Donald Secombe (8 September 1921 \u2013 11 April 2001) was a Welsh actor, comedian, singer and television presenter. Secombe was a member of the British radio comedy programme \"The Goon Show\" (1951\u20131960), playing many characters, most notably Neddie Seagoon. An accomplished baritone, he also appeared in musicals and films \u2013 notably as Mr Bumble in \"Oliver!\" (1968) \u2013 and, in his later years, was a presenter of television shows incorporating hymns and other devotional songs.\nEarly life.\nSecombe was born in St Thomas, Swansea, the third of four children of Nellie Jane Gladys (n\u00e9e Davies), a shop manageress, and Frederick Ernest Secombe, a travelling salesman and office worker for a Swansea wholesale grocery business. From the age of 11 he attended Dynevor School, a state grammar school in central Swansea.\nHis family were regular churchgoers, belonging to the congregation of St Thomas Church. A member of the choir, from the age of 12 Secombe would perform a sketch entitled \"The Welsh Courtship\" at church socials, acting as \"feed\" to his sister Carol. His elder brother, Fred Secombe, became the author of several books about his experiences as an Anglican priest and rector.\nArmy service.\nAfter leaving school in 1937, Secombe became a pay clerk at Baldwin's store. With war looming, he decided in 1938 that he would join the Territorial Army. Very short sighted, he got a friend to tell him the sight test, and then learnt it by heart. He served as a Lance Bombardier in No.132 Field Regiment of the Royal Artillery. He referred to the unit in which he served during the Second World War in the North African Campaign, Sicily, and Italy, as \"The Five-Mile Snipers\". While in North Africa Secombe met Spike Milligan for the first time. In Sicily he joined a concert party and developed his own comedy routines to entertain the troops.\nWhen Secombe visited the Falkland Islands to entertain the troops after the 1982 Falklands War, his old regiment promoted him to the rank of sergeant \u2013 37 years after he had been demobbed.\nAs an entertainer.\nHe made his first radio broadcast in May 1944 on a variety show aimed at the military services. Following the end of fighting in the war but prior to demobilisation, Secombe joined a pool of entertainers in Naples and formed a comedy duo with Spike Milligan.\nSecombe joined the cast of the Windmill Theatre in 1946, using a routine he had developed in Italy about how people shaved. An early review said that Secombe was \"an original humorist of the infectious type and is very funny in a series showing how different men shave and in an impression of a vocalist.\" Secombe always claimed that his ability to sing could always be counted on to save him when he bombed.\nFollowing a regional touring career, his first break came in radio in 1951 when he was chosen as resident comedian for the Welsh series \"Welsh Rarebit,\" followed by appearances on \"Variety Bandbox\" and a regular role in \"Educating Archie\".\nSecombe met Michael Bentine at the Windmill Theatre, and he was introduced to Peter Sellers by his agent Jimmy Grafton. Together with Spike Milligan, the four wrote a comedy radio script, and \"Those Crazy People\" was commissioned and first broadcast on 28 May 1951. Produced by Dennis Main Wilson, this soon became \"The Goon Show\" and the show remained on the air until 1960. Secombe mainly played Neddie Seagoon, around whom the show's absurd plots developed. In 1955, whilst appearing on \"The Goon Show\", Secombe was approached by the BBC to step in at short notice to take the lead in the radio comedy \"Hancock's Half Hour\". The star of the show, Tony Hancock, had decided to take an unannounced break abroad, on the day before the live airing of the second season. Secombe appeared in the lead for the first three episodes and had a guest role in the fourth after Hancock's return. All four episodes are lost, but following the discovery of the original scripts, the episodes were rerecorded in 2017, with his son, Andrew Secombe performing the role held by his late father.\nWith the success of \"The Goon Show\", Secombe developed a dual career as both a comedy actor and a singer. At the beginning of his career as an entertainer, his act would end with a joke version of the duet \"Sweethearts,\" in which he sang both the baritone and falsetto parts. Trained under Italian maestro Manlio di Veroli, he emerged as a baritone and had a long list of best-selling record albums to his credit.\nIn 1958 he appeared in the film \"Jet Storm,\" which starred Dame Sybil Thorndike and Richard Attenborough and in the same year Secombe starred in the title role in \"Davy\", one of Ealing Studios' last films. By this time he was invited to appear on the Royal Command Performance (1958) where he struck up a lifelong friendship with Roy Castle.\nThe power of his voice allowed Secombe to appear in many stage musicals. This included 1963's \"Pickwick,\" based on Charles Dickens's \"The Pickwick Papers\", which gave him the no. 18 hit single \"If I Ruled the World\" \u2013 his later signature tune. In 1965 the show was produced on tour in the United States, where, on Broadway, he garnered a nomination for a Tony Award for Best Actor in a Musical. Secombe scored his biggest hit single in 1967 with his version of \"This Is My Song\", which peaked at no. 2 on the charts in March 1967 while a recording by Petula Clark, which had hit no. 1 in February, was still in the top ten. He also appeared in the musical \"The Four Musketeers\" (1967) at Drury Lane, as Mr. Bumble in Carol Reed's film of \"Oliver!\" (1968), and in the Envy segment of \"The Magnificent Seven Deadly Sins\" (1971).\nHe went on to star in his own television show, \"The Harry Secombe Show\", which debuted on Christmas Day 1968 on BBC1 and ran for 31 episodes until 1973. A sketch comedy show featuring Julian Orchard as Secombe's regular sidekick, the series also featured guest appearances by fellow Goon Spike Milligan as well as leading performers such as Ronnie Barker and Arthur Lowe. Secombe later starred in similar vehicles such as \"Sing a Song of Secombe\" and ITV's \"Secombe with Music\" during the 1970s.\nLater career.\nLater in life, Secombe (whose brother Fred Secombe was a priest in the Church in Wales, part of the Anglican Communion) attracted new audiences as a presenter of religious programmes, such as the BBC's \"Songs of Praise\" and ITV's \"Stars on Sunday\" and \"Highway\". He was also a special programming consultant to Harlech Television and hosted a Thames Television programme in 1979 entitled \"Cross on the Donkey's Back\". In the latter half of the 1980s, Secombe personally sponsored a football team for boys aged 9\u201311 in the local West Sutton Little League, 'Secombes Knights'.\nIn 1990, he was one of a few to be honoured by a second appearance on \"This Is Your Life\", when he was surprised by Michael Aspel at a book signing in a London branch of WH Smith. Secombe had been a subject of the show previously in March 1958 when Eamonn Andrews surprised him at the BBC Television Theatre.\nHonours.\nIn 1963 he was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE).\nHe was knighted in 1981, and jokingly referred to himself as Sir Cumference (in recognition of his rotund figure). The motto he chose for his coat of arms was \"GO ON\", a reference to goon.\nLater life and death.\nSecombe had peritonitis in 1980. Within two years, taking advice from doctors, he had lost five stone in weight. He had a stroke in 1997 and his colon burst, from which he made a slow recovery. He was then diagnosed with prostate cancer in September 1998. Following a second stroke in 1999, he was forced to abandon his television career, but made a documentary about his condition in the hope of giving encouragement to others with the condition. Secombe had diabetes in the latter part of his life.\nSecombe died on 11 April 2001 at the age of 79, from prostate cancer, in hospital in Guildford, Surrey. His ashes are interred at the parish church of Shamley Green, and a later memorial service to celebrate his life was held at Westminster Abbey on 26 October 2001. As well as family members and friends, the service was attended by Charles, Prince of Wales and representatives of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, Anne, Princess Royal, Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon and Prince Edward, Duke of Kent. On his tombstone is the inscription: \"To know him was to love him.\"\nAt Peter Sellers's funeral in 1980, Secombe sang a hymn and Spike Milligan joked: \"I hope you die before me because I don't want you singing at my funeral.\" After Milligan's death in 2002, a recording of Secombe singing \"Guide me, O Thou great Redeemer\" was played at Milligan's memorial service.\nThe Secombe Theatre in Sutton, Greater London, was named after him. He is also fondly remembered at the London Welsh Centre, where he opened the bar on St Patrick's Day (17 March) 1971.\nFamily.\nSecombe met Myra Joan Atherton at the Mumbles Dance Hall in 1946. The couple were married from 1948 until his death, and had four children:\nMyra, Lady Secombe died on 7 February 2018, aged 93.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14034", "revid": "21408729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14034", "title": "Heroin", "text": "Opioid analgesic and recreational drug\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHeroin, also known as diacetylmorphine and diamorphine among other names, is a morphinan opioid substance synthesized from the dried latex of the opium poppy; it is mainly used as a recreational drug for its euphoric effects. Heroin is used medically in several countries to relieve pain, such as during childbirth or a heart attack, as well as in opioid replacement therapy. Medical-grade diamorphine is used as a pure hydrochloride salt. Various white and brown powders sold illegally around the world as \"heroin\" are routinely diluted with cutting agents. Black tar heroin is a variable admixture of morphine derivatives\u2014predominantly 6-MAM (6-monoacetylmorphine), which is the result of crude acetylation during clandestine production of street heroin.\nHeroin is typically injected, usually into a vein, but it can also be snorted, smoked, or inhaled. In a clinical context, the route of administration is most commonly intravenous injection; it may also be given by intramuscular or subcutaneous injection, as well as orally in the form of tablets. The onset of effects is usually rapid and lasts for a few hours.\nCommon side effects include respiratory depression (decreased breathing), dry mouth, drowsiness, impaired mental function, constipation, and addiction. Use by injection can also result in abscesses, infected heart valves, blood-borne infections, and pneumonia. After a history of long-term use, opioid withdrawal symptoms can begin within hours of the last use. When given by injection into a vein, heroin has two to three times the effect of a similar dose of morphine. It typically appears in the form of a white or brown powder.\nTreatment of heroin addiction often includes behavioral therapy and medications. Medications can include buprenorphine, methadone, or naltrexone. A heroin overdose may be treated with naloxone. As of 2015, an estimated 17\u00a0million people use opiates non-medically, of which heroin is the most common, and opioid use resulted in 122,000 deaths; also, as of 2015, the total number of heroin users worldwide is believed to have increased in Africa, the Americas, and Asia since 2000. In the United States, approximately 1.6 percent of people have used heroin at some point. When people die from overdosing on a drug, the drug is usually an opioid and often heroin.\nHeroin was first made by C. R. Alder Wright in 1874 from morphine, a natural product of the opium poppy. Internationally, heroin is controlled under Schedules I and IV of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, and it is generally illegal to make, possess, or sell without a license. About 448 tons of heroin were made in 2016. In 2015, Afghanistan produced about 66% of the world's opium. Illegal heroin is often mixed with other substances such as sugar, starch, caffeine, quinine, or other opioids like fentanyl.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUses.\nRecreational.\nBayer's original trade name of heroin is typically used in non-medical settings. It is used as a recreational drug for the euphoria it induces. Anthropologist Michael Agar once described heroin as \"the perfect whatever drug.\" Tolerance develops quickly, and increased doses are needed in order to achieve the same effects. Its popularity with recreational drug users, compared to morphine, reportedly stems from its perceived different effects.\nShort-term addiction studies by the same researchers demonstrated that tolerance to heroin and morphine developed at a similar rate. When compared to the opioids hydromorphone, fentanyl, oxycodone, and pethidine (meperidine), former addicts showed a strong preference for heroin and morphine, suggesting that heroin and morphine are particularly susceptible to misuse and causing dependence. Morphine and heroin were also much more likely to produce euphoria and other positive subjective effects when compared to these other opioids.\nMedical uses.\nIn the United States, heroin is not accepted as medically useful.\nUnder the generic name diamorphine, heroin is prescribed as a strong pain medication in the United Kingdom, where it is administered via oral, subcutaneous, intramuscular, intrathecal, intranasal or intravenous routes. It may be prescribed for the treatment of acute pain, such as in severe physical trauma, myocardial infarction, post-surgical pain and chronic pain, including end-stage terminal illnesses. In other countries it is more common to use morphine or other strong opioids in these situations. \nThe UK's National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence has produced guidance on the management of caesarean section, which recommends the use of intrathecal or epidural diamorphine for post-operative pain relief. For women who have had intrathecal opioids including diamorphine, there should be a minimum hourly observation of respiratory rate, sedation and pain scores for at least 12 hours if risk factors for respiratory depression are present. Women should be offered diamorphine (up to 0.3mg intrathecally) for intra- and postoperative analgesia because it reduces the need for supplemental analgesia after a caesarean section. Epidural diamorphine (up to 3mg) is a suitable alternative.\nDiamorphine continues to be widely used in palliative care in the UK, where it is commonly given by the subcutaneous route, often via a syringe driver if patients cannot easily swallow morphine solution. The advantage of diamorphine over morphine is that diamorphine is more fat soluble and therefore more potent by injection, so smaller doses of it are needed for the same effect on pain. Both of these factors are advantageous if giving high doses of opioids via the subcutaneous route, which is often necessary for palliative care.\nIt is also used in the palliative management of bone fractures and other trauma, especially in children. In the trauma context, it is primarily given by nose in hospital; although a prepared nasal spray is available, it has traditionally been made by the attending physician, generally from the same \"dry\" ampoules as used for injection. In children, Ayendi nasal spray is available at 720 micrograms and 1600 micrograms per 50 microlitres actuation of the spray, which may be preferable as a non-invasive alternative in pediatric care, avoiding the fear of injection in children.\nMaintenance therapy.\nA number of European countries prescribe heroin for treatment of heroin addiction. The initial Swiss HAT (heroin-assisted treatment) trial (\"PROVE\" study) was conducted as a prospective cohort study with some 1,000 participants in 18 treatment centers between 1994 and 1996, at the end of 2004, 1,200 patients were enrolled in HAT in 23 treatment centers across Switzerland. Diamorphine may be used as a maintenance drug to assist the treatment of opiate addiction, normally in long-term chronic intravenous (IV) heroin users. It is only prescribed following exhaustive efforts at treatment via other means. It is sometimes thought that heroin users can walk into a clinic and walk out with a prescription, but the process takes many weeks before a prescription for diamorphine is issued. Though this is somewhat controversial among proponents of a zero-tolerance drug policy, it has proven superior to methadone in improving the social and health situations of addicts.\nThe UK Department of Health's Rolleston Committee Report in 1926 established the British approach to diamorphine prescription to users, which was maintained for the next 40 years: dealers were prosecuted, but doctors could prescribe diamorphine to users when withdrawing. In 1964, the Brain Committee recommended that only selected approved doctors working at approved specialized centres be allowed to prescribe diamorphine and cocaine to users. The law was made more restrictive in 1968. Beginning in the 1970s, the emphasis shifted to abstinence and the use of methadone; currently, only a small number of users in the UK are prescribed diamorphine.\nIn 1994, Switzerland began a trial diamorphine maintenance program for users that had failed multiple withdrawal programs. The aim of this program was to maintain the health of the user by avoiding medical problems stemming from the illicit use of diamorphine. The first trial in 1994 involved 340 users, although enrollment was later expanded to 1000, based on the apparent success of the program. The trials proved diamorphine maintenance to be superior to other forms of treatment in improving the social and health situation for this group of patients. It has also been shown to save money, despite high treatment expenses, as it significantly reduces costs incurred by trials, incarceration, health interventions and delinquency. Patients appear twice daily at a treatment center, where they inject their dose of diamorphine under the supervision of medical staff. They are required to contribute about 450 Swiss francs per month to the treatment costs. A national referendum in November 2008 showed 68% of voters supported the plan, introducing diamorphine prescription into federal law. The previous trials were based on time-limited executive ordinances. The success of the Swiss trials led German, Dutch, and Canadian cities to try out their own diamorphine prescription programs. Some Australian cities (such as Sydney) have instituted legal diamorphine supervised injecting centers, in line with other wider harm minimization programs.\nSince January 2009, Denmark has prescribed diamorphine to a few addicts who have tried methadone and buprenorphine without success. Beginning in February 2010, addicts in Copenhagen and Odense became eligible to receive free diamorphine. Later in 2010, other cities including \u00c5rhus and Esbjerg joined the scheme. It was estimated that around 230 addicts would be able to receive free diamorphine.\nHowever, Danish addicts would only be able to inject heroin according to the policy set by Danish National Board of Health. Of the estimated 1500 drug users who did not benefit from the then-current oral substitution treatment, approximately 900 would not be in the target group for treatment with injectable diamorphine, either because of \"massive multiple drug abuse of non-opioids\" or \"not wanting treatment with injectable diamorphine\".\nIn July 2009, the German Bundestag passed a law allowing diamorphine prescription as a standard treatment for addicts; a large-scale trial of diamorphine prescription had been authorized in the country in 2002.\nOn 26 August 2016, Health Canada issued regulations amending prior regulations it had issued under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act; the \"New Classes of Practitioners Regulations\", the \"Narcotic Control Regulations\", and the \"Food and Drug Regulations\", to allow doctors to prescribe diamorphine to people who have a severe opioid addiction who have not responded to other treatments. The prescription heroin can be accessed by doctors through Health Canada's Special Access Programme (SAP) for \"emergency access to drugs for patients with serious or life-threatening conditions when conventional treatments have failed, are unsuitable, or are unavailable.\"\nRoutes of administration.\nThe onset of heroin's effects depends upon the route of administration. Smoking is the fastest route of drug administration, although intravenous injection results in a quicker rise in blood concentration. These are followed by suppository (anal or vaginal insertion), insufflation (snorting), and ingestion (swallowing).\nA 2002 study suggests that a fast onset of action increases the reinforcing effects of addictive drugs. Ingestion does not produce a rush as a forerunner to the high experienced with the use of heroin, which is most pronounced with intravenous use. While the onset of the rush induced by injection can occur in as little as a few seconds, the oral route of administration requires approximately half an hour before the high sets in. Thus, with both higher the dosage of heroin used and faster the route of administration used, the higher the potential risk for psychological dependence/addiction.\nLarge doses of heroin can cause fatal respiratory depression, and the drug has been used for suicide or as a murder weapon. The serial killer Harold Shipman used diamorphine on his victims, and the subsequent Shipman Inquiry led to a tightening of the regulations surrounding the storage, prescribing and destruction of controlled drugs in the UK.\nBecause significant tolerance to respiratory depression develops quickly with continued use and is lost just as quickly during withdrawal, it is often difficult to determine whether a heroin lethal overdose was accidental, suicide or homicide. Examples include the overdose deaths of Sid Vicious, Janis Joplin, Tim Buckley, Hillel Slovak, Layne Staley, Bradley Nowell, Ted Binion, and River Phoenix.\nBy mouth.\nUse of heroin by mouth is less common than other methods of administration, mainly because there is little to no \"rush\", and the effects are less potent. Heroin is entirely converted to morphine by means of first-pass metabolism, resulting in deacetylation when ingested. Heroin's oral bioavailability is both dose-dependent (as is morphine's) and significantly higher than oral use of morphine itself, reaching up to 64.2% for high doses and 45.6% for low doses; opiate-naive users showed far less absorption of the drug at low doses, having bioavailabilities of only up to 22.9%. The maximum plasma concentration of morphine following oral administration of heroin was around twice as much as that of oral morphine.\nInjection.\nInjection, also known as \"slamming\", \"banging\", \"shooting up\", \"digging\" or \"mainlining\", is a popular method which carries relatively greater risks than other methods of administration. Heroin base (commonly found in Europe), when prepared for injection, will only dissolve in water when mixed with an acid (most commonly citric acid powder or lemon juice) and heated. Heroin in the east-coast United States is most commonly found in the hydrochloride salt form, requiring just water (and no heat) to dissolve. Users tend to initially inject in the easily accessible arm veins, but as these veins collapse over time, users resort to more dangerous areas of the body, such as the femoral vein in the groin. Some medical professionals have expressed concern over this route of administration, as they suspect that it can lead to deep vein thrombosis.\nIntravenous users can use a variable single dose range using a hypodermic needle. The dose of heroin used for recreational purposes is dependent on the frequency and level of use.\nAs with the injection of any drug, if a group of users share a common needle without sterilization procedures, blood-borne diseases, such as HIV/AIDS or hepatitis, can be transmitted. The use of a common dispenser for water for the use in the preparation of the injection, as well as the sharing of spoons and filters can also cause the spread of blood-borne diseases. Many countries now supply small sterile spoons and filters for single use in order to prevent the spread of disease.\nSmoking.\nSmoking heroin refers to vaporizing it to inhale the resulting fumes, rather than burning and inhaling the smoke. It is commonly smoked in glass pipes made from glassblown Pyrex tubes and light bulbs. Heroin may be smoked from aluminium foil that is heated by a flame underneath it, with the resulting smoke inhaled through a tube of rolled up foil, a method also known as \"chasing the dragon\".\nInsufflation.\nAnother popular route to intake heroin is insufflation (snorting), where a user crushes the heroin into a fine powder and then gently inhales it (sometimes with a straw or a rolled-up banknote, as with cocaine) into the nose, where heroin is absorbed through the soft tissue in the mucous membrane of the sinus cavity and straight into the bloodstream. This method of administration redirects first-pass metabolism, with a quicker onset and higher bioavailability than oral administration, though the duration of action is shortened. This method is sometimes preferred by users who do not want to prepare and administer heroin for injection or smoking but still want to experience a fast onset. Snorting heroin becomes an often unwanted route, once a user begins to inject the drug. The user may still get high on the drug from snorting, and experience a nod, but will not get a rush. A \"rush\" is caused by a large amount of heroin entering the body at once. When the drug is taken in through the nose, the user does not get the rush because the drug is absorbed slowly rather than instantly.\nHeroin for pain has been mixed with sterile water on site by the attending physician, and administered using a syringe with a nebulizer tip. Heroin may be used for fractures, burns, finger-tip injuries, suturing, and wound re-dressing, but is inappropriate in head injuries.\nSuppository.\nLittle research has been focused on the suppository (anal insertion), also known as \"plugging\". These methods of administration are commonly carried out using an oral syringe. Heroin can be dissolved and withdrawn into an oral syringe which may then be lubricated and inserted into the anus or vagina before the plunger is pushed. The rectum or the vaginal canal is where the majority of the drug would likely be taken up, through the membranes lining their walls.\nAdverse effects.\nHeroin is classified as a hard drug in terms of drug harmfulness. Like most opioids, unadulterated heroin may lead to adverse effects. The purity of street heroin varies greatly, leading to overdoses when the purity is higher than expected.\nShort-term effects.\nUsers report an intense rush, an acute transcendent state of euphoria, which occurs while diamorphine is being metabolized into 6-monoacetylmorphine (6-MAM) and morphine in the brain. Some believe that heroin produces more euphoria than other opioids; one possible explanation is the presence of 6-monoacetylmorphine, a metabolite unique to heroin \u2013 although a more likely explanation is the rapidity of onset. While other opioids of recreational use produce only morphine, heroin also leaves 6-MAM, also a psycho-active metabolite.\nHowever, this perception is not supported by the results of clinical studies comparing the physiological and subjective effects of injected heroin and morphine in individuals formerly addicted to opioids; these subjects showed no preference for one drug over the other. Equipotent injected doses had comparable action courses, with no difference in subjects' self-rated feelings of euphoria, ambition, nervousness, relaxation, drowsiness, or sleepiness.\nThe rush is usually accompanied by a warm flushing of the skin, dry mouth, and a heavy feeling in the extremities. Nausea, vomiting, and severe itching may also occur. After the initial effects, users usually will be drowsy for several hours; mental function is clouded; heart function slows, and breathing is also severely slowed, sometimes enough to be life-threatening. Slowed breathing can also lead to coma and permanent brain damage. Heroin use has also been associated with myocardial infarction.\nLong-term effects.\nRepeated heroin use changes the physical structure and physiology of the brain, creating long-term imbalances in neuronal and hormonal systems that are not easily reversed. Studies have shown some deterioration of the brain's white matter due to heroin use, which may affect decision-making abilities, the ability to regulate behavior, and responses to stressful situations. Heroin also produces profound degrees of tolerance and physical dependence. Tolerance occurs when more and more of the drug is required to achieve the same effects. With physical dependence, the body adapts to the presence of the drug, and withdrawal symptoms occur if use is reduced abruptly.\nInjection.\nIntravenous use of heroin (and any other substance) with needles and syringes or other related equipment may lead to:\nSmoking.\nInhaling heroin appears to rarely lead to toxic leukoencephalopathy. There are also documented cases of both severe acute asthma and exacerbation of underlying asthma caused by heroin inhalation, potentially resulting in death.\nWithdrawal.\nThe withdrawal syndrome from heroin may begin within as little as two hours of discontinuation of the drug; however, this time frame can fluctuate with the degree of tolerance as well as the amount of the last consumed dose, and more typically begins within 6\u201324 hours after cessation. Symptoms may include sweating, malaise, anxiety, depression, akathisia, priapism, extra sensitivity of the genitals in females, general feeling of heaviness, excessive yawning or sneezing, rhinorrhea, insomnia, cold sweats, chills, severe muscle and bone aches, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, cramps, watery eyes, fever, cramp-like pains, and involuntary spasms in the limbs (thought to be an origin of the term \"kicking the habit\").\nOverdose.\nHeroin overdose is usually treated with the opioid antagonist naloxone. This reverses the effects of heroin and causes an immediate return of consciousness but may result in withdrawal symptoms. The half-life of naloxone is shorter than some opioids, such that it may need to be given multiple times until the opioid has been metabolized by the body.\nBetween 2012 and 2015, heroin was the leading cause of drug-related deaths in the United States. Since then, fentanyl has been a more common cause of drug-related deaths.\nDepending on drug interactions and numerous other factors, death from overdose can take anywhere from several minutes to several hours. Death usually occurs due to lack of oxygen resulting from the lack of breathing caused by the opioid. Heroin overdoses can occur because of an unexpected increase in the dose or purity or because of diminished opioid tolerance. However, many fatalities reported as overdoses are probably caused by interactions with other depressant drugs such as alcohol or benzodiazepines. Since heroin can cause nausea and vomiting, a significant number of deaths attributed to heroin overdose are caused by aspiration of vomit by an unconscious person. Some sources quote the median lethal dose (for an average 75\u00a0kg opiate-naive individual) as being between 75 and 600\u00a0mg. Illicit heroin is of widely varying and unpredictable purity. This means that the user may prepare what they consider to be a moderate dose while actually taking far more than intended. Also, tolerance typically decreases after a period of abstinence. If this occurs and the user takes a dose comparable to their previous use, the user may experience drug effects that are much greater than expected, potentially resulting in an overdose. It has been speculated that an unknown portion of heroin-related deaths are the result of an overdose or allergic reaction to quinine, which may sometimes be used as a cutting agent.\nPharmacology.\nWhen taken orally, heroin undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism via deacetylation, making it a prodrug for the systemic delivery of morphine. When the drug is injected, however, it avoids this first-pass effect, very rapidly crossing the blood\u2013brain barrier because of the presence of the acetyl groups, which render it much more fat soluble than morphine itself. Once in the brain, it then is deacetylated variously into the inactive 3-monoacetylmorphine and the active 6-monoacetylmorphine (6-MAM), and then to morphine, which bind to \u03bc-opioid receptors, resulting in the drug's euphoric, analgesic (pain relief), and anxiolytic (anti-anxiety) effects; heroin itself exhibits relatively low affinity for the \u03bc receptor. Analgesia follows from the activation of the \u03bc receptor G-protein coupled receptor, which indirectly hyperpolarizes the neuron, reducing the release of nociceptive neurotransmitters, and hence, causes analgesia and increased pain tolerance.\nUnlike hydromorphone and oxymorphone, however, administered intravenously, heroin creates a larger histamine release, similar to morphine, resulting in the feeling of a greater subjective \"body high\" to some, but also instances of pruritus (itching) when they first start using.\nNormally, GABA, which is released from inhibitory neurones, inhibits the release of dopamine. Opiates, like heroin and morphine, decrease the inhibitory activity of such neurones. This causes increased release of dopamine in the brain which is the reason for euphoric and rewarding effects of heroin.\nBoth morphine and 6-MAM are \u03bc-opioid agonists that bind to receptors present throughout the brain, spinal cord, and gut of all mammals. The \u03bc-opioid receptor also binds endogenous opioid peptides such as \u03b2-endorphin, leu-enkephalin, and met-enkephalin. Repeated use of heroin results in a number of physiological changes, including an increase in the production of \u03bc-opioid receptors (upregulation). These physiological alterations lead to tolerance and dependence, so that stopping heroin use results in uncomfortable symptoms including pain, anxiety, muscle spasms, and insomnia called the opioid withdrawal syndrome. Depending on usage it has an onset 4\u201324\u00a0hours after the last dose of heroin. Morphine also binds to \u03b4- and \u03ba-opioid receptors.\nThere is also evidence that 6-MAM binds to a subtype of \u03bc-opioid receptors that are also activated by the morphine metabolite morphine-6\u03b2-glucuronide but not morphine itself. The third subtype of third opioid type is the mu-3 receptor, which may be a commonality to other six-position monoesters of morphine. The contribution of these receptors to the overall pharmacology of heroin remains unknown.\nA subclass of morphine derivatives, namely the 3,6 esters of morphine, with similar effects and uses, includes the clinically used strong analgesics nicomorphine (Vilan), and dipropanoylmorphine; there is also the latter's dihydromorphine analogue, diacetyldihydromorphine (Paralaudin). Two other 3,6 diesters of morphine invented in 1874\u201375 along with diamorphine, dibenzoylmorphine and acetylpropionylmorphine, were made as substitutes after it was outlawed in 1925 and, therefore, sold as the first \"designer drugs\" until they were outlawed by the League of Nations in 1930.\nChemistry.\nDiamorphine is produced from acetylation of morphine derived from natural opium sources, generally using acetic anhydride.\nThe major metabolites of diamorphine, 6-MAM, morphine, morphine-3-glucuronide, and morphine-6-glucuronide, may be quantitated in blood, plasma or urine to monitor for use, confirm a diagnosis of poisoning, or assist in a medicolegal death investigation. Most commercial opiate screening tests cross-react appreciably with these metabolites, as well as with other biotransformation products likely to be present following usage of street-grade diamorphine such as 6-Monoacetylcodeine and codeine. However, chromatographic techniques can easily distinguish and measure each of these substances. When interpreting the results of a test, it is important to consider the diamorphine usage history of the individual, since a chronic user can develop tolerance to doses that would incapacitate an opiate-naive individual, and the chronic user often has high baseline values of these metabolites in his system. Furthermore, some testing procedures employ a hydrolysis step before quantitation that converts many of the metabolic products to morphine, yielding a result that may be 2\u00a0times larger than with a method that examines each product individually.\nHistory.\nThe opium poppy was cultivated in lower Mesopotamia as long ago as 3400 BC. The chemical analysis of opium in the 19th century revealed that most of its activity could be ascribed to the alkaloids codeine and morphine.\nDiamorphine was first synthesized in 1874 by C. R. Alder Wright, an English chemist working at St. Mary's Hospital Medical School in London who had been experimenting combining morphine with various acids. He boiled anhydrous morphine alkaloid with acetic anhydride for several hours and produced a more potent, acetylated form of morphine which is now called \"diacetylmorphine\" or \"morphine diacetate\". He sent the compound to F. M. Pierce of Owens College in Manchester for analysis. Pierce told Wright:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Doses\u2026 were subcutaneously injected into young dogs and rabbit\u2026 with the following general results\u2026 great prostration, fear, and sleepiness speedily following the administration, the eyes being sensitive, and pupils constrict, considerable salivation being produced in dogs, and a slight tendency to vomiting in some cases, but no actual emesis. Respiration was at first quickened, but subsequently reduced, and the heart's action was diminished and rendered irregular. Marked want of coordinating power over the muscular movements, and loss of power in the pelvis and hind limbs, together with a diminution of temperature in the rectum of about 4\u00b0.\nWright's invention did not lead to any further developments, and diamorphine became popular only after it was independently re-synthesized 23 years later by chemist Felix Hoffmann. Hoffmann was working at Bayer pharmaceutical company in Elberfeld, Germany, and his supervisor Heinrich Dreser instructed him to acetylate morphine with the objective of producing codeine, a constituent of the opium poppy that is pharmacologically similar to morphine but less potent and less addictive. Instead, the experiment produced an acetylated form of morphine one and a half to two times more potent than morphine itself. Hoffmann synthesized heroin on 21 August 1897, just eleven days after he had synthesized aspirin.\nThe head of Bayer's research department reputedly coined the drug's new name of \"heroin\", based on the German \"heroisch\" which means \"heroic, strong\" (from the ancient Greek word \"heros, \u03ae\u03c1\u03c9\u03c2\"). Bayer scientists were not the first to make heroin, but their scientists discovered ways to make it, and Bayer led the commercialization of heroin.\nBayer marketed diacetylmorphine as an over-the-counter drug under the trademark name Heroin. It was developed chiefly as a morphine substitute for cough suppressants that did not have morphine's addictive side-effects. Morphine at the time was a popular recreational drug, and Bayer wished to find a similar but non-addictive substitute to market. However, contrary to Bayer's advertising as a \"non-addictive morphine substitute\", heroin would soon have one of the highest rates of addiction among its users.\nFrom 1898 through to 1910, diamorphine was marketed under the trademark name Heroin as a non-addictive morphine substitute and cough suppressant. In the 11th edition of \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" (1910), the article on morphine states: \"In the cough of phthisis minute doses [of morphine] are of service, but in this particular disease morphine is frequently better replaced by codeine or by heroin, which checks irritable coughs without the narcotism following upon the administration of morphine.\"\nIn the US, the Harrison Narcotics Tax Act was passed in 1914 to control the sale and distribution of diacetylmorphine and other opioids, which allowed the drug to be prescribed and sold for medical purposes. In 1924, the United States Congress banned its sale, importation, or manufacture. It is now a Schedule I substance, which makes it illegal for non-medical use in signatory nations of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs treaty, including the United States.\nThe Health Committee of the League of Nations banned diacetylmorphine in 1925, although it took more than three years for this to be implemented. In the meantime, the first designer drugs, viz. 3,6 diesters and 6 monoesters of morphine and acetylated analogues of closely related drugs like hydromorphone and dihydromorphine, were produced in massive quantities to fill the worldwide demand for diacetylmorphine\u2014this continued until 1930 when the Committee banned diacetylmorphine analogues with no therapeutic advantage over drugs already in use, the first major legislation of this type.\nBayer lost some of its trademark rights to heroin (as well as aspirin) under the 1919 Treaty of Versailles following the German defeat in World War I.\nUse of heroin by jazz musicians in particular was prevalent in the mid-twentieth century, including Billie Holiday, saxophonists Charlie Parker and Art Pepper, trumpeter and vocalist Chet Baker, guitarist Joe Pass and piano player/singer Ray Charles; a \"staggering number of jazz musicians were addicts\". It was also a problem with many rock musicians, particularly from the late 1960s through the 1990s. Pete Doherty is also a self-confessed user of heroin. Nirvana lead singer Kurt Cobain's heroin addiction was well documented. Pantera frontman Phil Anselmo turned to heroin while touring during the 1990s to cope with his back pain. James Taylor, Taylor Hawkins, Jimmy Page, John Lennon, Eric Clapton, Johnny Winter, Keith Richards, Shaun Ryder, Shane MacGowan and Janis Joplin also used heroin. Many musicians have made songs referencing their heroin usage.\nSociety and culture.\nNames.\nDiamorphine is the international nonproprietary name and the British Approved Name. Other synonyms for heroin include: diacetylmorphine, and morphine diacetate. Heroin is also known by many street names including Big H, Black Tar, Chiva, Hell Dust, Horse, Negra, Smack, Thunder, dope, H, smack, junk, skag, brown, and unga, among others.\nLegal status.\nAsia.\nIn Hong Kong, diamorphine is regulated under Schedule 1 of Hong Kong's Chapter 134 \"Dangerous Drugs Ordinance\". It is available by prescription. Anyone supplying diamorphine without a valid prescription can be fined $5,000,000 (HKD) and imprisoned for life. The penalty for trafficking or manufacturing diamorphine is a $5,000,000 (HKD) fine and life imprisonment. Possession of diamorphine without a license from the Department of Health is illegal with a $1,000,000 (HKD) fine and seven years of jail time.\nEurope.\nIn the Netherlands, diamorphine is a List I drug of the Opium Law. It is available for prescription under tight regulation exclusively to long-term addicts for whom methadone maintenance treatment has failed. It cannot be used to treat severe pain or other illnesses.\nIn the United Kingdom, diamorphine is available by prescription, though it is a restricted Class A drug. According to the 50th edition of the British National Formulary (BNF), diamorphine hydrochloride may be used in the treatment of acute pain, myocardial infarction, acute pulmonary oedema, and chronic pain. The treatment of chronic non-malignant pain must be supervised by a specialist. The BNF notes that all opioid analgesics cause dependence and tolerance but that this is \"no deterrent in the control of pain in terminal illness\". When used in the palliative care of cancer patients, diamorphine is often injected using a syringe driver.\nIn Switzerland, heroin is produced in injectable or tablet form under the brand name Diaphin by a private company under contract to the Swiss government. Swiss-produced heroin has been imported into Canada with government approval.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, diamorphine is listed as a schedule 9 prohibited substance under the Poisons Standard (October 2015). The state of Western Australia, in its \"Poisons Act 1964\" (Reprint 6: amendments as at 10 September 2004), described a schedule 9 drug as: \"Poisons that are drugs of abuse, the manufacture, possession, sale or use of which should be prohibited by law except for amounts which may be necessary for educational, experimental or research purposes conducted with the approval of the Governor.\"\nNorth America.\nIn Canada, diamorphine is a controlled substance under Schedule I of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA). Any person seeking or obtaining diamorphine without disclosing authorization 30\u00a0days before obtaining another prescription from a practitioner is guilty of an indictable offense and subject to imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years. Possession of diamorphine for the purpose of trafficking is an indictable offense and subject to imprisonment for life.\nIn the United States, diamorphine is a Schedule I drug according to the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, making it illegal to possess without a DEA license. Possession of more than 100\u00a0grams of diamorphine or a mixture containing diamorphine is punishable with a minimum mandatory sentence of five years of imprisonment in a federal prison.\nIn 2021, the US state of Oregon became the first state to decriminalize the use of heroin after voters passed Ballot Measure 110 in 2020. This measure will allow people with small amounts to avoid arrest.\nTurkey.\nTurkey maintains strict laws against the use, possession or trafficking of illegal drugs. If convicted under these offences, one could receive a heavy fine or a prison sentence of 4 to 24 years.\nMisuse of prescription medication.\nMisused prescription medicine, such as opioids, can lead to heroin use and dependence. The number of death from illegal opioid overdose follows the increasing number of death caused by prescription opioid overdoses. Prescription opioids are relatively easy to obtain. This may ultimately lead to heroin injection because heroin is cheaper than prescribed pills.\nPharmaceutical supply chain.\nProduction.\nLegal opium production.\nHeroin is produced from opium, which is regulated differently around the world. Unlike coca leaves in Peru\u2014handled exclusively by the state monopoly, the National Coca Company (ENACO)\u2014there is no state company dedicated to the commercialization of opium and its derivatives. While international treaties\u2014such as the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs (1961)\u2014require strict state control or monopoly over the legal production and commercialization of opium for medical and scientific purposes, in practice, only a few countries maintain such a state monopoly today. Notably, India operates a state monopoly through the Government Opium and Alkaloid Factories (GOAF), also known as Opium and Alkaloid Works, which is responsible for processing raw opium into alkaloids for the pharmaceutical industry and managing the legal opium trade for medical and scientific use. Legal opium production in India, as well as in countries such as Turkey, Australia, France, Japan, and the UK, supplies licensed pharmaceutical manufacturers under close supervision to prevent diversion to illicit markets.\nLicensed pharmaceutical manufacturers.\nHeroin and its production and distribution are strictly regulated by government health authorities and subject to international drug control treaties. In countries where medical diamorphine (heroin) is legal, a small number of licensed pharmaceutical manufacturers are authorized to produce diamorphine from morphine, which is derived from legally cultivated opium poppy. All manufacturing and handling are conducted by these licensed companies under close government oversight, operating under stringent national and international regulations. Their activities are monitored by agencies such as the International Narcotics Control Board (INCB), and the entire supply chain\u2014from opium cultivation to the final pharmaceutical product\u2014is subject to quotas, licensing, and detailed reporting requirements to prevent diversion to illicit markets.\nDistribution.\nDiamorphine produced by licensed manufacturers is distributed to hospitals and clinics for medical use, primarily for pain management and, in some countries, for heroin-assisted treatment of opioid dependence. Distribution within the health care system is tightly controlled, and all use is documented and audited by health authorities. There is no commercial retail market for diamorphine; it is dispensed only by prescription and administered under medical supervision.\nIllicit supply chain.\nProduction.\nDiamorphine is produced from acetylation of morphine derived from natural opium sources. One such method of heroin production involves isolation of the water-soluble components of raw opium, including morphine, in a strongly basic aqueous solution, followed by recrystallization of the morphine base by addition of ammonium chloride. The solid morphine base is then filtered out. The morphine base is then reacted with acetic anhydride, which forms heroin. This highly impure brown heroin base may then undergo further purification steps, which produces a white-colored product; the final products have a different appearance depending on purity and have different names. Heroin purity has been classified into four grades. No.4 is the purest form \u2013 white powder (salt) to be easily dissolved and injected. No.3 is \"brown sugar\" for smoking (base). No.1 and No.2 are unprocessed raw heroin (salt or base).\nTrafficking.\nTraffic is heavy worldwide, with the biggest producer being Afghanistan. According to a U.N. sponsored survey, in 2004, Afghanistan accounted for production of 87 percent of the world's diamorphine. Afghan opium kills around 100,000 people annually.\nIn 2003 \"The Independent\" reported:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The cultivation of opium [in Afghanistan] reached its peak in 1999, when of poppies were sown\u00a0... The following year the Taliban banned poppy cultivation,\u00a0... a move which cut production by 94 percent\u00a0... By 2001 only of land were in use for growing opium poppies. A year later, after American and British troops had removed the Taliban and installed the interim government, the land under cultivation leapt back to , with Afghanistan supplanting Burma to become the world's largest opium producer once more.\nOpium production in that country has increased rapidly since, reaching an all-time high in 2006. War in Afghanistan once again appeared as a facilitator of the trade. Some 3.3\u00a0million Afghans are involved in producing opium.\nAt present, opium poppies are mostly grown in Afghanistan (), and in Southeast Asia, especially in the region known as the Golden Triangle straddling Burma (), Thailand, Vietnam, Laos () and Yunnan province in China. There is also cultivation of opium poppies in Pakistan (), Mexico () and in Colombia (). According to the DEA, the majority of the heroin consumed in the United States comes from Mexico (50%) and Colombia (43\u201345%) via Mexican criminal cartels such as Sinaloa Cartel. However, these statistics may be significantly unreliable, the DEA's 50/50 split between Colombia and Mexico is contradicted by the amount of hectares cultivated in each country and in 2014, the DEA claimed most of the heroin in the US came from Colombia.\nAs of 2015[ [update]], the Sinaloa Cartel is the most active drug cartel involved in smuggling illicit drugs such as heroin into the United States and trafficking them throughout the United States. According to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, 90% of the heroin seized in Canada (where the origin was known) came from Afghanistan. Pakistan is the destination and transit point for 40 percent of the opiates produced in Afghanistan, other destinations of Afghan opiates are Russia, Europe and Iran.\nA conviction for trafficking heroin carries the death penalty in most Southeast Asian, some East Asian and Middle Eastern countries (see Use of death penalty worldwide for details), among which Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand are the strictest. The penalty applies even to citizens of countries where the penalty is not in place, sometimes causing controversy when foreign visitors are arrested for trafficking, for example, the arrest of nine Australians in Bali, the death sentence given to Nola Blake in Thailand in 1987, or the hanging of an Australian citizen Van Tuong Nguyen in Singapore.\nRoutes.\nThe Balkan route.\nThe Balkan route remains the principal corridor for trafficking illegal opiates, primarily heroin, from Afghanistan to Western and Central Europe, with criminal networks-often highly organized and adaptable-leveraging both legal businesses and corruption to facilitate the smuggling, storage, and distribution of drugs. These groups generate enormous illicit profits, with the annual gross income from drug trafficking along the Balkan route estimated between $13.9 and $21.4 billion from 2019 to 2022, of which up to half is illegally moved across borders through complex financial flows that include shell companies, cryptocurrencies, and informal systems like hawala. The majority of these profits, around 90 percent, come from opiates, and the scale of this income rivals or exceeds the GDP of several countries along the route. The movement of these illicit funds not only sustains and expands drug trafficking operations but also undermines economic stability and governance in affected countries, making the Balkan route a persistent and multifaceted challenge for law enforcement and policymakers in the region.\nTrafficking history.\nThe origins of the present international illegal heroin trade can be traced back to laws passed in many countries in the early 1900s that closely regulated the production and sale of opium and its derivatives including heroin. At first, heroin flowed from countries where it was still legal into countries where it was no longer legal. By the mid-1920s, heroin production had been made illegal in many parts of the world. An illegal trade developed at that time between heroin labs in China (mostly in Shanghai and Tianjin) and other nations. The weakness of the government in China and conditions of civil war enabled heroin production to take root there. Chinese triad gangs eventually came to play a major role in the illicit heroin trade. The French Connection route started in the 1930s.\nHeroin trafficking was virtually eliminated in the US during World War II because of temporary trade disruptions caused by the war. Japan's war with China had cut the normal distribution routes for heroin and the war had generally disrupted the movement of opium. After World War II, the Mafia took advantage of the weakness of the postwar Italian government and set up heroin labs in Sicily which was located along the historic route opium took westward into Europe and the United States. Large-scale international heroin production effectively ended in China with the victory of the communists in the civil war in the late 1940s. The elimination of Chinese production happened at the same time that Sicily's role in the trade developed.\nAlthough it remained legal in some countries until after World War II, health risks, addiction, and widespread recreational use led most western countries to declare heroin a controlled substance by the latter half of the 20th century. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the CIA supported anti-Communist Chinese Nationalists settled near the Sino-Burmese border and Hmong tribesmen in Laos. This helped the development of the Golden Triangle opium production region, which supplied about one-third of heroin consumed in the US after the 1973 American withdrawal from Vietnam. In 1999, Burma, the heartland of the Golden Triangle, was the second-largest producer of heroin, after Afghanistan.\nThe Soviet-Afghan war led to increased production in the Pakistani-Afghan border regions, as US-backed mujaheddin militants raised money for arms from selling opium, contributing heavily to the modern Golden Crescent creation. By 1980, 60 percent of the heroin sold in the US originated in Afghanistan. It increased international production of heroin at lower prices in the 1980s. The trade shifted away from Sicily in the late 1970s as various criminal organizations violently fought with each other over the trade. The fighting also led to a stepped-up government law enforcement presence in Sicily.\nFollowing the discovery at a Jordanian airport of a toner cartridge that had been modified into an improvised explosive device, the resultant increased level of airfreight scrutiny led to a major shortage (drought) of heroin from October 2010 until April 2011. This was reported in most of mainland Europe and the UK which led to a price increase of approximately 30 percent in the cost of street heroin and increased demand for diverted methadone. The number of addicts seeking treatment also increased significantly during this period. Other heroin droughts (shortages) have been attributed to cartels restricting supply in order to force a price increase and also to a fungus that attacked the opium crop of 2009. Many people thought that the American government had introduced pathogens into the Afghanistan atmosphere in order to destroy the opium crop and thus starve insurgents of income.\nOn 13 March 2012, Haji Bagcho, with ties to the Taliban, was convicted by a US District Court of conspiracy, distribution of heroin for importation into the United States and narco-terrorism. Based on heroin production statistics compiled by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in 2006, Bagcho's activities accounted for approximately 20 percent of the world's total production for that year.\nStreet price.\nThe European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction reports that the retail price of brown heroin varies from \u20ac14.5 per gram in Turkey to \u20ac110 per gram in Sweden, with most European countries reporting typical prices of \u20ac35\u201340 per gram. The price of white heroin is reported only by a few European countries and ranged between \u20ac27 and \u20ac110 per gram.\nThe United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime claims in its 2008 World Drug Report that typical US retail prices are US$172 per gram.\nResearch.\nResearchers are attempting to reproduce the biosynthetic pathway that produces morphine in genetically engineered yeast. In June 2015 the \"S\"-reticuline could be produced from sugar and \"R\"-reticuline could be converted to morphine, but the intermediate reaction could not be performed.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14035", "revid": "14896122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14035", "title": "Hellas Verona FC", "text": "Italian association football club\nFootball club\nHellas Verona Football Club, commonly referred to as simply Hellas Verona (), is an Italian professional football club based in Verona, Veneto, that currently plays in Serie A. The team won the Serie A championship in the 1984\u201385 season.\nIn January 2025, it was announced that the club had been acquired by American private equity Presidio Investors.\nHistory.\nOrigins and early history.\nFounded in 1903 by a group of students at Liceo \"Scipione Maffei\", the club was named \"Hellas\" (the Greek word for Greece), at the request of a professor of classics. At a time in which football was played seriously only in the larger cities of northwestern Italy, most of Verona was indifferent to the growing sport. However, when in 1906 two city teams chose the city's Roman amphitheatre as a venue to showcase the game, crowd enthusiasm and media interest began to rise.\nDuring these first few years, Hellas was one of three or four area teams playing at a municipal level while fighting against city rivals Bentegodi to become the city's premier football outfit. By the 1907\u201308 season, Hellas was playing against regional teams, and an intense rivalry with Vicenza that has lasted to this day was born.\nFrom 1898 to 1926, Italian football was organised into regional groups. In this period, Hellas was one of the founding teams of the early league and often among its top final contenders. In 1911, the city helped Hellas replace the early, gritty football fields with a proper venue. This allowed the team to take part in its first regional tournament, which until 1926, was the qualifying stage for the national title.\nIn 1919, following a return to activity after a four-year suspension of all football competition in Italy during World War I, the team merged with city rival Verona and changed its name to Hellas Verona. Between 1926 and 1929, the elite \"Campionato Nazionale\" assimilated the top sides from the various regional groups. Hellas Verona joined the privileged teams, yet struggled to remain competitive.\nSerie A, as it is structured today, began in 1929, when the \"Campionato Nazionale\" turned into a professional league. Still an amateur team, Hellas merged with two city rivals, Bentegodi and Scaligera, to form AC Verona. Hoping to build a first class contender for future years, the new team debuted in Serie B in 1929. It would take the \"gialloblu\" 28 years to finally achieve their goal. After first being promoted to Serie A for one season in 1957\u201358, in 1959, the team merged with another city rival (called Hellas) and commemorated its beginnings by changing its name to Hellas Verona AC.\nSuccess in the 1970s and 1980s.\nCoached by Nils Liedholm, the team returned to Serie A in 1968 and remained in the elite league almost without interruption until 1990. Along the way, it scored a famous 5\u20133 win in the 1972\u201373 season that cost Milan the \"scudetto\" (the Serie A title). The fact that the result came late during the last matchday of the season makes the sudden and unexpected end to the \"rossoneri\"'s title ambitions all the more memorable.\nIn 1973\u201374, Hellas finished the season in fourth-last, just narrowly avoiding relegation, but were nonetheless sent down to Serie B during the summer months as a result of a scandal involving team president Saverio Garonzi. After a year in Serie B, Hellas returned to Serie A.\nIn the 1975\u201376 season, the team had a successful run in the Coppa Italia, eliminating highly rated teams such as Torino, Cagliari and Internazionale from the tournament. However, in their first ever final in the competition, Hellas were trounced 4\u20130 by Napoli.\nUnder the leadership of coach Osvaldo Bagnoli, in 1982\u201383 the team secured a fourth-place in Serie A (its highest finish at the time) and even led the Serie A standings for a few weeks. The same season Hellas again reached the Coppa Italia final. After a 2\u20130 home victory, Hellas then travelled to Turin to play Juventus but were defeated 3\u20130 after extra time.\nFurther disappointment followed in the 1983\u201384 season when the team again reached the Coppa Italia final, only to lose the Cup in the final minutes of the return match against defending Serie A champions Roma.\nThe team made its first European appearance in the 1983\u201384 UEFA Cup and were knocked out in the second round of the tournament by Sturm Graz. Hellas were eliminated from the 1985\u201386 European Cup in the second round by defending champions and fellow Serie A side Juventus after a contested game, the result of a scandalous arbitrage by the French Wurtz, having beaten PAOK of Greece in the first round.\nIn 1988, the team had their best international result when they reached the UEFA Cup quarterfinals with four victories and three draws. The decisive defeat came from German side Werder Bremen.\n1984\u20131985 \"Scudetto\".\nAlthough the 1984\u201385 season squad was made up of a mix of emerging players and mature stars, at the beginning of the season no one would have regarded the team as having the necessary ingredients to make it to the end. Certainly, the additions of Hans-Peter Briegel in midfield and of Danish striker Preben Elkj\u00e6r to an attack that already featured the wing play of Pietro Fanna, the creative abilities of Antonio Di Gennaro and the scoring touch of Giuseppe Galderisi were to prove crucial.\nTo mention a few of the memorable milestones on the road to the \"scudetto\": a decisive win against Juventus (2\u20130), with a goal scored by Elkj\u00e6r after having lost a boot in a tackle just outside the box, set the stage early in the championship; an away win over Udinese (5\u20133) ended any speculation that the team was losing energy at the midway point; three straight wins (including a hard-fought 1\u20130 victory against a strong Roma side) served notice that the team had kept its polish and focus intact during their rival's final surge; and a 1\u20131 draw in Bergamo against Atalanta secured the title with a game in hand.\nHellas finished the year with a 15\u201313\u20132 record and 43 points, four points ahead of Torino with Internazionale and Sampdoria rounding out the top four spots. This unusual final table of the Serie A (with the most successful Italian teams of the time, Juventus and Roma, ending up much lower than expected) has led to many speculations. The 1984\u201385 season was the only season when referees were assigned to matches by way of a random draw. Before then each referee had always been assigned to a specific match by a special commission of referees (\"designatori arbitrali\"). After the betting scandal of the early 1980 (the Calcio Scommesse scandal), it was decided to clean up the image of Italian football by assigning referees randomly instead of picking them, to clear up all the suspicions and accusations always accompanying Italy's football life. This resulted in a quieter championship and in a completely unexpected final table.\nIn the following season, won again by Juventus, the choice of the referees went back in the hands of the \"designatori arbitrali\". In 2006, a major scandal in Italian football revealed that certain clubs had been illegally influencing the referee selection process in an attempt to ensure that certain referees were assigned to their matches.\nBetween Serie A and Serie B.\nThese were more than mere modest achievements for a mid-size city with a limited appeal to fans across the nation. But soon enough financial difficulties caught up with team managers. In 1991 the team folded and was reborn as Verona, regularly moving to and fro between Serie A and Serie B for several seasons. In 1995 the name was officially returned to Hellas Verona.&lt;ref name=\"Oysan / Soccer Authority 2021 h703\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nAfter a three-year stay, their last stint in Serie A ended in grief in 2002. That season emerging international talents such as Adrian Mutu, Mauro Camoranesi, Alberto Gilardino, Martin Laursen, Massimo Oddo, Marco Cassetti and coach Alberto Malesani failed to capitalise on an excellent start and eventually dropped into fourth-to-last place for the first time all season on the final match day, enforcing relegation into Serie B.\nDecline and Serie C (2002\u20132011).\nFollowing the 2002 relegation to Serie B, team fortunes continued to slip throughout the decade. In the 2003\u201304 season Hellas Verona struggled in Serie B and spent most of the season fighting off an unthinkable relegation to Serie C1. Undeterred, the fans supported their team and a string of late season wins eventually warded off the danger. Over 5,000 of them followed Hellas to Como on the final day of the season to celebrate.\nIn 2004\u201305, things looked much brighter for the team. After a rocky start, Hellas put together a string of results and climbed to third spot. The \"giallobl\u00f9\" held on to the position until January 2005, when transfers weakened the team, yet they managed to take the battle for Serie A to the last day of the season.\nThe 2006\u201307 Serie B seemed to start well, due to the club takeover by Pietro Arvedi D'Emilei, which ended nine years of controversial leadership under chairman Gianbattista Pastorello, heavily contested by the supporters in his later years at Verona. However, Verona was immediately involved in the relegation battle, and Massimo Ficcadenti was replaced in December 2006 by Giampiero Ventura. Despite a recovery in the results, Verona ended in an 18th place, thus being forced to play a two-legged playoff against 19th-placed Spezia to avert relegation. A 2\u20131 away loss in the first leg at La Spezia was followed by a 0\u20130 home tie, and Verona were relegated to Serie C1 after 64 years of play in the two highest divisions.\nVerona appointed experienced coach Franco Colomba for the new season with the aim to return to Serie B as soon as possible. However, despite being widely considered the division favourite, the \"giallobl\u00f9\" spent almost the entire season in last place. After seven matches, club management sacked Colomba in early October and replaced him with youth team coach (and former Verona player) Davide Pellegrini. A new owner acquired the club in late 2007, appointing Giovanni Galli in December as new director of football and Maurizio Sarri as new head coach. Halfway through the 2007\u201308 season, the team remained at the bottom of Serie C1, on the brink of relegation to the fourth level (Serie C2). In response, club management sacked Sarri and brought back Pellegrini. Thanks to a late-season surge the \"scaligeri\" avoided direct relegation by qualifying for the relegation play-off, and narrowly averted dropping to Lega Pro Seconda Divisione in the final game, beating Pro Patria 2\u20131 on aggregate. However, despite the decline in results, attendance and season ticket sales remained at 15,000 on average.\nFor the 2008\u201309 season, Verona appointed former Sassuolo and Piacenza manager Gian Marco Remondina with the aim to win promotion to Serie B. However, the season did not start impressively, with Verona being out of the playoff zone by mid-season, and club chairman Pietro Arvedi D'Emilei entering into a coma after being involved in a car crash on his way back from a league match in December 2008. Arvedi died in March 2009, two months after the club was bought by new chairman Giovanni Martinelli.\nThe following season looked promising, as new transfer players were brought aboard, and fans enthusiastically embraced the new campaign. Season ticket figures climbed to over 10,000, placing Verona ahead of several Serie A teams and all but Torino in Serie B attendance. The team led the standings for much of the season, accumulating a seven-point lead by early in the spring. However, the advantage was gradually squandered, and the team dropped to second place on the second-last day of the season, with a chance to regain first place in the final regular season match against Portogruaro on home soil. Verona, however, disappointed a crowd of over 25,000 fans and, with the loss, dropped to third place and headed towards the play-offs. A managerial change for the post-season saw the firing of Remondina and the arrival of Giovanni Vavassori. After eliminating Rimini in the semi-finals (1\u20130; 0\u20130) Verona lost the final to Pescara (2\u20132 on home soil and 0\u20131 in the return match) and were condemned to a fourth-straight year of third division football.\nRising again and Serie A comeback (2012\u2013present).\nFormer 1990 World Cup star Giuseppe Giannini (a famous captain of Roma for many years) signed as manager for the 2010\u201311 campaign. Once again, the team was almost entirely revamped during the transfer season. The squad struggled in the early months and Giannini was eventually sacked and replaced by former Internazionale defender Andrea Mandorlini, who succeeded in reorganising the team's play and bringing discipline both on and off the pitch. In the second half of the season, Verona climbed back from the bottom of the division to clinch a play-off berth (fifth place) on the last day of the regular season. The team advanced to the play-off final after eliminating Sorrento in the semi-finals 3\u20131 on aggregate. Following the play-off final, after four years of Lega Pro football, Verona were promoted back to Serie B after a 2\u20131 aggregate win over Salernitana on 19 June 2011.\nOn 18 May 2013, Verona finished second in Serie B and were promoted to Serie A after an eleven-year absence. Their return to the top flight began against title contenders Milan and Roma, beating the former 2\u20131 and losing to the latter 3\u20130. The team continued at a steady pace, finishing the first half of the season with 32 points and sitting in sixth place, eleven points behind the closest UEFA Champions League spot\u2014and tied with Internazionale for the final UEFA Europa League spot. Verona, however, ultimately finished the year in tenth.\nDuring the 2015\u201316 season, Verona had not won a single match since the beginning of the campaign until the club edged Atalanta 2\u20131 on 3 February 2016 in a win at home; coming twenty-three games into the season. Consequently, Verona were relegated from Serie A.\nIn the 2016\u201317 Serie B season, Hellas Verona finished second on the table and were automatically promoted back to Serie A. Hellas lasted one season back in the top division after finishing second last during the 2017\u201318 Serie A season and were relegated back to Serie B. At the end of the 2018\u201319 season, Hellas finished in fifth position and achieved promotion back to Serie A after defeating Cittadella 3\u20130 in the second leg of their promotion play-off to win 3\u20132 on aggregate.\nThe club's return to the top flight in the 2019\u201320 Serie A season, in which it was considered a strong relegation candidate at the beginning of the campaign, was a successful one, with a ninth-placed finish. Heavily reliant on the defensive solidity of 20-year-old centre-back Marash Kumbulla, Amir Rrahmani and goalkeeper Marco Silvestri, along with the consistent performances of midfielder Sofyan Amrabat, Verona was a surprise contender for Europa League qualification but fell out of the race after a downturn in form after the coronavirus break which temporarily halted the season. A 2\u20131 win at home against eventual title winners Juventus in February was a highlight of a season in which the club achieved 10 clean sheets and punched towards the higher end of the table despite its modest budget.\nAhead of Verona's second consecutive year in Serie A, key players Amrabat, Rrahmani and Kumbulla were poached by Fiorentina, Napoli and Roma respectively, and loanee Matteo Pessina returned to Atalanta. This left the club with a heavily weakened squad and it was once again expected to struggle in the league prior to the season-opening match. Despite these losses in the transfer window, Verona again finished in the top half of the league table, ending the season in 10th place with 45 points. Successful breakout seasons for attacking midfielder Mattia Zaccagni, who was eventually called up to the Italy national team as a reward for his performances, as well as wing-backs Federico Dimarco and Davide Faraoni, were partly the reason for this achievement. At the end of the season, coach Ivan Juri\u0107 was appointed by Torino following his two impressive Serie A seasons with Verona, with the \"Gialloblu\" replacing him with Eusebio Di Francesco.\nFollowing another summer transfer window in which several of the club's star players were sold to Serie A rivals, namely Zaccagni transferring to Lazio, Marco Silvestri to Udinese and Dimarco returning to Inter, the beginning of the 2021-22 season proved to be much more difficult for Verona, as Di Francesco was fired and replaced with Igor Tudor after just three matches, all of which were defeats. This poor early-season form had left the club at the bottom of the table. Under the guidance of Tudor, the team regains competitiveness obtaining in the next eight matches three wins \u2013 including victories with Lazio and Juventus \u2013 four draws and only one defeat.\nColours and badge.\nThe team's colours are yellow and blue. As a result, the clubs most widely used nickname is \"giallobl\u00f9\" literally \"yellow-blue\" in Italian. The colours represent the city itself and Verona's emblem (a yellow cross on a blue shield) appears on most team apparel. Home kits are traditionally blue, sometimes of a navy shade, combined with yellow details and trim, although the club has used a blue and yellow striped design on occasion. Two more team nicknames are \"Mastini\" (the mastiffs) and \"Scaligeri\", both references to Mastino I della Scala of the Della Scala princes that ruled the city during the 13th and 14th centuries.\nThe Scala family coat of arms is depicted on the team's jersey and on its trademark logo as a stylised image of two large, powerful mastiffs facing opposite directions, introduced in 1995. In essence, the term \"scaligeri\" is synonymous with Veronese, and therefore can describe anything or anyone from Verona (e.g., Chievo Verona, a different team that also links itself to the Scala family\u00a0\u2013 specifically to Cangrande I della Scala).\nStadium.\nSince 1963, the club have played at the Stadio Marc'Antonio Bentegodi, which has a capacity of 39,211. It is the eighth-largest stadium in Italy by capacity. The stadium is named after the historic benefactor of Veronese sport, .\nThe ground was shared with Hellas's rivals, Chievo Verona until 2021. It was used as a venue for some matches of the 1990 FIFA World Cup and renovations prior to the tournament included an extra tier and a roof to cover all sections, improved visibility, public transport connections, an urban motorway connecting the city centre with the stadium and the Verona Nord motorway exit and services.\nDerby with Chievo Verona.\nThe intercity fixtures against Chievo Verona are known as the \"Derby della Scala\". The name refers to the Scaligeri or della Scala aristocratic family, who were rulers of Verona during the Middle Ages and early Renaissance.\nHellas, founded in 1903, were traditionally the main club in Verona. Chievo, founded in 1929, historically represented the small Verona suburb of the same name, using a small parish field as their home ground, and did not become a professional side until 1986. At that time, Chievo became tenants of Hellas at the Bentegodi, and began rising up the league ladder. By the mid-1990s, Chievo had joined Hellas in Serie B, creating the derby. During the teams' early Serie B meetings, Hellas supporters taunted Chievo with the chant \"Quando i mussi volara, faremo el derby in Serie A\" \u2013 \"Donkeys will fly before we\u2019ll have a derby in Serie A.\" Once Chievo earned promotion to Serie A at the end of the 2000\u201301 season, their fans started calling the team \"i Mussi Volanti\" (The Flying Donkeys). A 2014 story in the British football magazine \"Late Tackle\" remarked that \"Hellas fans didn\u2019t so much have their words rammed down their throat as forced through every orifice with a barge pole.\"\nIn the season 2001\u201302, both Hellas Verona and the city rivals of Chievo Verona were playing in the Serie A. The first ever derby of Verona in Serie A took place on 18 November 2001, while both teams were ranked among the top four. The match was won by Hellas, 3\u20132. Chievo got revenge in the return match in spring 2002, winning 2\u20131. Verona thus became the fifth city in Italy, after Milan, Rome, Turin and Genoa to host a cross-town derby in Serie A.\n\"Competitive, professional matches only.\"\n\"Competitive, professional matches only.\"\n \"As of 4 September 2025\"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"As of 28 September 2025\"\nPlayers.\nPrimavera.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"As of 4 September 2025\"\nOut on loan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nClub officials.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nManagers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWorld Cup players.\nThe following players have been selected by their country for the FIFA World Cup finals while playing for Hellas Verona.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14036", "revid": "1071745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14036", "title": "Hinayana", "text": "Term for preliminary Buddhism before Mahay\u0101na\nH\u012bnay\u0101na (Sanskrit: , ), literally meaning \"Small Vehicle\" or \"Lesser Vehicle\", is a term at one time collectively applied to the \"\u015ar\u0101vakay\u0101na\" (\"Listeners Vehicle\") and \"Pratyekabuddhay\u0101na\" (\"Solitary-Realizers Vehicle\") paths of Buddhism by followers of the \"Mah\u0101y\u0101na\" Buddhist school: i.e., an umbrella term for the non-Mah\u0101y\u0101na paths. Mah\u0101y\u0101na Buddhists consider the H\u012bnay\u0101na as the first, preliminary, and individual-focused (\"h\u012bna\") pathway to liberation, or \"vehicle\" (\"y\u0101na\"), offered by the Buddha's teachings, in contrast to the greater (\"mah\u0101\") vehicle (\"y\u0101na\"): the second path, which Mah\u0101y\u0101na Buddhists esteem more highly as it is devoted to helping all beings seek enlightenment, not just oneself. The word Classical India around the 1st or 2nd century CE. \nWestern scholars used the term \"H\u012bnay\u0101na\" to describe the early teachings of Buddhism, as the \"Mah\u0101y\u0101na\" teachings were generally given later. Modern Buddhist scholarship has deprecated the term as derogatory and polemical, and instead uses the term \"Nik\u0101ya\" referring to the early Buddhist schools. H\u012bnay\u0101na has also been inappropriately used as a synonym for the Therav\u0101da Buddhist school, which is the main tradition of Buddhism in Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"h\u012bnay\u0101na\" is formed from the adjective \"h\u012bna\" (Devanagari: \u0939\u0940\u0928) meaning \"little\", \"poor\", \"inferior\", \"abandoned\", \"deficient\", \"defective\"; and the noun \"y\u0101na\" (Devanagari: \u092f\u093e\u0928): \"vehicle\", where \"vehicle\" or \"path\" refers to \"a way of life that leads to enlightenment\". The Pali Text Society's \"P\u0101li-English Dictionary\" (1921\u20131925) defines \"h\u012bna\" in even stronger terms, with a semantic field that includes \"poor, miserable; vile, base, abject, contemptible\", and \"despicable\".\nThe term \"H\u012bnay\u0101na\" was translated by Kum\u0101raj\u012bva and others into Classical Chinese as \"small vehicle\" (\u5c0f meaning \"small\", \u4e58 meaning \"vehicle\"), although earlier and more accurate translations of the term also exist. In Mongolian (\"Baga Holgon\") the term for hinayana also means \"small\" or \"lesser\" vehicle or better called path, while in Classical Tibetan there are at least two words to designate the term: \"theg chung\", meaning \"small vehicle\", and \"theg dman\", meaning \"inferior vehicle\" or \"inferior spiritual approach\".\nAccording to Tibetan Buddhist monk and Kagyu master Thrangu Rinpoche, the term \"H\u012bnay\u0101na\" is in no way implying that the \"\u015ar\u0101vakay\u0101na\" (\"Listeners Vehicle\") and \"Pratyekabuddhay\u0101na\" (\"Solitary-realizers Vehicle\") are somehow \"inferior\" Buddhist paths to liberation in comparison to the later two vehicles (i.e., Mah\u0101y\u0101na and Vajray\u0101na). In his translation and commentary of Asa\u1e45ga's \"Distinguishing Dharm\u0101 from Dharm\u0101ta\", he writes: \"all three traditions of H\u012bnay\u0101na, Mah\u0101y\u0101na, and Vajray\u0101na were practiced in Tibet, and the H\u012bnay\u0101na, which literally means \"lesser vehicle\", is in no way inferior to the Mah\u0101y\u0101na\".\nOrigins.\nAccording to Jan Nattier, it is most likely that the term \"H\u012bnay\u0101na\" postdates the term \"Mah\u0101y\u0101na\" and was only added at a later date due to antagonism and conflict between proponents of the Bodhisattva and Arhat ideals within the Sa\u1e43gha. The sequence of terms then began with the term \"Bodhisattvay\u0101na\" (\"Bodhisattva Vehicle\"), which was given the epithet \"Mah\u0101y\u0101na\" (\"Great Vehicle\"). It was only later, after attitudes toward the Bodhisattva ideal had become more critical, that the term \"H\u012bnay\u0101na\" (\"Small Vehicle\" or \"Lesser Vehicle\") was created as a back-formation, contrasting with the already established term \"Mah\u0101y\u0101na\".\nThe earliest Mah\u0101y\u0101na texts often use the term \"Mah\u0101y\u0101na\" as an epithet and synonym for \"Bodhisattvay\u0101na\" but the term \"H\u012bnay\u0101na\" is comparatively rare, and the latter is usually not found at all in the earliest translations. Therefore, the often-perceived symmetry between \"Mah\u0101y\u0101na\" and \"H\u012bnay\u0101na\" can be deceptive, as the terms were not actually coined in relation to one another in the same era.\nAccording to Paul Williams, \"the deep-rooted misconception concerning an unfailing, ubiquitous fierce criticism of the Lesser Vehicle by the [Mah\u0101y\u0101na] is not supported by our texts\". Williams states that while evidence of conflict is present in some cases, there is also substantial evidence demonstrating peaceful coexistence between the two traditions.\nMah\u0101y\u0101na members of the early Buddhist schools.\nAlthough the 18\u201320 early Buddhist schools are sometimes loosely classified as H\u012bnay\u0101na in modern times, this is not necessarily accurate. There is no evidence that Mah\u0101y\u0101na ever referred to a separate formal school of Buddhism but rather as a certain set of ideals, and later doctrines. Paul Williams has also noted that the Mah\u0101y\u0101na never had nor ever attempted to have a separate vinaya or ordination lineage from the early Buddhist schools, and therefore bhik\u1e63us and bhik\u1e63u\u1e47\u012bs adhering to the Mah\u0101y\u0101na formally adheres to the vinaya of an early school. This continues today with the Dharmaguptaka ordination lineage in East Asia and the M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da ordination lineage in Tibetan Buddhism. Mah\u0101y\u0101na was never a separate sect of the early schools. From Chinese monks visiting India, we now know that both Mah\u0101y\u0101na and non-Mah\u0101y\u0101na monks in India often lived in the same monasteries side by side.\nThe seventh-century Chinese Buddhist monk and pilgrim Yijing wrote about the relationship between the various \"vehicles\" and the early Buddhist schools in India. He wrote, \"There exist in the West numerous subdivisions of the schools which have different origins, but there are only four principal schools of continuous tradition.\" These schools are the Mah\u0101s\u0101\u1e43ghika Nik\u0101ya, Sthavira nik\u0101ya, M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da Nik\u0101ya, and Sa\u1e43mit\u012bya Nik\u0101ya. Explaining their doctrinal affiliations, he then writes, \"Which of the four schools should be grouped with the Mah\u0101y\u0101na or with the H\u012bnay\u0101na is not determined.\" That is to say, there was no simple correspondence between a Buddhist school and whether its members learn \"H\u012bnay\u0101na\" or \"Mah\u0101y\u0101na\" teachings.\nTo identify entire schools as \"H\u012bnay\u0101na\" that contained not only \u015br\u0101vakas and pratyekabuddhas but also Mah\u0101y\u0101na bodhisattvas would be attacking the schools of their fellow Mah\u0101y\u0101nists as well as their own. Instead, what is demonstrated in the definition of \"H\u012bnay\u0101na\" given by Yijing is that the term referred to individuals based on doctrinal differences.\nH\u012bnay\u0101na as \u015ar\u0101vakay\u0101na.\nScholar Isabelle Onians asserts that although \"the Mah\u0101y\u0101na ... very occasionally referred to earlier Buddhism as the Hinay\u0101na, the Inferior Way, [...] the preponderance of this name in the secondary literature is far out of proportion to occurrences in the Indian texts.\" She notes that the term \u015ar\u0101vakay\u0101na was \"the more politically correct and much more usual\" term used by Mah\u0101y\u0101nists. Jonathan Silk has argued that the term \"Hinayana\" was used to refer to whomever one wanted to criticize on any given occasion, and did not refer to any definite grouping of Buddhists.\nH\u012bnay\u0101na and Mah\u0101y\u0101na.\nViews of Chinese pilgrims.\nThe Chinese monk Yijing, who visited India in the 7th century, distinguished Mah\u0101y\u0101na from H\u012bnay\u0101na as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Both adopt one and the same Vinaya, and they have in common the prohibitions of the five offenses, and also the practice of the Four Noble Truths. Those who venerate (regard with great respect) the bodhisattvas and read the Mah\u0101y\u0101na s\u016btras are called the Mah\u0101y\u0101nists, while those who do not perform these are called the H\u012bnay\u0101nists.\nIn the 7th century, the Chinese Buddhist monk Xuanzang describes the concurrent existence of the Mah\u0101vihara and the Abhayagiri vih\u0101ra in Sri Lanka. He refers to the monks of the Mah\u0101vihara as the \"H\u012bnay\u0101na Sthaviras\" and the monks of Abhayagiri vih\u0101ra as the \"Mah\u0101y\u0101na Sthaviras\". Xuanzang further writes, \"The Mah\u0101vih\u0101rav\u0101sins reject the Mah\u0101y\u0101na and practice the H\u012bnay\u0101na, while the Abhayagirivih\u0101rav\u0101sins study both H\u012bnay\u0101na and Mah\u0101y\u0101na teachings and propagate the \"Tripi\u1e6daka\".\"\nPhilosophical differences.\nMahayanists were primarily in philosophical dialectic with the Vaibh\u0101\u1e63ika school of Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da, which had by far the most \"comprehensive edifice of doctrinal systematics\" of the nik\u0101ya schools. With this in mind it is sometimes argued that the Theravada would not have been considered a \"Hinayana\" school by Mahayanists because, unlike the now-extinct Sarvastivada school, the primary object of Mahayana criticism, the Theravada school does not claim the existence of independent dharmas; in this it maintains the attitude of early Buddhism. Additionally, the concept of the bodhisattva as one who puts off enlightenment rather than reaching awakening as soon as possible, has no roots in Theravada textual or cultural contexts, current or historical. Aside from the Theravada schools being geographically distant from the Mahayana, the Hinayana distinction is used in reference to certain views and practices that had become found within the Mahayana tradition itself. Theravada, as well as Mahayana schools stress the urgency of one's own awakening in order to end suffering. Some contemporary Theravadin figures have thus indicated a sympathetic stance toward the Mahayana philosophy found in the \"Heart Sutra\" and the \"M\u016blamadhyamakak\u0101rik\u0101\".\nThe Mahayanists were bothered by the substantialist thought of the Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101dins and Sautr\u0101ntikins, and in emphasizing the doctrine of \u015b\u016bnyat\u0101, David Kalupahana holds that they endeavored to preserve the early teaching. The Theravadins too refuted the Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101dins and Sautr\u0101ntikins (and followers of other schools) on the grounds that their theories were in conflict with the non-substantialism of the canon. The Theravada arguments are preserved in the \"Kathavatthu\".\nOpinions of scholars.\nSome western scholars still regard the Theravada school to be one of the Hinayana schools referred to in Mahayana literature, or regard Hinayana as a synonym for Theravada. These scholars understand the term to refer to schools of Buddhism that did not accept the teachings of the Mah\u0101y\u0101na s\u016btras as authentic teachings of the Buddha. At the same time, scholars have objected to the pejorative connotation of the term Hinayana and some scholars do not use it for any school.\nRobert Thurman writes, \"'Nikaya Buddhism' is a coinage of Professor Masatoshi Nagatomi of Harvard University, who suggested it to me as a usage for the eighteen schools of Indian Buddhism to avoid the term 'Hinayana Buddhism,' which is found offensive by some members of the Theravada tradition.\"\nWithin Mahayana Buddhism, there were a variety of interpretations as to whom or to what the term \"Hinayana\" referred. Kalu Rinpoche stated the \"lesser\" or \"greater\" designation \"did not refer to economic or social status, but concerned the spiritual capacities of the practitioner\". Rinpoche states:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Small Vehicle is based on becoming aware of the fact that all we experience in samsara is marked by suffering. Being aware of this engenders the will to rid ourselves of this suffering, to liberate ourselves on an individual level, and to attain happiness. We are moved by our own interest. Renunciation and perseverance allow us to attain our goal.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14044", "revid": "1416331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14044", "title": "Howard Philips Lovecraft", "text": ""}
{"id": "14045", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14045", "title": "Humphrey Bogart", "text": "American actor (1899\u20131957)\nHumphrey DeForest Bogart ( ; December 25, 1899 \u2013 January 14, 1957), nicknamed Bogie, was an American actor. His performances in classic Hollywood cinema made him an American cultural icon. In 1999, the American Film Institute selected Bogart as the greatest male star of classic American cinema.\nBogart began acting in Broadway shows. Debuting in film in \"The Dancing Town\" (1928), he appeared in supporting roles for more than a decade, regularly portraying gangsters. He was praised for his work as Duke Mantee in \"The Petrified Forest\" (1936). Bogart also received positive reviews for his performance as gangster Hugh \"Baby Face\" Martin in William Wyler's \"Dead End\" (1937).\nHis breakthrough came in \"High Sierra\" (1941), and he catapulted to stardom as the lead in John Huston's \"The Maltese Falcon\" (1941), considered one of the first great \"noir\" films. Bogart's private detectives, Sam Spade (in \"The Maltese Falcon\") and Philip Marlowe (in 1946's \"The Big Sleep\"), became the models for detectives in other \"noir\" films. In 1947, he played a war hero in another \"noir\", \"Dead Reckoning\", tangled in a dangerous web of brutality and violence as he investigates his friend's murder, co-starring Lizabeth Scott. His first romantic lead role was a memorable one, as Rick Blaine, paired with Ingrid Bergman as Ilsa Lund in \"Casablanca\" (1942). Blaine was ranked as the fourth greatest hero of American cinema by the American Film Institute, and Blaine and Lund's romance the greatest love story in American cinema, also by the American Film Institute. Raymond Chandler, in a 1946 letter, wrote that \"Like Edward G. Robinson when he was younger, all he has to do to dominate a scene is to enter it.\"\n44-year-old Bogart and 19-year-old Lauren Bacall fell in love during the filming of \"To Have and Have Not\" (1944). In 1945, a few months after principal photography for \"The Big Sleep\", their second film together, he divorced his third wife and married Bacall. After their marriage, they played each other's love interest in the mystery thrillers \"Dark Passage\" (1947) and \"Key Largo\" (1948). Bogart's performances in Huston's \"The Treasure of the Sierra Madre\" (1948) and Nicholas Ray's \"In a Lonely Place\" (1950) are now considered among his best, although they were not recognized as such when the films were released. He reprised those unsettled, unstable characters as a World War II naval-vessel commander in \"The Caine Mutiny\" (1954), which was a critical and commercial hit and earned him a third Academy Award nomination for Best Actor, following \"Casablanca\" and his win for his portrayal of a cantankerous river steam launch skipper opposite Katharine Hepburn's missionary in the World War I African adventure \"The African Queen\" (1951), another collaboration with Huston. Other significant roles in his later years included \"The Barefoot Contessa\" (1954) with Ava Gardner and his on-screen competition with William Holden for Audrey Hepburn in \"Sabrina\" (1954).\nA heavy smoker and drinker, Bogart died from esophageal cancer in January 1957. \"Casablanca\", \"The Maltese Falcon\", \"The Treasure of the Sierra Madre\" and \"The African Queen\", made the American Film Institute's 1998 list of the greatest American movies of all time, with \"Casablanca\" ranked second. Regarding her husband's enduring popularity, Bacall later said, \"There was something that made him able to be a man of his own, and it showed through his work. There was also a purity, which is amazing considering the parts he played. Something solid too. I think as time goes by, we all believe less and less. Here was someone who believed in something.\"\nEarly life and education.\nHumphrey DeForest Bogart was born on Christmas Day 1899 in New York City, the eldest child of Belmont DeForest Bogart and Maud Humphrey. Belmont was the only child of the unhappy marriage of Adam Welty Bogart (a Canandaigua, New York, innkeeper) and Julia Augusta Stiles, a wealthy heiress. The name \"Bogart\" derives from the Dutch surname \"Bogaert\", meaning \"orchard\". Belmont and Maud married in June 1898. He was a Presbyterian, of English and Dutch descent, and a descendant of Sarah Rapelje (the first European Christian girl born in New Netherland). Maud was an Episcopalian of English heritage and a descendant of \"Mayflower\" passenger John Howland. Humphrey was raised Episcopalian but was non-practicing for most of his adult life.\nThe date of Bogart's birth has been disputed. Clifford McCarty wrote that Warner Bros. publicity department had altered it to January 23, 1900, \"to foster the view that a man born on Christmas Day couldn't be as villainous as he appeared to be on screen\". The \"corrected\" January birth date subsequently appeared\u2014and in some cases, remains\u2014in many otherwise-authoritative sources. According to biographers Ann M. Sperber and Eric Lax, Bogart always celebrated his birthday on December 25 and listed it on official records (including his marriage license).\nLauren Bacall wrote in her autobiography that Bogart's birthday was always celebrated on Christmas Day, saying that he joked about being cheated out of a present every year. Sperber and Lax noted that a birth announcement in the \"Ontario County Times\" of January 10, 1900, rules out the possibility of a January 23 birth date; state and federal census records from 1900 also report a Christmas 1899 birth date. Bogart's birth record confirms he was actually born on December 25, 1899.\nBelmont, Bogart's father, was a cardiopulmonary surgeon. Maud was a commercial illustrator who received her art training in New York and France, including study with James Abbott McNeill Whistler. She later became art director of the fashion magazine \"The Delineator\" and a militant suffragette. Maud used a drawing of baby Humphrey in an advertising campaign for Mellins Baby Food. She earned over $50,000 a year at the peak of her career \u2013 a very large sum of money at the time, and considerably more than her husband's $20,000. The Bogarts lived in an Upper West Side apartment, and had a cottage on a 55-acre estate on Canandaigua Lake in upstate New York. When he was young, Bogart's group of friends at the lake would put on plays.\nHe had two younger sisters: Frances (\"Pat\") and Catherine Elizabeth (\"Kay\"). Bogart's parents were busy in their careers, and frequently fought. Very formal, they showed little emotion towards their children. Maud told her offspring to call her \"Maud\" instead of \"Mother\", and showed little, if any, physical affection for them. When she was pleased, she \"[c]lapped you on the shoulder, almost the way a man does\", Bogart recalled. \"I was brought up very unsentimentally but very straightforwardly. A kiss, in our family, was an event. Our mother and father didn't glug over my two sisters and me.\"\nBogart was teased as a boy for his curls, tidiness, the \"cute\" pictures his mother had him pose for, the Little Lord Fauntleroy clothes in which she dressed him, and for his first name. He inherited from his father a tendency to needle, a fondness for fishing, a lifelong love of boating, and an attraction to strong-willed women.\nBogart attended the private Delancey School until the fifth grade and then attended the prestigious Trinity School. He was an indifferent, sullen student who showed no interest in after-school activities. Bogart later attended Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts, a boarding school to which he was admitted based on family connections. Although his parents hoped that he would go on to Yale University, Bogart left Phillips in 1918 after one semester (although the Phillips Academy website claims he was in the graduating class of 1920). He failed four out of six classes. Several reasons have been given; according to one, he was expelled for throwing the headmaster (or a groundskeeper) into Rabbit Pond on campus. Another cited smoking, drinking, poor academic performance, and (possibly) inappropriate comments made to the staff. In a third scenario, Bogart was withdrawn by his father for failing to improve his grades. His parents were deeply disappointed in their failed plans for his future.\nNavy.\nWith no viable career options, Bogart enlisted in the United States Navy in the spring of 1918, during World War I. He recalled later, \"At eighteen, war was great stuff. Paris! Sexy French girls! Hot damn!\" Bogart was recorded as a model sailor, who spent most of his sea time after the armistice ferrying troops back from Europe. Bogart left the service on June 18, 1919, at the rank of Petty Officer 2nd Class. During World War II, Bogart attempted to re-enlist in the Navy but was rejected due to his age. He then volunteered for the Coast Guard Temporary Reserve in 1944, patrolling the California coastline in his yacht, the \"Santana\".\nHe may have received his trademark scar and developed his characteristic lisp during his naval stint. There are several conflicting stories. In one, his lip was cut by shrapnel when his ship (the ) was shelled. The ship was never shelled, however, and Bogart may not have been at sea before the armistice. Another story, held by longtime friend Nathaniel Benchley, was that Bogart was injured while taking a prisoner to Portsmouth Naval Prison in Kittery, Maine. While changing trains in Boston, the handcuffed prisoner reportedly asked Bogart for a cigarette. When Bogart looked for a match, the prisoner smashed him across the mouth with the cuffs (cutting Bogart's lip) and fled before being recaptured and imprisoned. In an alternative version, Bogart was struck in the mouth by a handcuff loosened while freeing his charge; the other handcuff was still around the prisoner's wrist. By the time Bogart was treated by a doctor, a scar had formed. David Niven said that when he first asked Bogart about his scar, however, he said that it was caused by a childhood accident. \"Goddamn doctor\", Bogart later told Niven. \"Instead of stitching it up, he screwed it up.\" According to Niven, the stories that Bogart got the scar during wartime were made up by the studios. His post-service physical did not mention the lip scar, although it noted many smaller scars. When actress Louise Brooks met Bogart in 1924, he had scar tissue on his upper lip which Brooks said Bogart may have had partially repaired before entering the film industry in 1930. Brooks said that his \"lip wound gave him no speech impediment, either before or after it was mended.\"\nActing.\nFirst performances.\nBogart returned home to find his father in poor health, his medical practice faltering, and much of the family's wealth lost in bad timber investments. His character and values developed separately from his family during his navy days, and he began to rebel. Bogart became a liberal who disliked pretension, phonies and snobs, sometimes defying conventional behavior and authority; he was also well-mannered, articulate, punctual, self-effacing and standoffish. After his naval service, he worked as a shipper and a bond salesman, joining the Coast Guard Reserve.\nFrank Kelly Rich writes that Bogart \"dove headfirst into the Jazz Age lifestyle, always up for late night revels... When his meager wages were exhausted, he'd play chess against all comers in arcades for a dollar a match (he was a brilliant player) to fund his outings.\" Mike Doyle of Chess.com writes that \"Before he made any money from acting, he would hustle players for dimes and quarters, playing in New York parks and at Coney Island.\" Bogart resumed his friendship with Bill Brady Jr. (whose father had show-business connections), and obtained an office job with William A. Brady's new World Films company. Although he wanted to try his hand at screenwriting, directing, and production, he excelled at none. Bogart was stage manager for Brady's daughter Alice's play \"A Ruined Lady\". He made his stage debut a few months later as a Japanese butler in Alice's 1921 play \"Drifting\" (nervously delivering one line of dialogue), and appeared in several of her subsequent plays.\nAlthough Bogart had been raised to believe that acting was a lowly profession, he liked the late hours actors kept and the attention they received: \"I was born to be indolent and this was the softest of rackets.\" He spent much of his free time in speakeasies, drinking heavily. A bar-room brawl at this time was also a purported cause of Bogart's lip damage, dovetailing with Louise Brooks's account.\nPreferring to learn by doing, he never took acting lessons. Bogart was persistent and worked steadily at his craft, appearing in at least 18 Broadway productions between 1922 and 1935, 11 of which were comedies. He played juveniles or romantic supporting roles in drawing-room comedies and is reportedly the first actor to say, \"Tennis, anyone?\" on stage. According to Alexander Woollcott, Bogart \"is what is usually and mercifully described as inadequate.\" Other critics were kinder. Heywood Broun, reviewing \"Nerves\", wrote: \"Humphrey Bogart gives the most effective performance\u00a0... both dry and fresh, if that be possible\". He played a juvenile lead (reporter Gregory Brown) in Lynn Starling's comedy \"Meet the Wife\", which had a successful 232-performance run at the Klaw Theatre from November 1923 through July 1924. Bogart disliked his trivial, effeminate early-career parts, calling them \"White Pants Willie\" roles.\nWhile playing a double role in \"Drifting\" at the Playhouse Theatre in 1922, he met actress Helen Menken; they were married on May 20, 1926, at the Gramercy Park Hotel in New York City. Divorced on November 18, 1927, they remained friends. Menken said in her divorce filing that Bogart valued his career more than marriage, citing neglect and abuse. He married actress Mary Philips on April 3, 1928, at her mother's apartment in Hartford, Connecticut; Bogart and Philips had worked together in the play \"Nerves\" during its brief run at the Comedy Theatre in 1924.\nTheatrical production dropped off sharply after the Wall Street Crash of 1929, and many of the more-photogenic actors headed for Hollywood. Bogart debuted on film with Helen Hayes in the 1928 two-reeler \"The Dancing Town\", which survives intact. He also appeared with Joan Blondell and Ruth Etting in a Vitaphone short, \"Broadway's Like That\" (1930), which was rediscovered in 1963.\nBroadway to Hollywood.\nBogart signed a contract with the Fox Film Corporation for $750 a week (about $13,933 in 2025). There he met Spencer Tracy, a Broadway actor whom Bogart liked and admired, and the two men became close friends and drinking companions. In 1930, Tracy first called him \"Bogie\". Tracy made his feature film debut in his only movie with Bogart, John Ford's early sound film \"Up the River\" (1930), in which their leading roles were as inmates. Tracy received top billing, but Bogart's picture appeared on the film's posters. He was billed fourth behind Tracy, Claire Luce and Warren Hymer but his role was almost as large as Tracy's and much larger than Luce's or Hymer's. A quarter of a century later, the two men planned to make \"The Desperate Hours\" together. Both insisted upon top billing, however; Tracy dropped out, and was replaced by Fredric March.\nBogart then had a supporting role in \"Bad Sister\" (1931) with Bette Davis. Bogart shuttled back and forth between Hollywood and the New York stage from 1930 to 1935, out of work for long periods. His parents had separated; his father died in 1934 in debt, which Bogart eventually paid off. He inherited his father's gold ring, which he wore in many of his films. At his father's deathbed, Bogart finally told him how much he loved him. Bogart's second marriage was rocky; dissatisfied with his acting career, depressed and irritable, he drank heavily.\nIn Hollywood permanently: \"The Petrified Forest\".\nIn 1934, Bogart starred in the Broadway play \"Invitation to a Murder\" at the Theatre Masque (renamed the John Golden Theatre in 1937). Its producer, Arthur Hopkins, heard the play from offstage; he sent for Bogart and offered him the role of escaped murderer Duke Mantee in Robert E. Sherwood's forthcoming play, \"The Petrified Forest\". Hopkins later recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I saw the actor I was somewhat taken aback, for [I realized] he was the one I never much admired. He was an antiquated juvenile who spent most of his stage life in white pants swinging a tennis racquet. He seemed as far from a cold-blooded killer as one could get, but the voice[,] dry and tired[,] persisted, and the voice was Mantee's.\nThe play had 197 performances at the Broadhurst Theatre in New York in 1935. Although Leslie Howard was the star, \"The New York Times\" critic Brooks Atkinson said that the play was \"a peach\u00a0... a roaring Western melodrama\u00a0... Humphrey Bogart does the best work of his career as an actor.\" Bogart said that the play \"marked my deliverance from the ranks of the sleek, sybaritic, stiff-shirted, swallow-tailed 'smoothies' to which I seemed condemned to life.\" However, he still felt insecure. Warner Bros. bought the screen rights to \"The Petrified Forest\" in 1935. The play seemed ideal for the studio, which was known for its socially-realistic pictures for a public entranced by real-life criminals such as John Dillinger and Dutch Schultz. Bette Davis and Leslie Howard were cast. Howard, who held the production rights, made it clear that he wanted Bogart to star with him.\nThe studio tested several Hollywood veterans for the Duke Mantee role and chose Edward G. Robinson, who had star appeal and was due to make a film to fulfill his contract. Bogart cabled news of this development to Howard in Scotland, who replied: \"Att: Jack Warner Insist Bogart Play Mantee No Bogart No Deal L.H.\". When Warner Bros. saw that Howard would not budge, they gave in and cast Bogart. Jack Warner wanted Bogart to use a stage name but Bogart declined, having built a reputation with his name in Broadway theater. The film version of \"The Petrified Forest\" was released in 1936. According to \"Variety\", \"Bogart's menace leaves nothing wanting\". Frank S. Nugent wrote for \"The New York Times\" that the actor \"can be a psychopathic gangster more like Dillinger than the outlaw himself\". The film was successful at the box office, earning $500,000 in rentals ($11,427,014 in 2025), and made Bogart a star. He never forgot Howard's favor and named his only daughter, Leslie Howard Bogart, after him in 1952.\nSupporting gangster and villain roles.\nDespite his success in \"The Petrified Forest\" (an \"A movie\"), Bogart signed a tepid 26-week contract at $550 ($12,570 in 2025) per week and was typecast as a gangster in a series of B movie crime dramas. Although he was proud of his success, the fact that it derived from gangster roles weighed on him: \"I can't get in a mild discussion without turning it into an argument. There must be something in my tone of voice, or this arrogant face\u2014something that antagonizes everybody. Nobody likes me on sight. I suppose that's why I'm cast as the heavy.\"\nIn spite of his success, Warner Bros. had no interest in raising Bogart's profile. His roles were repetitive and physically demanding; studios were not yet air-conditioned, and his tightly scheduled job at Warners was anything but the indolent and \"peachy\" actor's life he hoped for. Although Bogart disliked the roles chosen for him, he worked steadily. \"In the first 34 pictures\" for Warner's, he told journalist George Frazier, \"I was shot in 12, electrocuted or hanged in 8, and was a jailbird in 9\". He averaged a film every two months between 1936 and 1940, sometimes working on two films at the same time. Bogart used these years to begin developing his film persona: a wounded, stoical, cynical, charming, vulnerable, self-mocking loner with a code of honor.\nAmenities at Warners were few, compared to the prestigious Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Bogart thought that the Warners wardrobe department was cheap, and often wore his own suits in his films. He chose his own dog named Zero, to play Pard (his character's dog) in \"High Sierra\". His disputes with Warner Bros. over roles and money were similar to those waged by the studio with more established and less malleable stars such as Bette Davis and James Cagney.\nLeading men at Warner Bros. included George Raft, James Cagney and Edward G. Robinson. Most of the studio's better scripts went to them or others, leaving Bogart with what was left: films like \"San Quentin\" (1937), \"Racket Busters\" (1938), and \"You Can't Get Away with Murder\" (1939). His only leading role during this period was in \"Dead End\" (1937, on loan to Samuel Goldwyn), as a gangster modeled after Baby Face Nelson.\nBogart played violent roles so often that in Nevil Shute's 1939 novel, \"What Happened to the Corbetts\", the protagonist replies \"I've seen Humphrey Bogart with one often enough\" when asked if he knows how to operate an automatic weapon. Although he played a variety of supporting roles in films such as \"Angels with Dirty Faces\" (1938), Bogart's roles were either rivals of characters played by Cagney and Robinson or a secondary member of their gang. In \"Black Legion\" (1937), a movie Graham Greene described as \"intelligent and exciting, if rather earnest\", he played a good man who was caught up with (and destroyed by) a racist organization.\nThe studio cast Bogart as a wrestling promoter in \"Swing Your Lady\" (1938), a \"hillbilly musical\" which he reportedly considered his worst film performance. He played a rejuvenated, formerly-dead scientist in \"The Return of Doctor X\" (1939), his only horror film: \"If it'd been Jack Warner's blood\u00a0... I wouldn't have minded so much. The trouble was they were drinking mine and I was making this stinking movie.\" His wife, Mary, had a stage hit in \"A Touch of Brimstone\" and refused to abandon her Broadway career for Hollywood. After the play closed, Mary relented; she insisted on continuing her career, however, and they divorced in 1937.\nOn August 21, 1938, Bogart entered a turbulent third marriage to actress Mayo Methot, a lively, friendly woman when sober but paranoid and aggressive when drunk. She became convinced that Bogart was unfaithful to her (which he eventually was, with Lauren Bacall, while filming \"To Have and Have Not\" in 1944). They drifted apart; Methot's drinking increased, and she threw plants, crockery and other objects at Bogart. She set their house afire, stabbed him with a knife, and slashed her wrists several times. Bogart needled her; apparently enjoying confrontation, he was sometimes violent as well. The press called them \"the Battling Bogarts\".\nAccording to their friend, Julius Epstein, \"The Bogart-Methot marriage was the sequel to the Civil War\". Bogart bought a motor launch which he named \"Sluggy,\" his nickname for Methot: \"I like a jealous wife\u00a0.. We get on so well together (because) we don't have illusions about each other\u00a0... I wouldn't give you two cents for a dame without a temper.\" Louise Brooks said that \"except for Leslie Howard, no one contributed as much to Humphrey's success as his third wife, Mayo Methot.\" Methot's influence was increasingly destructive, however, and Bogart also continued to drink.\nHe had a lifelong disdain for pretension and phoniness, and was again irritated by his inferior films. Bogart rarely watched his own films and avoided premieres, issuing fake press releases about his private life to satisfy journalistic and public curiosity. When he thought an actor, director or studio had done something shoddy, he spoke up publicly about it. Bogart advised Robert Mitchum that the only way to stay alive in Hollywood was to be an \"againster\". He was not the most popular of actors, and some in the Hollywood community shunned him privately to avoid trouble with the studios. Bogart once said,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All over Hollywood, they are continually advising me, \"Oh, you mustn't say that. That will get you in a lot of trouble,\" when I remark that some picture or writer or director or producer is no good. I don't get it. If he isn't any good, why can't you say so? If more people would mention it, pretty soon it might start having some effect. The local idea that anyone making a thousand dollars a week is sacred and is beyond the realm of criticism never strikes me as particularly sound.\nThe Hollywood press, unaccustomed to such candor, was delighted.\nEarly stardom.\n\"High Sierra\".\n\"High Sierra\" (1941, directed by Raoul Walsh) featured a screenplay written by John Huston, Bogart's friend and drinking partner, adapted from a novel by W. R. Burnett, author of the novel on which \"Little Caesar\" was based. Paul Muni, George Raft, Cagney and Robinson turned down the lead role, giving Bogart the opportunity to play a character with some depth. Walsh initially opposed Bogart's casting, preferring Raft for the part. It was Bogart's last major film as a gangster; a supporting role followed in \"The Big Shot\", released in 1942. He worked well with Ida Lupino, sparking jealousy from Mayo Methot.\nThe film cemented a strong personal and professional connection between Bogart and Huston. Bogart admired (and somewhat envied) Huston for his skill as a writer; a poor student, Bogart was a lifelong reader. He could quote Plato, Alexander Pope, Ralph Waldo Emerson and over a thousand lines of Shakespeare, and subscribed to the \"Harvard Law Review\". Bogart admired writers; some of his best friends were screenwriters, including Louis Bromfield, Nathaniel Benchley, and Nunnally Johnson. He enjoyed intense, provocative conversation (accompanied by stiff drinks), as did Huston. Both were rebellious and enjoyed playing childish pranks. Huston was reportedly easily bored during production and admired Bogart (also bored easily off-camera) for his acting talent and his intense concentration on-set.\n\"The Maltese Falcon\".\nNow regarded as a classic film noir, \"The Maltese Falcon\" (1941) was John Huston's directorial debut. Based on the Dashiell Hammett novel, it was first serialized in the pulp magazine \"Black Mask\" in 1929 and was the basis of two earlier film versions; the second was \"Satan Met a Lady\" (1936), starring Bette Davis. Producer Hal B. Wallis initially offered to cast George Raft as the leading man, but Raft (then better known than Bogart) had a contract stipulating he was not required to appear in remakes. Fearing that it would be nothing more than a sanitized version of the pre-Production Code \"The Maltese Falcon\" (1931), Raft turned down the role to make \"Manpower\" with director Raoul Walsh, with whom he had worked on \"The Bowery\" in 1933. Huston then eagerly accepted Bogart as his Sam Spade.\nComplementing Bogart were co-stars Sydney Greenstreet, Peter Lorre, Elisha Cook Jr., and Mary Astor as the treacherous female foil. Bogart's sharp timing and facial expressions were praised by the cast and director as vital to the film's quick action and rapid-fire dialogue. It was a commercial hit, and a major triumph for Huston. Bogart was unusually happy with the film: \"It is practically a masterpiece. I don't have many things I'm proud of\u00a0... but that's one\".\n\"Casablanca\".\nBogart played his first romantic lead in \"Casablanca\" (1942): Rick Blaine, an expatriate nightclub owner hiding from a suspicious past and negotiating a fine line among Nazis, the French underground, the Vichy prefect and unresolved feelings for his ex-girlfriend. Bosley Crowther wrote in his November 1942 \"New York Times\" review that Bogart's character was used \"to inject a cold point of tough resistance to evil forces afoot in Europe today\". The film, directed by Michael Curtiz and produced by Hal Wallis, featured Ingrid Bergman, Claude Rains, Sydney Greenstreet, Paul Henreid, Conrad Veidt, Peter Lorre and Dooley Wilson.\nBogart and Bergman's on-screen relationship was based on professionalism rather than actual rapport, although Mayo Methot assumed otherwise. Off the set, the co-stars hardly spoke. Bergman (who had a reputation for affairs with her leading men) later said about Bogart, \"I kissed him but I never knew him.\" Because she was taller, Bogart had blocks attached to his shoes in some scenes.\nBogart is reported to have been responsible for the notion that Rick Blaine should be portrayed as a chess player, a metaphor for the relationships he maintained with friends, enemies, and allies. He played tournament-level chess (one division below master) in real life, often enjoying games with crew members and cast but finding his better in Paul Henreid. During the production, Bogart also began playing games of correspondence chess against American G.I.s through mail. The series of long distance matches began after a private who Bogart versed on set was transferred to the South Pacific. The letters began to be intercepted by the FBI due to fears the algebraic notation used in chess games was actually an encrypted message.\n\"Casablanca\" won the Academy Award for Best Picture at the 16th Academy Awards for 1943. Bogart was nominated for Best Actor in a Leading Role, but lost to Paul Lukas for his performance in \"Watch on the Rhine\". The film vaulted Bogart from fourth place to first in the studio's roster, however, finally overtaking James Cagney. He more than doubled his annual salary to over $460,000 by 1946 ($7,493,777 in 2025), making him the world's highest-paid actor.\nBogart went on United Service Organizations and War Bond tours with Methot in 1943 and 1944, making arduous trips to Italy and North Africa (including Casablanca). He was still required to perform in films with weak scripts, leading to conflicts with the front office. He starred in \"Conflict\" (1945, again with Greenstreet), but turned down \"God Is My Co-Pilot\" that year.\nBogie and Bacall.\n\"To Have and Have Not\".\nHoward Hawks introduced Bogart and Lauren Bacall while Bogart was filming \"Passage to Marseille\" (1944). The three subsequently collaborated on \"To Have and Have Not\" (1944), a loose adaptation of the Ernest Hemingway novel, and Bacall's film debut. It has several similarities to \"Casablanca\": the same kind of hero and enemies, and a piano player (portrayed this time by Hoagy Carmichael) as a supporting character. When they met, Bacall was 19 and Bogart 44; he nicknamed her \"Baby\". A model since age 16, she had appeared in two failed plays. Bogart was attracted by Bacall's high cheekbones, green eyes, tawny blond hair, lean body, maturity, poise and earthy, outspoken honesty; he reportedly said, \"I just saw your test. We'll have a lot of fun together\".\nTheir emotional bond was strong from the start; their difference in age and acting-experience encouraged a mentor-student dynamic. In contrast to the Hollywood norm, their affair was Bogart's first with a leading lady. His early meetings with Bacall were discreet and brief, their separations bridged by love letters. The relationship made it easier for Bacall to make her first film, and Bogart did his best to put her at ease with jokes and quiet coaching. He encouraged her to steal scenes; Howard Hawks also did his best to highlight her role, and found Bogart easy to direct.\nHowever, Hawks began to disapprove of the relationship. He considered himself Bacall's protector and mentor, and Bogart was usurping that role. Not usually drawn to his starlets, the married director also fell for Bacall; he told her that she meant nothing to Bogart and threatened to send her to the poverty-row studio Monogram Pictures. Bogart calmed her down, and then went after Hawks; Jack Warner settled the dispute, and filming resumed. Hawks said about Bacall, \"Bogie fell in love with the character she played, so she had to keep playing it the rest of her life.\" However, Bacall wrote in her memoir about the love she and Bogart shared, \"No one has ever written a romance better than we lived it.\" and she said regarding Bogart's personality, \"He was a very gentle soul. He was very strong, and very sure about what he believed in and what he thought was important and not important. He couldn't be pushed around. But he was a gentle man. I was very, very lucky to have even met him, much less have been married to him. He had extraordinary gifts. He was much more of a complete individual than most people are. He had the kind of standards my mother had. Their values were very much the same. It was very interesting. He had tremendous character and a great sense of honor and would not tolerate lies, even if they asked him what he thought of a movie.\"\n\"The Big Sleep\".\nMonths after wrapping \"To Have and Have Not\", Bogart and Bacall were reunited for an encore: the film noir \"The Big Sleep\" (1946), based on the novel by Raymond Chandler with script help from William Faulkner. Chandler admired the actor's performance: \"Bogart can be tough without a gun. Also, he has a sense of humor that contains that grating undertone of contempt.\" Although the film was completed and scheduled for release in 1945, it was withdrawn and re-edited to add scenes exploiting Bogart and Bacall's box-office chemistry in \"To Have and Have Not\" and the publicity surrounding their offscreen relationship. At the insistence of director Howard Hawks, production partner Charles K. Feldman agreed to a rewrite of Bacall's scenes to heighten the \"insolent\" quality which had intrigued critics such as James Agee and audiences of the earlier film, and a memo was sent to studio head Jack Warner.\nThe dialogue, especially in the added scenes supplied by Hawks, was full of sexual innuendo. The film was successful, although some critics found its plot confusing and overly complicated. According to Chandler, Hawks and Bogart argued about who killed the chauffeur; when Chandler received an inquiry by telegram, he could not provide an answer.\nMarriage to Bacall.\nBogart filed for divorce from Methot in February 1945. He and Bacall married in a small ceremony at the country home of Bogart's close friend, Pulitzer Prize-winning author Louis Bromfield, at Malabar Farm (near Lucas, Ohio) on May 21, 1945. They moved into a $160,000 ($ in 2024) white brick mansion in an exclusive neighborhood of Los Angeles' Holmby Hills. At the time of the 1950 United States census, the couple was living at 2707 Benedict Canyon Drive in Beverly Hills with their son and nursemaid. Bacall is listed as Betty Bogart. The marriage was a mostly happy one but not without its troubles. Bogart's drinking was sometimes problematic and he initially wasn't happy about having his first child, fearing that it would create distance between himself and Bacall. He was a homebody, and Bacall liked the nightlife; he loved the sea, and it made her seasick. However, Bogart and Bacall never stopped loving each other, a fact Bacall mentions throughout her memoir \"By Myself\". In a 1997 \"Parade\" magazine cover story, she told reporter Dotson Rader that Bogart said \"'If you want a career more than anything, I will do everything I can to help you, and I will send you on your way, but I will not marry you. I've been through it, and I know it doesn't work.' He was right. He loved me and wanted me with him. I made the deal, and I stuck to it, and I'm damn glad that I did.\"\nBogart bought the \"Santana\", a sailing yacht, from actor Dick Powell in 1945. He found the sea a sanctuary and spent about thirty weekends a year on the water, with a particular fondness for sailing around Catalina Island: \"An actor needs something to stabilize his personality, something to nail down what he really is, not what he is currently pretending to be.\" Bogart joined the Coast Guard Temporary Reserve (a forerunner of the modern Coast Guard Auxiliary), offering the Coast Guard use of the \"Santana\". He reportedly attempted to enlist, but was turned down due to his age.\n\"Dark Passage\" and \"Key Largo\".\nThe suspenseful \"Dark Passage\" (1947) was Bogart and Bacall's next collaboration. Vincent Parry (Bogart) is intent on finding the real murderer for a crime of which he was convicted and sentenced to prison. According to Bogart's biographer, Stefan Kanfer, it was \"a production line film noir with no particular distinction\".\nBogart and Bacall's last pairing in a film was in \"Key Largo\" (1948). Directed by John Huston, Edward G. Robinson was billed second (behind Bogart) as gangster Johnny Rocco: a seething, older synthesis of many of his early bad-guy roles. The billing question was hard-fought and at the end of at least one of the trailers, Robinson is listed above Bogart in a list of the actors' names in the last frame; and in the film itself, Robinson's name, appearing between Bogart's and Bacall's, is pictured slightly higher onscreen than the other two. Robinson had top billing over Bogart in their four previous films together: \"Bullets or Ballots\" (1936), \"Kid Galahad\" (1937), \"The Amazing Dr. Clitterhouse\" (1938) and \"Brother Orchid\" (1940). In some posters for \"Key Largo\", Robinson's picture is substantially larger than Bogart's, and in the foreground manhandling Bacall while Bogart is in the background. The characters are trapped during a hurricane in a hotel owned by Bacall's father-in-law, portrayed by Lionel Barrymore. Claire Trevor won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performance as Rocco's physically abused, alcoholic girlfriend.\nLater career.\n\"The Treasure of the Sierra Madre\".\nRiding high in 1947 with a new 15-year contract with Warners which provided limited script refusal and the right to form his own production company, Bogart rejoined with John Huston for \"The Treasure of the Sierra Madre\": a stark tale of greed among three gold prospectors in Mexico. Lacking a love interest or a happy ending, it was considered a risky project. Bogart later said about co-star (and John Huston's father) Walter Huston, \"He's probably the only performer in Hollywood to whom I'd gladly lose a scene.\"\nThe film was shot in the heat of summer for greater realism and atmosphere and was grueling to make. James Agee wrote, \"Bogart does a wonderful job with this character\u00a0... miles ahead of the very good work he has done before.\" Although John Huston won the Academy Award for Best Director and screenplay and his father won the Best Supporting Actor award, the film had mediocre box-office results. Bogart complained, \"An intelligent script, beautifully directed\u2014something different\u2014and the public turned a cold shoulder on it.\"\nHouse Un-American Activities Committee.\nBogart, a liberal Democrat, organized the Committee for the First Amendment (a delegation to Washington, D.C.) opposing what he saw as the House Un-American Activities Committee's harassment of Hollywood screenwriters and actors. He later wrote an article, \"I'm No Communist\", for the March 1948 issue of \"Photoplay\" magazine distancing himself from the Hollywood Ten to counter negative publicity resulting from his appearance. Bogart wrote, \"The ten men cited for contempt by the House Un-American Activities Committee were not defended by us.\"\nSantana Productions.\nBogart created his film company, Santana Productions (named after his yacht and the cabin cruiser in \"Key Largo\"), in 1948. The right to create his own company had left Jack Warner furious, fearful that other stars would do the same and further erode the major studios' power. In addition to pressure from freelancing actors such as Bogart, James Stewart, and Henry Fonda, they were beginning to buckle from the impact of television and the enforcement of antitrust laws which broke up theater chains. Bogart's new contract with Warners had required him to make one film a year for Warners but he only made \"Chain Lightning\" (1950) and \"The Enforcer\" (1951) for them during the contract period. In 1953, his contract with Warners was dissolved by mutual consent.\nExcept for \"Beat the Devil\" (1953), originally distributed in the United States by United Artists, the company released its films through Columbia Pictures; Columbia re-released \"Beat the Devil\" a decade later. In quick succession, Bogart starred in \"Knock on Any Door\" (1949), \"Tokyo Joe\" (1949), \"In a Lonely Place\" (1950), and \"Sirocco\" (1951). Santana also made two films without him: \"And Baby Makes Three\" (1949) and \"The Family Secret\" (1951).\nAlthough most lost money at the box office (ultimately forcing Santana's sale), at least two retain a reputation; \"In a Lonely Place\" is considered a film-noir high point. Bogart plays Dixon Steele, an embittered writer with a violent reputation who is the primary suspect in the murder of a young woman and falls in love with failed actress Laurel Gray (Gloria Grahame). Several Bogart biographers, and actress-writer Louise Brooks, have felt that this role is closest to the real Bogart. According to Brooks, the film \"gave him a role that he could play with complexity, because the film character's pride in his art, his selfishness, drunkenness, lack of energy stabbed with lightning strokes of violence were shared by the real Bogart\". The character mimics some of Bogart's personal habits, twice ordering the actor's favorite meal (ham and eggs).\nA parody of sorts of \"The Maltese Falcon\", \"Beat the Devil\" was the final film for Bogart and John Huston. Co-written by Truman Capote, the eccentrically filmed story follows an amoral group of rogues, one of whom was portrayed by Peter Lorre, chasing an unattainable treasure. Bogart sold his interest in Santana to Columbia for over $1\u00a0million in 1955.\n\"The African Queen\".\nOutside Santana Productions, Bogart starred with Katharine Hepburn in the John Huston-directed \"The African Queen\" in 1951. The C. S. Forester novel on which it was based was overlooked and left undeveloped for 15 years until producer Sam Spiegel and Huston bought the rights. Spiegel sent Katharine Hepburn the book; she suggested Bogart for the male lead, believing that \"he was the only man who could have played that part\". Huston's love of adventure, his deep, longstanding friendship (and success) with Bogart, and the chance to work with Hepburn convinced the actor to leave Hollywood for a difficult shoot on location in the Belgian Congo. Bogart was to get 30 percent of the profits and Hepburn 10 percent, plus a relatively small salary for both. The stars met in London and announced that they would work together.\nBacall came for the over-four-month duration, leaving their young son in Los Angeles. The Bogarts began the trip with a junket through Europe, including a visit with Pope Pius XII. Bacall later made herself useful as a cook, nurse and clothes washer; her husband said: \"I don't know what we'd have done without her. She Luxed my undies in darkest Africa.\" Nearly everyone in the cast developed dysentery except Bogart and Huston, who subsisted on canned food and alcohol; Bogart said, \"All I ate was baked beans, canned asparagus and Scotch whisky. Whenever a fly bit Huston or me, it dropped dead.\" Hepburn (a teetotaler) fared worse in the difficult conditions, losing weight and at one point becoming very ill. Bogart resisted Huston's insistence on using real leeches in a key scene where Charlie has to drag his steam launch through an infested marsh, and reasonable fakes were employed. The crew overcame illness, army-ant infestations, leaky boats, poor food, attacking hippos, poor water filters, extreme heat, isolation, and a boat fire to complete the film. Despite the discomfort of jumping from the boat into swamps, rivers and marshes, \"The African Queen\" apparently rekindled Bogart's early love of boats; when he returned to California, he bought a classic mahogany Hacker-Craft runabout which he kept until his death.\nHis performance as cantankerous skipper Charlie Allnut earned Bogart an Academy Award for Best Actor in 1951 (his only award of three nominations), and he considered it the best of his film career. Promising friends that if he won his speech would break the convention of thanking everyone in sight, Bogart advised Claire Trevor when she was nominated for \"Key Largo\" to \"just say you did it all yourself and don't thank anyone\". When Bogart won, however, he said: \"It's a long way from the Belgian Congo to the stage of this theatre. It's nicer to be here. Thank you very much\u00a0... No one does it alone. As in tennis, you need a good opponent or partner to bring out the best in you. John and Katie helped me to be where I am now.\" Despite the award and its accompanying recognition, Bogart later said: \"The way to survive an Oscar is never to try to win another one\u00a0... too many stars\u00a0... win it and then figure they have to top themselves\u00a0... they become afraid to take chances. The result: A lot of dull performances in dull pictures.\" \"The African Queen\" was Bogart's first starring Technicolor role.\n\"The Caine Mutiny\".\nBogart dropped his asking price to obtain the role of Captain Queeg in Edward Dmytryk's drama, \"The Caine Mutiny\" (1954). Though he retained some of his old bitterness about having to do so, he delivered a strong performance in the lead; he received his final Oscar nomination and was the subject of a June 7, 1954, \"Time\" magazine cover story.\nDespite his success, Bogart was still melancholy; he grumbled to (and feuded with) the studio, while his health began to deteriorate. Like his portrayal of Fred C. Dobbs in \"The Treasure of the Sierra Madre\", Bogart's Queeg is a paranoid, self-pitying character whose small-mindedness eventually destroys him. Henry Fonda played a different role in the Broadway version of \"The Caine Mutiny\", generating publicity for the film.\nFinal roles.\nFor \"Sabrina\" (1954), Billy Wilder wanted Cary Grant for the older male lead but chose Bogart to play the conservative brother who competes with his younger, playboy sibling (William Holden) for the affection of the Cinderella-like Sabrina (Audrey Hepburn). Although Bogart was lukewarm about the part, he agreed to it on a handshake with Wilder without a finished script but with the director's assurance that he would take good care of Bogart during filming. The actor, however, got along poorly with his director and co-stars; he complained about the script's last-minute drafting and delivery, and accused Wilder of favoring Hepburn and Holden on and off the set. Wilder was the opposite of Bogart's ideal director (John Huston) in style and personality; Bogart complained to the press that Wilder was \"overbearing\" and \"is [a] kind of Prussian German with a riding crop. He is the type of director I don't like to work with\u00a0... the picture is a crock of crap. I got sick and tired of who gets Sabrina.\" Wilder later said, \"We parted as enemies but finally made up.\" Despite the acrimony, the film was successful; according to a review in \"The New York Times\", Bogart was \"incredibly adroit\u00a0... the skill with which this old rock-ribbed actor blends the gags and such duplicities with a manly manner of melting is one of the incalculable joys of the show\".\nJoseph L. Mankiewicz's \"The Barefoot Contessa\" (1954) was filmed in Rome. In this Hollywood backstory, Bogart is a broken-down man, a cynical director-narrator who saves his career by making a star of a flamenco dancer modeled on Rita Hayworth. He was uneasy with Ava Gardner in the female lead; she had just broken up with his Rat Pack buddy Frank Sinatra, and Bogart was annoyed by her inexperienced performance. The actor was generally praised as the film's strongest part. During filming and while Bacall was home, Bogart resumed his discreet affair with Verita Bouvaire-Thompson (his long-time studio assistant, whom he drank with and took sailing). When Bacall found them together, she extracted an expensive shopping spree from her husband; the three traveled together after the shooting.\nBogart could be generous with actors, particularly those who were blacklisted, down on their luck or having personal problems. During the filming of the Edward Dmytryk\u2013directed \"The Left Hand of God\" (1955), he noticed his co-star Gene Tierney having a hard time remembering her lines and behaving oddly; he coached her, feeding Tierney her lines. Familiar with mental illness because of his sister's bouts of depression, Bogart encouraged Tierney to seek treatment. He also stood behind Joan Bennett and insisted on her as his co-star in Michael Curtiz's \"We're No Angels\" (1955) when a scandal made her \"persona non grata\" with studio head Jack Warner.\nBogart had already been diagnosed with terminal cancer when shooting \"The Harder They Fall\", a boxing drama with Rod Steiger in a supporting role. Steiger later mentioned Bogart's courage and geniality during his final performance:\nBogey and I got on very well. Unlike some other stars, when they had closeups, you might have been relegated to a two-shot, or cut out altogether. Bogey didn't play those games. He was a professional and had tremendous authority. He'd come in exactly at 9 a.m. and leave at precisely 6 p.m. I remember once walking to lunch in between takes and seeing Bogey on the lot. I shouldn't have because his work was finished for the day. I asked him why he was still on the lot, and he said, \"They want to shoot some retakes of my closeups because my eyes are too watery\". A little while later, after the film, somebody came up to me with word of Bogey's death. Then it struck me. His eyes were watery because he was in pain with the cancer. I thought: \"How dumb can you be, Rodney\"!\nTelevision and radio.\nBogart rarely performed on television, but he and Bacall appeared on Edward R. Murrow's \"Person to Person\" and disagreed on the answer to every question. He also appeared on \"The Jack Benny Program\", where a surviving kinescope of the live telecast captures him in his only TV sketch-comedy performance (October 25, 1953).\nBogart and Bacall worked on an early color telecast in 1955, an NBC adaptation of \"The Petrified Forest\" for \"Producers' Showcase\". Bogart received top billing, Henry Fonda played Leslie Howard's role and Bacall played Bette Davis's part. Jack Klugman, Richard Jaeckel, and Jack Warden played supporting roles. In the late 1990s, Bacall donated the only known kinescope of the 1955 performance (in black and white) to the Museum of Television &amp; Radio (now the Paley Center for Media), where it remains archived for viewing in New York City and Los Angeles. It is now in the public domain.\nBogart also performed radio adaptations of some of his best-known films, such as \"Casablanca\" and \"The Maltese Falcon\", and recorded a radio series entitled \"Bold Venture\" with Bacall.\nPersonal life.\nChildren.\nBogart became a father at age 49, when Bacall gave birth to their son Stephen Humphrey Bogart on January 6, 1949, during the filming of \"Tokyo Joe\". The name was taken from Steve, Bogart's character's nickname in \"To Have and Have Not\". Stephen became an author and biographer and hosted a television special about his father on Turner Classic Movies. The couple's second child and daughter, Leslie Howard Bogart, was born on August 23, 1952. Her first and middle names honor Leslie Howard, Bogart's friend and co-star in \"The Petrified Forest\".\nRat Pack.\nBogart was a founding member and the original leader of the Hollywood Rat Pack. In the spring of 1955, after a long party in Las Vegas attended by Frank Sinatra, Judy Garland and her husband Sidney Luft, Michael Romanoff and his wife Gloria, David Niven, Angie Dickinson and others, Bacall surveyed the wreckage and said: \"You look like a goddamn rat pack.\"\nThe name stuck and was made official at Romanoff's in Beverly Hills. Sinatra was dubbed pack president; Bacall den mother; Bogart director of public relations, and Sid Luft acting cage manager. Asked by columnist Earl Wilson what the group's purpose was, Bacall replied: \"To drink a lot of bourbon and stay up late.\"\nExtended family and ancestors.\nBogart is descended from Mayflower passengers John Tilley, Joan (Hurst) Rogers, Elizabeth Tilley, and John Howland. \nIllness and death.\nAfter signing a long-term deal with Warner Bros., Bogart predicted with glee that his teeth and hair would fall out before the contract ended. By 1955, however, his health was failing. In the wake of Santana, Bogart had formed a new company and had plans for a film (\"Melville Goodwin, U.S.A.\") in which he would play a general and Bacall a press magnate. His persistent cough and difficulty eating became too serious to ignore, though, and he dropped the project. The film was re-tooled as \"Top Secret Affair\" and released just two weeks after Bogart's death in 1957, with Kirk Douglas and Susan Hayward replacing Bogart and Bacall.\nA heavy smoker and drinker, Bogart had developed esophageal cancer. He did not talk about his health and visited a doctor in late January 1956 after considerable persuasion from Bacall. The disease worsened and several weeks later, on March 1, Bogart had surgery to remove his esophagus, two lymph nodes and a rib. The surgery was unsuccessful, and chemotherapy followed. He had additional surgery in November 1956, when the cancer had metastasized. Although he became too weak to walk up and down stairs, he joked despite the pain: \"Put me in the dumbwaiter and I'll ride down to the first floor in style.\" It was then altered to accommodate his wheelchair. Frank Sinatra, Katharine Hepburn, and Spencer Tracy visited him on January 13, 1957. In an interview, Hepburn said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Spence patted him on the shoulder and said, \"Goodnight, Bogie.\" Bogie turned his eyes to Spence very quietly and with a sweet smile covered Spence's hand with his own and said, \"Goodbye, Spence.\" Spence's heart stood still. He understood.\nBogart lapsed into a coma and died the following day; at the time of his death, he weighed only . A simple funeral was held at All Saints Episcopal Church, with music by Bogart's favorite composers: Johann Sebastian Bach and Claude Debussy. Among those who attended Bogart's funeral were Ingrid Bergman, Mary Astor, Olivia de Havilland, Bing Crosby, James Cagney, Errol Flynn, Henry Fonda, Harry Cohn, Gregory Peck, James Mason, David O. Selznick and Jack L. Warner. Bacall asked Tracy to give the eulogy; he was too upset, however, and John Huston spoke instead:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Himself, he never took his work too seriously. He regarded the somewhat gaudy figure of Bogart, the star, with an amused cynicism; Bogart, the actor, he held in deep respect\u00a0... In each of the fountains at Versailles there is a pike which keeps all the carp active; otherwise they would grow over-fat and die. Bogie took rare delight in performing a similar duty in the fountains of Hollywood. Yet his victims seldom bore him any malice, and when they did, not for long. His shafts were fashioned only to stick into the outer layer of complacency, and not to penetrate through to the regions of the spirit where real injuries are done\u00a0... He is quite irreplaceable. There will never be another like him.\nBogart was cremated, and his ashes were interred in Forest Lawn Memorial Park's Columbarium of Eternal Light in its Garden of Memory in Glendale, California. He was buried with a small, gold whistle that had been part of a charm bracelet he had given to Bacall before they married. On it was inscribed, \"If you want anything, just whistle.\" This alluded to a scene in \"To Have and Have Not\" when Bacall's character says to Bogart shortly after their first meeting, \"You know how to whistle, don't you, Steve? You just put your lips together and blow.\"\nBogart's estate had a gross value of $910,146 and a net value of $737,668.\nAwards and honors.\nOn August 21, 1946, he recorded his hand- and footprints in cement in a ceremony at Grauman's Chinese Theatre. On February 8, 1960, Bogart was posthumously inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame with a motion-picture star at 6322 Hollywood Boulevard. There is a street named after Bogart in San Antonio, Texas.\nLegacy and tributes.\nAfter his death, a \"Bogie cult\" formed at the Brattle Theatre in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in Greenwich Village, and in France; this contributed to his increased popularity during the late 1950s and 1960s. In 1997, \"Entertainment Weekly\" magazine ranked Bogart the number-one movie legend of all time; two years later, the American Film Institute rated him the greatest male screen legend.\nJean-Luc Godard's \"Breathless\" (1960) was the first film to pay tribute to Bogart. Over a decade later, in Woody Allen's comic paean \"Play It Again, Sam\" (1972), Bogart's ghost aids Allen's character: a film critic having difficulties with women who says that his \"sex life has turned into the 'Petrified Forest'\".\nThe United States Postal Service honored Bogart with a stamp in its \"Legends of Hollywood\" series in 1997, the third figure recognized. At a ceremony attended by Lauren Bacall and the Bogart children, Stephen and Leslie, USPS governing-board chair Tirso del Junco delivered a tribute:\n\"Today, we mark another chapter in the Bogart legacy. With an image that is small and yet as powerful as the ones he left in celluloid, we will begin today to bring his artistry, his power, his unique star quality, to the messages that travel the world.\"\nOn June 24, 2006, 103rd Street between Broadway and West End Avenue in New York City was renamed Humphrey Bogart Place. Lauren Bacall and her son, Stephen Bogart, attended the ceremony. \"Bogie would never have believed it\", she said to the assembled city officials and onlookers.\nIn popular culture.\nBogart has inspired multiple artists.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14047", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14047", "title": "Homicidal government", "text": ""}
{"id": "14051", "revid": "1319326988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14051", "title": "History painting", "text": "History paintings is a genre of Western art that focuses on the depiction of historical, mythological, biblical, or literary subjects, often with a moral or didactic purpose. Considered the most prestigious genre in the academic art hierarchy during the 17th to 19th centuries, history painting aimed to capture significant moments or narratives, emphasizing grandeur, heroism, and moral lessons.Genre in painting defined by narrative subjects\nHistory painting is a genre in painting defined by its subject matter rather than any artistic style or specific period. History paintings depict a moment in a narrative story, most often (but not exclusively) Greek and Roman mythology and Bible stories, opposed to a specific and static subject, as in portrait, still life, and landscape painting. The term is derived from the wider senses of the word \"historia\" in Latin and \"histoire\" in French, meaning \"story\" or \"narrative\", and essentially means \"story painting\". Most history paintings are not of scenes from history, especially paintings from before about 1850.\nIn modern English, \"historical painting\" is sometimes used to describe the painting of scenes from history in its narrower sense, especially for 19th-century art, excluding religious, mythological, and allegorical subjects, which are included in the broader term \"history painting\", and before the 19th century were the most common subjects for history paintings.\nHistory paintings almost always contain a number of figures, often a large number, and normally show some typical states on that is a moment in a narrative. The genre includes depictions of moments in religious narratives, above all the \"Life of Christ\", Middle Eastern culture as well as narrative scenes from mythology, and also allegorical scenes. These groups were for long the most frequently painted; works such as Michelangelo's Sistine Chapel ceiling are therefore history paintings, as are most very large paintings before the 19th century. The term covers large paintings in oil on canvas or fresco produced between the Renaissance and the late 19th century, after which the term is generally not used even for the many works that still meet the basic definition.\nHistory painting may be used interchangeably with historical painting, and was especially so used before the 20th century. Where a distinction is made, \"historical painting\" is the painting of scenes from secular history, whether specific episodes or generalized scenes. In the 19th century, historical painting in this sense became a distinct genre. In phrases such as \"historical painting materials\", \"historical\" means in use before about 1900, or some earlier date.\nPrestige.\nHistory paintings were traditionally regarded as the highest form of Western painting, occupying the most prestigious place in the hierarchy of genres, and considered the equivalent to the epic in literature. In his \"De Pictura\" of 1436, Leon Battista Alberti had argued that multi-figure history painting was the noblest form of art, as being the most difficult, which required mastery of all the others, because it was a visual form of history, and because it had the greatest potential to move the viewer. He placed emphasis on the ability to depict the interactions between the figures by gesture and expression.\nThis view remained general until the 19th century, when artistic movements began to struggle against the establishment institutions of academic art, which continued to adhere to it. At the same time, there was from the latter part of the 18th century an increased interest in depicting in the form of history painting moments of drama from recent or contemporary history, which had long largely been confined to battle-scenes and scenes of formal surrenders and the like. Scenes from ancient history had been popular in the early Renaissance, and once again became common in the Baroque and Rococo periods, and still more so with the rise of Neoclassicism. In some 19th or 20th century contexts, the term may refer specifically to paintings of scenes from secular history, rather than those from religious narratives, literature or mythology.\nDevelopment.\nThe term is generally not used in art history in speaking of medieval painting, although the Western tradition was developing in large altarpieces, fresco cycles, and other works, as well as miniatures in illuminated manuscripts. It comes to the fore in Italian Renaissance painting, where a series of increasingly ambitious works were produced, many still religious, but several, especially in Florence, which did actually feature near-contemporary historical scenes such as the set of three huge canvases on \"The Battle of San Romano\" by Paolo Uccello, the abortive \"Battle of Cascina\" by Michelangelo and the \"Battle of Anghiari\" by Leonardo da Vinci, neither of which were completed. Scenes from ancient history and mythology were also popular. Writers such as Alberti and the following century Giorgio Vasari in his \"Lives of the Artists\", followed public and artistic opinion in judging the best painters above all on their production of large works of history painting (though in fact the only modern (post-classical) work described in \"De Pictura\" is Giotto's huge \"Navicella\" in mosaic). Artists continued for centuries to strive to make their reputation by producing such works, often neglecting genres to which their talents were better suited.\nThere was some objection to the term, as many writers preferred terms such as \"poetic painting\" (\"poesia\"), or wanted to make a distinction between the \"true\" \"istoria\", covering history including biblical and religious scenes, and the \"fabula\", covering pagan myth, allegory, and scenes from fiction, which could not be regarded as true. The large works of Raphael were long considered, with those of Michelangelo, as the finest models for the genre.\nIn the Raphael Rooms in the Vatican Palace, allegories and historical scenes are mixed together, and the Raphael Cartoons show scenes from the Gospels, all in the Grand Manner that from the High Renaissance became associated with, and often expected in, history painting. In the Late Renaissance and Baroque the painting of actual history tended to degenerate into panoramic battle-scenes with the victorious monarch or general perched on a horse accompanied with his retinue, or formal scenes of ceremonies, although some artists managed to make a masterpiece from such unpromising material, as Vel\u00e1zquez did with his \"The Surrender of Breda\".\nAn influential formulation of the hierarchy of genres, confirming the history painting at the top, was made in 1667 by Andr\u00e9 F\u00e9libien, a historiographer, architect and theoretician of French classicism became the classic statement of the theory for the 18th century:Celui qui fait parfaitement des pa\u00efsages est au-dessus d'un autre qui ne fait que des fruits, des fleurs ou des coquilles. Celui qui peint des animaux vivants est plus estimable que ceux qui ne repr\u00e9sentent que des choses mortes &amp; sans mouvement; &amp; comme la figure de l'homme est le plus parfait ouvrage de Dieu sur la Terre, il est certain aussi que celui qui se rend l'imitateur de Dieu en peignant des figures humaines, est beaucoup plus excellent que tous les autres ... un Peintre qui ne fait que des portraits, n'a pas encore cette haute perfection de l'Art, &amp; ne peut pr\u00e9tendre \u00e0 l'honneur que re\u00e7oivent les plus s\u00e7avans. Il faut pour cela passer d'une seule figure \u00e0 la repr\u00e9sentation de plusieurs ensemble; il faut traiter l'histoire &amp; la fable; il faut repr\u00e9senter de grandes actions comme les historiens, ou des sujets agr\u00e9ables comme les Po\u00ebtes; &amp; montant encore plus haut, il faut par des compositions all\u00e9goriques, s\u00e7avoir couvrir sous le voile de la fable les vertus des grands hommes, &amp; les myst\u00e8res les plus relevez.\nHe who produces perfect landscapes is above another who only produces fruit, flowers or seashells. He who paints living animals is more than those who only represent dead things without movement, and as man is the most perfect work of God on the earth, it is also certain that he who becomes an imitator of God in representing human figures, is much more excellent than all the others ... a painter who only does portraits still does not have the highest perfection of his art, and cannot expect the honour due to the most skilled. For that he must pass from representing a single figure to several together; history and myth must be depicted; great events must be represented as by historians, or like the poets, subjects that will please, and climbing still higher, he must have the skill to cover under the veil of myth the virtues of great men in allegories, and the mysteries they reveal\".\nBy the late 18th century, with both religious and mytholological painting in decline, there was an increased demand for paintings of scenes from history, including contemporary history. This was in part driven by the changing audience for ambitious paintings, which now increasingly made their reputation in public exhibitions rather than by impressing the owners of and visitors to palaces and public buildings. Classical history remained popular, but scenes from national histories were often the best-received. From 1760 onwards, the Society of Artists of Great Britain, the first body to organize regular exhibitions in London, awarded two generous prizes each year to paintings of subjects from British history. \nThe unheroic nature of modern dress was regarded as a serious difficulty. When, in 1770, Benjamin West proposed to paint \"The Death of General Wolfe\" in contemporary dress, he was firmly instructed to use classical costume by many people. He ignored these comments and showed the scene in modern dress. Although George III refused to purchase the work, West succeeded both in overcoming his critics' objections and inaugurating a more historically accurate style in such paintings. Other artists depicted scenes, regardless of when they occurred, in classical dress and for a long time, especially during the French Revolution, history painting often focused on depictions of the heroic male nude.\nThe large production, using the finest French artists, of propaganda paintings glorifying the exploits of Napoleon, were matched by works, showing both victories and losses, from the anti-Napoleonic alliance by artists such as Goya and J. M. W. Turner. Th\u00e9odore G\u00e9ricault's \"The Raft of the Medusa\" (1818\u20131819) was a sensation, appearing to update the history painting for the 19th century, and showing anonymous figures famous only for being victims of what was then a famous and controversial disaster at sea. Conveniently their clothes had been worn away to classical-seeming rags by the point the painting depicts. At the same time the demand for traditional large religious history paintings very largely fell away.\nIn the mid-nineteenth century there arose a style known as historicism, which marked a formal imitation of historical styles and/or artists. Another development in the nineteenth century was the treatment of historical subjects, often on a large scale, with the values of genre painting, the depiction of scenes of everyday life, and anecdote. Grand depictions of events of great public importance were supplemented with scenes depicting more personal incidents in the lives of the great, or of scenes centred on unnamed figures involved in historical events, as in the Troubadour style. At the same time scenes of ordinary life with moral, political or satirical content became often the main vehicle for expressive interplay between figures in painting, whether given a modern or historical setting.\nBy the later 19th century, history painting was often explicitly rejected by avant-garde movements such as the Impressionists (except for \u00c9douard Manet) and the Symbolists, and according to one recent writer \"Modernism was to a considerable extent built upon the rejection of History Painting... All other genres are deemed capable of entering, in one form or another, the 'pantheon' of modernity considered, but History Painting is excluded\".\nHistory painting and historical painting.\nThe terms.\nInitially, \"history painting\" and \"historical painting\" were used interchangeably in English, as when Sir Joshua Reynolds in his fourth \"Discourse\" uses both indiscriminately to cover \"history painting\", while saying \"...it ought to be called poetical, as in reality it is\", reflecting the French term \"peinture historique\", one equivalent of \"history painting\". The terms began to separate in the 19th century, with \"historical painting\" becoming a sub-group of \"history painting\" restricted to subjects taken from history in its normal sense. In 1853 John Ruskin asked his audience: \"What do you at present \"mean\" by historical painting? Now-a-days it means the endeavour, by the power of imagination, to portray some historical event of past days.\" So for example Harold Wethey's three-volume catalogue of the paintings of Titian (Phaidon, 1969\u201375) is divided between \"Religious Paintings\", \"Portraits\", and \"Mythological and Historical Paintings\", though both volumes I and III cover what is included in the term \"History Paintings\". This distinction is useful but is by no means generally observed, and the terms are still often used in a confusing manner. Because of the potential for confusion modern academic writing tends to avoid the phrase \"historical painting\", talking instead of \"historical subject matter\" in history painting, but where the phrase is still used in contemporary scholarship it will normally mean the painting of subjects from history, very often in the 19th century. \"Historical painting\" may also be used, especially in discussion of painting techniques in conservation studies, to mean \"old\", as opposed to modern or recent painting.\nIn 19th-century British writing on art the terms \"subject painting\" or \"anecdotic\" painting were often used for works in a line of development going back to William Hogarth of monoscenic depictions of crucial moments in an implied narrative with unidentified characters, such as William Holman Hunt's 1853 painting \"The Awakening Conscience\" or Augustus Egg's \"Past and Present\", a set of three paintings, updating sets by Hogarth such as \"Marriage \u00e0-la-mode\".\n19th century.\nHistory painting was the dominant form of academic painting in the various national academies in the 18th century, and for most of the 19th, and increasingly historical subjects dominated. During the Revolutionary and Napoleonic periods the heroic treatment of contemporary history in a frankly propagandistic fashion by Antoine-Jean, Baron Gros, Jacques-Louis David, Carle Vernet and others was supported by the French state, but after the fall of Napoleon in 1815 the French governments were not regarded as suitable for heroic treatment and many artists retreated further into the past to find subjects, though in Britain depicting the victories of the Napoleonic Wars mostly occurred after they were over. Another path was to choose contemporary subjects that were oppositional to government either at home and abroad, and many of what were arguably the last great generation of history paintings were protests at contemporary episodes of repression or outrages at home or abroad: Goya's \"The Third of May 1808\" (1814), Th\u00e9odore G\u00e9ricault's \"The Raft of the Medusa\" (1818\u201319), Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix's \"The Massacre at Chios\" (1824) and \"Liberty Leading the People\" (1830). These were heroic, but showed heroic suffering by ordinary civilians.\nRomantic artists such as G\u00e9ricault and Delacroix, and those from other movements such as the English Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood continued to regard history painting as the ideal for their most ambitious works. Others such as Jan Matejko in Poland, Vasily Surikov in Russia, Jos\u00e9 Moreno Carbonero in Spain and Paul Delaroche in France became specialized painters of large historical subjects. The \"style troubadour\" (\"troubadour style\") was a somewhat derisive French term for earlier paintings of medieval and Renaissance scenes, which were often small and depicting moments of anecdote rather than drama; Ingres, Richard Parkes Bonington and Henri Fradelle painted such works. Sir Roy Strong calls this type of work the \"Intimate Romantic\", and in French it was known as the \"peinture de genre historique\" or \"peinture anecdotique\" (\"historical genre painting\" or \"anecdotal painting\").\nChurch commissions for large group scenes from the Bible had greatly reduced, and historical painting became very significant. Especially in the early 19th century, much historical painting depicted specific moments from historical literature, with the novels of Sir Walter Scott a particular favourite, in France and other European countries as much as Great Britain. By the middle of the century medieval scenes were expected to be very carefully researched, using the work of historians of costume, architecture and all elements of decor that were becoming available. An example of this is the extensive research of Byzantine architecture, clothing, and decoration made in Parisian museums and libraries by Moreno Carbonero for his masterwork \"The Entry of Roger de Flor in Constantinople\". The provision of examples and expertise for artists, as well as revivalist industrial designers, was one of the motivations for the establishment of museums like the Victoria and Albert Museum in London.\nNew techniques of printmaking such as the chromolithograph made good quality reproductions both relatively cheap and very widely accessible, and also hugely profitable for artist and publisher, as the sales were so large. Historical painting often had a close relationship with Nationalism, and painters like Matejko in Poland could play an important role in fixing the prevailing historical narrative of national history in the popular mind. In France, \"L'art Pompier\" (\"Fireman art\") was a derisory term for official academic historical painting, and in a final phase, \"History painting of a debased sort, scenes of brutality and terror, purporting to illustrate episodes from Roman and Moorish history, were Salon sensations. On the overcrowded walls of the exhibition galleries, the paintings that shouted loudest got the attention\". Orientalist painting was an alternative genre that offered similar exotic costumes and decor, and at least as much opportunity to depict sex and violence.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14052", "revid": "48535834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14052", "title": "Hyperbola", "text": "Plane curve: conic section\nIn mathematics, a hyperbola is a type of smooth curve lying in a plane, defined by its geometric properties or by equations for which it is the solution set. A hyperbola has two pieces, called connected components or branches, that are mirror images of each other and resemble two infinite bows. The hyperbola is one of the three kinds of conic section, formed by the intersection of a plane and a double cone. (The other conic sections are the parabola and the ellipse. A circle is a special case of an ellipse.) If the plane intersects both halves of the double cone but does not pass through the apex of the cones, then the conic is a hyperbola.\nBesides being a conic section, a hyperbola can arise as the locus of points whose difference of distances to two fixed foci is constant, as a curve for each point of which the rays to two fixed foci are reflections across the tangent line at that point, or as the solution of certain bivariate quadratic equations such as the reciprocal relationship formula_1 In practical applications, a hyperbola can arise as the path followed by the shadow of the tip of a sundial's gnomon, the shape of an open orbit such as that of a celestial object exceeding the escape velocity of the nearest gravitational body, or the scattering trajectory of a subatomic particle, among others.\nEach branch of the hyperbola has two arms which become straighter (lower curvature) further out from the center of the hyperbola. Diagonally opposite arms, one from each branch, tend in the limit to a common line, called the asymptote of those two arms. So there are two asymptotes, whose intersection is at the center of symmetry of the hyperbola, which can be thought of as the mirror point about which each branch reflects to form the other branch. In the case of the curve formula_2 the asymptotes are the two coordinate axes.\nHyperbolas share many of the ellipses' analytical properties such as eccentricity, focus, and directrix. Typically the correspondence can be made with nothing more than a change of sign in some term. Many other mathematical objects have their origin in the hyperbola, such as hyperbolic paraboloids (saddle surfaces), hyperboloids (\"wastebaskets\"), hyperbolic geometry (Lobachevsky's celebrated non-Euclidean geometry), hyperbolic functions (sinh, cosh, tanh, etc.), and gyrovector spaces (a geometry proposed for use in both relativity and quantum mechanics which is not Euclidean).\nEtymology and history.\nThe word \"hyperbola\" derives from the Greek , meaning \"over-thrown\" or \"excessive\", from which the English term hyperbole also derives. Hyperbolae were discovered by Menaechmus in his investigations of the problem of doubling the cube, but were then called sections of obtuse cones. The term hyperbola is believed to have been coined by Apollonius of Perga (c.\u2009262\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009190 BC) in his definitive work on the conic sections, the \"Conics\".\nThe names of the other two general conic sections, the ellipse and the parabola, derive from the corresponding Greek words for \"deficient\" and \"applied\"; all three names are borrowed from earlier Pythagorean terminology which referred to a comparison of the side of rectangles of fixed area with a given line segment. The rectangle could be \"applied\" to the segment (meaning, have an equal length), be shorter than the segment or exceed the segment.\nDefinitions.\nAs locus of points.\nA hyperbola can be defined geometrically as a set of points (locus of points) in the Euclidean plane:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;PF_1\nThe midpoint formula_3 of the line segment joining the foci is called the \"center\" of the hyperbola. The line through the foci is called the \"major axis\". It contains the \"vertices\" formula_4, which have distance formula_5 to the center. The distance formula_6 of the foci to the center is called the \"focal distance\" or \"linear eccentricity\". The quotient formula_7 is the \"eccentricity\" formula_8.\nThe equation formula_9 can be viewed in a different way (see diagram):\nIf formula_10 is the circle with midpoint formula_11 and radius formula_12, then the distance of a point formula_13 of the right branch to the circle formula_10 equals the distance to the focus formula_15:\nformula_16\nformula_10 is called the \"circular directrix\" (related to focus formula_11) of the hyperbola. In order to get the left branch of the hyperbola, one has to use the circular directrix related to formula_15. This property should not be confused with the definition of a hyperbola with help of a directrix (line) below.\nHyperbola with equation \"y\" = \"A\"/\"x\".\nIf the \"xy\"-coordinate system is rotated about the origin by the angle formula_20 and new coordinates formula_21 are assigned, then formula_22.\nThe rectangular hyperbola formula_23 (whose semi-axes are equal) has the new equation formula_24.\nSolving for formula_25 yields formula_26\nThus, in an \"xy\"-coordinate system the graph of a function formula_27 with equation\nformula_28 is a \"rectangular hyperbola\" entirely in the first and third quadrants with\nA rotation of the original hyperbola by formula_38 results in a rectangular hyperbola entirely in the second and fourth quadrants, with the same asymptotes, center, semi-latus rectum, radius of curvature at the vertices, linear eccentricity, and eccentricity as for the case of formula_20 rotation, with equation\nformula_40\nShifting the hyperbola with equation formula_44 so that the new center is formula_45, yields the new equation\nformula_46\nand the new asymptotes are formula_47 and formula_48. The shape parameters formula_49 remain unchanged.\nBy the directrix property.\nThe two lines at distance formula_50 from the center and parallel to the minor axis are called directrices of the hyperbola (see diagram).\nFor an arbitrary point formula_13 of the hyperbola the quotient of the distance to one focus and to the corresponding directrix (see diagram) is equal to the eccentricity:\nformula_52\nThe proof for the pair formula_53 follows from the fact that formula_54 and formula_55 satisfy the equation\nformula_56\nThe second case is proven analogously.\nThe \"inverse statement\" is also true and can be used to define a hyperbola (in a manner similar to the definition of a parabola):\nFor any point formula_57 (focus), any line formula_58 (directrix) not through formula_57 and any real number formula_8 with formula_61 the set of points (locus of points), for which the quotient of the distances to the point and to the line is formula_8\nformula_63\nis a hyperbola.\nProof.\nLet formula_66 and assume formula_30 is a point on the curve.\nThe directrix formula_58 has equation formula_69. With formula_70, the relation formula_71 produces the equations\nformula_72 and formula_73\nThe substitution formula_74 yields\nformula_75\nThis is the equation of an \"ellipse\" (formula_76) or a \"parabola\" (formula_77) or a \"hyperbola\" (formula_78). All of these non-degenerate conics have, in common, the origin as a vertex (see diagram).\nIf formula_61, introduce new parameters formula_80 so that formula_81, and then the equation above becomes\nformula_82\nwhich is the equation of a hyperbola with center formula_83, the \"x\"-axis as major axis and the major/minor semi axis formula_80.\nConstruction of a directrix.\nBecause of formula_85 point formula_86 of directrix formula_87 (see diagram) and focus formula_15 are inverse with respect to the circle inversion at circle formula_89 (in diagram green). Hence point formula_90 can be constructed using the theorem of Thales (not shown in the diagram). The directrix formula_87 is the perpendicular to line formula_92 through point formula_90.\n\"Alternative construction of formula_90\": Calculation shows, that point formula_90 is the intersection of the asymptote with its perpendicular through formula_15 (see diagram).\nAs plane section of a cone.\nThe intersection of an upright double cone by a plane not through the vertex with slope greater than the slope of the lines on the cone is a hyperbola (see diagram: red curve). In order to prove the defining property of a hyperbola (see above) one uses two Dandelin spheres formula_97, which are spheres that touch the cone along circles formula_98, formula_99 and the intersecting (hyperbola) plane at points formula_15 and formula_11. It turns out: formula_102 are the \"foci\" of the hyperbola.\nPin and string construction.\nThe definition of a hyperbola by its foci and its circular directrices (see above) can be used for drawing an arc of it with help of pins, a string and a ruler:\nSteiner generation of a hyperbola.\nThe following method to construct single points of a hyperbola relies on the Steiner generation of a non degenerate conic section:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;Given two pencils formula_133 of lines at two points formula_134 (all lines containing formula_135 and formula_136, respectively) and a projective but not perspective mapping formula_137 of formula_138 onto formula_139, then the intersection points of corresponding lines form a non-degenerate projective conic section.\nFor the generation of points of the hyperbola formula_140 one uses the pencils at the vertices formula_141. Let formula_142 be a point of the hyperbola and formula_143. The line segment formula_144 is divided into n equally-spaced segments and this division is projected parallel with the diagonal formula_121 as direction onto the line segment formula_146 (see diagram). The parallel projection is part of the projective mapping between the pencils at formula_147 and formula_148 needed. The intersection points of any two related lines formula_149 and formula_150 are points of the uniquely defined hyperbola.\n\"Remarks:\"\nInscribed angles for hyperbolas \"y\" = \"a\"/(\"x\" \u2212 \"b\") + \"c\" and the 3-point-form.\nA hyperbola with equation formula_153 is uniquely determined by three points formula_154 with different \"x\"- and \"y\"-coordinates. A simple way to determine the shape parameters formula_155 uses the \"inscribed angle theorem\" for hyperbolas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;In order to measure an angle between two lines with equations formula_156 in this context one uses the quotient\nformula_157\nAnalogous to the inscribed angle theorem for circles one gets the\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nInscribed angle theorem for hyperbolas\u2014For four points formula_158 (see diagram) the following statement is true:\nThe four points are on a hyperbola with equation formula_159 if and only if the angles at formula_160 and formula_161 are equal in the sense of the measurement above. That means if formula_162\nThe proof can be derived by straightforward calculation. If the points are on a hyperbola, one can assume the hyperbola's equation is \nA consequence of the inscribed angle theorem for hyperbolas is the\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\n3-point-form of a hyperbola's equation\u2014The equation of the hyperbola determined by 3 points formula_163 is the solution of the equation formula_164 for formula_165.\nAs an affine image of the unit hyperbola \"x\"2 \u2212 \"y\"2 = 1.\nAnother definition of a hyperbola uses affine transformations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;Any \"hyperbola\" is the affine image of the unit hyperbola with equation formula_166.\nParametric representation.\nAn affine transformation of the Euclidean plane has the form formula_167, where formula_106 is a regular matrix (its determinant is not 0) and formula_169 is an arbitrary vector. If formula_170 are the column vectors of the matrix formula_106, the unit hyperbola formula_172 is mapped onto the hyperbola\nformula_173\nformula_169 is the center, formula_175 a point of the hyperbola and formula_176 a tangent vector at this point.\nVertices.\nIn general the vectors formula_170 are not perpendicular. That means, in general formula_178 are \"not\" the vertices of the hyperbola. But formula_179 point into the directions of the asymptotes. The tangent vector at point formula_180 is\nformula_181\nBecause at a vertex the tangent is perpendicular to the major axis of the hyperbola one gets the parameter formula_182 of a vertex from the equation\nformula_183\nand hence from\nformula_184\nwhich yields\nformula_185\nThe formulae and formula_186 were used.\nThe two \"vertices\" of the hyperbola are formula_187\nImplicit representation.\nSolving the parametric representation for formula_188 by Cramer's rule and using formula_189, one gets the implicit representation\nformula_190\nHyperbola in space.\nThe definition of a hyperbola in this section gives a parametric representation of an arbitrary hyperbola, even in space, if one allows formula_191 to be vectors in space.\nAs an affine image of the hyperbola \"y\" = 1/\"x\".\nBecause the unit hyperbola formula_192 is affinely equivalent to the hyperbola formula_193, an arbitrary hyperbola can be considered as the affine image (see previous section) of the hyperbola \nformula_194\nformula_195 is the center of the hyperbola, the vectors formula_196 have the directions of the asymptotes and formula_197 is a point of the hyperbola. The tangent vector is\nformula_198\nAt a vertex the tangent is perpendicular to the major axis. Hence\nformula_199\nand the parameter of a vertex is\nformula_200\nformula_201 is equivalent to formula_202 and formula_203 are the vertices of the hyperbola.\nThe following properties of a hyperbola are easily proven using the representation of a hyperbola introduced in this section.\nTangent construction.\nThe tangent vector can be rewritten by factorization:\nformula_204\nThis means that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;the diagonal formula_121 of the parallelogram formula_206 is parallel to the tangent at the hyperbola point formula_13 (see diagram).\nThis property provides a way to construct the tangent at a point on the hyperbola.\nThis property of a hyperbola is an affine version of the 3-point-degeneration of Pascal's theorem.\nThe area of the grey parallelogram formula_208 in the above diagram is\nformula_209\nand hence independent of point formula_13. The last equation follows from a calculation for the case, where formula_13 is a vertex and the hyperbola in its canonical form formula_212\nPoint construction.\nFor a hyperbola with parametric representation formula_213 (for simplicity the center is the origin) the following is true:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;For any two points formula_214 the points\nformula_215\nare collinear with the center of the hyperbola (see diagram).\nThe simple proof is a consequence of the equation formula_216.\nThis property provides a possibility to construct points of a hyperbola if the asymptotes and one point are given.\nThis property of a hyperbola is an affine version of the 4-point-degeneration of Pascal's theorem.\nTangent\u2013asymptotes triangle.\nFor simplicity the center of the hyperbola may be the origin and the vectors formula_217 have equal length. If the last assumption is not fulfilled one can first apply a parameter transformation (see above) in order to make the assumption true. Hence formula_218 are the vertices, formula_219 span the minor axis and one gets formula_220 and formula_221.\nFor the intersection points of the tangent at point formula_222 with the asymptotes one gets the points\nformula_223\nThe \"area\" of the triangle formula_224 can be calculated by a 2\u2009\u00d7\u20092 determinant:\nformula_225\n(see rules for determinants).\nformula_226 is the area of the rhombus generated by formula_217. The area of a rhombus is equal to one half of the product of its diagonals. The diagonals are the semi-axes formula_80 of the hyperbola. Hence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;The \"area\" of the triangle formula_229 is independent of the point of the hyperbola: formula_230\nReciprocation of a circle.\nThe reciprocation of a circle \"B\" in a circle \"C\" always yields a conic section such as a hyperbola. The process of \"reciprocation in a circle \"C\"\" consists of replacing every line and point in a geometrical figure with their corresponding pole and polar, respectively. The \"pole\" of a line is the inversion of its closest point to the circle \"C\", whereas the polar of a point is the converse, namely, a line whose closest point to \"C\" is the inversion of the point.\nThe eccentricity of the conic section obtained by reciprocation is the ratio of the distances between the two circles' centers to the radius \"r\" of reciprocation circle \"C\". If B and C represent the points at the centers of the corresponding circles, then\nformula_231\nSince the eccentricity of a hyperbola is always greater than one, the center B must lie outside of the reciprocating circle \"C\".\nThis definition implies that the hyperbola is both the locus of the poles of the tangent lines to the circle \"B\", as well as the envelope of the polar lines of the points on \"B\". Conversely, the circle \"B\" is the envelope of polars of points on the hyperbola, and the locus of poles of tangent lines to the hyperbola. Two tangent lines to \"B\" have no (finite) poles because they pass through the center C of the reciprocation circle \"C\"; the polars of the corresponding tangent points on \"B\" are the asymptotes of the hyperbola. The two branches of the hyperbola correspond to the two parts of the circle \"B\" that are separated by these tangent points.\nQuadratic equation.\nA hyperbola can also be defined as a second-degree equation in the Cartesian coordinates formula_232 in the plane,\nformula_233\nprovided that the constants formula_234 formula_235 formula_236 formula_237 formula_238 and formula_239 satisfy the determinant condition\nformula_240\nThis determinant is conventionally called the discriminant of the conic section.\nA special case of a hyperbola\u2014the \"degenerate hyperbola\" consisting of two intersecting lines\u2014occurs when another determinant is zero:\nformula_241\nThis determinant formula_242 is sometimes called the discriminant of the conic section.\nThe general equation's coefficients can be obtained from known semi-major axis formula_243 semi-minor axis formula_244 center coordinates formula_245, and rotation angle formula_246 (the angle from the positive horizontal axis to the hyperbola's major axis) using the formulae:\nformula_247\nThese expressions can be derived from the canonical equation\nformula_248\nby a translation and rotation of the coordinates formula_232:\nformula_250\nGiven the above general parametrization of the hyperbola in Cartesian coordinates, the eccentricity can be found using the formula in Conic section#Eccentricity in terms of coefficients.\nThe center formula_251 of the hyperbola may be determined from the formulae\nformula_252\nIn terms of new coordinates, formula_253 and formula_254 the defining equation of the hyperbola can be written\nformula_255\nThe principal axes of the hyperbola make an angle formula_256 with the positive formula_257-axis that is given by\nformula_258\nRotating the coordinate axes so that the formula_257-axis is aligned with the transverse axis brings the equation into its canonical form\nformula_260\nThe major and minor semiaxes formula_5 and formula_262 are defined by the equations\nformula_263\nwhere formula_264 and formula_265 are the roots of the quadratic equation\nformula_266\nFor comparison, the corresponding equation for a degenerate hyperbola (consisting of two intersecting lines) is\nformula_267\nThe tangent line to a given point formula_268 on the hyperbola is defined by the equation\nformula_269\nwhere formula_270 formula_271 and formula_272 are defined by\nformula_273\nThe normal line to the hyperbola at the same point is given by the equation\nformula_274\nThe normal line is perpendicular to the tangent line, and both pass through the same point formula_275\nFrom the equation\nformula_276\nthe left focus is formula_277 and the right focus is formula_278 where formula_8 is the eccentricity. Denote the distances from a point formula_232 to the left and right foci as formula_281 and formula_282 For a point on the right branch,\nformula_283\nand for a point on the left branch,\nformula_284\nThis can be proved as follows:\nIf formula_232 is a point on the hyperbola the distance to the left focal point is\nformula_286\nTo the right focal point the distance is\nformula_287\nIf formula_232 is a point on the right branch of the hyperbola then formula_289 and\nformula_290\nSubtracting these equations one gets\nformula_291\nIf formula_232 is a point on the left branch of the hyperbola then formula_293 and\nformula_294\nSubtracting these equations one gets\nformula_295\nIn Cartesian coordinates.\nEquation.\nIf Cartesian coordinates are introduced such that the origin is the center of the hyperbola and the \"x\"-axis is the major axis, then the hyperbola is called \"east-west-opening\" and\nthe \"foci\" are the points formula_296,\nthe \"vertices\" are formula_297.\nFor an arbitrary point formula_298 the distance to the focus formula_299 is formula_300 and to the second focus formula_301. Hence the point formula_298 is on the hyperbola if the following condition is fulfilled\nformula_303\nRemove the square roots by suitable squarings and use the relation formula_304 to obtain the equation of the hyperbola:\nformula_305\nThis equation is called the canonical form of a hyperbola, because any hyperbola, regardless of its orientation relative to the Cartesian axes and regardless of the location of its center, can be transformed to this form by a change of variables, giving a hyperbola that is congruent to the original (see below).\nThe axes of symmetry or \"principal axes\" are the \"transverse axis\" (containing the segment of length 2\"a\" with endpoints at the vertices) and the \"conjugate axis\" (containing the segment of length 2\"b\" perpendicular to the transverse axis and with midpoint at the hyperbola's center). As opposed to an ellipse, a hyperbola has only two vertices: formula_306. The two points formula_307 on the conjugate axes are \"not\" on the hyperbola.\nIt follows from the equation that the hyperbola is \"symmetric\" with respect to both of the coordinate axes and hence symmetric with respect to the origin.\nEccentricity.\nFor a hyperbola in the above canonical form, the eccentricity is given by\nformula_308\nTwo hyperbolas are geometrically similar to each other \u2013 meaning that they have the same shape, so that one can be transformed into the other by rigid left and right movements, rotation, taking a mirror image, and scaling (magnification) \u2013 if and only if they have the same eccentricity.\nAsymptotes.\nSolving the equation (above) of the hyperbola for formula_309 yields\nformula_310\nIt follows from this that the hyperbola approaches the two lines\nformula_311\nfor large values of formula_312. These two lines intersect at the center (origin) and are called \"asymptotes\" of the hyperbola formula_313\nWith the help of the second figure one can see that\nformula_314 The \"perpendicular distance from a focus to either asymptote\" is formula_262 (the semi-minor axis).\nFrom the Hesse normal form formula_316 of the asymptotes and the equation of the hyperbola one gets:\nformula_317 The \"product of the distances from a point on the hyperbola to both the asymptotes\" is the constant formula_318 which can also be written in terms of the eccentricity \"e\" as formula_319\nFrom the equation formula_320 of the hyperbola (above) one can derive:\nformula_321 The \"product of the slopes of lines from a point P to the two vertices\" is the constant formula_322\nIn addition, from (2) above it can be shown that\nformula_323 \"The product of the distances from a point on the hyperbola to the asymptotes along lines parallel to the asymptotes\" is the constant formula_324\nSemi-latus rectum.\nThe length of the chord through one of the foci, perpendicular to the major axis of the hyperbola, is called the \"latus rectum\". One half of it is the \"semi-latus rectum\" formula_325. A calculation shows\nformula_326\nThe semi-latus rectum formula_325 may also be viewed as the \"radius of curvature \" at the vertices.\nTangent.\nThe simplest way to determine the equation of the tangent at a point formula_328 is to implicitly differentiate the equation formula_329 of the hyperbola. Denoting \"dy/dx\" as \"y\u2032\", this produces\nformula_330\nWith respect to formula_331, the equation of the tangent at point formula_328 is\nformula_333\nA particular tangent line distinguishes the hyperbola from the other conic sections. Let \"f\" be the distance from the vertex \"V\" (on both the hyperbola and its axis through the two foci) to the nearer focus. Then the distance, along a line perpendicular to that axis, from that focus to a point P on the hyperbola is greater than 2\"f\". The tangent to the hyperbola at P intersects that axis at point Q at an angle \u2220PQV of greater than 45\u00b0.\nRectangular hyperbola.\nIn the case formula_334 the hyperbola is called \"rectangular\" (or \"equilateral\"), because its asymptotes intersect at right angles. For this case, the linear eccentricity is formula_335, the eccentricity formula_336 and the semi-latus rectum formula_337. The graph of the equation formula_193 is a rectangular hyperbola.\nParametric representation with hyperbolic sine/cosine.\nUsing the hyperbolic sine and cosine functions formula_339, a parametric representation of the hyperbola formula_329 can be obtained, which is similar to the parametric representation of an ellipse:\nformula_341\nwhich satisfies the Cartesian equation because formula_342\nFurther parametric representations are given in the section Parametric equations below.\nConjugate hyperbola.\nFor the hyperbola formula_343, change the sign on the right to obtain the equation of the conjugate hyperbola:\nformula_344 or equivalently:formula_345\nA hyperbola and its conjugate may have diameters which are conjugate. In the theory of special relativity, such diameters may represent axes of time and space, where one hyperbola represents events at a given spatial distance from the center, and the other represents events at a corresponding temporal distance from the center.\nformula_346 and formula_347 also specify conjugate hyperbolas.\nIn polar coordinates.\nOrigin at the focus.\nThe polar coordinates used most commonly for the hyperbola are defined relative to the Cartesian coordinate system that has its \"origin in a focus\" and its x-axis pointing toward the origin of the \"canonical coordinate system\" as illustrated in the first diagram.\nIn this case the angle formula_256 is called true anomaly.\nRelative to this coordinate system one has that\nformula_349\nand\nformula_350\nOrigin at the center.\nWith polar coordinates relative to the \"canonical coordinate system\" (see second diagram)\none has that\nformula_351\nFor the right branch of the hyperbola the range of formula_352 is\nformula_353\nEccentricity.\nWhen using polar coordinates, the eccentricity of the hyperbola can be expressed as formula_354 where formula_355 is the limit of the angular coordinate. As formula_256 approaches this limit, \"r\" approaches infinity and the denominator in either of the equations noted above approaches zero, hence:\nformula_357\nformula_358\nformula_359\nParametric equations.\nA hyperbola with equation formula_360 can be described by several parametric equations:\nHyperbolic functions.\nJust as the trigonometric functions are defined in terms of the unit circle, so also the hyperbolic functions are defined in terms of the unit hyperbola, as shown in this diagram. In a unit circle, the angle (in radians) is equal to twice the area of the circular sector which that angle subtends. The analogous hyperbolic angle is likewise defined as twice the area of a hyperbolic sector.\nLet formula_5 be twice the area between the formula_257 axis and a ray through the origin intersecting the unit hyperbola, and define formula_375 as the coordinates of the intersection point.\nThen the area of the hyperbolic sector is the area of the triangle minus the curved region past the vertex at formula_376:\nformula_377\nwhich simplifies to the area hyperbolic cosine\nformula_378\nSolving for formula_257 yields the exponential form of the hyperbolic cosine:\nformula_380\nFrom formula_192 one gets\nformula_382\nand its inverse the area hyperbolic sine:\nformula_383\nOther hyperbolic functions are defined according to the hyperbolic cosine and hyperbolic sine, so for example\nformula_384\nProperties.\nReflection property.\nThe tangent at a point formula_13 bisects the angle between the lines formula_386 This is called the \"optical property\" or \"reflection property\" of a hyperbola.\nLet formula_387 be the point on the line formula_112 with the distance formula_12 to the focus formula_11 (see diagram, formula_5 is the semi major axis of the hyperbola). Line formula_392 is the bisector of the angle between the lines formula_393. In order to prove that formula_392 is the tangent line at point formula_13, one checks that any point formula_396 on line formula_392 which is different from formula_13 cannot be on the hyperbola. Hence formula_392 has only point formula_13 in common with the hyperbola and is, therefore, the tangent at point formula_13. \nFrom the diagram and the triangle inequality one recognizes that formula_402 holds, which means: formula_403. But if formula_396 is a point of the hyperbola, the difference should be formula_12.\nMidpoints of parallel chords.\nThe midpoints of parallel chords of a hyperbola lie on a line through the center (see diagram).\nThe points of any chord may lie on different branches of the hyperbola.\nThe proof of the property on midpoints is best done for the hyperbola formula_193. Because any hyperbola is an affine image of the hyperbola formula_193 (see section below) and an affine transformation preserves parallelism and midpoints of line segments, the property is true for all hyperbolas:\nFor two points formula_408 of the hyperbola formula_193\nthe midpoint of the chord is formula_410\nthe slope of the chord is formula_411\nFor parallel chords the slope is constant and the midpoints of the parallel chords lie on the line formula_412\nConsequence: for any pair of points formula_413 of a chord there exists a \"skew reflection\" with an axis (set of fixed points) passing through the center of the hyperbola, which exchanges the points formula_413 and leaves the hyperbola (as a whole) fixed. A skew reflection is a generalization of an ordinary reflection across a line formula_364, where all point-image pairs are on a line perpendicular to formula_364.\nBecause a skew reflection leaves the hyperbola fixed, the pair of asymptotes is fixed, too. Hence the midpoint formula_3 of a chord formula_418 divides the related line segment formula_419 between the asymptotes into halves, too. This means that formula_420. This property can be used for the construction of further points formula_396 of the hyperbola if a point formula_13 and the asymptotes are given.\nIf the chord degenerates into a \"tangent\", then the touching point divides the line segment between the asymptotes in two halves.\nOrthogonal tangents \u2013 orthoptic.\nFor a hyperbola formula_423 the intersection points of \"orthogonal\" tangents lie on the circle formula_424. \nThis circle is called the \"orthoptic\" of the given hyperbola.\nThe tangents may belong to points on different branches of the hyperbola.\nIn case of formula_425 there are no pairs of orthogonal tangents.\nPole-polar relation for a hyperbola.\nAny hyperbola can be described in a suitable coordinate system by an equation formula_329. The equation of the tangent at a point formula_427 of the hyperbola is formula_428 If one allows point formula_427 to be an arbitrary point different from the origin, then\npoint formula_430 is mapped onto the line formula_431, not through the center of the hyperbola.\nThis relation between points and lines is a bijection.\nThe inverse function maps\nline formula_432 onto the point formula_433 and\nline formula_434 onto the point formula_435\nSuch a relation between points and lines generated by a conic is called pole-polar relation or just \"polarity\". The pole is the point, the polar the line. See Pole and polar.\nBy calculation one checks the following properties of the pole-polar relation of the hyperbola:\n\"Remarks:\"\nPole-polar relations exist for ellipses and parabolas, too.\nArc length.\nThe arc length of a hyperbola does not have an elementary expression. The upper half of a hyperbola can be parameterized as\nformula_447\nThen the integral giving the arc length formula_448 from formula_449 to formula_450 can be computed as:\nformula_451\nAfter using the substitution formula_452, this can also be represented using the incomplete elliptic integral of the second kind formula_453 with parameter formula_454:\nformula_455\nUsing only real numbers, this becomes\nformula_456\nwhere formula_57 is the incomplete elliptic integral of the first kind with parameter formula_454 and formula_459 is the Gudermannian function.\nDerived curves.\nSeveral other curves can be derived from the hyperbola by inversion, the so-called inverse curves of the hyperbola. If the center of inversion is chosen as the hyperbola's own center, the inverse curve is the lemniscate of Bernoulli; the lemniscate is also the envelope of circles centered on a rectangular hyperbola and passing through the origin. If the center of inversion is chosen at a focus or a vertex of the hyperbola, the resulting inverse curves are a lima\u00e7on or a strophoid, respectively.\nElliptic coordinates.\nA family of confocal hyperbolas is the basis of the system of elliptic coordinates in two dimensions. These hyperbolas are described by the equation\nformula_460\nwhere the foci are located at a distance \"c\" from the origin on the \"x\"-axis, and where \u03b8 is the angle of the asymptotes with the \"x\"-axis. Every hyperbola in this family is orthogonal to every ellipse that shares the same foci. This orthogonality may be shown by a conformal map of the Cartesian coordinate system \"w\" = \"z\" + 1/\"z\", where \"z\"= \"x\" + \"iy\" are the original Cartesian coordinates, and \"w\"=\"u\" + \"iv\" are those after the transformation.\nOther orthogonal two-dimensional coordinate systems involving hyperbolas may be obtained by other conformal mappings. For example, the mapping \"w\" = \"z\"2 transforms the Cartesian coordinate system into two families of orthogonal hyperbolas.\nConic section analysis of the hyperbolic appearance of circles.\nBesides providing a uniform description of circles, ellipses, parabolas, and hyperbolas, conic sections can also be understood as a natural model of the geometry of perspective in the case where the scene being viewed consists of circles, or more generally an ellipse. The viewer is typically a camera or the human eye and the image of the scene a central projection onto an image plane, that is, all projection rays pass a fixed point \"O\", the center. The lens plane is a plane parallel to the image plane at the lens \"O\".\nThe image of a circle c is\nThese results can be understood if one recognizes that the projection process can be seen in two steps: 1) circle c and point \"O\" generate a cone which is 2) cut by the image plane, in order to generate the image.\nOne sees a hyperbola whenever catching sight of a portion of a circle cut by one's lens plane. The inability to see very much of the arms of the visible branch, combined with the complete absence of the second branch, makes it virtually impossible for the human visual system to recognize the connection with hyperbolas.\nApplications.\nSundials.\nHyperbolas may be seen in many sundials. On any given day, the sun revolves in a circle on the celestial sphere, and its rays striking the point on a sundial traces out a cone of light. The intersection of this cone with the horizontal plane of the ground forms a conic section. At most populated latitudes and at most times of the year, this conic section is a hyperbola. In practical terms, the shadow of the tip of a pole traces out a hyperbola on the ground over the course of a day (this path is called the \"declination line\"). The shape of this hyperbola varies with the geographical latitude and with the time of the year, since those factors affect the cone of the sun's rays relative to the horizon. The collection of such hyperbolas for a whole year at a given location was called a \"pelekinon\" by the Greeks, since it resembles a double-bladed axe.\nMultilateration.\nA hyperbola is the basis for solving multilateration problems, the task of locating a point from the differences in its distances to given points \u2014 or, equivalently, the difference in arrival times of synchronized signals between the point and the given points. Such problems are important in navigation, particularly on water; a ship can locate its position from the difference in arrival times of signals from a LORAN or GPS transmitters. Conversely, a homing beacon or any transmitter can be located by comparing the arrival times of its signals at two separate receiving stations; such techniques may be used to track objects and people. In particular, the set of possible positions of a point that has a distance difference of 2\"a\" from two given points is a hyperbola of vertex separation 2\"a\" whose foci are the two given points.\nPath followed by a particle.\nThe path followed by any particle in the classical Kepler problem is a conic section. In particular, if the total energy \"E\" of the particle is greater than zero (that is, if the particle is unbound), the path of such a particle is a hyperbola. This property is useful in studying atomic and sub-atomic forces by scattering high-energy particles; for example, the Rutherford experiment demonstrated the existence of an atomic nucleus by examining the scattering of alpha particles from gold atoms. If the short-range nuclear interactions are ignored, the atomic nucleus and the alpha particle interact only by a repulsive Coulomb force, which satisfies the inverse square law requirement for a Kepler problem.\nKorteweg\u2013de Vries equation.\nThe hyperbolic trig function formula_461 appears as one solution to the Korteweg\u2013de Vries equation which describes the motion of a soliton wave in a canal.\nAngle trisection.\nAs shown first by Apollonius of Perga, a hyperbola can be used to trisect any angle, a well studied problem of geometry. Given an angle, first draw a circle centered at its vertex O, which intersects the sides of the angle at points A and B. Next draw the line segment with endpoints A and B and its perpendicular bisector formula_462. Construct a hyperbola of eccentricity \"e\"=2 with formula_462 as directrix and B as a focus. Let P be the intersection (upper) of the hyperbola with the circle. Angle POB trisects angle AOB.\nTo prove this, reflect the line segment OP about the line formula_462 obtaining the point P' as the image of P. Segment AP' has the same length as segment BP due to the reflection, while segment PP' has the same length as segment BP due to the eccentricity of the hyperbola. As OA, OP', OP and OB are all radii of the same circle (and so, have the same length), the triangles OAP', OPP' and OPB are all congruent. Therefore, the angle has been trisected, since 3\u00d7POB = AOB.\nEfficient portfolio frontier.\nIn portfolio theory, the locus of mean-variance efficient portfolios (called the efficient frontier) is the upper half of the east-opening branch of a hyperbola drawn with the portfolio return's standard deviation plotted horizontally and its expected value plotted vertically; according to this theory, all rational investors would choose a portfolio characterized by some point on this locus.\nBiochemistry.\nIn biochemistry and pharmacology, the Hill equation and Hill-Langmuir equation respectively describe biological responses and the formation of protein\u2013ligand complexes as functions of ligand concentration. They are both rectangular hyperbolae.\nHyperbolas as plane sections of quadrics.\nHyperbolas appear as plane sections of the following quadrics:\nSee also.\nOther conic sections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther related topics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14055", "revid": "45118566", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14055", "title": "Humayun", "text": "Mughal emperor from 1530 to 1540 and from 1555 to 1556\nNasir al-Din Muhammad (, 6 March 1508 \u2013 27 January 1556), commonly known by his regnal name Humayun (, ), was the second Mughal emperor, who ruled over territory in what is now Eastern Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Northern India, and Pakistan from 1530 to 1540 and again from 1555 to his death in 1556. At the time of his death, the Mughal Empire spanned almost one million square kilometers.\nOn 26 December 1530, Humayun succeeded his father Babur to the throne of Delhi as ruler of the Mughal territories in the Indian subcontinent. Humayun was an inexperienced ruler when he came to power at the age of 22. His half-brother Kamran Mirza inherited Kabul and Kandahar, the northernmost parts of their father's empire; the two half-brothers became bitter rivals.\nEarly in his reign, Humayun lost his entire empire to Sher Shah Suri but regained it 15 years later with Safavid aid. His return from Persia was accompanied by a large retinue of Persian noblemen, signaling an important change in Mughal court culture. The Central Asian origins of the dynasty were largely overshadowed by the influences of Persian art, architecture, language, and literature. To this day, stone carvings and thousands of Persian manuscripts in India dating from the time of Humayun remain in the subcontinent. Following his return to power, Humayun quickly expanded the Empire, leaving a substantial legacy for his son, Akbar.\nBackground.\nHumayun was born as Nasir al-Din Muhammad to Babur's favourite wife M\u0101ham Begum on Tuesday 6 March 1508. According to Abul Fazl, M\u0101ham was related to the noble family of Sultan Husayn Bayqara, the Timurid ruler of Herat. She was also related to Sheikh Ahmad-e Jami, a Persian mystic and poet.\nThe decision of Babur to divide the territories of his empire between two of his sons was unusual in India, although it had been a common Central Asian practice since the time of Genghis Khan. Unlike most monarchies, which practised primogeniture, the Timurids followed the example of Genghis and did not leave an entire kingdom to the eldest son. Although under that system only a Chingissid could claim sovereignty and Khanal authority, any male Chinggisid within a given sub-branch had an equal right to the throne (though the Timurids were not Chinggisid in their paternal ancestry). While Genghis Khan's empire had been peacefully divided between his sons upon his death, almost every Chinggisid succession since had resulted in fratricide.\nAfter Timur's death, his territories were divided among Pir Muhammad, Miran Shah, Khalil Sultan and Shah Rukh, which resulted in inter-family warfare. Not all \"umarah\" (nobles) viewed Humayun as Babur's rightful successor. While Babur was still alive, some of the nobles tried unsuccessfully to install his brother-in-law, Mahdi Khwaja, as ruler. Upon Babur's death, Humayun's territories were the least secure.\nEarly reign.\nWhen Humayun came to the throne of the Mughal Empire, several of his brothers revolted against him after he split the empire among them. Another brother, Hindal Mirza, supported Humayun but was assassinated. The Emperor commenced construction of a tomb for his brother, but this was not yet finished when he was forced to flee to Persia. Sher Shah Suri destroyed the structure and no further work was done on it after Humayun's restoration.\nHumayun had two major rivals for his lands: Sultan Bahadur of Gujarat to the southwest and Sher Shah Suri (Sher Khan) settled along the river Ganges in Bihar to the east. Humayun's first campaign was to confront Sher Shah Suri. Halfway through this offensive, Humayun had to abandon it to focus on Gujarat, where a threat from Ahmed Shah had emerged. Humayun was victorious annexing Gujarat, Malwa, Champaner and the great fort of Mandu.\nDuring the first five years of Humayun's reign, Bahadur and Sher Khan extended their rule, although Sultan Bahadur faced pressure in the east from sporadic conflicts with the Portuguese.\nIn 1535 Humayun was made aware that the Sultan of Gujarat was planning an assault on the Mughal territories in Bayana with Portuguese aid. Humayun gathered an army and marched on Bahadur. Within a month he had captured the forts of Mandu and Champaner. However, instead of pressing his attack, Humayun ceased the campaign and consolidated his newly conquered territory. Sultan Bahadur, meanwhile escaped and took up refuge with the Portuguese. Like his father, Humayun was a frequent user of opium. In a popular revolt Bahadur Shah recaptured all of Gujarat in 1536 and began an attack on Malwa.\nStrife with Sher Shah Suri.\nShortly after Humayun had marched on Gujarat, Sher Shah Suri saw an opportunity to wrest control of Agra from the Mughals. He began to gather his army together hoping for a rapid and decisive siege of the Mughal capital. Upon hearing this alarming news, Humayun quickly marched his troops back to Agra allowing Bahadur to easily regain control of the territories Humayun had recently taken. In February 1537, however, Bahadur was killed when a botched plan to kidnap the Portuguese viceroy ended in a fire-fight that the Sultan lost. Bahadur's passing caused a power vacuum in Gujarat, which ultimately paved the way for the Mughals to become the region's dominant force.\nWhile Humayun was occupied in Gujarat, in the east Sher Khan invaded Bengal and besieged Gaur, its capital. Humayun set off to relieve the siege, but was delayed while taking Chunar, a fort occupied by Sher Shah's son, in order to protect his troops from an attack from the rear. Meanwhile, Gaur fell, the large stores of grain there were emptied, and Humayun arrived to see corpses littering the roads. The vast wealth of Bengal was depleted and brought east, giving Sher Shah a substantial war chest.\nSher Shah withdrew to the west, but Humayun did not follow; instead, he \"shut himself up for a considerable time in his Harem, and abandoned himself to every kind of luxury\". Hindal, Humayun's 19-year-old brother, had agreed to aid him in this battle and protect the rear from attack, but he abandoned his position and withdrew to Agra, where he decreed himself acting emperor. When Humayun sent the grand \"Mufti\", Sheikh Buhlul, to reason with him; the Sheikh was killed. Further provoking the rebellion, Hindal ordered that the \"Khutba\", or sermon, in the main mosque be surrounded.\nHumayun's other brother, Kamran Mirza, marched from his territories in the Punjab, ostensibly to aid Humayun. However, his return home had treacherous motives as he intended to stake a claim for Humayun's apparently collapsing empire. He brokered a deal with Hindal providing that his brother would cease all acts of disloyalty in return for a share in the new empire, which Kamran would create once Humayun was deposed.\nIn June 1539, Sher Shah met Humayun in the Battle of Chausa on the banks of the Ganges, near Buxar. This was to become an entrenched battle in which both sides spent a lot of time digging themselves into positions. The major part of the Mughal army, the artillery, was now immobile, and Humayun decided to engage in some diplomacy using Muhammad Aziz as ambassador. Humayun agreed to allow Sher Shah to rule over Bengal and Bihar, but only as provinces granted to him by his Emperor, Humayun, falling short of outright sovereignty. The two rulers also struck a bargain in order to save face: Humayun's troops would charge those of Sher Shah whose forces then retreat in feigned fear. Thus honour would, supposedly, be satisfied.\nOnce the Army of Humayun had made its charge and Sher Shah's troops made their agreed-upon retreat, the Mughal troops relaxed their defensive preparations and returned to their entrenchments without posting a proper guard. Observing the Mughals' vulnerability, Sher Shah reneged on his earlier agreement. That very night, his army approached the Mughal camp and finding the Mughal troops unprepared with a majority asleep, they advanced and killed most of them. The Emperor survived by swimming across the Ganges using an air-filled \"water skin\", and quietly returned to Agra. Humayun was assisted across the Ganges by Shams al-Din Muhammad.\nIn Agra.\nWhen Humayun returned to Agra, he found that all three of his brothers were present. Humayun once again not only pardoned his brothers for plotting against him, but even forgave Hindal for his outright betrayal. With his armies travelling at a leisurely pace, Sher Shah was gradually drawing closer and closer to Agra. This was a serious threat to the entire family, but Humayun and Kamran squabbled over how to proceed. Kamran withdrew after Humayun refused to make a quick attack on the approaching enemy, instead opting to build a larger army under his own name.\nWhen Kamran returned to Lahore, Humayun, with his other brothers Askari and Hindal, marched to meet Sher Shah east of Agra at the battle of Kannauj on 17 May 1540. Humayun was soundly defeated. He retreated to Agra, pursued by Sher Shah, and thence through Delhi to Lahore. Sher Shah's founding of the short-lived Sur Empire, with its capital at Delhi, resulted in Humayun's exile for 15 years in the court of Shah Tahmasp I.\nIn Lahore.\nThe four brothers were united in Lahore, but every day they were informed that Sher Shah was getting closer and closer. When he reached Sirhind, Humayun sent an ambassador carrying the message \"I have left you the whole of Hindustan [i.e. the lands to the East of Punjab, comprising most of the Ganges Valley]. Leave Lahore alone, and let Sirhind be a boundary between you and me.\" Sher Shah, however, replied \"I have left you Kabul. You should go there\". Kabul was the capital of the empire of Humayun's brother Kamran, who was far from willing to hand over any of his territories to his brother. Instead, Kamran approached Sher Shah and proposed that he actually revolt against his brother and side with Sher Shah in return for most of the Punjab. Sher Shah dismissed his help, believing it not to be required, though word soon spread to Lahore about the treacherous proposal, and Humayun was urged to make an example of Kamran and kill him. Humayun refused, citing the last words of his father, Babur, \"Do nothing against your brothers, even though they may deserve it.\"\nMeeting with the Sikh Guru \u2013 Guru Angad Sahib.\nHumayun visited Guru Angad at around 1540 after Humayun lost the Battle of Kannauj, and thereby the Mughal throne to Sher Shah Suri. According to Sikh hagiographies, when Humayun arrived in Gurdwara Mal Akhara Sahib at Khadur Sahib, Guru Angad was sitting and teaching children. The failure to greet the Emperor immediately angered Humayun. Humayun lashed out but the Guru reminded him that \u201cthe time when you needed to fight when you lost your throne, you ran away and did not fight, and now you want to attack a person engaged in prayer.\u201d In the Sikh texts written more than a century after the event, Guru Angad is said to have blessed the emperor, and reassured him that someday he will regain the throne.\nWithdrawing further.\nHumayun decided it would be wise to withdraw still further. He and his army rode out through and across the Thar Desert, when the Hindu ruler Rao Maldeo Rathore allied with Sher Shah Suri against the Mughal Empire. In many accounts Humayun mentions how he and his pregnant wife had to trace their steps through the desert at the hottest time of year. Their rations were low, and they had little to eat; even drinking water was a major problem in the desert. When Hamida Bano's horse died, no one would lend the Queen (who was now eight months pregnant) a horse, so Humayun did so himself, resulting in him riding a camel for six kilometres (four miles), although Khaled Beg then offered him his mount. Humayun was later to describe this incident as the lowest point in his life. Humayun asked that his brothers join him as he fell back into Sindh. While the previously rebellious Hindal Mirza remained loyal and was ordered to join his brothers in Kandahar, Kamran Mirza and Askari Mirza instead decided to head to the relative peace of Kabul. This was to be a definitive schism in the family. Humayun headed for Sindh because he expected aid from the Emir of Sindh, Hussein Umrani, whom he had appointed and who owed him his allegiance. Also, his wife Hamida hailed from Sindh; she was the daughter of a prestigious \"pir\" family (a \"pir\" is an Islamic religious guide) of Persian heritage long settled in Sindh. En route to the Emir's court, Humayun had to break journey because his pregnant wife Hamida was unable to travel further. Humayun sought refuge with the Hindu ruler of the oasis town of Amarkot (now part of Sindh province).\nRana Prasad Rao of Amarkot duly welcomed Humayun into his home and sheltered the refugees for several months. Here, in the household of a Hindu Rajput nobleman, Humayun's wife Hamida Bano, daughter of a Persian family, gave birth to the future Emperor Akbar on 15 October 1542. The date of birth is well established because Humayun consulted his astronomer to utilise the astrolabe and check the location of the planets. The infant was the long-awaited heir-apparent to the 34-year-old Humayun and the answer of many prayers. Shortly after the birth, Humayun and his party left Amarkot for Sindh, leaving Akbar behind, who was not ready for the grueling journey ahead in his infancy. He was later adopted by Askari Mirza.\nFor a change, Humayun was not deceived in the character of the man on whom he has pinned his hopes. Emir Hussein Umrani, ruler of Sindh, welcomed Humayun's presence and was loyal to him, just as he had been loyal to Babur against the renegade Arghuns. While in Sindh, Humayun alongside Hussein Umrani, gathered horses and weapons and formed new alliances that helped regain lost territories. Until finally Humayun had gathered hundreds of Sindhi and Baloch tribesmen alongside his Mughals and then marched towards Kandahar and later Kabul, thousands more gathered by his side as Humayun continually declared himself the rightful Timurid heir of the first Mughal Emperor, Babur.\nRetreat to Kabul.\nAfter Humayun set out from his expedition in Sindh, along with 300 camels (mostly wild) and 2000 loads of grain, he set off to join his brothers in Kandahar after crossing the Indus River on 11 July 1543 along with the ambition to regain the Mughal Empire and overthrow the Suri dynasty. Among the tribes that had sworn allegiance to Humayun were the Leghari, Magsi, Rind and many others.\nIn Kamran Mirza's territory, Hindal Mirza had been placed under house arrest in Kabul after refusing to have the \"Khutba\" recited in Kamran Mirza's name. His other brother, Askari Mirza, was now ordered to gather an army and march on Humayun. When Humayun received word of the approaching hostile army he decided against facing them, and instead sought refuge elsewhere. Akbar was left behind in camp close to Kandahar, as it was December, too cold and dangerous to include the 14-month-old toddler in the march through the mountains of the Hindu Kush. Askari Mirza took Akbar in, leaving the wives of Kamran and Askari Mirza to raise him. The \"Akbarnama\" specifies Kamran Mirza's wife, Sultan Begam.\nOnce again Humayun turned toward Kandahar where his brother Kamran Mirza was in power, but he received no help and had to seek refuge with the Shah of Persia\nRefuge in Persia.\nHumayun fled to the refuge of the Safavid Empire in Persia, marching with 40 men, his wife Bega Begum, and her companion through mountains and valleys. Among other trials, the imperial party were forced to live on horse meat boiled in the soldiers' helmets. These indignities continued during the month it took them to reach Herat. However, after their arrival they were reintroduced to the finer things in life. Upon entering the city his army was greeted with an armed escort, and they were treated to lavish food and clothing. They were given fine accommodation and the roads were cleared and cleaned before them. The Shah, Tahmasp I, unlike Humayun's own family, welcomed the Mughal, and treated him as a royal visitor. After his arrival in Herat, Humayun went sightseeing and was amazed at the Persian artwork and architecture he saw: much of this was the work sponsored by the Timurid Sultan Husayn Bayqarah and his ancestor, princess Gauhar Shad. Thus Humayun was able to admire the work of his relatives and ancestors at first hand.\nThe Mughal monarch was introduced to the work of the Persian miniaturists, and Kamaleddin Behzad sent two of his pupils to join Humayun's court. Humayun was amazed by their work and asked if they would serve him if he regained the sovereignty of Hindustan; they agreed. With so much happening, Humayun did not meet Tahmasp until July, six months after his arrival in Persia. After a lengthy journey from Herat the two met in Qazvin where a large feast and parties were held for the event. The meeting of the two emperors is depicted in a famous wall-painting in the Chehel Sotoun (Forty Columns) palace in Esfahan.\nTahmasp urged that Humayun convert from Sunni to Shia Islam in order to keep himself and several hundred followers alive. Although the Mughals initially disagreed to their conversion they knew that with this outward acceptance of Shi'ism, Tahmasp was eventually prepared to offer Humayun more substantial support. When Humayun's brother, Kamran Mirza, offered to cede Kandahar to the Persians in exchange for Humayun, dead or alive, Tahmasp refused. Instead he staged a celebration, with 300 tents, an imperial Persian carpet, 12 musical bands and \"meat of all kinds\". Here the Shah announced that 12,000 elite cavalry and 300 veterans of Shah's personal guard along with provisions were Humayun's so that he could lead an attack on Kamran and recover his lost domains. All that Tahmasp asked was for Kandahar would be his if Humayun's forces were victorious.\nKandahar and onward.\nOn 21 March 1545, Humayun, with the Safavid support, reached the area around Kandahar with 14,000 Persian soldiers and began a siege. During the siege, he sent Bairam Khan to Kabul in an effort to win over the Timurid princes and nobles. On 3 September 1545, Mirza Askari gave up the fort, and Kandahar was handed over to the Persians as agreed. However, the Persian troops stopped offering further assistance. With his own supporters gathering but lacking shelter, Humayun felt forced to act. One month later, he launched a surprise attack on Kandahar, drove out the Persian garrison, and took control of the city despite having promised it to Shah Tahmasp. After appointing Bairam Khan as governor of Kandahar, Humayun set off for Kabul. Mirza Hindal joined him on the journey, while desertions in his own camp forced Kamran Mirza to escape into Sind. By 18 November 1545, Humayun entered Kabul without resistance and soon met his son Akbar after nearly two years. With both Kandahar and Kabul under his control, he effectively dominated southern Afghanistan.\nIn March 1546, Humayun began a campaign in northern Afghanistan, Badakhshan, against the local ruler, Mirza Sulaiman, who had recently been freed from Kamran\u2019s influence in Kabul. Accompanied by Askari, Humayun ordered the execution of Yadgar Nasir Mirza because he was showing signs of disloyalty. At Tirgiran, he defeated Sulaiman, who then fled to Kulab. Humayun continued on to Kishm and Qila Zafar, but a serious illness weakened his forces and allowed Kamran to leave Sindh. With help from his father-in-law Shah Husain, Kamran returned to Afghanistan, captured Ghazni (executing its governor Zahid Beg), and advanced on Kabul. Kamran took Kabul by force, terrorising many of Humayun\u2019s supporters. Despite harsh winter conditions, Humayun hurried back, besieged the city for several months, and the fighting became so fierce that Kamran even placed Akbar on the battlements, exposing him to enemy fire. Realising he could not hold the fort, Kamran escaped through a breach in the wall on 27 April 1547, narrowly avoiding capture. Initially seeking support from Mirza Sulaiman, Kamran then allied with the Uzbek chief Pir Muhammad Khan of Balkh to capture much of Badakhshan. In response, Humayun launched a second campaign against Badakhshan in June 1548. He travelled through Andarab, where Mirza Hindal joined him from Qunduz, to Taliqan, which he besieged. When Kamran failed to secure further Uzbek support, he surrendered on 17 August 1548 and was granted Kulab, north of the Oxus, as his fief, a move that was seen as an insult by the former rulers of Kabul and Badakhshan. Humayun then returned to Kabul in October. By February 1549, Humayun led another campaign, this time against Balkh and the Uzbeks, who had long been his enemies. Even though Mirza Hindal and Mirza Sulaiman supported him, Kamran refused to help. Early successes against Pir Muhammad Khan\u2019s forces nearly enabled Humayun to capture Balkh, but the news of Kamran\u2019s attack on Kabul demoralised his troops, resulting in a chaotic retreat and heavy losses. Meanwhile, Kamran seized Taliqan and Qila Zafar and clashed with Mirza Hindal, though he was eventually forced back into the Hazara region.\nAround mid-1550, Humayun marched from Kabul toward Ghurband to punish his unruly brother. In a narrow pass known as the Qibchaq defile, Kamran ambushed him, causing significant casualties and wounding Humayun. Kamran quickly took control of Kabul and held it for three months, while many believed Humayun to be dead as he hid in Andarab. Reinforcements sent by Mirza Sulaiman\u2019s wife enabled Humayun to challenge Kamran, and after a hard-fought battle for Kabul, Kamran was forced to flee. His ally, Mirza \u2018Askari, was captured and exiled. Even after regaining Kabul, Humayun still faced the threat from Kamran, who had teamed up with the influential officer Haji Muhammad Khan. To deal with this danger, Humayun recalled Bairam Khan from Qandahar. Bairam Khan succeeded in persuading Haji Muhammad Khan to switch sides. Already hardened by past betrayals\u2014evident in the executions of Yadgar Nasir Mirza and the exile of \u2018Askari\u2014Humayun ordered the execution of Haji Muhammad Khan. Kamran then rallied Afghan forces and stirred up trouble between Kabul and the Indus. On the night of 20 November 1551, Kamran launched a surprise attack at Jiryar in Nangarhar. Although Kamran was ultimately defeated, Mirza Hindal was killed in the conflict. Humayun pursued Kamran, who fled to Punjab and sought refuge with Islam Shah, though he received little support there. Eventually, Kamran found temporary shelter with Sultan Adam, a local Gakkhar chief, who hesitantly handed him over to Humayun. On his nobles\u2019 advice, Humayun had Kamran blinded in 1553 and sent him off to Mecca. Later historians noted that Kamran suffered more from the turmoil than he caused.\nAfter these events, Humayun planned an expedition into Kashmir, where a brief Mughal rule under Haidar Mirza had ended two years earlier, but opposition from his advisors forced him to return to Kabul in December 1553. Throughout these struggles in Afghanistan, Humayun\u2019s position was strongly supported by Bairam Khan, who managed Kandahar as a secure base. By 1554, Bairam Khan left Kandahar to join Humayun as he prepared for an Indian campaign. At that time, Humayun had firm control over Kandahar, Kabul, and Ghazni, and with his brothers out of the picture, no rival threatened his throne. When news arrived of Islam Shah\u2019s death and of widespread chaos in India marked by the rule of the young Firuz and civil war among the Afghans\u2014Humayun realized it was time to make another bid for the throne of Delhi.\nRestoration of the Mughal Empire.\nHumayun gathered a vast army and attempted the challenging task of retaking the throne in Delhi. Due to the Safavid role in Humayun's army, the vast majority of the soldiers were of the Shi\u2019a faith. As one Shaikh Ahmad described to Humayun, \"My king, I see the whole of your army are Rafizi... Everywhere the names of your soldiers are of this kind. I find they are all Yar Ali or Kashfi Ali or Haider Ali and I have, not found a single man bearing the names of the other Companions.\" Humayun placed the army under the leadership of Bairam Khan, a wise move given Humayun's record of military ineptitude, and it turned out to be prescient as Bairam proved himself a great tactician.\nBairam Khan led the army through the Punjab virtually unopposed. The only major battle faced by Humayun's armies was against Sikandar Shah Suri in Sirhind, where Bairam Khan employed a tactic whereby he engaged his enemy in open battle but then retreated quickly in apparent fear. When the enemy followed after them, they were surprised by entrenched defensive positions and were easily annihilated. At the Battle of Sirhind on 22 June 1555, the armies of Sikandar Shah Suri were decisively defeated and the Mughal Empire was reestablished.\nAfter Sirhind fell, most towns and villages chose to welcome the invading army as it made its way to the capital Delhi. On 23 July 1555, Humayun once again sat on Babur's throne in Delhi.\nMarriage relations with the Khanzadas.\nThe \"Gazetteer of Ulwur\" states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Soon after Babur's death, his successor, Humayun, was in AD 1530 supplanted by the Pathan Sher Shah, who, in AD 1545, was followed by Islam Shah. During the reign of the latter a battle was fought and lost by the Emperor's troops at Firozpur Jhirka, in Mewat, on which, however, Islam Shah did not loose his hold. Adil Shah, the third of the Pathan interlopers, who succeeded in AD 1552, had to contend for the Empire with the returned Humayun.\nIn these struggles for the restoration of Babar's dynasty Khanzadas apparently do not figure at all. Humayun seems to have conciliated them by marrying the elder daughter of Jamal Khan, nephew of Babar's opponent, Hasan Khan and, by causing his great minister, Bairam Khan, to marry a younger daughter of the same Mewatti.\nRuling Kashmir.\nWith all of Humayun's brothers now dead, there was no fear of another usurping his throne during his military campaigns. He was also now an established leader and could trust his generals. With this new-found strength Humayun embarked on a series of military campaigns aimed at extending his reign over areas in the east and west of the subcontinent. His sojourn in exile seems to have reduced his reliance, and his military leadership came to imitate the more effective methods that he had observed in Persia.\nCharacter.\nEdward S. Holden writes; \"He was uniformly kind and considerate to his dependents, devotedly attached to his son Akbar, to his friends, and to his turbulent brothers. The misfortunes of his reign arose in great part, from his failure to treat them with rigor.\" He further writes: \"The very defects of his character, which render him less admirable as a successful ruler of nations, make us more fond of him as a man. His renown has suffered in that his reign came between the brilliant conquests of Babur and the beneficent statesmanship of Akbar; but he was not unworthy to be the son of the one and the father of the other.\"\nStanley Lane-Poole writes in his book \"Medieval India\": \"His name meant the winner (Lucky/Conqueror), there is no king in the history to be named as wrong as Humayun\", he was of a forgiving nature. He further writes, \"He was in fact unfortunate ... Scarcely had he enjoyed his throne for six months in Delhi when he slipped down from the polished steps of his palace and died in his forty-ninth year (Jan. 24, 1556). If there was a possibility of falling, Humayun was not the man to miss it. He tumbled through his life and tumbled out of it.\"\nHumayun ordered the crushing by elephant of an imam he mistakenly believed to be critical of his reign.\nDeath and legacy.\nOn 24 January 1556, Humayun, with his arms full of books, was descending the staircase from his library Sher Mandal when the muezzin announced the Azaan (the call to prayer). It was his habit, wherever and whenever he heard the summons, to bow his knee in holy reverence. Trying to kneel, he caught his foot in his robe, slipped down several steps and hit his temple on a rugged stone edge. He died three days later. His body was laid to rest in Purana Qila initially, but, because of an attack by Hemu on Delhi and the capture of Purana Qila, Humayun's body was exhumed by the fleeing army and transferred to Kalanaur in Punjab where Akbar was crowned. After young Mughal emperor Akbar defeated and killed Hemu in the Second Battle of Panipat, Humayun's body was buried in Humayun's Tomb in Delhi the first very grand garden tomb in Mughal architecture, setting the precedent later followed by the Taj Mahal and many other Indian monuments. It was commissioned by his favorite and devoted chief wife, Bega Begum.\nAkbar later asked his paternal aunt, Gulbadan Begum, to write a biography of his father Humayun, the \"Humayun nameh\" (or \"Humayun-nama\"), and what she remembered of Babur.\nThe full title is \"Ahwal Humayun Padshah Jamah Kardom Gulbadan Begum bint Babur Padshah amma Akbar Padshah\". She was only eight when Babur died, and was married at 17, and her work is in simple Persian style.\nUnlike other Mughal royal biographies (the \"Zafarnama\" of Timur, \"Baburnama\", and Akbar's own \"Akbarnama\") no richly illustrated copy has survived, and the work is only known from a single battered and slightly incomplete manuscript, now in the British Library, that emerged in the 1860s. Annette Beveridge published an English translation in 1901, and editions in English and Bengali have been published since 2000.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14056", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14056", "title": "Prince-elector", "text": "Members of the electoral college that elected the emperor of the Holy Roman Empire\nThe prince-electors ( , pl. , , ) were the members of the Electoral College of the Holy Roman Empire, which elected the Holy Roman Emperor. Usually, half of the electors were archbishops.\nFrom the 13th century onwards, a small group of prince-electors gained the privilege of electing the King of the Romans. The king would then later be crowned Emperor by the pope. Charles V (elected in 1519) was the last emperor to be crowned (1530); his successors assumed the title \"Elected Emperor of the Romans\" (; ) upon their coronation as kings.\nThe dignity of elector carried great prestige and was considered to be behind only the emperor, kings, and the highest dukes. The electors held exclusive privileges that were not shared with other princes of the Empire, and they continued to hold their original titles alongside that of elector.\nThe heir apparent to a secular prince-elector was known as an electoral prince ().\nRights and privileges.\nElectors were rulers of (Imperial Estates), enjoying precedence over the other Imperial Princes. They were, until the 18th century, exclusively entitled to be addressed with the title (Serene Highness). In 1742, the electors became entitled to the superlative (Most Serene Highness), while other princes were promoted to .\nAs rulers of Imperial Estates, the electors enjoyed all the privileges of princes, including the right to enter into alliances, to autonomy in relation to dynastic affairs, and to precedence over other subjects. The Golden Bull granted them the Privilegium de non appellando, which prevented their subjects from lodging an appeal to a higher Imperial court. Although this privilege, and some others, were automatically granted to Electors, they were not exclusive to them and many of the larger Imperial Estates were also to be individually granted some or all those rights and privileges.\nImperial Diet.\nThe electors, like the other princes ruling States of the Empire, were members of the Imperial Diet, which was divided into three \"collegia\": the Council of Electors, the Council of Princes, and the Council of Cities. In addition to being members of the Council of Electors, most electors were also members of the Council of Princes by virtue of possessing territory or holding ecclesiastical position. The assent of both bodies was required for important decisions affecting the structure of the Empire, such as the creation of new electorates or States of the Empire.\nMany electors ruled a number of States of the Empire or held several ecclesiastical titles, and therefore had multiple votes in the Council of Princes. In 1792, the Elector of Brandenburg had eight votes, the Elector of Bavaria six votes, the Elector of Hanover six votes, the King of Bohemia three votes, the Elector-Archbishop of Trier three votes, the Elector-Archbishop of Cologne two votes, and the Elector-Archbishop of Mainz one vote. Thus, of the hundred votes in the Council of Princes in 1792, twenty-nine belonged to electors, giving them considerable influence in the Council of Princes in addition to their positions as electors.\nIn addition to voting by colleges or councils, the Imperial Diet also voted in religious coalitions, as provided for in the Peace of Westphalia. The Archbishop of Mainz presided over the Catholic body, the , while the Elector of Saxony presided over the Protestant body, the . The division into religious bodies was on the basis of the official religion of the state.\nElections.\nThe electors were originally summoned by the Archbishop of Mainz within one month of an Emperor's death, and met within three months of being summoned. On many occasions, however, there was no interregnum, as a new king had been elected during the lifetime of the previous Emperor. During any interregnum, imperial power was exercised by two imperial vicars under the terms of the Golden Bull. The Elector of Saxony was vicar in areas operating under Saxon law (Saxony, Westphalia, Hannover, and northern Germany), while the Elector Palatine was vicar in the remainder of the Empire (Franconia, Swabia, the Rhine, and southern Germany). The Elector of Bavaria sometimes replaced the Elector Palatine between 1623 and 1777, when the Elector Palatine inherited Bavaria. \nFrankfurt regularly served as the site of the election from the 14th century on, but elections were also held at Cologne (1531), Regensburg (1575 and 1636), and Augsburg (1653 and 1690). An elector could appear in person or could appoint another elector as his proxy. More often, an electoral suite or embassy was sent to cast the vote; the credentials of such representatives were verified by the Archbishop of Mainz, who presided over the ceremony. The deliberations were held at the city hall, but voting occurred in the cathedral. In Frankfurt, a special electoral chapel, or , was used for elections. Under the Golden Bull, a majority of electors sufficed to elect a king, and each elector could cast only one vote. Electors were free to vote for whomsoever they pleased (including themselves), but dynastic considerations played a great part in the choice.\nFrom the 16th century on, electors drafted a , or electoral capitulation, which was presented to the king-elect. The capitulation may be described as a contract between the princes and the king, the latter conceding rights and powers to the electors and other princes. Once an individual swore to abide by the electoral capitulation, he assumed the office of King of the Romans.\nIn the 10th and 11th centuries, princes often acted merely to confirm hereditary succession in the Ottonian and Salian dynasties. But with the actual formation of the prince-elector class, elections became more open, starting with the election of Lothair III in 1125. The Staufen dynasty managed to get its sons formally elected in their fathers' lifetimes almost as a formality. After those lines ended in extinction, the electors began to elect kings from different families, so that the throne would not once again settle within a single dynasty. All kings elected from 1438 onwards were from among the Habsburg dynasty until 1740, when Austria was inherited by a woman, Maria Theresa, sparking the War of the Austrian Succession and the short-lived rule of a Bavarian Wittelsbach emperor. In 1745, Maria Theresa's husband, Francis I of Lorraine, was elected emperor. All of his successors were also from the Habsburg-Lorraine family.\nHigh offices.\nEach elector held a \"High Office of the Empire\" () analogous to a modern cabinet office position and was a member of the ceremonial Imperial Household. The three spiritual electors became Archchancellors (, ): the Archbishop of Mainz became \"Archchancellor of Germany\", the Archbishop of Cologne became \"Archchancellor of Italy\", and the Archbishop of Trier became \"Archchancellor of Burgundy\". The secular electors were granted heraldic augmentations to their coats of arms reflecting their positions in the Household. These augmentations were displayed in three alternative ways:\nWhen the Duke of Bavaria replaced the Elector Palatine in 1623, he assumed the latter's office of Arch-Steward. When the Count Palatine was granted a new electorate, he assumed the position of Arch-Treasurer of the Empire. When the Duke of Bavaria was banned in 1706, the Elector Palatine returned to the office of Arch-Steward, and in 1710, the Elector of Hanover was promoted to the post of Arch-Treasurer. Matters were complicated by the Duke of Bavaria's restoration in 1714; the Elector of Bavaria resumed the office of Arch-Steward, while the Elector Palatine returned to the post of Arch-Treasurer, and the Elector of Hanover was given the new office of Archbannerbearer. The Electors of Hanover, however, continued to be styled Arch-Treasurers, though the Elector Palatine was the one who actually exercised the office until 1777, when he inherited Bavaria and the Arch-Stewardship. After 1777, no further changes were made to the Imperial Household; new offices were planned for the Electors admitted in 1803, but the Empire was abolished before they could be created. The Duke of W\u00fcrttemberg, however, started to adopt the trappings of the Arch-Bannerbearer.\nThe electors discharged the ceremonial duties associated with their offices only during coronations, where they bore the crown and regalia of the Empire. Otherwise, they were represented by holders of corresponding \"Hereditary Offices of the Household\". The Arch-Butler was represented by the Hereditary Butler (Cupbearer) (the Count of Althann), the Arch-Seneschal by the Hereditary Steward (the Count of Waldburg, who adopted the title into their name as \"Truchsess von Waldburg\"), the Arch-Chamberlain by the Hereditary Chamberlain (the Count of Hohenzollern), the Arch-Marshal by the Hereditary Marshal (the Count of Pappenheim), and the Arch-Treasurer by the Hereditary Treasurer (the Count of Sinzendorf). After 1803, the Duke of W\u00fcrttemberg as Arch-Bannerbearer assigned the count of Zeppelin-Aschhausen as Hereditary Bannerbearer.&lt;br&gt;[]\nHistory.\nThe German practice of electing monarchs began when ancient Germanic tribes formed \"ad hoc\" coalitions and elected the leaders thereof. Elections were irregularly held by the Franks, whose successor states include France and the Holy Roman Empire. The French monarchy eventually became hereditary, but the Holy Roman Emperors remained elective. While all free men originally exercised the right to vote in such elections, suffrage eventually came to be limited to the leading men of the realm. In the election of Lothar III in 1125, a small number of eminent nobles chose the monarch and then submitted him to the remaining magnates for their approbation.\nSoon, the right to choose the monarch was settled on an exclusive group of princes, and the procedure of seeking the approval of the remaining nobles was abandoned. The college of electors was mentioned in 1152 and again in 1198. The composition of electors at that time is unclear, but appears to have included bishops and the dukes of the stem duchies.\n1257 to Thirty Years' War.\nThe electoral college is known to have existed by 1152, but its composition is unknown. A letter written by Pope Urban IV in 1265 suggests that by \"immemorial custom\", seven princes had the right to elect the King and future Emperor. The pope wrote that the seven electors were those who had just voted in the election of 1257, which resulted in the election of two kings.\nThe three Archbishops oversaw the most venerable and powerful sees in Germany. Since 1214, the Palatinate and Bavaria were held by the same individual, but in 1253, they were divided between two members of the House of Wittelsbach. The other electors refused to allow two princes from the same dynasty to have electoral rights, so a heated rivalry arose between the Count Palatine and the Duke of Bavaria over who should hold the Wittelsbach seat.\nMeanwhile, the King of Bohemia, who held the ancient imperial office of Arch-Cupbearer, asserted his right to participate in elections. Sometimes he was challenged on the grounds that his kingdom was not German, though usually he was recognized, instead of Bavaria, which, after all, was just a younger line of Wittelsbachs.\nThe Declaration of Rhense issued in 1338 had the effect that election by the majority of the electors automatically conferred the royal title and rule over the empire, without papal confirmation. The Golden Bull of 1356 finally resolved the disputes among the electors. Under it, the Archbishops of Mainz, Trier, and Cologne, as well as the King of Bohemia, the Count Palatine of the Rhine, the Duke of Saxony, and the Margrave of Brandenburg held the right to elect the King.\nThe college's composition remained unchanged until the 17th century, although the Electorate of Saxony was transferred from the senior to the junior branch of the Wettin family in 1547, in the aftermath of the Schmalkaldic War.\nThirty Years' War to Napoleon.\nIn 1623, the Elector Palatine, Frederick V, came under the imperial ban after participating in the Bohemian Revolt (a part of the Thirty Years' War). The Elector Palatine's seat was conferred on the Duke of Bavaria, the head of a junior branch of his family. Originally, the Duke held the electorate personally, but it was later made hereditary along with the duchy. When the Thirty Years' War concluded with the Peace of Westphalia in 1648, a new electorate was created for the Count Palatine of the Rhine. Since the Elector of Bavaria retained his seat, the number of electors increased to eight; the two Wittelsbach lines were now sufficiently estranged so as not to pose a combined potential threat.\nIn 1685, the religious composition of the College of Electors was disrupted when a Catholic branch of the Wittelsbach family inherited the Palatinate. A new Protestant electorate was created in 1692 for the Duke of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg, who became known as the Elector of Hanover (the Imperial Diet officially confirmed the creation in 1708). The Elector of Saxony converted to Catholicism in 1697 so that he could become King of Poland, but no additional Protestant electors were created. Although the Elector of Saxony was personally Catholic, the Electorate itself remained officially Protestant, and the Elector even remained the leader of the Protestant body in the Reichstag.\nIn 1706, the Elector of Bavaria and Archbishop of Cologne were outlawed during the War of the Spanish Succession, but both were restored in 1714 after the Peace of Baden. In 1777, the number of electors was reduced to eight when the Elector Palatine inherited Bavaria.\nIn 1788, the ruling family of Savoy pushed to receive an electoral title. Their ambition was backed by Brandenburg-Prussia. Nonetheless, the French Revolution and subsequent Coalition Wars soon rendered this a moot point.\nMany changes to the composition of the college were necessitated by Napoleon's aggression during the early 19th century. The Treaty of Lun\u00e9ville (1801), which ceded territory on the Rhine's left bank to France, led to the abolition of the archbishoprics of Trier and Cologne, and the transfer of the remaining spiritual Elector from Mainz to Regensburg. In 1803, electorates were created for the Duke of W\u00fcrttemberg, the Margrave of Baden, the Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel, and the Duke of Salzburg, bringing the total number of electors to ten. When Austria annexed Salzburg under the Treaty of Pressburg (1805), the Duke of Salzburg moved to the Grand Duchy of W\u00fcrzburg and retained his electorate. None of the new electors, however, had an opportunity to cast votes, as the Holy Roman Empire was abolished in 1806, and the new electorates were never confirmed by the Emperor.\nAfter the Empire.\nAfter the abolition of the Holy Roman Empire in August 1806, the Electors continued to reign over their territories, many of them taking higher or alternative titles. The Electors of Bavaria, W\u00fcrttemberg, and Saxony styled themselves Kings, while the Electors of Baden, Regensburg, and W\u00fcrzburg became Grand Dukes. The Elector of Hesse-Kassel, however, retained the meaningless title \"Elector of Hesse\", thus distinguishing himself from other Hessian princes (the Grand Duke of Hesse(-Darmstadt) and the Landgrave of Hesse-Homburg). Napoleon soon exiled him and Kassel was annexed to the Kingdom of Westphalia, a new creation. The King of Great Britain remained at war with Napoleon and continued to style himself Elector of Hanover, while the Hanoverian government continued to operate in London.\nThe Congress of Vienna accepted the Electors of Bavaria, W\u00fcrttemberg, and Saxony as Kings, along with the newly created Grand Duke of Baden. The Elector of Hanover finally joined his fellow Electors by declaring himself the King of Hanover. The restored Elector of Hesse tried to be recognized as the King of the Chatti. The European powers refused to acknowledge this title at the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle (1818), however, and instead listed him with the Grand Dukes as a \"Royal Highness\". Believing the title of Prince-Elector to be superior in dignity to that of Grand Duke, the Elector of Hesse-Kassel chose to remain an Elector, even though there was no longer a Holy Roman Emperor to elect. Hesse-Kassel remained the only Electorate in Germany until 1866, when the country backed the losing side in the Austro-Prussian War and was absorbed into Prussia.\nMarks of office.\nElectoral arms.\nBelow are the State arms of each Imperial Elector. Emblems of Imperial High Offices are shown on the appropriate arms.\nThree Electors Spiritual (Archbishops): all three were annexed by various powers through German Mediatisation of 1803.\nFour Electors Secular:\nElectors added in the 17th century:\nNapoleonic additions.\nAs Napoleon waged war on Europe, between 1803 and 1806, the following changes to the Constitution of the Holy Roman Empire were attempted until the Empire's collapse. The arch-chancellor of Germany and archbishop elector of Mainz continued to be an elector, but as the prince of Regensburg, which took over Mainz's arch-episcopal status. The prince of W\u00fcrttemberg received the formerly defunct office of Arch-Bannerbearer, while the other new electors were not given augments or high office in the imperial household, though new offices were planned.\nReferences.\nArmorials.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14059", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14059", "title": "Howard Hughes", "text": "American aerospace engineer and business magnate (1905\u20131976)\nHoward Robard Hughes Jr. (December 24, 1905 \u2013 April 5, 1976) was an American aerospace engineer, business magnate, film producer, and investor. He was one of the richest and most influential people in the world during his lifetime. He first became prominent as a film producer, and then as an important figure in the aviation industry. Later in life, he became known for his eccentric behavior and reclusive lifestyle\u2014oddities that were caused in part by his worsening obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), chronic pain from a near-fatal plane crash, and increasing deafness.\nAs a film tycoon, Hughes gained fame in Hollywood beginning in the late 1920s, when he produced big-budget and often controversial films such as \"The Racket\" (1928), \"Hell's Angels\" (1930), and \"Scarface\" (1932). He later acquired the RKO Pictures film studio in 1948, recognized then as one of the Big Five studios in Hollywood, although the production company struggled under his control and ultimately ceased operations in 1957.\nIn 1932, Hughes founded Hughes Aircraft Company and spent the next two decades setting multiple world air speed records and building landmark planes like the Hughes H-1 Racer (1935) and the H-4 Hercules (the \"Spruce Goose\", 1947).163, 259 The H-4 was the largest flying boat in history with the longest wingspan of any aircraft from the time it was built until 2019. He acquired and expanded Trans World Airlines and later acquired Air West, renaming it Hughes Airwest. Hughes won the Harmon Trophy on two occasions (1936 and 1938), the Collier Trophy (1938), and the Congressional Gold Medal (1939) all for his achievements in aviation throughout the 1930s. He was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame in 1973 and was included in \"Flying\" magazine's 2013 list of the 51 Heroes of Aviation, ranked at No. 25.\nDuring his final years, Hughes extended his financial empire to include several major businesses in Las Vegas, such as real estate, hotels, casinos, and media outlets. Known at the time as one of the most powerful men in the state of Nevada, he is largely credited with transforming Las Vegas into a more refined cosmopolitan city. After years of mental and physical decline, Hughes died of kidney failure in 1976. His legacy is maintained through the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Howard Hughes Holdings Inc.\nEarly life.\nHoward Robard Hughes Jr. was the only child of Allene Stone Gano (1883\u20131922) and of Howard R. Hughes Sr. (1869\u20131924), a successful inventor and businessman from Missouri. He had English, Welsh and some French Huguenot ancestry, and was a descendant of John Gano (1727\u20131804), the minister who allegedly baptized George Washington. Through John Gano's sister Sussanah, Hughes was a fifth cousin once removed of the Wright brothers, Orville and Wilbur, who invented the first successful airplane.\nHughes Sr. patented the two-cone roller bit in 1909, which allowed rotary drilling for petroleum in previously inaccessible places. The senior Hughes made the shrewd and lucrative decision to commercialize the invention by leasing the bits instead of selling them, obtaining several early patents, and founding the Hughes Tool Company in 1909.\nHughes' uncle was the famed novelist, screenwriter, and film director Rupert Hughes.\nA 1941 affidavit birth certificate of Hughes, signed by his aunt Annette Gano Lummis and by Estelle Boughton Sharp, states that he was born on December 24, 1905, in Harris County, Texas. However, his certificate of baptism, recorded on October 7, 1906, in the parish register of St. John's Episcopal Church in Keokuk, Iowa, listed his date of birth as September 24, 1905, without any reference to the place of birth.\nAt a young age, Hughes Jr. showed interest in science and technology. In particular, he had a great engineering aptitude, and built Houston's first \"wireless\" radio transmitter at age 11. He went on to be one of the first licensed ham-radio operators in Houston, having the assigned callsign W5CY (originally 5CY). At 12, Hughes was photographed for the local newspaper, which identified him as the first boy in Houston to have a \"motorized\" bicycle, which he had built from parts of his father's steam engine. He was an indifferent student, with a liking for mathematics, flying, and mechanics. He took his first flying lesson at 14, and attended Fessenden School in Massachusetts in 1921.\nAfter a brief stint at The Thacher School, Hughes attended math and aeronautical engineering courses at Caltech. The house where Hughes lived as a teenager at 3921 Yoakum Blvd., Houston, still stands, now known as Hughes House on the grounds of the University of St. Thomas.\nHis mother Allene died in March 1922 from complications of an ectopic pregnancy. Howard Hughes Sr. died of a heart attack in 1924. Their deaths apparently inspired Hughes to include the establishment of a medical research laboratory in the will that he signed in 1925 at age 19. Howard Sr.'s will had not been updated since Allene's death, and Hughes Jr. inherited 75% of the family fortune. On his 19th birthday, Hughes was declared an emancipated minor, enabling him to take full control of his life.\nFrom a young age, Hughes became a proficient and enthusiastic golfer. He often scored near-par figures, playing the game to a two-three handicap during his 20s, and for a time aimed for a professional golf career. He golfed frequently with top players, including Gene Sarazen. Hughes rarely played competitively and gradually gave up his passion for the sport to pursue other interests.\nHughes played golf every afternoon at Los Angeles courses including the Lakeside Golf Club, Wilshire Country Club, or the Bel-Air Country Club. Partners included George Von Elm or Ozzie Carlton. After Hughes hurt himself in the late 1920s, his golfing tapered off, and after his XF-11 crash, Hughes was unable to play at all.\nHughes withdrew from Rice University shortly after his father's death. On June 1, 1925, he married Ella Botts Rice, daughter of David Rice and Martha Lawson Botts of Houston, and great-niece of William Marsh Rice, for whom Rice University was named. They moved to Los Angeles, where he hoped to make a name for himself as a filmmaker.\nThey moved into the Ambassador Hotel, and Hughes proceeded to learn to fly a Waco, while simultaneously producing his first motion picture, \"Swell Hogan\". In 1929, after four years of marriage, Ella returned to Houston and filed for divorce.\nBusiness career.\nHughes enjoyed a highly successful business career beyond engineering, aviation and film-making; many of his career endeavors involved varying entrepreneurial roles.\nEntertainment.\nRalph Graves persuaded Hughes to finance a short film, \"Swell Hogan\", which Graves had written and would star in. Hughes himself produced it. When he screened it, he thought it was a disaster. After hiring a film editor to try to salvage it, he finally ordered that it be destroyed. His next two films, \"Everybody's Acting\" (1926) and \"Two Arabian Knights\" (1927), achieved financial success; the latter won the first Academy Award for Best Director of a comedy picture. \"The Racket\" (1928) and \"The Front Page\" (1931) were also nominated for Academy Awards.\nHughes spent $3.5\u00a0million to make the flying film \"Hell's Angels\" (1930). \"Hell's Angels\" received one Academy Award nomination for Best Cinematography.\nHe produced another hit, \"Scarface\" (1932), a production delayed by censors' concern over its violence.\n\"The Outlaw\" premiered in 1943, but was not released nationally until 1946. The film featured Jane Russell, who received considerable attention from industry censors, this time owing to her revealing costumes.\nRKO.\nFrom the 1940s to the late 1950s, the Hughes Tool Company ventured into the film industry when it obtained partial ownership of the RKO companies, which included RKO Pictures, RKO Studios, a chain of movie theaters known as RKO Theatres and a network of radio stations known as the RKO Radio Network.\nIn 1948, Hughes gained control of RKO, a struggling major Hollywood studio, by acquiring the 929,000 shares owned by Floyd Odlum's Atlas Corporation, for $8,825,000 ($118,634,365 in 2025). Within weeks of acquiring the studio, Hughes dismissed 700 employees. Production dwindled to 9 pictures during the first year of Hughes' control; previously RKO had averaged 30 per year.\nThat same year, 1948, he was able to arrange for his previous films with United Artists (UA), \"The Outlaw\", \"Mad Wednesday\", and \"Vendetta\" to be transferred to RKO. In exchange for the three completed being removed from UA distribution, Hughes and James and Theodore Nasser of General Service Studios would provide the financing of three independent films for distribution by UA. In terms of negotiations directly with RKO, the company agree to remove the production of the film \"Jet Pilot\" from David O. Selznick to Hughes. Hughes produced the film during the years 1949-1950 and owned RKO and in turn the distribution for the film. However, the film was not released until 1957 by Universal Pictures due in part to the subsequent events that would take place at RKO Distribution, and largely due the extra aerial film footage that had been filmed over the years after the film's 1950 completion. Hughes was undertaking a final edit before the 1957 release.\nAfter his acquisition of RKO, Hughes shut down production at the studio for six months, during which time he ordered investigations into the political leanings of every remaining RKO employee. Only after ensuring that the stars under contract to RKO had no suspect affiliations would Hughes approve completed pictures to be sent back for re-shooting. This was especially true of the women under contract to RKO at that time. If Hughes felt that his stars did not properly represent the political views of his liking or if a film's anti-communist politics were not sufficiently clear, he pulled the plug. In 1952, an abortive sale to a Chicago-based five-man syndicate, two of whom had a history of complaints about their business practices and none with any experience in the movie industry, disrupted studio operations at RKO even further.\nIn 1953, Hughes became involved with a high-profile lawsuit as part of the settlement of the \"United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc.\" Antitrust Case. As a result of the hearings, the shaky status of RKO became increasingly apparent. A steady stream of lawsuits from RKO's minority shareholders had grown to become extremely annoying to Hughes. They had accused him of financial misconduct and corporate mismanagement. Since Hughes wanted to focus primarily on his aircraft manufacturing and TWA holdings during the years of the Korean War of 1950 to 1953, Hughes offered to buy out all other RKO stockholders in order to dispense with their distractions.\nBy the end of 1954, Hughes had gained near-total control of RKO at a cost of nearly $24\u00a0million, becoming the first sole owner of a major Hollywood studio since the silent-film era. Six months later Hughes sold the studio to the General Tire and Rubber Company for $25\u00a0million. Hughes retained the rights to pictures that he had personally produced, including those made at RKO. He also retained Jane Russell's contract. For Howard Hughes, this was the virtual end of his 25-year involvement in the motion-picture industry. However, his reputation as a financial wizard emerged unscathed. During that time period, RKO became known as the home of classic \"film noir\" productions, thanks in part to the limited budgets required to make such films during Hughes' tenure. Hughes reportedly walked away from RKO having made $6.5\u00a0million in personal profit. According to Noah Dietrich, Hughes made a $10,000,000 profit from the sale of the theaters and made a profit of $1,000,000 from his 7-year ownership of RKO.\nReal estate.\nAccording to Noah Dietrich, \"Land became a principal asset for the Hughes empire\". Hughes acquired 1200 acres in Culver City for Hughes Aircraft, bought 7 sections [4,480 acres] in Tucson for his Falcon missile-plant, and purchased 25,000 acres near Las Vegas. In 1968, the Hughes Tool Company purchased the North Las Vegas Air Terminal.\nOriginally known as Summa Corporation, the Howard Hughes Corporation formed in 1972 when the oil-tools business of Hughes Tool Company, then owned by Howard Hughes Jr., floated on the New York Stock Exchange under the \"Hughes Tool\" name. This forced the remaining businesses of the \"original\" Hughes Tool to adopt a new corporate name: \"Summa\". The name \"Summa\"\u2014Latin for \"highest\"\u2014was adopted without the approval of Hughes himself, who preferred to keep his own name on the business, and suggested \"HRH Properties\" (for Hughes Resorts and Hotels, and also his own initials). In 1988 Summa announced plans for Summerlin, a master-planned community named for the paternal grandmother of Howard Hughes, Jean Amelia Summerlin.\nInitially staying in the Desert Inn, Hughes refused to vacate his room, and instead decided to purchase the entire hotel. Hughes extended his financial empire to include Las Vegas real estate, hotels, and media outlets, spending an estimated $300 million, and using his considerable powers to acquire many of the well-known hotels, especially the venues connected with organized crime. He quickly became one of the most powerful men in Las Vegas. He was instrumental in changing the image of Las Vegas from its Wild West and, later, Mafia / organized crime roots into a more refined cosmopolitan city. In addition to the Desert Inn, Hughes would eventually own the Sands, Frontier, Silver Slipper, Castaways, and Landmark and Harold's Club in Reno. During his four years in Las Vegas, Hughes became the largest employer in Nevada.\nAviation and aerospace.\nAnother portion of Hughes' commercial interests involved aviation, airlines, and the aerospace and defense industries. A lifelong aircraft enthusiast and pilot, Hughes survived four airplane accidents: one in a Thomas-Morse Scout while filming \"Hell's Angels\", one while setting the airspeed record in the Hughes Racer, one at Lake Mead in 1943, and the near-fatal crash of the Hughes XF-11 in 1946. At Rogers Airport in Los Angeles, he learned to fly from pioneer aviators, including Moye Stephens and J.B. Alexander. He set many world records and commissioned the construction of custom aircraft for himself while heading Hughes Aircraft at the airport in Glendale, CA. Operating from there, the most technologically important aircraft he commissioned was the Hughes H-1 Racer. On September 13, 1935, Hughes, flying the H-1, set the landplane airspeed record of over his test course near Santa Ana, California (Giuseppe Motta reaching 362\u00a0mph in 1929 and George Stainforth reached 407.5\u00a0mph in 1931, both in seaplanes). This marked the last time in history that an aircraft built by a private individual set the world airspeed record. A year and a half later, on January 19, 1937, flying the same H-1 Racer fitted with longer wings, Hughes set a new transcontinental airspeed record by flying non-stop from Los Angeles to Newark in seven hours, 28 minutes, and 25 seconds (beating his own previous record of nine hours, 27 minutes). His average ground-speed over the flight was .\nThe H-1 Racer featured a number of design innovations: it had retractable landing gear (as Boeing Monomail had five years before), and all rivets and joints set flush into the body of the aircraft to reduce drag. The H-1 Racer is thought to have influenced the design of a number of World War II fighters such as the Mitsubishi A6M Zero, Focke-Wulf Fw 190, and F8F Bearcat, although that has never been reliably confirmed. In 1975 the H-1 Racer was donated to the Smithsonian.\nHughes Aircraft.\nIn 1932, Hughes founded the Hughes Aircraft Company, a division of Hughes Tool Company, in a rented corner of a Lockheed Aircraft Corporation hangar in Burbank, California, to build the H-1 racer.\nShortly after founding the company, Hughes used the alias \"Charles Howard\" to accept a job as a baggage handler for American Airlines. He was soon promoted to co-pilot.\nHughes continued to work for American Airlines until his real identity was discovered.\nDuring and after World War II, Hughes turned his company into a major defense contractor. The Hughes Helicopters division started in 1947 when helicopter manufacturer Kellett sold their latest design to Hughes for production. Hughes Aircraft became a major U.S. aerospace- and defense contractor, manufacturing numerous technology-related products that included spacecraft vehicles, military aircraft, radar systems, electro-optical systems, the first working laser, aircraft computer systems, missile systems, ion-propulsion engines (for space travel), commercial satellites, and other electronics systems.\nIn 1948 Hughes created a new division of Hughes Aircraft: the Hughes Aerospace Group. The Hughes Space and Communications Group and the Hughes Space Systems Division were later spun off in 1948 to form their own divisions and ultimately became the Hughes Space and Communications Company in 1961. In 1953 Howard Hughes gave all his stock in the Hughes Aircraft Company to the newly formed Howard Hughes Medical Institute, thereby turning the aerospace and defense contractor into a tax-exempt charitable organization. The Howard Hughes Medical Institute sold Hughes Aircraft in 1985 to General Motors for $5.2 billion. In 1997 General Motors sold Hughes Aircraft to Raytheon and in 2000, sold Hughes Space &amp; Communications to Boeing. A combination of Boeing, GM, and Raytheon acquired the Hughes Research Laboratories, which focused on advanced developments in microelectronics, information &amp; systems sciences, materials, sensors, and photonics; their work-space spans from basic research to product delivery. It has particularly emphasized capabilities in high-performance integrated circuits, high-power lasers, antennas, networking, and smart materials.\nRound-the-world flight.\nOn July 14, 1938, Hughes set another record by completing a flight around the world in just 91 hours (three days, 19 hours, 17 minutes), beating the previous record of 186 hours (seven days, 18 hours, 49 minutes) set in 1933 by Wiley Post in a single-engine Lockheed Vega by almost four days. Hughes returned home ahead of photographs of his flight. Taking off from New York City, Hughes continued to Paris, Moscow, Omsk, Yakutsk, Fairbanks, and Minneapolis, then returning to New York City. For this flight he flew a Lockheed 14 Super Electra (NX18973, a twin-engine transport with a crew of four) fitted with the latest radio and navigational equipment. Harry Connor was the co-pilot, Thomas Thurlow the navigator, Richard Stoddart the engineer, and Ed Lund the mechanic. Hughes wanted the flight to be a triumph of U.S. aviation technology, illustrating that safe, long-distance air travel was possible. Albert Lodwick of Mystic, Iowa, provided organizational skills as the flight operations manager. While Hughes had previously been relatively obscure despite his wealth, better known for dating Katharine Hepburn, New York City now gave him a ticker-tape parade in the Canyon of Heroes. Hughes and his crew were awarded the 1938 Collier Trophy for flying around the world in record time. He was awarded the Harmon Trophy in 1936 and 1938 for the record-breaking global circumnavigation.\nIn 1938 the William P. Hobby Airport in Houston, Texas\u2014known at the time as Houston Municipal Airport\u2014was renamed after Hughes, but the name was changed back due to public outrage over naming the airport after a living person. Hughes also had a role in the financing of the Boeing 307 Stratoliner for TWA, and the design and financing of the Lockheed L-049 Constellation.\nOther aviator awards include: the Bibesco Cup of the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration A\u00e9ronautique Internationale in 1938, the Octave Chanute Award in 1940, and a special Congressional Gold Medal in 1939 \"in recognition of the achievements of Howard Hughes in advancing the science of aviation and thus bringing great credit to his country throughout the world\".\nPresident Harry S. Truman awarded the Congressional Gold Medal to Hughes after the F-11 crash. After his around-the-world flight, Hughes had declined to go to the White House to collect it.\nHughes D-2.\nDevelopment of the D-2 began around 1937, but little is known about its early gestation because Hughes' archives on the aircraft have not been made public. Aircraft historian Ren\u00e9 Francillon speculates that Hughes designed the aircraft for another circumnavigation record attempt, but the outbreak of World War II closed much of the world's airspace and made it difficult to buy aircraft parts without government approval, so he decided to sell the aircraft to the U.S. Army instead. In December 1939, Hughes proposed that the United States Army Air Corps (USAAC) procure it as a \"pursuit type airplane\" (i.e. a fighter aircraft). It emerged as a two or three-seat twin-boom aircraft powered by two Pratt &amp; Whitney R-2800-49 engines and constructed mostly of Duramold, a type of molded plywood. The United States Army Air Forces (USAAF, successor to the USAAC) struggled to define a mission for the D-2, which lacked both the maneuverability of a fighter and the payload of a bomber, and was highly skeptical of the extensive use of plywood; however, the project was kept alive by high-level intervention from General Henry H. Arnold. The prototype was brought to Harper's Dry Lake in California in great secrecy in 1943 and first flew on June 20 of that year. The initial test flights revealed serious flight control problems, so the D-2 returned to the hangar for extensive changes to its wings, and Hughes proposed to redesignate it as the D-5. However, in November 1944, the still-incomplete D-2 was destroyed in a hangar fire reportedly caused by a lightning strike.\nFatal crash of the Sikorsky S-43.\nIn the spring of 1943 Hughes spent nearly a month in Las Vegas, test-flying his Sikorsky S-43 amphibious aircraft, practicing touch-and-go landings on Lake Mead in preparation for flying the H-4 Hercules. The weather conditions at the lake during the day were ideal and he enjoyed Las Vegas at night. On May 17, 1943, Hughes flew the Sikorsky from California, carrying two Civil Aeronautics Authority (CAA) aviation inspectors, two of his employees, and actress Ava Gardner. Hughes dropped Gardner off in Las Vegas and proceeded to Lake Mead to conduct qualifying tests in the S-43. The test flight did not go well. The Sikorsky crashed into Lake Mead, killing CAA inspector Ceco Cline and Hughes' employee Richard Felt. Hughes suffered a severe gash on the top of his head when he hit the upper control panel and had to be rescued by one of the others on board. Hughes paid divers $100,000 to raise the aircraft and later spent more than $500,000 restoring it. Hughes sent the plane to Houston, where it remained for many years.\nHughes XF-11.\nActing on a recommendation of the president's son, Colonel Elliott Roosevelt, who had become friends with Hughes, in September 1943 General Arnold issued a directive to order 100 of a reconnaissance development of the D-2, known as the F-11 (XF-11 in prototype form). The project was controversial from the beginning, as the USAAF Air Materiel Command deeply doubted that Hughes Aircraft could fulfill a contract this large, but Arnold pushed the project forward. Materiel Command demanded a host of major design changes notably including the elimination of Duramold; Hughes, who sought $3.9 million in reimbursement for sunk costs from the D-2, strenuously objected because this undercut his argument that the XF-11 was a modified D-2 rather than a new design. Protracted negotiations caused months of delays but ultimately yielded few design concessions. The war ended before the first XF-11 prototype was completed and the F-11 production contract was canceled. The XF-11 emerged in 1946 as an all-metal, twin-boom, three-seat reconnaissance aircraft, substantially larger than the D-2 and powered by two Pratt &amp; Whitney R-4360-31 engines, each driving a set of contra-rotating propellers. Only two prototypes were completed; the second one had a conventional single propeller per side.\nNear-fatal crash of the XF-11.\nHughes was almost killed on July 7, 1946, while performing the first flight of the XF-11 near Hughes Airfield at Culver City, California. Hughes extended the test flight well beyond the 45-minute limit decreed by the USAAF, possibly distracted by landing gear retraction problems. An oil leak caused one of the contra-rotating propellers to reverse pitch, causing the aircraft to yaw sharply and lose altitude rapidly. Hughes attempted to save the aircraft by landing it at the Los Angeles Country Club golf course, but just seconds before reaching the course, the XF-11 started to drop dramatically and crashed in the Beverly Hills neighborhood surrounding the country club.\nWhen the XF-11 finally came to a halt after destroying three houses, the fuel tanks exploded, setting fire to the aircraft and a nearby home at 808 Whittier Drive owned by Charles E. Meyer. Hughes managed to pull himself out of the flaming wreckage but lay beside the aircraft until he was rescued by U.S. Marine Corps Master Sergeant William L. Durkin, who happened to be in the area visiting friends. Hughes sustained significant injuries in the crash, including a crushed collar bone, multiple cracked ribs, crushed chest with collapsed left lung, shifting his heart to the right side of the chest cavity, and numerous third-degree burns. An oft-told story said that Hughes sent a check to the Marine weekly for the remainder of his life as a sign of gratitude. Noah Dietrich asserted that Hughes did send Durkin $200 a month, but Durkin's daughter denied knowing that he received any money from Hughes.\nDespite his physical injuries, Hughes took pride that his mind was still working. As he lay in his hospital bed, he decided that he did not like the bed's design. He called in plant engineers to design a customized bed, equipped with hot and cold running water, built in six sections, and operated by 30 electric motors, with push-button adjustments. Hughes designed the hospital bed specifically to alleviate the pain caused by moving with severe burn injuries. He never used the bed that he designed. Hughes' doctors considered his recovery almost miraculous.\nMany attribute his long-term dependence on opiates to his use of codeine as a painkiller during his convalescence. Yet Dietrich asserts that Hughes recovered the \"hard way\u2014no sleeping pills, no opiates of any kind\". The trademark mustache he wore afterward hid a scar on his upper lip resulting from the accident.\nHughes conducted the maiden flight of the second XF-11 prototype on April 5, 1947. The USAAF had insisted that Hughes not be allowed to fly the aircraft, but after a personal appeal to Generals Ira Eaker and Carl Spaatz, he was allowed to do so against posting of $5 million in security. The USAAF demanded that the aircraft be trucked from Culver City to Muroc Dry Lake for the flight, fearing the repercussions of another crash in a populated area.\nH-4 Hercules.\nThe War Production Board, a civilian government agency that supervised war production from 1942 to 1945, originally contracted with Henry Kaiser and Hughes to produce the gigantic HK-1 Hercules flying boat for use during World War II to transport troops and equipment across the Atlantic as an alternative to seagoing troop transport ships that were vulnerable to German U-boats. The military services opposed the project, thinking it would siphon resources from higher-priority programs, but Hughes' powerful allies in Washington, D.C. advocated it. After disputes, Kaiser withdrew from the project and Hughes elected to continue it as the H-4 Hercules. However, the aircraft was not completed until after World War II.\nThe Hercules was the world's largest flying boat, the largest aircraft made from wood, and, at , had the longest wingspan of any aircraft (the next-largest wingspan was about ). (The Hercules is no longer the longest nor heaviest aircraft ever built - surpassed by the Antonov An-225 \"Mriya\" produced in 1985.)\nThe Hercules flew only once for , and above the water, with Hughes at the controls, on November 2, 1947.\nCritics nicknamed the Hercules the \"Spruce Goose\", but it was actually made largely from birch (not spruce) rather than from aluminum, because the contract required that Hughes build the aircraft of \"non-strategic materials\". It was built in Hughes' Westchester, California, facility. In 1947, Howard Hughes was summoned to testify before the Senate War Investigating Committee to explain why the H-4 development had been so troubled, and why $22 million had produced only two prototypes of the XF-11. General Elliott Roosevelt and numerous other USAAF officers were also called to testify in hearings that transfixed the nation during August and November 1947. In hotly-disputed testimony over TWA's route awards and malfeasance in the defense-acquisition process, Hughes turned the tables on his main interlocutor, Maine senator Owen Brewster, and the hearings were widely interpreted as a Hughes victory. After being displayed at the harbor of Long Beach, California, the Hercules was moved to McMinnville, Oregon, where, as of 2020[ [update]], features at the Evergreen Aviation &amp; Space Museum.\nOn November 4, 2017, the 70th anniversary of the only flight of the H-4 Hercules was celebrated at the Evergreen Aviation &amp; Space Museum with Hughes' paternal cousin Michael Wesley Summerlin and Brian Palmer Evans, son of Hughes radio technology pioneer Dave Evans, taking their positions in the recreation of a photo that was previously taken of Hughes, Dave Evans, and Joe Petrali on board the H-4 Hercules.\nAirlines.\nIn 1939, at the urging of Jack Frye, president of Transcontinental &amp; Western Airlines, the predecessor of Trans World Airlines (TWA), Hughes began to quietly purchase a majority share of TWA stock (78% of stock, to be exact); he took a controlling interest in the airline by 1944. Although he never had an official position with TWA, Hughes handpicked the board of directors, which included Noah Dietrich, and often issued orders directly to airline staff. Hughes Tool Co. purchased the first six Stratoliners Boeing manufactured. Hughes used one personally, and he let TWA operate the other five.\nHughes is commonly credited as the driving force behind the Lockheed Constellation airliner, which Hughes and Frye ordered in 1939 as a long-range replacement for TWA's fleet of Boeing 307 Stratoliners. Hughes personally financed TWA's acquisition of 40 Constellations for $18 million, the largest aircraft order in history up to that time. The Constellations were among the highest-performing commercial aircraft of the late 1940s and 1950s and allowed TWA to pioneer nonstop transcontinental service. During World War II, Hughes leveraged political connections in Washington to obtain rights for TWA to serve Europe, making it the only U.S. carrier with a combination of domestic and transatlantic routes.\nAfter the announcement of the Boeing 707, Hughes opted to pursue a more advanced jet aircraft for TWA and approached Convair in late 1954. Convair proposed two concepts to Hughes, but Hughes was unable to decide which concept to adopt, and Convair eventually abandoned its initial jet project after the mockups of the 707 and Douglas DC-8 were unveiled. Even after competitors such as United Airlines, American Airlines and Pan American World Airways had placed large orders for the 707, Hughes only placed eight orders for 707s through the Hughes Tool Company and forbade TWA from using the aircraft. After finally beginning to reserve 707 orders in 1956, Hughes embarked on a plan to build his own \"superior\" jet aircraft for TWA, applied for CAB permission to sell Hughes aircraft to TWA, and began negotiations with the state of Florida to build a manufacturing plant there. However, he abandoned this plan around 1958, and in the interim, negotiated new contracts for 707 and Convair 880 aircraft and engines totaling $400 million.\nThe financing of TWA's jet orders precipitated the end of Hughes' relationship with Noah Dietrich, and ultimately Hughes' ouster from control of TWA. Hughes did not have enough cash on hand or future cash flow to pay for the orders and did not immediately seek bank financing. Hughes' refusal to heed Dietrich's financing advice led to a major rift between the two by the end of 1956. Hughes believed that Dietrich wished to have Hughes committed as mentally incompetent, although the evidence of this is inconclusive. Dietrich resigned by telephone in May 1957 after repeated requests for stock options, which Hughes refused to grant, and with no further progress on the jet financing. As Hughes' mental state worsened, he ordered various tactics to delay payments to Boeing and Convair; his behavior led TWA's banks to insist that he be removed from management as a condition for further financing.\nIn 1960, Hughes was ultimately forced out of the management of TWA, although he continued to own 78% of the company. In 1961, TWA filed suit against Hughes Tool Company, claiming that the latter had violated antitrust law by using TWA as a captive market for aircraft trading. The claim was largely dependent upon obtaining testimony from Hughes himself. Hughes went into hiding and refused to testify. A default judgment was issued against Hughes Tool Company for $135 million in 1963 but was overturned by the Supreme Court of the United States in 1973, on the basis that Hughes was immune from prosecution. In 1966, Hughes was forced to sell his TWA shares. The sale of his TWA shares brought Hughes $546,549,771.\nHughes acquired control of Boston-based Northeast Airlines in 1962. However, the airline's lucrative route authority between major northeastern cities and Miami was terminated by a CAB decision around the time of the acquisition, and Hughes sold control of the company to a trustee in 1964. Northeast went on to merge with Delta Air Lines in 1972.\nIn 1970, Hughes acquired San Francisco-based Air West and renamed it Hughes Airwest. Air West had been formed in 1968 by the merger of Bonanza Air Lines, Pacific Air Lines, and West Coast Airlines, all of which operated in the western U.S. By the late 1970s, Hughes Airwest operated an all-jet fleet of Boeing 727-200, Douglas DC-9-10, and McDonnell Douglas DC-9-30 jetliners serving an extensive route network in the western U.S. with flights to Mexico and western Canada as well. By 1980, the airline's route system reached as far east as Houston (Hobby Airport) and Milwaukee with a total of 42 destinations being served. Hughes Airwest was then acquired by and merged into Republic Airlines (1979\u20131986) in late 1980. Republic was subsequently acquired by and merged into Northwest Airlines, which in turn was ultimately merged into Delta Air Lines in 2008.\nBusiness with David Charnay.\nHughes made numerous business partnerships through his friend, the industrialist and producer David Charnay, beginning with their work on the film \"The Conqueror (1956)\". Though the film made money at the box office, its themes, dialogue, and casting were ridiculed. It was shot in St. George, Utah, which had been badly affected by the testing of more than 100 nuclear bombs. Many of the cast and crew were later diagnosed with cancer, leading it to be called an \"RKO Radioactive Picture\". Hughes eventually bought every copy of the film he could, and is reported to have watched the film at home every night in the years before he died.\nCharnay later bought Four Star, the film and television production company that produced \"The Conqueror.\"\nHughes and Charnay's most published dealings were with a contested AirWest leveraged buyout. Charnay led the buyout group that involved Howard Hughes and their partners acquiring Air West. Hughes, Charnay, as well as three others, were indicted. The indictment, made by U.S. Attorney DeVoe Heaton, accused the group of conspiring to drive down the stock price of Air West in order to pressure company directors to sell to Hughes. The charges were dismissed after a judge had determined that the indictment had failed to allege an illegal action on the part of Hughes, Charnay, and all the other accused in the indictment. Thompson, the federal judge that made the decision to dismiss the charges, called the indictment one of the worst claims that he had ever seen. The charges were filed a second time by U.S. Attorney DeVoe Heaton's assistant, Dean Vernon. The Federal Judge ruled on November 13, 1974, and elaborated to say that the case suggested a \"reprehensible misuse of the power of great wealth,\" but in his judicial opinion, \"no crime had been committed.\" The aftermath of the Air West deal was later settled with the SEC by paying former stockholders for alleged losses from the sale of their investment in Air West stock. As noted above, Air West was subsequently renamed Hughes Airwest. During a long pause between the years of the dismissed charges against Hughes, Charnay, and their partners, Howard Hughes died mid-flight while on the way to Houston from Acapulco. No further attempts were made to file any indictments after Hughes died.\nHoward Hughes Medical Institute.\nIn 1953, Hughes launched the Howard Hughes Medical Institute in Miami (currently located in Chevy Chase, Maryland near Washington, D.C.), with the express goal of basic biomedical research, including trying to understand, in Hughes' words, the \"genesis of life itself,\" due to his lifelong interest in science and technology. Hughes' first will, which he signed in 1925 at the age of 19, stipulated that a portion of his estate should be used to create a medical institute bearing his name. When a major battle with the IRS loomed ahead, Hughes gave all his stock in the Hughes Aircraft Company to the institute, thereby turning the aerospace and defense contractor into a for-profit entity of a fully tax-exempt charity. Hughes' internist, Verne Mason, who treated Hughes after his 1946 aircraft crash, was chairman of the institute's medical advisory committee. The Howard Hughes Medical Institute's new board of trustees sold Hughes Aircraft in 1985 to General Motors for $5.2 billion, allowing the institute to grow dramatically.\nIn 1954, Hughes transferred Hughes Aircraft to the foundation, which paid Hughes Tool Co. $18,000,000 for the assets. The foundation leased the land from Hughes Tool Co., which then subleased it to Hughes Aircraft Corp. The difference in rent, $2,000,000 per year, became the foundation's working capital.\nThe deal was the topic of a protracted legal battle between Hughes and the Internal Revenue Service, which Hughes ultimately won. After his death in 1976, many thought that the balance of Hughes' estate would go to the institute, although it was ultimately divided among his cousins and other heirs, given the lack of a will to the contrary. The HHMI was the fourth largest private organization as of 2007[ [update]] and one of the largest devoted to biological and medical research, with an endowment of $20.4 billion as of June\u00a02018[ [update]].\n\"Glomar Explorer\" and the taking of \"K-129\".\nIn 1972, during the Cold War era, Hughes was approached by the CIA through his longtime partner, David Charnay, to help secretly recover the Soviet submarine \"K-129\", which had sunk near Hawaii four years earlier. Hughes' involvement provided the CIA with a plausible cover story, conducting expensive civilian marine research at extreme depths and the mining of undersea manganese nodules. The recovery plan used the special-purpose salvage vessel \"Glomar Explorer\". In the summer of 1974, \"Glomar Explorer\" attempted to raise the Soviet vessel. However, during the recovery, a mechanical failure in the ship's grapple caused half of the submarine to break off and fall to the ocean floor. This section is believed to have held many of the most sought-after items, including its code book and nuclear missiles. Two nuclear-tipped torpedoes and some cryptographic machines were recovered, along with the bodies of six Soviet submariners who were subsequently given formal burial at sea in a filmed ceremony. The operation, known as Project Azorian (but incorrectly referred to by the press as Project Jennifer), became public in February 1975 after secret documents, obtained by burglars of Hughes' headquarters in June 1974, were released. Although he lent his name and his company's resources to the operation, Hughes and his companies had no operational involvement in the project. The \"Glomar Explorer\" was eventually acquired by Transocean, and was sent to the scrap yard in 2015 during a large decline in oil prices.\nPersonal life.\nEarly romances.\nHughes dated many famous women, including Joan Crawford, Terry Moore, Debra Paget, Billie Dove, Faith Domergue, Bette Davis, Yvonne De Carlo, Ava Gardner, Olivia de Havilland, Katharine Hepburn, Hedy Lamarr, Ginger Rogers, Pat Sheehan, Gloria Vanderbilt, Mamie Van Doren and Gene Tierney.\nHe also proposed to Joan Fontaine several times, according to her autobiography \"No Bed of Roses\". Jean Harlow accompanied him to the premiere of \"Hell's Angels\", but Noah Dietrich wrote many years later that the relationship was strictly professional, as Hughes disliked Harlow personally. In his 1971 book, \"Howard: The Amazing Mr. Hughes\", Dietrich said that Hughes genuinely liked and respected Jane Russell, but never sought romantic involvement with her. According to Russell's autobiography, however, Hughes once tried to bed her after a party. Russell (who was married at the time) refused him, and Hughes promised it would never happen again. The two maintained a professional and private friendship for many years. Hughes remained good friends with Tierney who, after his failed attempts to seduce her, was quoted as saying \"I don't think Howard could love anything that did not have a motor in it\". Later, when Tierney's daughter Daria was born deaf and blind and with a severe learning disability because of Tierney's exposure to rubella during her pregnancy, Hughes saw to it that Daria received the best medical care and paid all expenses.\nLuxury yacht.\nIn 1933, Hughes made a purchase of a luxury steam yacht named the \"Rover\", which was previously owned by Scottish shipping magnate James Mackay, 1st Earl of Inchcape. Hughes stated that \"I have never seen the \"Rover\" but bought it on the blueprints, photographs and the reports of Lloyd's surveyors. My experience is that the English are the most honest race in the world.\" Hughes renamed the yacht \"Southern Cross\" and later sold her to Swedish entrepreneur Axel Wenner-Gren.\n1936 automobile accident.\nOn July 11, 1936, Hughes struck and killed a pedestrian named Gabriel S. Meyer with his car at the corner of 3rd Street and Lorraine in Los Angeles. After the crash, Hughes was taken to the hospital and certified as sober, but an attending doctor made a note that Hughes had been drinking. A witness to the crash told police that Hughes was driving erratically and too fast and that Meyer had been standing in the safety zone of a streetcar stop. Hughes was booked on suspicion of negligent homicide and held overnight in jail until his attorney, Neil S. McCarthy, obtained a writ of \"habeas corpus\" for his release pending a coroner's inquest. By the time of the coroner's inquiry, however, the witness had changed his story and claimed that Meyer had moved directly in front of Hughes' car. Nancy Bayly (Watts), who was in the car with Hughes at the time of the crash, corroborated this version of the story. On July 16, 1936, Hughes was held blameless by a coroner's jury at the inquest into Meyer's death. Hughes told reporters outside the inquiry, \"I was driving slowly and a man stepped out of the darkness in front of me\".\nMarriage to Jean Peters.\nOn January 12, 1957, Hughes married actress Jean Peters at a small hotel in Tonopah, Nevada. The couple met in the 1940s, before Peters became a film actress. They had a highly publicized romance in 1947 and there was talk of marriage, but she said she could not combine it with her career. Some later claimed that Peters was \"the only woman [Hughes] ever loved\", and he reportedly had his security officers follow her everywhere even when they were not in a relationship. Such reports were confirmed by actor Max Showalter, who became a close friend of Peters while shooting \"Niagara\" (1953). Showalter told an interviewer that because he frequently met with Peters, Hughes' men threatened to ruin his career if he did not leave her alone.\nConnections to Richard Nixon and Watergate.\nShortly before the 1960 Presidential election, Richard Nixon was alarmed when it was revealed that his brother, Donald, had received a $205,000 loan from Hughes. It has long been speculated that Nixon's drive to learn what the Democrats were planning in 1972 was based in part on his belief that the Democrats knew about a later bribe that his friend Bebe Rebozo had received from Hughes after Nixon took office.\nIn late 1971, Donald Nixon was collecting intelligence for his brother in preparation for the upcoming presidential election. One of his sources was John H. Meier, a former business adviser of Hughes who had also worked with Democratic National Committee Chairman Larry O'Brien.\nMeier, in collaboration with former Vice President Hubert Humphrey and others, wanted to feed misinformation to the Nixon campaign. Meier told Donald that he was sure the Democrats would win the election because Larry O'Brien had a great deal of information on Richard Nixon's illicit dealings with Howard Hughes that had never been released; O'Brien did not actually have any such information, but Meier wanted Nixon to think that he did. Donald told his brother that O'Brien was in possession of damaging information that could destroy his campaign. Terry Lenzner, who was the chief investigator for the Senate Watergate Committee, speculates that it was Nixon's desire to know what O'Brien knew about Nixon's dealings with Hughes that may have partially motivated the Watergate break-in.\nLast years.\nPhysical and mental decline.\nHughes was widely considered eccentric and suffered from severe obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).\nDietrich wrote that Hughes ate the same dinner daily: a New York strip steak cooked medium rare, dinner salad, and peas; but only the smaller peas, pushing the larger ones aside. For breakfast, his eggs had to be cooked the way Lily, his family cook, made them. Hughes had a \"phobia about germs\", and \"his passion for secrecy became a mania.\"\nWhile directing \"The Outlaw\", Hughes became fixated on a small flaw in one of Jane Russell's blouses, claiming that the fabric bunched up along a seam and gave the appearance of two nipples on each breast. He wrote a detailed memorandum to the crew on how to fix the problem. Richard Fleischer, who directed \"His Kind of Woman\" with Hughes as executive producer, wrote at length in his autobiography about the difficulty of dealing with the tycoon. In his book \"Just Tell Me When to Cry\", Fleischer explained that Hughes was fixated on trivial details and was alternately indecisive and obstinate. He also revealed that Hughes' unpredictable mood swings made him wonder if the film would ever be completed.\nIn 1957, Hughes told his aides that he wanted to screen some movies at a film studio near his home. He stayed in the studio's darkened screening room for more than four months, never leaving. He ate only chocolate bars and chicken and drank only milk and was surrounded by dozens of boxes of Kleenex that he continuously stacked and re-arranged. He wrote detailed memos to his aides giving them explicit instructions neither to look at him nor speak to him unless spoken to. Throughout this period, Hughes sat fixated in his chair, often naked, continuously watching movies. When he finally emerged in the spring of 1958, his hygiene was terrible. He had neither bathed nor cut his hair and nails for weeks.\nAfter the screening room incident, Hughes moved into a bungalow at the Beverly Hills Hotel where he also rented rooms for his aides, his wife, and numerous girlfriends. He would sit naked in his bedroom with a pink hotel napkin placed over his genitals, watching movies. This may have been because Hughes found the touch of clothing painful due to allodynia. He may have watched movies to distract himself from his pain\u2014a common practice among patients with intractable pain, especially those who do not receive adequate treatment. In one year, he spent an estimated $11\u00a0million at the hotel.\nHughes began purchasing restaurant chains and four-star hotels that had been founded within the state of Texas. This included, if for only a short period, many unknown franchises currently out of business. He placed ownership of the restaurants with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and all licenses were resold shortly after.\nHe became obsessed with the 1968 film \"Ice Station Zebra\", and had it run on a continuous loop in his home. According to his aides, he watched it 150 times. Feeling guilty about the failure of his film \"The Conqueror\", a commercial and critical flop, he bought every copy of the film for $12 million, watching the film on repeat. Paramount Pictures acquired the rights of the film in 1979, three years after his death.\nHughes insisted on using tissues to pick up objects to insulate himself from germs. He would also notice dust, stains, or other imperfections on people's clothes and demand that they take care of them. Once one of the most visible men in America, Hughes ultimately vanished from public view, although tabloids continued to follow rumors of his behavior and whereabouts. He was reported to be terminally ill, mentally unstable, or even dead.\nInjuries from numerous aircraft crashes caused Hughes to spend much of his later life in pain, and he eventually became addicted to codeine, which he injected intramuscularly. He had his hair cut and nails trimmed only once a year, likely due to the pain caused by the RSD/CRPS, which was caused by the plane crashes. He also stored his urine in bottles.\nLater years in Las Vegas.\nThe wealthy and aging Hughes, accompanied by his entourage of personal aides, began moving from one hotel to another, always taking up residence in the top floor penthouse. In the last ten years of his life, 1966 to 1976, Hughes lived in hotels in many cities\u2014including Beverly Hills, Boston, Las Vegas, Nassau, Freeport and Vancouver.\nOn November 24, 1966 (Thanksgiving Day), Hughes arrived in Las Vegas by railroad car and moved into the Desert Inn. Because he refused to leave the hotel and to avoid further conflicts with the owners, Hughes bought the Desert Inn in early 1967. The hotel's eighth floor became the center of Hughes' empire, and the ninth-floor penthouse became his personal residence. Between 1966 and 1968, he bought several other hotel-casinos, including the Castaways, New Frontier, the Landmark Hotel and Casino, and the Sands. Hughes was rumored to have bought the Silver Slipper casino to move its trademark neon silver slipper which was visible from his bedroom, but this is not credible. After Hughes left the Desert Inn, hotel employees discovered that his drapes had not been opened during the time he lived there and had rotted through.\nHughes wanted to change the image of Las Vegas to something more glamorous. He wrote in a memo to an aide, \"I like to think of Las Vegas in terms of a well-dressed man in a dinner jacket and a beautifully jeweled and furred female getting out of an expensive car.\" Hughes bought several local television stations (including KLAS-TV).\nEventually, the brain trauma from Hughes' previous accidents, the effects of neurosyphilis diagnosed in 1932 and undiagnosed obsessive-compulsive disorder considerably affected his decision-making. A small panel, unofficially dubbed the \"Mormon Mafia\" for the many Latter-day Saints on the committee, was led by Frank William Gay and originally served as Hughes' \"secret police\" headquartered at 7000 Romaine, Hollywood. Over the next two decades, this group oversaw and controlled considerable business holdings, with the CIA anointing Gay while awarding a contract to the Hughes corporation to acquire sensitive information on a sunken Russian submarine. In addition to supervising day-to-day business operations and Hughes' health, they also went to great pains to satisfy Hughes' every whim. For example, Hughes once became fond of Baskin-Robbins's banana nut ice cream, so his aides sought to secure a bulk shipment for him, only to discover that Baskin-Robbins had discontinued the flavor. They put in a request for the smallest amount the company could provide for a special order, 350 gallons (1,300 L), and had it shipped from Los Angeles. A few days after the order arrived, Hughes announced he was tired of banana nut and wanted only French vanilla ice cream. The Desert Inn ended up distributing free banana nut ice cream to casino customers for a year. In a 1996 interview, former Howard Hughes Chief of Nevada Operations Robert Maheu said, \"There is a rumor that there is still some banana nut ice cream left in the freezer. It is most likely true.\"\nAs an owner of several major Las Vegas businesses, Hughes wielded much political and economic influence in Nevada and elsewhere. During the 1960s and early 1970s, he disapproved of underground nuclear testing at the Nevada Test Site. Hughes was concerned about the risk from residual nuclear radiation and attempted to halt the tests. When the tests finally went through despite Hughes' efforts, the detonations were powerful enough that the entire hotel in which he was living trembled from the shock waves. In two separate, last-ditch maneuvers, Hughes instructed his representatives to offer bribes of $1 million to both Presidents Lyndon B. Johnson and Richard Nixon.\nIn 1970, Jean Peters filed for divorce. The two had not lived together for many years. Peters requested a lifetime alimony payment of $70,000 a year, adjusted for inflation, and waived all claims to Hughes' estate. Hughes offered her a settlement of over a million dollars, but she declined it. Hughes did not insist on a confidentiality agreement from Peters as a condition of the divorce. Aides reported that Hughes never spoke ill of her. She refused to discuss her life with Hughes and declined several lucrative offers from publishers and biographers. Peters would state only that she had not seen Hughes for several years before their divorce and had dealt with him only by phone.\nHughes was living in the Intercontinental Hotel near Lake Managua in Nicaragua, seeking privacy and security, when a magnitude 6.5 earthquake damaged Managua on December 23, 1972. As a precaution, Hughes moved to a large tent facing the hotel; after a few days, he moved to the Nicaraguan National Palace and stayed there as a guest of Anastasio Somoza Debayle before leaving for Florida on a private jet the following day. He subsequently moved into the penthouse at the Xanadu Princess Resort on Grand Bahama Island, which he had recently purchased. He lived almost exclusively in the penthouse of the Xanadu Beach Resort &amp; Marina for the last four years of his life. Hughes spent a total of $300\u00a0million on his many properties in Las Vegas.\nAutobiography hoax.\nIn 1972, author Clifford Irving caused a media sensation when he claimed he had co-written an authorized Hughes autobiography. Irving claimed he and Hughes had corresponded through the United States mail and offered as proof handwritten notes allegedly sent by Hughes. Publisher McGraw-Hill, Inc. was duped into believing the manuscript was authentic. Hughes was so reclusive that he did not immediately publicly refute Irving's statement, leading many to believe that Irving's book was genuine. However, before the book's publication, Hughes finally denounced Irving in a teleconference attended by reporters Hughes knew personally: James Bacon of the Hearst papers, Marvin Miles of the \"Los Angeles Times\", Vernon Scott of UPI, Roy Neal of NBC News, Gene Handsaker of AP, Wayne Thomas of the \"Chicago Tribune\", and Gladwin Hill of the \"New York Times\".\nThe entire hoax finally unraveled. The United States Postal Inspection Service (USPIS) got a subpoena to force Irving to turn over samples of his handwriting. The USPIS investigation led to Irving's indictment and subsequent conviction for using the postal service to commit fraud. He was incarcerated for 17 months. In 1974, the Orson Welles film \"F for Fake\" included a section on the Hughes autobiography hoax, leaving a question open as to whether it was actually Hughes who took part in the teleconference (since so few people had actually heard or seen him in recent years). In 1977, \"The Hoax\" by Clifford Irving was published in the United Kingdom, telling his story of these events. The 2006 film \"The Hoax\", starring Richard Gere, is also based on these events.\nDeath.\nHughes is reported to have died on April 5, 1976, at 1:27\u00a0p.m. on board an aircraft, Learjet 24B N855W, owned by Robert Graf and piloted by Roger Sutton and Jeff Abrams. He was en route from his penthouse at the Acapulco Princess Hotel (now the Princess Mundo Imperial) in Mexico to the Methodist Hospital in Houston.\nHis reclusiveness and possibly his drug use made him practically unrecognizable. His hair, beard, fingernails, and toenails were long\u2014his tall frame now weighed barely , and the FBI had to use fingerprints to conclusively identify the body. Howard Hughes' alias, John T. Conover, was used when his body arrived at a morgue in Houston on the day of his death.\nAn autopsy recorded kidney failure as the cause of death. In an eighteen-month study investigating Hughes' drug abuse for the estate, it was found that \"someone administered a deadly injection of the painkiller to this comatose man\u00a0... obviously needlessly and almost certainly fatal\". He suffered from malnutrition and was covered in bedsores. While his kidneys were damaged, his other internal organs, including his brain, which had no visible damage or illnesses, were deemed perfectly healthy. X-rays revealed five broken-off hypodermic needles in the flesh of his arms. To inject codeine into his muscles, Hughes had used glass syringes with metal needles that easily became detached.\nHughes is buried next to his parents at Glenwood Cemetery in Houston.\nEstate.\nApproximately three weeks after Hughes' death, a handwritten will was found on the desk of an official of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Salt Lake City, Utah. The so-called \"Mormon Will\" gave $1.56 billion to various charitable organizations (including $625\u00a0million to the Howard Hughes Medical Institute), nearly $470\u00a0million to the upper management in Hughes' companies and to his aides, $156\u00a0million to first cousin William Lummis, and $156\u00a0million split equally between his two ex-wives Ella Rice and Jean Peters.\nA further $156\u00a0million was endowed to a gas station owner, Melvin Dummar, who told reporters that in 1967, he found a disheveled and dirty man lying along U.S. Route 95, just north of Las Vegas. The man asked for a ride to Vegas. Dropping him off at the Sands Hotel, Dummar said the man told him that he was Hughes. Dummar later claimed that days after Hughes' death a \"mysterious man\" appeared at his gas station, leaving an envelope containing the will on his desk. Unsure if the will was genuine and unsure of what to do, Dummar left the will at the LDS Church office. In 1978, a Nevada court ruled the Mormon Will a forgery and officially declared that Hughes had died intestate (without a valid will). Dummar's story was later adapted into Jonathan Demme's film \"Melvin and Howard\" in 1980.\nHughes' $2.5\u00a0billion estate was eventually split in 1983 among 22 cousins, including William Lummis, who serves as a trustee of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. The Supreme Court of the United States ruled that Hughes Aircraft was owned by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, which sold it to General Motors in 1985 for $5.2\u00a0billion. The court rejected suits by the states of California and Texas that claimed they were owed inheritance tax.\nIn 1984, Hughes' estate paid an undisclosed amount to Terry Moore, who claimed she and Hughes had secretly married on a yacht in international waters off Mexico in 1949 and never divorced. Moore never produced proof of a marriage, but her book, \"The Beauty and the Billionaire,\" became a bestseller.\nArchive.\nThe moving image collection of Howard Hughes is held at the Academy Film Archive. The collection consists of over 200 items including 35mm and 16mm elements of feature films, documentaries, and television programs made or accumulated by Hughes.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14062", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14062", "title": "Hook of Holland", "text": "Hook of Holland (, ) is a coastal village in the southwestern corner of Holland, hence the name; \"hoek\" means \"corner\" and was in use before the word \"kaap\" \u2013 \"cape\". The English translation using Hook is a false cognate of the Dutch Hoek, but has become commonplace in the Netherlands (in official government records in English, the name tends not to get translated and Hoek van Holland is used). It is located at the mouth of the New Waterway shipping canal into the North Sea. The village is administered as a district of the municipality of Rotterdam. Its district covers an area of 18.53\u00a0km2, of which 14.19\u00a0km2 is land. On 1 January 2023 it had an estimated population of 10,560.\nSettlements near \"the Hook\" () include the small towns Monster, Naaldwijk and 's-Gravenzande and the city Delft to the northeast, and the town Maassluis to the southeast. On the other side of the river is the harbor Europort and the Maasvlakte. The wide sandy beach, one section of which is designated for use by naturists, runs for approximately 18 kilometres to Scheveningen and for most of this distance is backed by extensive sand dunes through which there are foot and cycle paths. On the north side of the New Waterway, to the west of the village, is a pier, part of which is accessible to pedestrians and cyclists.\nThe Berghaven is a small harbour on the New Waterway where the Rotterdam and Europoort pilots are based. This small harbour is only for the use of the pilot service, government vessels and the Hook of Holland lifeboat.\nHistory.\nThe Hook of Holland area was created as a sandbar in the Maas estuary, when it became more and more silted after St. Elizabeth's flood of 1421. All kinds of plans were designed to improve the shipping channel to Rotterdam. In 1863 it was finally decided to construct the New Waterway which was dug between 1866 and 1868. The route ran through the Hook of Holland, where a primitive settlement, Old Hook (Oude Hoek - nowadays the Zuidelijk Strandcentrum), was created. Many workers and senior employees of the Rijkswaterstaat settled in Old Hook.\nThe Hook initially fell under the administrative authority of 's-Gravenzande. An attempt by the inhabitants to transform the place into an independent municipality failed and, on 1 January 1914, Hook of Holland was added to Rotterdam. After the First World War the village started to develop into a seaside resort. It has since been informally known as 'Rotterdam by the sea'.\nDuring World War II, the Hook was one of the most important places for the Wehrmacht to hold because of its harbour, which comprised an important and strategic part of the Atlantic Wall. The German Army installed three 11\" guns (removed from the damaged battleship Gneisenau) as shore batteries to protect the port area from invasion.\nHook of Holland already had a ward council in 1947 and has been a borough since 1973. In 2014, it was replaced by an \"area committee\".\nKindertransport monument.\nThe \"kindertransport\", with which Jewish children from Germany, Austria, Poland and Czechoslovakia could be brought to England from December 1938 until the outbreak of World War II, usually went from the children's home stations to the Netherlands by train. The crossing to Harwich then largely took place from Hook of Holland. The transports were supported by the Dutch government and by volunteers. The first transport, which started on December 1, 1938, at the Berlin Anhalter Bahnhof, reached England on December 2, 1938. When the transport was allowed, the British government stipulated that the children could not be older than seventeen and that their parents could not come along. The Nazis stipulated, among other things, that the children at the railway station were not allowed to say goodbye to those left behind. By the time the war broke out in 1939, approximately 10,000 children had been brought to Britain in this way.\nTransport links.\nRailways.\nThe Schiedam\u2013Hoek van Holland railway was a 24-kilometre train service branch line from Schiedam Centrum station via Vlaardingen and Maassluis. The final two stations on the line were located within the village. Hoek van Holland Haven, the penultimate station, was close to the village centre, adjacent to the ferry terminal and the small harbour, the Berghaven. Hoek van Holland Strand, the terminus, is closest to the beach. The railway line opened for service in 1893 and was electrified in 1935. International trains ran from Berlin and Moscow to connected these with London via the ferry service. From 1928 to 1939 and from 1962 to 1979, Hook of Holland was the northern terminus of the Rheingold Express to Frankfurt and Geneva. Services on the line to Rotterdam Centraal station were operated by NS every half-hour during the day until April 2017, when the line was closed.\nIt was then converted to a metro/lightrail system. It was reopened in September 2019, as an extension of the Rotterdam Metro / lightrail. The metro/lightrail service from Hook of Holland terminates at the beach, stops at the redeveloped Hoek van Holland Haven metro station where it connects to the Stena Line ferry to Harwich. It connects to Dutch trains services at Schiedam Centrum station, Rotterdam Blaak station and Rotterdam Alexander station and after changing to other metro lines at Beurs metro station to Rotterdam Centraal.\nFerry.\nHook of Holland is also the location of an international ferry terminal, from which service to eastern England has operated since 1893 except for the durations of the two World Wars. Currently, two routes are operated: one, a day-and-night freight and passenger service to Harwich, Essex, and the other, a night, freight-only service to North Killingholme Haven, Lincolnshire. The passenger ferry service is operated by Stena Line as part of the Dutchflyer rail-ferry service between Hook van Holland Haven station and Harwich International station in England, from which Greater Anglia provides service to Liverpool Street station in central London.\nA local ferry operated by RET links the Hook with the Maasvlakte part of the Port of Rotterdam.\nMotorways.\nThe A20 motorway begins approximately 10 kilometres east of Hook of Holland near Westerlee, heading east towards Rotterdam and Utrecht. It connects to the A4 heading north towards The Hague and Amsterdam 17 kilometres east of the village.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14063", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14063", "title": "Hugh Binning", "text": "Scottish philosopher and theologian\nHugh Binning (1627\u20131653) was a Scottish philosopher and theologian. He was born in Scotland during the reign of Charles I and was ordained in the (Presbyterian) Church of Scotland. He died in 1653, during the time of Oliver Cromwell and the Commonwealth of England.\nPersonal life.\nHugh Binning was the son of John Binning of Dalvennan, Straiton, South Ayrshire. and Margaret M'Kell. Margaret was the daughter of Matthew McKell,\nwho was a minister in the parish of Bothwell, Scotland, and sister of Hugh M'Kell, a minister in Edinburgh. Binning was born on his father's estate in Dalvennan. The family owned other lands in the parishes of Straiton and Colmonell as well as Maybole in Carrick.\nA precocious child, Binning was admitted to the study of philosophy at the University of Glasgow at age thirteen. Binning has been described as \"an extraordinary instance of precocious learning and genius.\"\nIn 1645, James Dalrymple, 1st Viscount of Stair, who was Hugh's master (primary professor) in the study of philosophy, announced he was retiring from the University of Glasgow. Dalrymple was afterward President of the Court of Session, and Viscount Stair. After a national search for a replacement on the faculty, three men were selected to compete for the position. Binning was one of those selected, but was at a disadvantage because of his extreme youth and because he was not of noble birth. However, he had strong support from the existing faculty, who suggested that the candidates speak extemporaneously on any topic of the candidate's choice. After hearing Hugh speak, the other candidates withdrew, making Hugh a regent and professor of philosophy, while he was still 18 years old.\nOn 7 February 1648, (at the age of 21) Hugh was appointed an Advocate before the Court of Sessions (an attorney). In the same year, he married Barbara Simpson (sometimes called Mary), daughter of James Simpson a minister in Ireland. Their son, John, was born in 1650.\nBinning became a minister on 25 October 1649. As minister of Govan, he was the successor of William Wilkie. His ordination took place on 8 January 1649, when Mr David Dickson, one of the theological professors at the College of Glasgow, and author of \"Therapeutica Sacra\", presided. He was ordained in January, at the age of 22, holding his regency until 14 May that year. At that time Govan was a separate town rather than part of Glasgow.\nHugh died around September 1653 and was buried in the churchyard of Govan, where Patrick Gillespie, then principal of the University of Glasgow, ordered a monument inscribed in Latin, roughly translated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Here lies Mr. Hugh Binning, a man distinguished for his piety and eloquence, learned in philology, philosophy, and theology, a Prelate, faithful to the Gospel, and finally an excellent preacher. In the middle of a series of events, he was taken at the age of 26, in the year of our Lord 1653. Alive, he changed the society of his own land because he walked with God. And if you wish to make other inquires, the rest should keep silence, since neither you nor the marble can comprehend it.\nHugh's widow, Barbara (or Mary), then remarried James Gordon, an Anglican priest at Cumber in Ireland. Together they had a daughter,Jean who married Daniel MacKenzie, who was on the winning side of the Battle of Bothwell Bridge serving as an ensign under Lieutenant-Colonel William Ramsay (who became the third Earl of Dalhousie), in the Earl of Mar's Regiment of Foot.\nBinning's son, John Binning, married Hanna Keir, who was born in Ireland. The Binnings were Covenanters, a resistance movement that objected to the return of Charles\u00a0II (who was received into the Catholic Church on his deathbed). They were on the losing side in the 1679 Battle of Bothwell Bridge. Most of the rebels who were not executed were exiled to the Americas; about 30 Covenanters were exiled to the Carolinas on the Carolina Merchant in 1684. After the battle, John and Hanna were separated.\nIn the aftermath of the battle at Bothwell Bridge, Hugh Binning's widow (now Barbara Gordon) tried to reclaim the family estate at Dalvennan by saying that John and his wife owed his stepfather a considerable some of money. The legal action was successful and Dalvennan became the possession of John's half-sister Jean, and her husband Daniel MacKenzie. In addition, Jean came into possession of Hanna Keir's property in Ireland.\nBy 1683, Jean was widowed. John Binning was branded a traitor, was sentenced to death and forfeited his property to the Crown. John's wife (Hanna Keir) was branded as a traitor and forfeited her property in Ireland. In 1685, Jean \"donated\" the Binning family's home at Dalvennan and other properties, along with the Keir properties, to Roderick MacKenzie, who was a Scottish advocate of James\u00a0II (James\u00a0VII of Scotland), and the baillie of Carrick. According to an act of the Scottish Parliament, Roderick MacKenzie was also very effective in \"suppressing the rebellious, fanatical party in the western and other shires of this realm, and putting the laws to vigorous execution against them\".\nSince Bothwell Bridge, Hanna had been hiding from the authorities. In 1685, Hanna was in Edinburgh where she was found during a sweep for subversives and imprisoned in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, a combination city hall and prison. Those arrested with Hanna were exiled to North America, however, she developed dysentery and remained behind. By 1687, near death, Hanna petitioned the Privy Council of Scotland for her release; she was exiled to her family in Ireland, where she died around 1692.\nIn 1690, the Scottish Parliament rescinded John's fines and forfeiture, but he was unable to recover his family's estates, the courts suggesting that he had relinquished his claim to Dalvennan in exchange for forgiveness of debt, rather than forfeiture.\nThere is little documentation about John after his wife's death. John received a small income from royalties on his father's works after parliament extended copyrights on Binning's writings to him. However, the income was not significant and John made several petitions to the Scottish parliament for money, the last occurring in 1717. It is thought that he died in Somerset county, in southwestern England.\nHe died of consumption at the age of 26 on September 1653. He was remarkably popular as a preacher, having been considered \"the most accomplished philosopher and divine in his time, and styled the Scottish Cicero.\" He married (cont. 17 May 1650), Mary (who died at Paisley in 1694) and had a son, John of Dalvennan. She was the daughter of Richard Simson, minister of Sprouston. After John's early death Mary married her second husband, James Gordon, minister of Comber, in Ireland. A marble tablet, with an inscription in classical Latin, was erected to his memory by his friend Mr Patrick Gillespie, who was then Principal of the University of Glasgow. It has been placed in the vestibule of the present parish church. The whole of his works are posthumous publications.\nHe was a follower of James Dalrymple. In later life, he was well known as an evangelical Christian.\nImpact of the Commonwealth.\nHugh Binning was born two years after Charles\u00a0I became monarch of England, Ireland, and Scotland. At the time, each was an independent country sharing the same monarch. The Acts of Union 1707 integrated Scotland and England to form the Kingdom of Great Britain, and the Acts of Union 1800 integrated Ireland to form the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.\nThe period was dominated by both political and religious strife between the three independent countries. Religious disputes centered on questions such as whether religion was to be dictated by the monarch or was to be the choice of the people, and whether individuals had a direct relationship with God or needed to use an intermediary. Civil disputes centered on debates about the extent of the King's power (a question of the Divine right of kings), and specifically whether the King had the right to raise taxes and armed forces without the consent of the governed. These wars ultimately changed the relationship between king and subjects.\nIn 1638, the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland voted to remove bishops and the \"Book of Common Prayer\" that had been introduced by Charles\u00a0I to impose the Anglican model on the Presbyterian Church of Scotland. Public riots followed, culminating in the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, an interrelated series of conflicts that took place in the three countries. The first conflict, which was also the first of the Bishops' Wars, took place in 1639 and was a single border skirmish between England and Scotland, also known as \"the war the armys did not wanted to fight.\"\nTo maintain his English power base, Charles\u00a0I made secret alliances with Catholic Ireland and Presbyterian Scotland to invade Anglican England, promising that each country could establish their own separate state religion. Once these secret entreaties became known to the English Long Parliament, the Congregationalist faction (of which Oliver Cromwell was a primary spokesman) took matters into its own hands and Parliament established an army separate from the King. Charles\u00a0I was executed in January 1649, which led to the rule of Cromwell and the establishment of the Commonwealth. The conflicts concluded with The English Restoration of the monarchy and the return of Charles\u00a0II in 1660.\nThe Act of Classes was passed by the Parliament of Scotland on 23 January 1649; the act banned Royalists (people supporting the monarchy) from holding political or military office. In exile, Charles II signed the Treaty of Breda (1650) with the Scottish Parliament; among other things, the treaty established Presbyterianism as the national religion. Charles was crowned King of Scots at Scone in January 1651. By September 1651, Scotland was annexed by England, its legislative institutions abolished, Presbyterianism dis-established, and Charles was forced into exile in France.\nThe Scottish Parliament rescinded the Act of Classes in 1651, which produced a split within Scottish society. The sides of the conflict were called the Resolutioners (who supported the rescission of the act \u2013 supported the monarchy and the Scottish House of Stewart) and the Protesters (who supported Cromwell and the Commonwealth); Binning sided with the Protestors. Binning joined the Protesters in 1651. When Cromwell had sent troops to Scotland, he was also attempting to dis-establish Presbyterianism and the Church of Scotland, Binning spoke against Cromwell's act.\nOn Saturday 19 April 1651, Cromwell entered Glasgow and the next day he heard a sermon by three ministers who condemned him for invading Scotland. That evening, Cromwell summoned those ministers and others, to a debate on the issue. a discussion on some of the controverted points of the times was held in his presence, between his chaplains, the learned Dr John Owen, Joseph Caryl, and others on the one side, and some Scots ministers on the other. Mr. Binning, who was one of the disputants, apparently nonplussed the Independents, which led Cromwell to ask who the learned and bold young man was. Told it was Binning, he said: \"He hath bound well, indeed,\" ... \" but, laying his hand on his sword, this will lose all again.\" The late Mr. Orme was of the opinion that there is nothing improbable in the account of the meeting, but that such a meeting took place is certain. This appears from two letters which were written by Principal Robert Baillie, who was then Professor of Theology at the University of Glasgow.At the debate, Rev Hugh Binning is said to have out-debated Cromwell's ministers so completely that he silenced them.\nPolitics.\nHugh Binning's political views were based on his theology. Binning was a Covenanter, a movement that began in Scotland at Greyfriars Kirkyard in 1638 with the National Covenant and continued with the 1643 Solemn League and Covenant\u2014in effect a treaty between the English Long Parliament and Scotland for the preservation of the reformed religion in exchange for troops to confront the threat of Irish Catholic troops joining the Royalist army. Binning could also be described as a Protestor; both political positions were taken because of their religious implications. However, he saw the evils of the politics of his day was not a \"fomenter of factions\" writing \"A Treatise of Christian Love\" as a response.\nTheology.\nBecause of the tumultuous time in which Hugh Binning lived, politics and religion were inexorably intertwined. Binning was a Calvinist and follower of John Knox. As a profession, Binning was trained as a Philosopher, and he believed that philosophy was the servant of theology. He thought that both Philosophy and Theology should be taught in parallel. Binning's writing, which is primarily a collection of his sermons, \"forms an important bridge between the 17th century, when philosophy in Scotland was heavily dominated by Calvinism, and the 18th century when figures such as Francis Hutcheson re-asserted a greater degree of independence between the two and allied philosophy with the developing human sciences.\"\nReligiously, Hugh Binning was, what we would call today, an Evangelical Calvinist. He spoke on the primacy of God's love as the ground of salvation: \n\"... our salvation is not the business of Christ alone, but the whole Godhead is interested in it deeply, so deeply that you cannot say who loves it most, or who likes it most. The Father is the very fountain of it, his love is the spring of all.\"\nWith regards to the extent of the 'atonement', Hugh Binning, did not hold that the offer of redemption applied only to the few that are elect but said that \"the ultimate ground of faith is in the electing will of God.\" In Scotland, during the 1600s, the questions concerning atonement revolved around the terms in which the offer was expressed.\nBinning believed that \"forgiveness is based on Christ's death, understood as a satisfaction and as a sacrifice: 'If he had pardoned sin without any satisfaction what rich grace it had been! But truly, to provide the Lamb and sacrifice himself, to find out the ransom, and to exact it of his own Son, in our name, is a testimony\nof mercy and grace far beyond that. But then, his justice is very conspicuous in this work'.\"\nWorks.\nAll of the works of Hugh Binning were published posthumously and were primarily collections of his sermons. Of his speaking style, it was said: \"There is originality without any affectation, a rich imagination, without anything fanciful or extravert, the utmost simplicity, without an thing mean or trifling.\" \n(https://, fulltext) Quotations from the publication include: \n\"On the love of God\"\nAnd what is love but the very motion of the soul to God? And so till it have attained that, to be in him, it can find no place of rest. \n\"On the free grace of the Gospel\"\nI am guilty, and can say nothing against it, while I stand alone. But though I cannot satisfy, and have not; yet there is one, Jesus Christ, who gave his life a ransom for many, and whom God hath given as a propitiation for sins. He hath satisfied and paid the debt in my name; go and apprehend the cautioner, since he hath undertaken it, nay, he hath done it, and is absolved.\n\"On Learning\" \nBe not ignorant as beasts, that know no other things than to follow the drove; qu\u00e6 pergunt, non quo eundum est, sed quo itur; \"they follow not whither they ought to go, but whither most go\". You are men, and have reasonable souls within you; therefore I beseech you, be not composed and fashioned according to custom and example, that is, brutish, but according to some inward knowledge and reason. Retire once from the multitude, and ask in earnest at God, What is the way? Him that fears him he will teach the way that he should choose. The way to his blessed end is very strait, very difficult; you must have a guide in it,\u2014you must have a lamp and a light in it,\u2014else you cannot but go wrong.\nWhere God hath given us liberty by the law of nature, or his word, no king can justly tie us, and when God binds and obliges us by any of these, no king or parliament can loose or untie us.\nBut Christ\u2019s last words persuade this, that unity in affection is more essential and fundamental. This is the badge he left to his disciples. If we cast away this upon every different apprehension of mind, we disown our Master, and disclaim his token and badge.\n\"On Charity\"\nCharity \"thinketh no evil.\" [1 Cor. 13:5] Charity is apt to take all things in the best sense. If a thing may be subject to diverse acceptations, it can put the best construction on it. It is so benign and good in its own nature that it is not inclinable to suspect others. It desires to condemn no man, but would gladly, as far as reason and conscience will permit, absolve every man. It is so far from desire of revenge, that it is not provoked or troubled with an injury. For that were nothing else but to wrong itself because others have wronged it already, and it is so far from wronging others, that it will not willingly so much as think evil of them. Yet if need requires, charity can execute justice, and inflict chastisement, not out of desire of another\u2019s misery, but out of love and compassion to mankind. Charitas non punit quia peccatum est, sed ne peccaretur, \"it looks more to prevention of future sin, than to revenge of a bypast fault\", and can do all without any discomposure of spirit, as a physician cuts a vein without anger. Quis enim cut medetur irascitur? \"\"Who is angry at his own patient\"?\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "14064", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14064", "title": "Henry Home, Lord Kames", "text": "Scottish philosopher, judge and agricultural improver (1696\u20131782)\nHenry Home, Lord Kames (1696\u201327 December 1782) was a Scottish writer, philosopher and judge who played a major role in Scotland's Agricultural Revolution. A central figure of the Scottish Enlightenment, he was a founding member of the Philosophical Society of Edinburgh and active in The Select Society. Home acted as patron to some of the most influential thinkers of the Scottish Enlightenment, including philosopher David Hume, economist Adam Smith, writer James Boswell, philosopher William Cullen and naturalist John Walker.\nLife.\nHenry Home was born in 1696 at Kames House, between Eccles and Birgham in Berwickshire. Henry was the son of George Home of Kames, and was homeschooled by Mr Wingate, a private tutor, until the age of 16. In 1712, Home was apprenticed as a lawyer under a Writer to the Signet in Edinburgh, and was called to the Scottish bar as an advocate bar in 1724. He soon acquired reputation by a number of publications on the civil and Scottish law, and was one of the leaders of the Scottish Enlightenment. In 1752, he was \"raised to the bench\", thus acquiring the title of Lord Kames.\nKames held an interest in the development and production of linen in Scotland. Kames was one of the original proprietors of the British Linen Company, serving as a director of the company from 1754 to 1756. Kames was on the panel of judges in the \"Knight v. Wedderburn\" case which ruled that slavery was illegal in Scotland. In 1775, he lived in a townhouse in Canongate. The house was located the head of the street's east side, facing onto the Canongate. \nHe died of old age, aged 86, and is buried in the Home-Drummond plot at Kincardine-in-Menteith west of Blair Drummond.\nWritings.\nHome wrote much about the importance of property to society. In his \"Essay Upon Several Subjects Concerning British Antiquities\", written just after the Jacobite rising of 1745, he showed that the politics of Scotland were based not on loyalty to Kings, as the Jacobites had said, but on the royal land grants that lay at the base of feudalism, the system whereby the sovereign maintained \"an immediate hold of the persons and property of his subjects\".\nIn \"Historical Law Tracts\" Home described a four-stage model of social evolution that became \"a way of organizing the history of Western civilization\". The first stage was that of the hunter-gatherer, wherein families avoided each other as competitors for the same food. The second was that of the herder of domestic animals, which encouraged the formation of larger groups but did not result in what Home considered a true society. No laws were needed at these early stages except those given by the head of the family, clan, or tribe. Agriculture was the third stage, wherein new occupations such as \"plowman, carpenter, blacksmith, stonemason\" made \"the industry of individuals profitable to others as well as to themselves\", and a new complexity of relationships, rights, and obligations required laws and law enforcers. A fourth stage evolved with the development of market towns and seaports, \"commercial society\", bringing yet more laws and complexity but also providing more benefit. Lord Kames could see these stages within Scotland itself, with the pastoral Highlands, the agricultural Lowlands, the \"polite\" commercial towns of Glasgow and Edinburgh, and in the Western Isles a remaining culture of rude huts where fishermen and gatherers of seaweed eked out their subsistence living.\nHome was a polygenist, he believed God had created different races on earth in separate regions. In his book \"Sketches of the History of Man\", in 1774, Home claimed that the environment, climate, or state of society could not account for racial differences, so that the races must have come from distinct, separate stocks.\nThe above studies created the genre of the story of civilization and defined the fields of anthropology and sociology and therefore the modern study of history for two hundred years.\nIn the popular book \"Elements of Criticism\" (1762) Home interrogated the notion of fixed or arbitrary rules of literary composition, and endeavoured to establish a new theory based on the principles of human nature. The late eighteenth-century tradition of sentimental writing was associated with his notion that \"the genuine rules of criticism are all of them derived from the human heart.\" Neil Rhodes has argued that Lord Kames played a significant role in the development of English as an academic discipline in the Scottish Universities.\nFamily.\nHe was married to Agatha Drummond of Blair Drummond. Their children included George Drummond-Home."}
{"id": "14065", "revid": "50655340", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14065", "title": "Harwich", "text": "Town in Essex, England\nHarwich is a port town and civil parish in the Tendring district of Essex, England. It is one of the Haven ports on the North Sea coast. Nearby places include Felixstowe to the north-east, Ipswich to the north-west, Colchester to the south-west and Clacton-on-Sea to the south. It is the northernmost coastal town in Essex.\nIts position on the estuaries of the Stour and Orwell rivers, with its usefulness to mariners as one of the safest ports between the Thames and the Humber, led to a long period of civil and military maritime significance. The town became a naval base in 1657 and was heavily fortified, with Harwich Redoubt, Beacon Hill Battery, and Bath Side Battery.\nThe \"Mayflower\", which carried English Puritans to North America, was registered with Harwich as its home port, and Harwich is the presumed birthplace of \"Mayflower\" captain Christopher Jones.\nThe historic core of the town stands at the end of a peninsula. The built up area now extends westwards from the peninsula to included Dovercourt, which has been administered as part of Harwich since at least the 17th century. There are few retail facilities in the historic core of Harwich today, and Dovercourt now has the main retail town centre for the built up area. The main port facilities of Harwich International Port are now at Parkeston, about upstream on the Stour from the old town's quays.\nAt the 2021 census, the population of the parish of Harwich (which includes Dovercourt) was 18,794, and the population of the built up area as defined by the Office for National Statistics (which extends beyond Harwich parish to also include parts of the neighbouring parishes of Little Oakley and Ramsey and Parkeston) was 20,215.\nHistory.\nThe town's name means \"military settlement\", from Old English \"here-wic\".\nRoman remains have been found in the area. In 885 the River Stour north of the town was the location for the two battles.\nHarwich was anciently part of the manor and parish of Dovercourt. The original village of Dovercourt was at what is now known as Upper Dovercourt, a little way inland. In 1177, a chapel of ease was recorded at Harwich, which was probably a very small settlement at that time. It was not until the Duke of Norfolk as lord of the manor obtained the right to hold a market at Harwich in 1253 that the town began to develop more significantly. Harwich was granted its first charter making it a borough in 1318. The town was deemed to be a separate parish for civil purposes by the 16th century, but remained part of the ecclesiastical parish of Dovercourt until 1871, when its chapel of St Nicholas was upgraded to being a parish church.\nThe town was the target of an abortive raid by French forces under Antonio Doria on 24 March 1339 during the Hundred Years' War.\nThe town is known to have been granted several borough charters in medieval times, but the earliest surviving charter was issued in 1604. This charter confirms that the borough covered the whole area of the two parishes of Harwich St Nicholas and Dovercourt; it is not clear whether Dovercourt was added to the borough by virtue of that charter or whether Dovercourt was already included in the borough under the earlier lost charters.\nBecause of its strategic position, Harwich was the target for the invasion of Britain by William of Orange on 11 November 1688. However, unfavourable winds forced his fleet to sail into the English Channel instead and eventually land at Torbay. Due to the involvement of the Schomberg family in the invasion, Charles Louis Schomberg was made Marquess of Harwich.\nWriter Daniel Defoe devotes a few pages to the town in \"A tour thro' the Whole Island of Great Britain\". Visiting in 1722, he noted its formidable fort and harbour \"of a vast extent\". The town, he recounts, was also known for an unusual chalybeate spring rising on Beacon Hill (a promontory to the north-east of the town), which \"petrified\" clay, allowing it to be used to pave Harwich's streets and build its walls. The locals also claimed that \"the same spring is said to turn wood into iron\", but Defoe put this down to the presence of \"copperas\" in the water. Regarding the atmosphere of the town, he states: \"Harwich is a town of hurry and business, not much of gaiety and pleasure; yet the inhabitants seem warm in their nests and some of them are very wealthy\".\nIn the late 19th century and early 20th century the hamlet of Lower Dovercourt, lying on the western edge of Harwich between the town and the older village of Upper Dovercourt, was significantly developed. Both Upper Dovercourt and Lower Dovercourt were being described as suburbs of Harwich by the early 20th century. Lying next to Dovercourt railway station, Lower Dovercourt came to be known as Dovercourt and it now has the main town centre for the Harwich built up area; there are today few retail facilities in the old town of Harwich.\nHarwich played an important part in the Napoleonic and more especially the two world wars. Of particular note:\n1793\u20131815: Post Office Station for communication with Europe, one of embarkation and evacuation bases for expeditions to Holland in 1799, 1809, and 1813/14; base for capturing enemy privateers. The dockyard built many ships for the Navy, including HMS \"Conqueror\" which captured the French Admiral Villeneuve at the Battle of Trafalgar. The Redoubt and the now-demolished Ordnance Building date from that era.\n1914\u20131918: Base for the Royal Navy's Harwich Force light cruisers and destroyers under Commodore Tyrwhitt, and for British submarines. In November 1918, the German U-boat fleet surrendered to the Royal Navy in the harbour.\n1939\u20131945: One of main East Coast minesweeping and destroyer bases, at one period base for British and French submarines; assembled fleets for Dutch and Dunkirk evacuations and follow-up to D-Day; unusually, a target for Italian bombers during the Battle of Britain.\nRoyal Naval Dockyard.\nHarwich Dockyard was established as a Naval Dockyard in 1652. It ceased to operate as a Royal Dockyard in 1713 (though a Royal Navy presence was maintained until 1829). During the various wars with France and Holland, through to 1815, the dockyard was responsible for both building and repairing numerous warships. HMS \"Conqueror\", a 74-gun ship completed in 1801, captured the French admiral Villeneuve at Trafalgar. The yard was then a semi-private concern, with the actual shipbuilding contracted to Joseph Graham, who was sometimes mayor of the town. During World War II parts of Harwich were again requisitioned for naval use and ships were based at HMS \"Badger\"; \"Badger\" was decommissioned in 1946, but the Royal Naval Auxiliary Service maintained a headquarters on the site until 1992.\nLighthouses.\nIn 1665, not long after the establishment of the Dockyard, a pair of lighthouses were set up on the Town Green to serve as leading lights for ships entering the harbour. Completely rebuilt in 1818, both towers are still standing (though they ceased functioning as lighthouses in 1863, when they were replaced by a new pair of lights at Dovercourt).\nTransport.\nThe Royal Navy no longer has a presence in Harwich but Harwich International Port at nearby Parkeston continues to offer regular ferry services to the Hook of Holland (Hoek van Holland) in the Netherlands.\nMany operations of the Port of Felixstowe and of Trinity House, the lighthouse authority, are managed from Harwich.\nThe Mayflower railway line serves Harwich and there are three operational passenger stations: Harwich International, Dovercourt and Harwich Town. The line also allows freight trains to access the Port.\nThe port is famous for the phrase \"Harwich for the Continent\", seen on road signs and in London and North Eastern Railway (LNER) advertisements.\nFrom 1924 to 1987 (with a break during the Second World War), a train ferry service operated between Harwich and Zeebrugge. The train ferry linkspan still exists today and the rails leading from the former goods yard of Harwich Town railway station are still in position across the road, although the line is blocked by the Trinity House buoy store.\nArchitecture.\nDespite, or perhaps because of, its small size Harwich is highly regarded in terms of architectural heritage, and the whole of the older part of the town, excluding Navyard Wharf, is a conservation area.\nThe regular street plan with principal thoroughfares connected by numerous small alleys indicates the town's medieval origins, although many buildings of this period are hidden behind 18th century facades.\nThe extant medieval structures are largely private homes. The house featured in the image of Kings Head St to the left is unique in the town and is an example of a sailmaker's house, thought to have been built circa 1600. Notable public buildings include the parish church of St. Nicholas of 1820\u20131822 (architect: M G Thompson of Dedham), in a restrained Gothic style, with many original furnishings, including a somewhat altered organ in the west end gallery. There is also the Harwich Guildhall of 1769, the only Grade I listed building in Harwich.\nThe Pier Hotel of 1860 and the building that was the Great Eastern Hotel of 1864 can both been seen on the quayside, both reflecting the town's new importance to travellers following the arrival of the Great Eastern Main Line from Colchester in 1854. In 1923, The Great Eastern Hotel was closed by the newly formed LNER, as the Great Eastern Railway had opened a new hotel with the same name at the new passenger port at Parkeston Quay, causing a decline in numbers. The hotel became the Harwich Town Hall, which included the Magistrates Court and, following changes in local government, was sold and divided into apartments.\nAlso of interest are the High Lighthouse (1818), the unusual Treadwheel Crane (late 17th century), the Old Custom Houses on West Street, a number of Victorian shopfronts and the Electric Palace Cinema (1911), one of the oldest purpose-built cinemas to survive complete with its ornamental frontage and original projection room still intact and operational.\nThere is little notable building from the later parts of the 20th century, but major recent additions include the lifeboat station and two new structures for Trinity House. The Trinity House office building, next door to the Old Custom Houses, was completed in 2005. All three additions are influenced by the high-tech style.\nGovernance.\nThere are three tiers of local government covering Harwich, at parish (town), district and county level: Harwich Town Council, Tendring District Council, and Essex County Council. The town council is based at Harwich Guildhall at 11 Church Street.\nAdministrative history.\nThe town was granted its first borough charter in 1318. It was administered by a portreeve until 1604 when a new charter formally incorporated the borough and established a council led by a mayor. From 1604 the borough also served as a constituency for parliamentary elections, as the Harwich parliamentary borough.\nThe borough was reformed to become a municipal borough in 1836 under the Municipal Corporations Act 1835, which standardised how most boroughs operated across the country. From at least the 1604 charter, the borough had covered the two parishes of Harwich St Nicholas and Dovercourt. In 1925 the two parishes were merged into a single parish of Harwich matching the borough.\nThe borough of Harwich was abolished in 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, when the area became part of the new Tendring district. A successor parish called Harwich was created as part of the 1974 reforms, covering the area of the abolished borough, with its parish council taking the name Harwich Town Council.\nInternational Shanty Festival.\nA Harwich International Shanty Festival was set up in 2006 to organise and co-ordinate an annual sea shanty festival in October. Through concerts, 'singarounds', pub sessions, talks and workshops, the seafaring history and heritage of Harwich is celebrated by local people and international groups. This unique event for Essex attracts audiences countrywide and beyond. The festival is one of the biggest shanty festivals in the country.\nNotable residents.\nHarwich has also historically hosted a number of notable inhabitants, linked with Harwich's maritime past.\nSport.\nHarwich is home to Harwich &amp; Parkeston F.C.; Harwich and Dovercourt RFC; Harwich Rangers FC; Sunday Shrimpers; Harwich &amp; Dovercourt Sailing Club; Harwich, Dovercourt &amp; Parkeston Swimming Club; Harwich &amp; Dovercourt Rugby Union Football Club; Harwich &amp; Dovercourt Cricket Club; and Harwich Runners who with support from Harwich Swimming Club host the annual Harwich Triathlons.\nMedia.\nLocal news and television programmes are provided by BBC East and ITV Anglia. Television signals are received from the Sudbury transmitting station and the local relay transmitter.\nThe town is served by both BBC Essex and BBC Radio Suffolk. Other radio stations including Heart East, Greatest Hits Radio Essex, Actual Radio, Nation Radio Suffolk and \"Radio Mi Amigo\", a community based station which broadcast from The Harwich Quay.\nThe town is served by the local newspaper, \"Harwich and Manningtree Standard\" which publishes on Fridays.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14067", "revid": "49425883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14067", "title": "Hendrick Avercamp", "text": "Dutch painter (c. 1585\u20131634)\nHendrick Avercamp (January 27, 1585 (bapt.) \u2013 May 15, 1634 (buried)) was a Dutch painter during the Dutch Golden Age of painting. He was one of the earliest landscape painters of the 17th-century Dutch school, he specialized in painting the Netherlands in winter. His paintings are colorful and lively, with carefully crafted images of the people in the landscape. His works give a vivid depiction of sport and leisure in the Netherlands in the beginning of the 17th century. Many of Avercamp's paintings feature people ice skating on frozen lakes.\nAvercamp's work enjoyed great popularity and he sold his drawings, many of which were tinted with water-color, as finished pictures to be pasted into the albums of collectors. The Royal Collection has an outstanding collection of his works.\nLife.\nAvercamp was born in Amsterdam, where he studied with the Danish-born portrait painter Pieter Isaacsz (1569\u20131625), and perhaps also with David Vinckboons, who was a follower of Pieter Brueghel the Elder. In 1608 he moved from Amsterdam to Kampen in the province of Overijssel. Avercamp was mute and probably deaf, he was known as \"de Stomme van Kampen\" (the mute of Kampen). He also had a nephew Barent Avercamp (1621-1679) who was also a painter and who imitated Hendrick's style of painting. Avercamp lived his entire life through the Eighty Years' war, where the young Dutch Republic resisted in a war against the Spanish Habsburgs. He died in Kampen and was interred there in the Sint Nicolaaskerk.\nArtwork.\nAvercamp probably painted in his studio on the basis of sketches he had made in the winter.\nAvercamp was famous even from abroad for his winter landscapes. The passion for painting skating characters probably came from his childhood as he practiced skating with his parents. The last quarter of the 16th century, during which Avercamp was born, was one of the coldest periods of the Little Ice Age.\nThe Flemish painting tradition is mainly expressed in Avercamp's early work. This is consistent with the landscapes of Pieter Bruegel the Elder. Avercamp painted landscapes with a high horizon and many figures who were working on something. Many of his paintings are narrative-based, with many anecdotes. For instance, included in the painting \"Winter Landscape with Skaters\" are several prurient details: a couple making love, naked buttocks, and a peeing male. \nAvercamp used the painting technique of aerial perspective. The depth is suggested by a change of color in the distance. To the front objects are painted in richer colors, such as trees or a boat, while farther objects are lighter. This technique strengthens the impression of depth in the painting.\nSometimes Avercamp used paper frames, which were a cheap alternative to oil paintings. He first drew with pen and ink. This work was then covered with finishing paint. The contours of the drawing remained. Even with this technique, Avercamp could show the pale wintry colors and nuances of the ice. Avercamp has also painted cattle and seascapes. Later in his life drawing the atmosphere was also important in his work.\nAvercamp produced about a hundred paintings. The bulk of his artwork can be seen in the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam and the Mauritshuis in The Hague. \nIn 2009, the Rijksmuseum and the National Gallery of Art organized \"Hendrick Avercamp: The Little Ice Age\"\".\" It was shown at the Rijksmuseum November 20, 2009, to February 15, 2010, and the National Gallery of Art March 21 to July 5, 2010. The catalog was written by Pieter Roelofs et al. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14068", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14068", "title": "Hans Baldung", "text": "German painter and printmaker (c. 1484\u20131545)\nHans Baldung (1484 or 1485 \u2013 September 1545), called Hans Baldung Grien, (being an early nickname, because of his predilection for the colour green), was a painter, printer, engraver, draftsman, and stained glass artist, who was considered the most gifted student of Albrecht D\u00fcrer and whose art belongs to both German Renaissance and Mannerism. \nThroughout his lifetime, he developed a distinctive style, full of colour, expression and imagination. His talents were varied, and he produced a great and extensive variety of work including portraits, woodcuts, drawings, tapestries, altarpieces, and stained glass, often relying on allegories and mythological motifs.\nLife.\nEarly life, c. 1484\u20131500.\nHans was born in Schw\u00e4bisch Gm\u00fcnd (formerly Gm\u00fcnd in Germany), a small free city of the Empire, part of the East W\u00fcrttemberg region in former Swabia, Germany, in the year 1484 or 1485. Baldung was the son of Johann Baldung, a university-educated jurist, who held the office of legal adviser to the bishop of Strasbourg (Albert of Bavaria) from 1492, and Margarethe Herlin, daughter of Arbogast Herlin. His uncle, Hieronymus Baldung, was a doctor in medicine, with a son, Pius Hieronymus, Hans' cousin, who taught law at Freiburg and became chancellor of Tyrol in 1527.\nHans was not propertyless, but with unknown occupation. He was the first male in his family not to attend university, but was one of the first German artists to come from an academic family.\nLife as a student of D\u00fcrer.\nBaldung's earliest training as an artist began around 1500 in the Upper Rhineland with an artist from Strasbourg. Beginning in 1503, during the \"Wanderjahre\" (\"years of wandering\") required of artists of the time, Baldung became an assistant in Albrecht D\u00fcrer's studio in Nuremberg, where he perfected his art between 1503 and 1507.\nHere, he may have been given his nickname \"Grien\". This name is thought to have come foremost from a preference to the color green: he seems to have worn green clothing. He may also have been given this nickname to distinguish him from at least two other Hanses in D\u00fcrer's shop, Hans Sch\u00e4ufelin and Hans Suess von Kulmbach. He later included the name \"Grien\" in his monogram, and it has also been suggested that the name came from, or consciously echoed, \"grienhals\", a German word for witch\u2014one of his signature themes. \nHans quickly picked up D\u00fcrer's influence and style, and they became friends. Baldung seems to have managed D\u00fcrer's workshop during the latter's second sojourn in Venice. In a later trip to the Netherlands in 1521 D\u00fcrer's account book records that he took with him and sold prints by Baldung. Near the end of his Nuremberg years, Grien oversaw the production by D\u00fcrer of stained glass, woodcuts and engravings, and therefore developed an affinity for these media and for the Nuremberg master's handing of them. On D\u00fcrer's death Baldung was sent a lock of his hair, which suggests a close friendship.\nStrasbourg.\nIn 1509, when Baldung's time in Nuremberg was complete, he moved back to Strasbourg and became a citizen there. He became a celebrity of the town and received many important commissions. The following year, at age 26, he married Margarethe Herlin, a local merchant's daughter, with whom he had one child, Margarethe Baldungin. He also joined the guild \"Zur Steltz\", opened a workshop, and began signing his works with the HGB monogram that he used for the rest of his career. \nHis style became much more deliberately individual\u2014a tendency art historians used to term \"mannerist.\" He stayed in Freiburg im Breisgau in 1513\u20131516 where he made, among other things, the High altar of the Freiburg M\u00fcnster.\nLike D\u00fcrer and Cranach, Baldung supported the Protestant Reformation. He was present at the diet of Augsburg in 1518, and one of his woodcuts represents Luther in quasi-saintly guise, under the protection of (or being inspired by) the Holy Spirit, which hovers over him in the shape of a dove.\nWitchcraft and religious imagery.\nIn addition to traditional religious subjects, Baldung was concerned during these years with the profane themes of the imminence of death and the relation between the sexes, as well as with scenes of sorcery and witchcraft. The number of Baldung's religious works diminished with the Protestant Reformation, which generally repudiated church art as either wasteful or idolatrous.\nWhile D\u00fcrer had occasionally included images of witches in his work, Baldung was the first German artist to heavily incorporate witches and witchcraft and erotic themes into his artwork. His most characteristic works in this area are small in scale and mostly in the medium of drawing; these include a series of puzzling, often erotic allegories and mythological works executed in quill pen and ink and white body color on primed paper. \nHis fascination with witchcraft began early, in 1510 when he produced an important chiaroscuro woodcut known as \"The Witches' Sabbath\", and lasted to the end of his career. Witches were also a local interest: Strasbourg's humanists studied witchcraft and its bishop was charged with finding and prosecuting witches. \nBaldung's work depicting witches was produced in the first half of the 16th century, before witch hunting became a widespread cultural phenomenon in Europe. According to one view, Baldung's work did not represent widespread cultural beliefs at the time of creation but reflected largely individual choices. \nOn the other hand, Baldung may have taken inspiration from the humanism of the early 16th century. Baldung, through his family, stood closer to the leading humanist intellectuals of the day than any of his contemporaries and partook in this culture, producing not only many works depicting Strasbourg humanists and scenes from ancient art and literature, but also works reflecting their attitude, drawn in large part from classical poetry and satire, toward witches. To take one example, Baldung is believed to have alluded to the notion expressed in Latin and Greek literature that witches could control the weather in his 1523 oil painting \"Weather Witches\", which showcases two attractive and naked witches in front of a stormy sky. As Gert von der Osten commented, \"Baldung [treats] his witches humorously, an attitude that reflects the dominant viewpoint of the humanists in Strasbourg at this time who viewed witchcraft as 'lustig,' a matter that was more amusing than serious\". \nHowever, it has also proved difficult to distinguish between the satirical tone that some critics observe in Baldung's work and a more serious vilifying intent, just as it is for many other artists, including his rough contemporary Hieronymus Bosch. Baldung could also draw on a burgeoning literature on witchcraft, as well as on developing juridical and forensic strategies for witch-hunting. While Baldung never worked directly with any Reformation leaders to spread religious ideals through his artwork, even though he lived in fervently religious Strasbourg, he was a supporter of the movement, working on the high altar in the city of M\u00fcnster, Germany.\nBaldung also regularly incorporated scenes of witches flying in his art, a characteristic that had been contested centuries before his artwork came into being. Flying was inherently attributed to witches by those who believed in the myth of the Sabbath Flight; without their ability to fly, the myth fragmented. Baldung depicted this in works such as \"Witches Preparing for the Sabbath Flight\" (1514).\nWork.\nPainting.\nBaldung settled eventually in Strasbourg and then to Freiburg im Breisgau, where he executed what is held to be his masterpiece: an eleven-panel altarpiece for the Freiburg Cathedral, still intact today, depicting scenes from the life of the Virgin, including \"The Annunciation\", \"The Visitation\", \"The Nativity\", \"The Flight into Egypt\", \"The Crucifixion\", \"Four Saints\" and \"The Donators\". These depictions were a large part of the artist's greater body of work containing several renowned depictions of the Virgin.\nThe earliest pictures assigned to him by some are altar-pieces with the monogram H. B. interlaced, and the date of 1496, in the monastery chapel of Lichtenthal near Baden-Baden. \"The Martyrdom of St Sebastian and the Epiphany\" (now Berlin, 1507) was painted for the market-church of Halle in Saxony.\nBaldung is well known as a portrait painter, known for his sharp characterization of his subjects. His works include historical pictures and portraits, such as Maximilian I and Charles V. At a later period he had sittings with Margrave Christopher of Baden, Ottilia his wife, and all their children, and the picture containing these portraits is still in the gallery at Karlsruhe. \nWhile D\u00fcrer rigorously details his models, Baldung's style differs by focusing more on the personality of the represented character, an abstract conception of the model's state of mind.\nPrintmaking.\nHis prints are more important than his paintings. Baldung's prints, though D\u00fcreresque, are very individual in style, and often in subject, showing little direct Italian influence. He worked mainly in woodcut, although he made six engravings, one very fine. He joined in the fashion for chiaroscuro woodcuts, adding a tone block to a woodcut of 1510. Most of his hundreds of woodcuts were commissioned for books, as was usual at the time; his \"single-leaf\" woodcuts (i.e. prints not for book illustration) are fewer than 100, though no two catalogues agree as to the exact number.\nUnconventional as a draughtsman, his treatment of human form is often exaggerated and eccentric (hence his linkage, in the art historical literature, with European Mannerism), whilst his ornamental style\u2014profuse, eclectic, and akin to the self-consciously \"German\" strain of contemporary limewood sculptors\u2014is equally distinctive. Though Baldung has been commonly called the Correggio of the north, his compositions are a curious medley of glaring and heterogeneous colours, in which pure black is contrasted with pale yellow, dirty grey, impure red and glowing green. Flesh is a mere glaze under which the features are indicated by lines.\nHis works are notable for their individualistic departure from the Renaissance composure of his model, D\u00fcrer, for the wild and fantastic strength that some of them display, and for their remarkable themes. In the field of painting, his \"Eve, the Serpent and Death\" (National Gallery of Canada) shows his strengths well. There is special force in the \"Death and the Maiden\" panel of 1517 (Basel), in the \"Weather Witches\" (Frankfurt), in the monumental panels of \"Adam\" and \"Eve\" (Madrid), and in his many powerful portraits. Baldung's most sustained effort is the altarpiece of Freiburg, where the \"Coronation of the Virgin\", and the \"Twelve Apostles\", the \"Annunciation\", \"Visitation\", \"Nativity\" and \"Flight into Egypt\", and the \"Crucifixion\", with portraits of donors, are executed with some of that fanciful power that Martin Schongauer bequeathed to the Swabian school.\nOther works.\nOne of his earliest works is a portrait of the emperor Maximilian, drawn in 1501 on a leaf of a sketch-book now in the print-room at Karlsruhe. \nHis bust of Margrave Philip in the Munich Gallery tells us that he was connected with the reigning family of Baden as early as 1514.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14070", "revid": "43270384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14070", "title": "Hammered dulcimer", "text": "Percussion-stringed instrument\nThe hammered dulcimer (also called the hammer dulcimer) is a percussion-string instrument which consists of strings typically stretched over a trapezoidal resonant sound board. The hammered dulcimer is set before the musician, who in more traditional styles may sit cross-legged on the floor, or in a more modern style may stand or sit at a wooden support with legs. The player holds a small spoon-shaped mallet or \"hammer\" in each hand to strike the strings. The Graeco-Roman word \"dulcimer\" ('sweet song') derives from the Latin ('sweet') and the Greek (, 'song'). The dulcimer, in which the strings are beaten with small hammers, originated from the psaltery, in which the strings are plucked.\nHammered dulcimers and other similar instruments are traditionally played in Iraq, India, Iran, Southwest Asia, China, Korea, and parts of Southeast Asia, Central Europe (Hungary, Slovenia, Romania, Slovakia, Poland, Czech Republic, Switzerland [particularly Appenzell], Austria and Bavaria), the Balkans, Eastern Europe (Ukraine and Belarus), and Scandinavia. The instrument is also played in the United Kingdom (Wales, East Anglia, Northumbria), and the United States, where its traditional use in folk music saw a revival in the late 20th century.\nHistory.\nThe santur, a type of hammered dulcimer, originates from the Middle East. The earliest evidence comes from Assyrian and Babylonian stone carvings dated to 669 BC, showing the instrument being played while hanging from the player's neck. This instrument was traded and travelled to different parts of the Middle East. Musicians modified the original design over the centuries, yielding a wide array of musical scales and tunings. The original santur was likely made with wood and stone and strung with goat intestines. The Babylonian santur was the ancestor of the harp, yangqin, harpsichord, qanun, cimbalom and hammered dulcimers. \nIn Western Europe, a hammered dulcimer first appears in textual and iconographic sources from the early 15th century. The hammered dulcimer was extensively used during the Middle Ages in England, France, Italy, Germany, the Netherlands, and Spain. \nStrings and tuning.\nA dulcimer usually has two bridges, a bass bridge near the right and a treble bridge on the left side. The bass bridge holds up bass strings, which are played to the left of the bridge. The treble strings can be played on either side of the treble bridge. In the usual construction, playing them on the left side gives a note a fifth higher than playing them on the right of the bridge.\nThe dulcimer comes in various sizes, identified by the number of strings that cross each of the bridges. A 15/14, for example, has 15 strings crossing the treble bridge and 14 crossing the bass bridge, and can span three octaves. The strings of a hammered dulcimer are usually found in pairs, two strings for each note (though some instruments have three or four strings per note). Each set of strings is tuned in unison and is called a course. As with a piano, the purpose of using multiple strings per course is to make the instrument louder, although as the courses are rarely in perfect unison, a chorus effect usually results like a mandolin. The strings of the hammered dulcimer are wound around tuning pins with square heads (ordinarily, 5\u00a0mm \"zither pins\" are used, similar to, but smaller in diameter than piano tuning pins, which come in various sizes ranging upwards from \"1/0\" or 7\u00a0mm), and tuning requires a wrench as for an autoharp, harp, or piano. \nThe strings of the hammered dulcimer are often tuned according to a circle of fifths pattern. Typically, the lowest note (often a G or D) is struck at the lower right-hand of the instrument, just to the left of the right-hand (bass) bridge. As a player strikes the courses above in sequence, they ascend following a repeating sequence of two whole steps and a half step. With this tuning, a diatonic scale is broken into two tetrachords, or groups of four notes. For example, on an instrument with D as the lowest note, the D major scale is played starting in the lower-right corner and ascending the bass bridge: D \u2013 E \u2013 F\u266f \u2013 G. This is the lower tetrachord of the D major scale. At this point the player returns to the bottom of the instrument and shifts to the treble strings to the right of the treble bridge to play the higher tetrachord: A \u2013 B \u2013 C\u266f \u2013 D. The player can continue up the scale on the right side of the treble bridge with E \u2013 F\u266f \u2013 G \u2013 A \u2013 B, but the next note will be C, not C\u266f, so he or she must switch to the left side of the treble bridge (and closer to the player) to continue the D major scale. See the drawing on the left above, in which \"DO\" would correspond to D (see Movable do solf\u00e8ge).\nThe shift from the bass bridge to the treble bridge is required because the bass bridge's fourth string G is the start of the lower tetrachord of the G scale. The player could go on up a couple notes (G \u2013 A \u2013 B), but the next note will be a flatted seventh (C natural in this case), because this note is drawn from the G tetrachord. This D major scale with a flatted seventh is the mixolydian mode in D.\nThe same thing happens as the player goes up the treble bridge \u2013 after getting to La (B in this case), one has to go to the left of the treble bridge. Moving from the left side of the bass bridge to the right side of the treble bridge is analogous to moving from the right side of the treble bridge to the left side of the treble bridge.\nThe whole pattern can be shifted up by three courses, so that instead of a D-major scale one would have a G-major scale, and so on. This transposes one equally tempered scale to another. Shifting down three courses transposes the D-major scale to A-major, but of course the first Do-Re-Mi would be shifted off the instrument.\nThis tuning results in most, but not all, notes of the chromatic scale being available. To fill in the gaps, many modern dulcimer builders include extra short bridges at the top and bottom of the soundboard, where extra strings are tuned to some or all of the missing pitches. Such instruments are often called \"chromatic dulcimers\" as opposed to the more traditional \"diatonic dulcimers\".\nThe tetrachord markers found on the bridges of most hammered dulcimers in the English-speaking world were introduced by the American player and maker Sam Rizzetta in the 1960s.\nIn the Alps there are also chromatic dulcimers with crossed strings, which are in a whole tone distance in every row. This chromatic \"Salzburger hackbrett\" was developed in the mid 1930s from the diatonic hammered dulcimer by Tobi Reizer and his son along with Franz Peyer and Heinrich Bandzauner. In the postwar period it was one of the instruments taught in state-sponsored music schools.\nHammered dulcimers of non-European descent may have other tuning patterns, and builders of European-style dulcimers sometimes experiment with alternate tuning patterns.\nHammers.\nThe instrument is referred to as \"hammered\" in reference to the small mallets (referred to as \"hammers\") that players use to strike the strings. Hammers are usually made of wood (most likely hardwoods such as maple, cherry, padauk, oak, walnut, or any other hardwood), but can also be made from any material, including metal and plastic. In the Western hemisphere, hammers are usually stiff, but in Asia, flexible hammers are often used. The head of the hammer can be left bare for a sharp attack sound, or can be covered with adhesive tape, leather, or fabric for a softer sound. Two-sided hammers are also available. The heads of two-sided hammers are usually oval or round. Most of the time, one side is left as bare wood while the other side may be covered in leather or a softer material such as piano felt.\nSeveral traditional players have used hammers that differ substantially from those in common use today. Paul Van Arsdale (1920\u20132018), a player from upstate New York, used flexible hammers made from hacksaw blades, with leather-covered wooden blocks attached to the ends (these were modeled after the hammers used by his grandfather, Jesse Martin). The Irish player John Rea (1915\u20131983) used hammers made of thick steel wire, which he made himself from old bicycle wheel spokes wrapped with wool. Billy Bennington (1900\u20131986), a player from Norfolk, England, used cane hammers bound with wool.\nThe piano, like the dulcimer, uses a hammering action to strike the strings.\nVariants and adaptations.\nVersions of the hammered dulcimer, each of which has its own distinct manner of construction and playing style, are used throughout the world:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14071", "revid": "50718406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14071", "title": "Humanae vitae", "text": "1968 encyclical by Pope Paul VI\n (Latin, meaning 'Of Human Life') is an encyclical written by Pope Paul VI and dated 25 July 1968. The text was issued at a Vatican press conference on 29 July. Subtitled \"On the Regulation of Birth\", it re-affirmed the teaching of the Catholic Church regarding married love, responsible parenthood, and the rejection of artificial contraception. In formulating his teaching he explained why he did not accept the conclusions of the Pontifical Commission on Birth Control established by his predecessor, Pope John XXIII, a commission he himself had expanded.\nMainly because of its restatement of the Church's opposition to artificial contraception, the encyclical was politically controversial. It dogmaticized a conservative interpretation of traditional Church moral teaching on the sanctity of life in the context of human intervention in fertility and the procreative and unitive nature of Catholic conjugal relations.\nIt was the last of Paul's seven encyclicals.\nSummary.\nAffirmation of traditional teaching.\nIn this encyclical Paul VI reaffirmed the Catholic Church's view of marriage and marital relations and a continued condemnation of \"artificial\" birth control. Referencing two Papal committees and numerous independent experts examining new developments in artificial birth control, Paul VI built on the teachings of his predecessors, especially Pius XI, Pius XII and John XXIII, all of whom had insisted on the divine obligations of the marital partners in light of their partnership with God the creator.\nDoctrinal basis.\nPaul VI himself, even as commission members issued their personal views over the years, always reaffirmed the teachings of the Church, repeating them more than once in the first years of his Pontificate.\nTo Pope Paul VI, marital relations were much more than a union of two people. In his view, they constitute a union of the loving couple with a loving God, in which the two persons generate the matter for the body, while God creates the unique soul of a person. For this reason, Paul VI teaches in the first sentence of , that the \"transmission of human life is a most serious role in which married people collaborate freely and responsibly with God the Creator.\" This is divine partnership, so Paul VI does not allow for arbitrary human decisions, which may limit divine providence. According to Paul VI, marital relations are a source of great joy, but also of difficulties and hardships. The question of human procreation with God, exceeds in the view of Paul VI specific disciplines such as biology, psychology, demography or sociology. According to Paul VI, married love takes its origin from God, who is love, and from this basic dignity, he defines his position:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Love is total \u2013 that very special form of personal friendship in which husband and wife generously share everything, allowing no unreasonable exceptions and not thinking solely of their own convenience. Whoever really loves his partner loves not only for what he receives, but loves that partner for the partner's own sake, content to be able to enrich the other with the gift of himself.\nThe encyclical opens with an assertion of the competency of the magisterium of the Catholic Church to decide questions of morality. It then goes on to observe that circumstances often dictate that married couples should limit the number of children, and that the sexual act between husband and wife is still worthy even if it can be foreseen not to result in procreation. Nevertheless, it is held that the sexual act must retain its intrinsic relationship to the procreation of human life.\nEvery action specifically intended to prevent procreation is forbidden, except in medically necessary circumstances. Therapeutic means necessary to cure diseases are exempted, even if a foreseeable impediment to procreation should result, but only if infertility is not directly intended. This is held to directly contradict the moral order which was established by God. Abortion, even for therapeutic reasons, is absolutely forbidden, as is sterilization, even if temporary. Therapeutic means which induce infertility are allowed (e.g., hysterectomy), if they are not specifically intended to cause infertility (e.g., the uterus is cancerous, so the preservation of life is intended). If there are well grounded reasons (arising from the physical or psychological condition of husband or wife, or from external circumstances), natural family planning methods (abstaining from intercourse during certain parts of the menstrual cycle) are allowed, since they take advantage of a faculty provided by nature.\nThe acceptance of artificial methods of birth control is then claimed to result in several negative consequences, among them a general lowering of moral standards resulting from sex without consequences, and the danger that men may reduce women to being a mere instrument for the satisfaction of [their] own desires; finally, abuse of power by public authorities, and a false sense of autonomy.\nAppeal to natural law and conclusion.\nPublic authorities should oppose laws which undermine natural law; scientists should further study effective methods of natural birth control; doctors should further familiarize themselves with this teaching, in order to be able to give advice to their patients, and priests must spell out clearly and completely the Church's teaching on marriage. The encyclical acknowledges that \"perhaps not everyone will easily accept this particular teaching\", but that \"it comes as no surprise to the church that she, no less than her Divine founder is destined to be a sign of contradiction.\" Noted is the duty of proclaiming the entire moral law, \"both natural and evangelical.\" The encyclical also points out that the Roman Catholic Church cannot \"declare lawful what is in fact unlawful\", because she is concerned with \"safeguarding the holiness of marriage, in order to guide married life to its full human and Christian perfection.\" This is to be the priority for his fellow bishops and priests and lay people. Paul VI predicted that future progress in social cultural and economic spheres would make marital and family life more joyful, provided God's design for the world was faithfully followed. The encyclical closes with an appeal to observe the natural laws of the most high God. \"These laws must be wisely and lovingly observed.\"\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThere had been a long-standing general Christian prohibition on contraception and abortion, with such Church Fathers as Clement of Alexandria and Saint Augustine condemning the practices. It was not until the 1930 Lambeth Conference that the Anglican Communion allowed for contraception in limited circumstances. Mainline Protestant denominations have since removed prohibitions against artificial contraception. In a partial reaction, Pope Pius XI wrote the encyclical (\"Of Chaste Wedlock\") in 1930, reaffirming the Catholic Church's belief in various traditional Christian teachings on marriage and sexuality, including the prohibition of artificial birth control even within marriage. is against contraception and regarding natural family planning allowed married couples to use their nuptial rights \"in the proper manner\" when because of either time or defects, new life could not be brought forth.\nThe commission of John XXIII.\nWith the appearance of the first oral contraceptives in 1960, dissenters in the Church argued for a reconsideration of the Church positions. In 1963 Pope John XXIII established a commission of six European non-theologians to study questions of birth control and population. It met once in 1963 and twice in 1964. As Vatican Council II was concluding, Pope Paul VI enlarged it to fifty-eight members, including married couples, laywomen, theologians and bishops. The last document issued by the council () contained a section titled \"Fostering the Nobility of Marriage\" (1965, nos. 47\u201352), which discussed marriage from the personalist point of view. The \"duty of responsible parenthood\" was affirmed, but the determination of licit and illicit forms of regulating birth was reserved to Pope Paul VI. In the spring of 1966, following the close of the council, the commission held its fifth and final meeting, having been enlarged again to include sixteen bishops as an executive committee. The commission was only consultative but it submitted a report approved by a majority of 64 members to Paul VI. It proposed the approval of artificial contraception without distinction of the various means. A minority of four members opposed this report and issued a parallel report to the Pope. Arguments in the minority report, against change in the church's teaching, were that a loosening of contraception restrictions would mean the Catholic Church would \"have to concede frankly that the Holy Spirit had been on the side of the Protestant churches in 1930\" (when was promulgated), and that \"it should likewise have to be admitted that for a half a century the Spirit failed to protect Pius XI, Pius XII, and a large part of the Catholic hierarchy from a very serious error.\"\nAfter two more years of study and consultation, the pope issued , which removed any doubt that the Church views hormonal anti-ovulants as contraceptive. He explained why he did not accept the opinion of the majority report of the commission (1968, #6). Arguments were raised in the decades that followed that his decision has never passed the condition of \"reception\" to become church doctrine.\nDrafting of the encyclical.\nIn his role as Theologian of the Pontifical Household, Mario Luigi Ciappi advised Pope Paul VI during the drafting of . Ciappi, a doctoral graduate of the , the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, , served as professor of dogmatic theology there and was Dean of the 's Faculty of Theology from 1935 to 1955.\nAccording to George Weigel, Paul VI named Archbishop Karol Wojty\u0142a (later Pope John Paul II) to the commission, but Polish government authorities would not permit him to travel to Rome. Wojty\u0142a had earlier defended the church's position from a philosophical standpoint in his 1960 book \"Love and Responsibility\". Wojty\u0142a's position was strongly considered and it was reflected in the final draft of the encyclical, although much of his language and arguments were not incorporated. Weigel attributes much of the poor reception of the encyclical to the omission of many of Wojty\u0142a's arguments.\nIn 2017, anticipating the 50th anniversary of the encyclical, four theologians led by Mgr. Gilfredo Marengo, a professor of theological anthropology at the Pontifical John Paul II Institute for Studies on Marriage and Family, launched a research project he called \"a work of historical-critical investigation without any aim other than reconstructing as well as possible the whole process of composing the encyclical\". Using the resources of the Vatican Secret Archives and the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, they hope to detail the writing process and the interaction between the commission, publicity surrounding the commission's work, and Paul's own authorship.\nHighlights.\nFaithfulness to God's design.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;13. Men rightly observe that a conjugal act imposed on one's partner without regard to his or her condition or personal and reasonable wishes in the matter, is no true act of love, and therefore offends the moral order in its particular application to the intimate relationship of husband and wife. If they further reflect, they must also recognize that an act of mutual love which impairs the capacity to transmit life which God the Creator, through specific laws, has built into it, frustrates His design which constitutes the norm of marriage, and contradicts the will of the Author of life. Hence to use this divine gift while depriving it, even if only partially, of its meaning and purpose, is equally repugnant to the nature of man and of woman, and is consequently in opposition to the plan of God and His holy will. But to experience the gift of married love while respecting the laws of conception is to acknowledge that one is not the master of the sources of life but rather the minister of the design established by the Creator. Just as man does not have unlimited dominion over his body in general, so also, and with more particular reason, he has no such dominion over his specifically sexual faculties, for these are concerned by their very nature with the generation of life, of which God is the source. \"Human life is sacred\u2014all men must recognize that fact,\" Our predecessor Pope John XXIII recalled. \"From its very inception it reveals the creating hand of God.\"\u2014\u200a\nLawful therapeutic means.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRecourse to infertile periods.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nConcern of the Church.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;18. It is to be anticipated that perhaps not everyone will easily accept this particular teaching. There is too much clamorous outcry against the voice of the Church, and this is intensified by modern means of communication. But it comes as no surprise to the Church that it, no less than its divine Founder, is destined to be a \"sign of contradiction.\" The Church does not, because of this, evade the duty imposed on it of proclaiming humbly but firmly the entire moral law, both natural and evangelical. Since the Church did not make either of these laws, it cannot be their arbiter\u2014only their guardian and interpreter. It could never be right for the Church to declare lawful what is in fact unlawful, since that, by its very nature, is always opposed to the true good of man. In preserving intact the whole moral law of marriage, the Church is convinced that it is contributing to the creation of a truly human civilization. The Church urges man not to betray his personal responsibilities by putting all his faith in technical expedients. In this way it defends the dignity of husband and wife. This course of action shows that the Church, loyal to the example and teaching of the divine Savior, is sincere and unselfish in its regard for men whom it strives to help even now during this earthly pilgrimage \"to share God's life as sons of the living God, the Father of all men\".\nDeveloping countries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;23. We are fully aware of the difficulties confronting the public authorities in this matter, especially in the developing countries. In fact, We had in mind the justifiable anxieties which weigh upon them when We published Our encyclical letter . But now We join Our voice to that of Our predecessor John XXIII of venerable memory, and We make Our own his words: \"No statement of the problem and no solution to it is acceptable which does violence to man's essential dignity; those who propose such solutions base them on an utterly materialistic conception of man himself and his life. The only possible solution to this question is one which envisages the social and economic progress both of individuals and of the whole of human society, and which respects and promotes true human values.\" No one can, without being grossly unfair, make divine Providence responsible for what clearly seems to be the result of misguided governmental policies, of an insufficient sense of social justice, of a selfish accumulation of material goods, and finally of a culpable failure to undertake those initiatives and responsibilities which would raise the standard of living of peoples and their children.\nReception.\nGalileo affair comparison.\nCardinal Leo Joseph Suenens, a moderator of the ecumenical council, questioned, \"whether moral theology took sufficient account of scientific progress, which can help determine, what is according to nature. I beg you my brothers let us avoid another Galileo affair. One is enough for the Church.\" In an interview in on 15 May 1969, he criticized the Pope's decision again as frustrating the collegiality defined by the council, calling it a non-collegial or even an anti-collegial act. He was supported by Vatican II theologians such as Karl Rahner, Hans K\u00fcng, several Episcopal conferences, e.g. the Episcopal Conference of Austria, Germany, and Switzerland, as well as several bishops, including Christopher Butler, who called it one of the most important contributions to contemporary discussion in the Church.\nOpen dissent.\nThe publication of the encyclical marks the first time in the twentieth century that open dissent from the laity about teachings of the Church was voiced widely and publicly. The teaching has been criticized by development organizations and others who claim that it limits the methods available to fight worldwide population growth and struggle against HIV/AIDS. Within two days of the encyclical's release, a group of dissident theologians, led by Rev. Charles Curran, then Catholic University of America, issued a statement stating, \"spouses may responsibly decide according to their conscience that artificial contraception in some circumstances is permissible and indeed necessary to preserve and foster the value and sacredness of marriage.\"\nCanadian bishops.\nTwo months later, the controversial Winnipeg Statement issued by the Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops stated that those who cannot accept the teaching should not be considered shut off from the Catholic Church, and that individuals can in good conscience use contraception as long as they have first made an honest attempt to accept the difficult directives of the encyclical.\nDutch Catechism.\nThe Dutch Catechism of 1966, based on the Dutch bishops' interpretation of the just completed Vatican Council, and the first post-Council comprehensive Catholic catechism, noted the lack of mention of artificial contraception in the council. \"As everyone can ascertain nowadays, there are several methods of regulating births. The Second Vatican Council did not speak of any of these concrete methods[...] This is a different standpoint than that taken under Pius XI some thirty years ago which was also maintained by his successor[...] we can sense here a clear development in the Church, a development, which is also going on outside the Church.\"\nSoviet Union.\nIn the Soviet Union, \"Literaturnaya Gazeta\", a publication of Soviet intellectuals, included an editorial and statement by Russian physicians against the encyclical.\nEcumenical reactions.\nEcumenical reactions were mixed. Liberal and Moderate Lutherans and the World Council of Churches were disappointed. Eugene Carson Blake criticised the concepts of nature and natural law, which, in his view, still dominated Catholic theology, as outdated. This concern dominated several articles in Catholic and non-Catholic journals at the time. Patriarch Athenagoras I stated his full agreement with Pope Paul VI: \"He could not have spoken in any other way.\"\nLatin America.\nIn Latin America, much support developed for the Pope and his encyclical. As World Bank President Robert McNamara declared at the 1968 Annual Meeting of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group that countries permitting birth control practices will get preferential access to resources, doctors in La Paz, Bolivia, called it insulting that money should be exchanged for the conscience of a Catholic nation. In Colombia, Cardinal An\u00edbal Mu\u00f1oz Duque declared, \"if American conditionality undermines Papal teachings, we prefer not to receive one cent\". The Senate of Bolivia passed a resolution, stating that can be discussed in its implications on individual consciences, but is of greatest significance because it defends the rights of developing nations to determine their own population policies. The Jesuit Journal \"Sic\" dedicated one edition to the encyclical with supportive contributions. However, against eighteen insubordinate priests, professors of theology at Pontifical Catholic University of Chile, and the ensuing conspiracy of silence practiced by the Chilean Episcopate, which had to be censured by the Nuncio in Santiago at the behest of Cardinal Gabriel-Marie Garrone, prefect of the Congregation for Catholic Education, triggering eventually a media conflict with El Diario Ilustrado, Plinio Corr\u00eaa de Oliveira expressed his affliction with the lamentations of Jeremiah: \"O ye all that pass through the way\u2026\" (Lamentations 1:12, King James Bible).\nCardinal Martini.\nIn the book \"Nighttime conversations in Jerusalem. On the risk of faith.\", well-known liberal Cardinal Carlo Maria Martini accused Paul VI of deliberately concealing the truth, leaving it to theologians and pastors to fix things by adapting precepts to practice: \"I knew Paul VI well. With the encyclical, he wanted to express consideration for human life. He explained his intention to some of his friends by using a comparison: although one must not lie, sometimes it is not possible to do otherwise; it may be necessary to conceal the truth, or it may be unavoidable to tell a lie. It is up to the moralists to explain where sin begins, especially in the cases in which there is a higher duty than the transmission of life.\"\nKarol Wojty\u0142a.\nThe future Pope John Paul II (at the time Archbishop of Krakow Karol Wojty\u0142a) asked Paul VI to apply Papal infallibility \"in docendo\" (in teaching) to the encyclical, equating it with the authority of a dogma. Paul VI and John XXIII did not. Wojty\u0142a himself declared the encyclical part of the ordinary and universal Magisterium of the Roman Catholic Church.\nResponse of Pope Paul VI.\nPope Paul VI was troubled by the encyclical's reception in the West. Acknowledging the controversy, Paul VI in a letter to the Congress of German Catholics (30 August 1968), stated: \"May the lively debate aroused by our encyclical lead to a better knowledge of God's will.\" In March 1969, he had a meeting with one of the main critics of , Cardinal Leo Joseph Suenens. Paul heard him out and said merely, \"Yes, pray for me; because of my weaknesses, the Church is badly governed.\" To jog the memory of his critics, he also put in their minds the experience of no less a figure than Peter: \"[n]ow I understand St Peter: he came to Rome twice, the second time to be crucified\", \u2013 herewith directing their attention to his rejoicing in glorifying the Lord. Increasingly convinced, that \"the smoke of Satan entered the temple of God from some fissure\", Paul VI reaffirmed, on 23 June 1978, weeks before his death, in an address to the College of Cardinals, his : \"following the confirmations of serious science\", and which sought to affirm the principle of respect for the laws of nature and of \"a conscious and ethically responsible paternity\".\nPadre Pio.\nIn his last letter to Pope Paul VI, Christian mystic and canonized saint Padre Pio called \"clear and decisive words\".\nLegacy.\nPolls have shown that many self-identified Catholics use artificial means of contraception, and that very few use natural family planning. However, John L. Allen Jr. wrote in 2008: \"Three decades of bishops' appointments by John Paul II and Benedict XVI, both unambiguously committed to , mean that senior leaders in Catholicism these days are far less inclined than they were in 1968 to distance themselves from the ban on birth control, or to soft-pedal it. Some Catholic bishops have brought out documents of their own defending .\" Developments in fertility awareness since the 1960s have also given rise to natural family planning organizations such as the Billings Ovulation Method, Couple to Couple League and the Creighton Model FertilityCare System, which actively provide formal instruction on the use and reliability of natural methods of birth control.\nPope John Paul I.\nJohn Paul the First's views on have been debated. Journalist John L. Allen Jr. claims that \"it's virtually certain that John Paul I would not have reversed Paul VI's teaching, particularly since he was no doctrinal radical. Moreover, as Patriarch in Venice some had seen a hardening of his stance on social issues as the years went by.\" According to Allen, \"it is reasonable to assume that John Paul I would not have insisted upon the negative judgment in as aggressively and publicly as John Paul II did, and probably would not have treated it as a quasi-infallible teaching. It would have remained a more 'open' question\". Other sources take a different view and note that during his time as Patriarch of Venice that \"Luciani was intransigent with his upholding of the teaching of the Church and severe with those, through intellectual pride and disobedience paid no attention to the Church's prohibition of contraception\", though while not condoning the sin, he was tolerant of those who sincerely tried and failed to live up to the Church's teaching. Raymond and Lauretta's book \"The Smiling Pope, The Life &amp; Teaching of John Paul I\" states that \"if some people think that his compassion and gentleness in this respect implies he was against one can only infer it was wishful thinking on their part and an attempt to find an ally in favor of artificial contraception.\"\nPope John Paul II.\nAfter he became pope in 1978, John Paul II continued on the Catholic Theology of the Body of his predecessors with a series of lectures, entitled \"Theology of the Body\", in which he talked about an \"original unity between man and women\", purity of heart (on the Sermon on the Mount), marriage and celibacy and reflections on , focusing largely on responsible parenthood and marital chastity.\nIn 1981, the Pope's Apostolic exhortation, , restated the Church's opposition to artificial birth control stated previously in .\nJohn Paul II readdressed some of the same issues in his 1993 encyclical . He reaffirmed much of , and specifically described the practice of artificial contraception as an act not permitted by Catholic teaching in any circumstances. The same encyclical also clarifies the use of conscience in arriving at moral decisions, including in the use of contraception. However, John Paul also said, \"It is not right then to regard the moral conscience of the individual and the magisterium of the Church as two contenders, as two realities in conflict. The authority which the magisterium enjoys by the will of Christ exists so that the moral conscience can attain the truth with security and remain in it.\" John Paul quoted as a compassionate encyclical, \"Christ has come not to judge the world but to save it, and while he was uncompromisingly stern towards sin, he was patient and rich in mercy towards sinners\".\nPope John Paul's 1995 encyclical ('The Gospel of Life') affirmed the Church's position on contraception and multiple topics related to the culture of life.\nPope Benedict XVI.\nOn 12 May 2008, Benedict XVI accepted an invitation to talk to participants in the International Congress organized by the Pontifical Lateran University on the 40th anniversary of . He put the encyclical in the broader view of love in a global context, a topic he called \"so controversial, yet so crucial for humanity's future.\" became \"a sign of contradiction but also of continuity of the Church's doctrine and tradition... What was true yesterday is true also today.\" The Church continues to reflect \"in an ever new and deeper way on the fundamental principles that concern marriage and procreation.\" The key message of is love. Benedict states, that the fullness of a person is achieved by a unity of soul and body, but neither spirit nor body alone can love, only the two together. If this unity is broken, if only the body is satisfied, love becomes a commodity.\nPope Francis.\nOn 16 January 2015, Pope Francis said to a meeting with families in Manila, insisting on the need to protect the family: \"The family is[...] threatened by growing efforts on the part of some to redefine the very institution of marriage, by relativism, by the culture of the ephemeral, by a lack of openness to life. I think of Blessed Paul VI. At a time when the problem of population growth was being raised, he had the courage to defend openness to life in families. He knew the difficulties that are there in every family, and so in his Encyclical he was very merciful towards particular cases, and he asked confessors to be very merciful and understanding in dealing with particular cases. But he also had a broader vision: he looked at the peoples of the earth and he saw this threat of the destruction of the family through the privation of children [original Spanish: ]. Paul VI was courageous; he was a good pastor and he warned his flock of the wolves who were coming.\"\nA year before, on 1 May 2014, Pope Francis, in an interview given to Italian newspaper , expressed his opinion and praise for : \"Everything depends on how is interpreted. Paul VI himself, in the end, urged confessors to be very merciful and pay attention to concrete situations. But his genius was prophetic, he had the courage to take a stand against the majority, to defend moral discipline, to exercise a cultural restraint, to oppose present and future neo-Malthusianism. The question is not of changing doctrine, but of digging deep and making sure that pastoral care takes into account situations and what it is possible for persons to do.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14072", "revid": "7407280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14072", "title": "History of Wikipedia", "text": " The English edition of Wikipedia has grown to articles.\nWikipedia, a free-content online encyclopedia written and maintained by a community of volunteers known as Wikipedians, began with its first edit on 15 January 2001, two days after the domain was registered. It grew out of Nupedia, a more structured free encyclopedia, as a way to allow easier and faster drafting of articles and translations.\nThe technological and conceptual underpinnings of Wikipedia predate this; the earliest known proposal for an online encyclopedia was made by Rick Gates in 1993, and the concept of a free-as-in-freedom online encyclopedia (as distinct from mere open source) was proposed by Richard Stallman in 1998.\nStallman's concept specifically included the idea that no central organization should control editing. This contrasted with contemporary digital encyclopedias such as Microsoft Encarta and \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica.\" In 2001, the license for Nupedia was changed to GFDL, and Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger launched Wikipedia as a complementary project, using an online wiki as a collaborative drafting tool.\nWhile Wikipedia was initially imagined as a place to draft articles and ideas for eventual polishing in Nupedia, it quickly overtook its predecessor, becoming both draft space and home for the polished final product of a global project in hundreds of languages, inspiring a wide range of other online reference projects.\nIn 2014, Wikipedia had approximately 495 million monthly readers. In 2015, according to comScore, Wikipedia received over 115 million monthly unique visitors from the United States alone. In September 2018, the projects saw 15.5 billion monthly page views.\nHistorical overview.\nBackground.\nThe concept of compiling the world's knowledge in a single location dates back to the ancient Library of Alexandria and Library of Pergamum, and there are ancient precursors of the idea of a comprehensive encyclopedia, such as Pliny the Elder's \"Naturalis historia\", but the modern concept of a general-purpose, widely distributed, printed encyclopedia originates with Denis Diderot and the 18th-century French encyclopedists. The idea of using automated machinery beyond the printing press to build a more useful encyclopedia can be traced to Paul Otlet's 1934 book \"Trait\u00e9 de Documentation\". Otlet also founded the Mundaneum, an institution dedicated to indexing the world's knowledge, in 1910. This concept of a machine-assisted encyclopedia was further expanded in H. G. Wells' book of essays \"World Brain\" (1938) and Vannevar Bush's future vision of the microfilm-based Memex in his essay \"As We May Think\" (1945). Another milestone was Ted Nelson's hypertext design Project Xanadu, which began in 1960.\nThe use of volunteers was integral in making and maintaining Wikipedia. However, even without the internet, huge complex projects of similar nature had made use of volunteers. Specifically, the creation of the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" was conceived with the speech at the London Library, on Guy Fawkes Day, 5 November 1857, by Richard Chenevix Trench. It took about 70 years to complete. Dr. Trench envisioned a grand new dictionary of every word in the English language, and to be used democratically and freely. According to author Simon Winchester, \"The undertaking of the scheme, he said, was beyond the ability of any one man. To peruse all of English literature\u00a0\u2013 and to comb the London and New York newspapers and the most literate of the magazines and journals\u00a0\u2013 must be instead 'the combined action of many.' It would be necessary to recruit a team\u00a0\u2013 moreover, a huge one\u00a0\u2013 probably comprising hundreds and hundreds of unpaid amateurs, all of them working as volunteers.\"\nAdvances in information technology in the late 20th century led to changes in the form of encyclopedias. While previous encyclopedias, notably the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\", were often book-based, Microsoft's Encarta, published in 1993, was available on CD-ROM and hyperlinked. The development of the World Wide Web led to many attempts to develop internet encyclopedia projects. An early proposal for an online encyclopedia was Interpedia in 1993 by Rick Gates; this project died before generating any encyclopedic content. Free software proponent Richard Stallman described the usefulness of a \"Free Universal Encyclopedia and Learning Resource\" in 1998. His published document outlined how to \"ensure that progress continues towards this best and most natural outcome.\"\nWikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales said that the concept of Wikipedia came when he was a graduate student at Indiana University, where he was impressed with the successes of the open-source movement and found Richard Stallman's Emacs Manifesto promoting free software and a sharing economy interesting. Wales also credits Austrian School economist Friedrich Hayek's essay, \"The Use of Knowledge in Society,\" which he read as an undergraduate, as \"central\" to his thinking about \"how to manage the Wikipedia project.\" The essay asserts that information is decentralized\u2014that each individual only knows a small fraction of what is known collectively\u2014and that as a result, decisions are best made by those with local knowledge, rather than by a central authority. At the time, Wales was studying finance and was intrigued by the incentives of the many people who contributed as volunteers toward creating free software, where many examples were having excellent results. According to \"The Economist\", Wikipedia \"has its roots in the techno-optimism that characterised the internet at the end of the 20th century. It held that ordinary people could use their computers as tools for liberation, education, and enlightenment.\"\nFormulation of the concept.\nWikipedia was initially conceived as a feeder project for the Wales-founded Nupedia, an earlier project to produce a free online encyclopedia, volunteered by Bomis, a web-advertising firm owned by Jimmy Wales, Tim Shell and Michael E. Davis. Nupedia was founded upon the use of qualified volunteer contributors and a considered multi-step peer review process. Despite its mailing list of over 2000 interested editors, and the presence of Sanger as full-time editor-in-chief, the production of content for Nupedia was extremely slow, with only 12 articles written during the first year.\nThe Nupedians discussed various ways to create content more rapidly. Wikis had been used elsewhere on the web to organize knowledge, and the idea of a wiki-based complement to Nupedia was seeded by a conversation between Sanger and Ben Kovitz, and by another between Wales and Jeremy Rosenfeld. Kovitz was a computer programmer and regular on Ward Cunningham's revolutionary wiki \"the WikiWikiWeb\". He explained to Sanger what wikis were, over a dinner on 2 January 2001. Wales stated in October 2001 that \"Larry had the idea to use Wiki software\" for people bored by Nupedia process, and later stated in December 2005 that Rosenfeld had introduced him to the wiki concept. Sanger thought a wiki would be a good platform to use, and proposed on the Nupedia mailing list that a wiki based upon UseModWiki (then v. 0.90) be set up as a \"feeder\" project for Nupedia. Under the subject \"Let's make a wiki\", he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No, this is not an indecent proposal. It's an idea to add a little feature to Nupedia. Jimmy Wales thinks that many people might find the idea objectionable, but I think not... As to Nupedia's use of a wiki, this is the ULTIMATE \"open\" and simple format for developing content. We have occasionally bandied about ideas for simpler, more open projects to either replace or supplement Nupedia. It seems to me wikis can be implemented practically instantly, need very little maintenance, and in general, are very low-risk. They're also a potentially great source of content. So there's little downside, as far as I can determine.\nWales set one up and put it online on Wednesday 10 January 2001, under the nupedia.com domain. This moved to a new wiki under the wikipedia.com domain on 15 January. On 17 January, the Free Software Foundation's (FSF) GNUPedia project went online, potentially competing with Nupedia, but within a few years the FSF encouraged people \"to visit and contribute to [Wikipedia]\" instead.\nFounding of Wikipedia.\nThere was some hesitation among editors about binding Nupedia too closely to a wiki-style workflow. After a Nupedia wiki was launched under nupedia.com on 10 January 2001, Wales proposed launching the new project under its own name, and Sanger proposed \"Wikipedia\", framing it as \"a supplementary project to Nupedia which operates entirely independently.\" A new wiki was launched at wikipedia.com on Monday 15 January 2001. The bandwidth and server (located in San Diego) used for these initial projects were donated by Bomis. Many former Bomis employees later contributed content to the encyclopedia: notably Tim Shell, co-founder and later CEO of Bomis, and programmer Jason Richey.\nWales stated in December 2008 that he made Wikipedia's first edit, a test edit with the text \"Hello, World!\", but this may have been to an old version of Wikipedia which soon after was scrapped and replaced by a restart. The first recovered edit to Wikipedia.com was to the HomePage on 15 January 2001, reading \"This is the new WikiPedia!\"; it can be found . The existence of the project was formally announced and an appeal for volunteers to engage in content creation was made to the Nupedia mailing list on 17 January 2001.\nThe project received many new participants after being mentioned on the Slashdot website in July 2001, having already earned two minor mentions in March 2001. It then received a prominent pointer to a story on the community-edited technology and culture website Kuro5hin on 25 July. Between these influxes of traffic, there had been a steady stream of traffic from other sources, especially Google, which alone sent hundreds of new visitors to the site every day. Its first major mainstream media coverage was in \"The New York Times\" on 20 September 2001.\nDivisions and internationalization.\nEarly in Wikipedia's development, it began to expand internationally, with the creation of new namespaces, each with a distinct set of usernames. The first subdomain created for a non-English Wikipedia was deutsche.wikipedia.com (created on Friday 16 March 2001, 01:38 UTC), followed after a few hours by catalan.wikipedia.com (at 13:07 UTC). The Japanese Wikipedia, started as nihongo.wikipedia.com, was created around that period, and initially used only Romanized Japanese. For about two months Catalan was the one with the most articles in a non-English language, although statistics of that early period are imprecise.\nThe French Wikipedia was created on or around 11 May 2001, in a wave of new language versions that also included Chinese, Dutch, Esperanto, Hebrew, Italian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and Swedish. These languages were soon joined by Arabic and Hungarian. In September 2001, an announcement pledged commitment to the multilingual provision of Wikipedia, notifying users of an upcoming roll-out of Wikipedias for all major languages, the establishment of core standards, and a push for the translation of core pages for the new wikis. At the end of that year, when international statistics first began to be logged, Afrikaans, Norwegian, and Serbian versions were announced.\nIn January 2002, 90% of all Wikipedia articles were in English. By January 2004, fewer than 50% were English, and this internationalization has continued to increase as the encyclopedia grows. As of 2014[ [update]], about 85% of all Wikipedia articles were in non-English Wikipedia versions. As of 2023[ [update]], the English and Simple English Wikipedias have 7 million articles between them, but roughly 90% of articles were in non-English Wikipedias.\nDevelopment of Wikipedia.\nIn March 2002, following the withdrawal of funding by Bomis during the dot-com bust, Sanger left both Nupedia and Wikipedia. By 2002, he and Wales differed in their views on how best to manage open encyclopedias. Both still supported the open-collaboration concept, but they disagreed on how to handle disruptive editors, specific roles for experts, and the best way to guide the project to success.\nWales went on to establish self-governance and bottom-up self-direction by editors on Wikipedia. He made it clear that he would not be involved in the community's day-to-day management, but would encourage it to learn to self-manage and find its own best approaches. As of 2007[ [update]], Wales mostly restricted his role to occasional input on serious matters, executive activity, advocacy of knowledge, and encouragement of similar reference projects.\nSanger said he is an \"inclusionist\" and is open to almost anything, and proposed that experts still have a place in the Web 2.0 world. In 2006 he founded Citizendium, an open encyclopedia that used real names for contributors to reduce disruptive editing, and hoped to facilitate \"gentle expert guidance\" to increase the accuracy of its content. Decisions about article content were to be up to the community, but the site was to include a statement about \"family-friendly content\".\nPast content of Wikipedia.\nOld, even obsolete, encyclopedia articles are highly valuable for historical research. For each Wikipedia article, past versions are accessible through the \"View history\" link at the top of the page. The full version history of all Wikipedia articles is also available for download as , in the form of compressed XML files.\nIn addition, the ZIM File Archive, at Internet Archive, contains past full snapshots of Wikipedia as well as article selections, in multiple languages, from different years. They can be opened with Kiwix software. Between 2007 and 2011, three CD/DVD versions (called Wikipedia Version , and ) containing a selection of articles from English Wikipedia were released. They became available as Kiwix ZIM files, both from the ZIM File Archive and from the Kiwix download site.\nTimeline.\nFirst decade: 2000\u20132009.\n2000.\nIn March 2000, the Nupedia project was started. Its intention was to publish articles written by experts which would be licensed as free content. Nupedia was founded by Wales, with Sanger as editor-in-chief, and funded by the web-advertising company Bomis.\n2001.\nIn January 2001, Wikipedia began as a side-project of Nupedia, to allow collaboration on articles prior to entering the peer-review process. The name was suggested by Sanger on 11 January 2001 as a portmanteau of the words \"wiki\" (Hawaiian for \"quick\") and \"encyclopedia\". The \"wikipedia.com\" and \"wikipedia.org\" domain names were registered on 12 and 13 January, respectively, with \"wikipedia.org\" being brought online on the same day. The project formally opened on 15 January (\"\"), with the first international Wikipedias \u2013 the German, Catalan, French, Swedish, and Italian editions \u2013 being created between March and May. The \"neutral point of view\" () policy was officially formulated at this time, and Wikipedia's first slashdotter wave arrived on 26 July. The first media report about Wikipedia appeared in August 2001 in the newspaper \"Wales on Sunday\".\nThe September 11 attacks spurred the appearance of breaking news stories on the homepage, as well as information boxes linking related articles. At the time, approximately 100 articles related to 9/11 had been created. After the September 11 attacks, a link to the Wikipedia article on the attacks appeared on Yahoo!'s home page, resulting in a spike in traffic.\n2002.\n2002 saw the reduction of funding for Wikipedia from Bomis and the departure of Sanger. A fork of the Spanish Wikipedia took place, with the establishment of the \"Enciclopedia Libre\". Jimmy Wales confirmed that Wikipedia would never run commercial advertising. The first portable MediaWiki software went live on 25 January. Bots were introduced. The first sister project (Wiktionary) and first formal Manual of Style were launched. Close to 200 contributors were editing Wikipedia daily.\n2003.\nThe English Wikipedia passed 100,000 articles in 2003, while the next largest edition, the German Wikipedia, passed 10,000. The Wikimedia Foundation was established. Wikipedia adopted its jigsaw world logo. Mathematical formulae using TeX were reintroduced to the website. The took place in Munich, Germany, in October. The basic principles of English Wikipedia's https:// (\"ArbCom\") were developed. Wikisource was created as a separate project on 24 November 2003, to host free textual sources as its aim in multiple languages and translations.\n2004.\nThe worldwide Wikipedia article pool continued to grow rapidly in 2004, doubling in size in 12 months, from under 500,000 articles in late 2003 to over 1 million in over 100 languages by the end of 2004. The English Wikipedia accounted for just under half of these articles. The website's server farms were moved from California to Florida. https:// and CSS style configuration sheets were introduced. The first attempt to block Wikipedia occurred, with the website being blocked in China for two weeks in June. Formal elections began for a board for the Foundation, and an Arbitration Committee on English Wikipedia. The first national chapter of the Foundation, Wikimedia Deutschland, was recognized. The first social meeting in the United States took place in Boston, . Wikimedia Commons was created on 7 September 2004 to host media files for Wikipedia in all languages.\n\"Bourgeois v. Peters\", (11th Cir. 2004), a court case decided by the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit was one of the earliest court opinions to cite and quote Wikipedia. It stated: \"We also reject the notion that the Department of Homeland Security's threat advisory level somehow justifies these searches. Although the threat level was 'elevated' at the time of the protest, 'to date, the threat level has stood at yellow (elevated) for the majority of its time in existence. It has been raised to orange (high) six times.'\"\n2005.\nIn 2005, Wikipedia became the most popular reference website on the Internet, according to Hitwise, with English Wikipedia alone exceeding 750,000 articles. Wikipedia's first multilingual and subject portals were established in 2005. A formal fundraiser held in the first quarter of the year raised almost US$100,000 for system upgrades to handle growing demand. China again blocked Wikipedia in October 2005.\nThe first major Wikipedia scandal, the Seigenthaler incident, occurred in 2005 when a well-known figure was found to have a vandalized biography that had gone unnoticed for months. In the wake of this and other concerns, the first policy and system changes specifically designed to counter this form of abuse were established. These included a new privilege policy update to assist in sock puppetry investigations, a new feature called https://, a more strict policy on biographies of living people, and the tagging of such articles for stricter review. A restriction of new article creation to registered users was only put into place in December 2005. Wikimania 2005, the first Wikimania conference, was held from 4 to 8 August 2005 at the \"Haus der Jugend\" in Frankfurt, attracting about 380 attendees.\n2006.\nThe English Wikipedia gained its one-millionth article, Jordanhill railway station, on 1 March 2006. The first approved Wikipedia article selection was made freely available to download, and \"Wikipedia\" became registered as a trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation. The congressional aides biography scandals \u2013 multiple incidents in which congressional staffers and a campaign manager were caught trying to covertly alter Wikipedia biographies \u2013 came to public attention, leading to the resignation of the campaign manager. Nonetheless, Wikipedia was rated as one of the top five global brands of 2006.\nJimmy Wales indicated at Wikimania 2006 that Wikipedia had achieved sufficient volume and called for an emphasis on quality, perhaps best expressed in the call for . A new privilege, \"oversight\", was created, allowing specific versions of archived pages with unacceptable content to be marked as non-viewable. Semi-protection against anonymous vandalism, introduced in 2005, proved more popular than expected, with over 1,000 pages being semi-protected at any given time in 2006.\n2007.\nWikipedia continued to grow rapidly in 2007, possessing over 5 million registered editor accounts by 13 August. The 250 language editions of Wikipedia contained a combined total of 7.5 million articles, totalling 1.74 billion words, by 13 August. The English Wikipedia gained articles at a steady rate of 1,700 a day, with the wikipedia.org domain name ranked the 10th-busiest in the world. Wikipedia continued to garner visibility in \u2013 the Essjay controversy broke out when a prominent member of Wikipedia was found to have lied about his credentials. Citizendium, a competing online encyclopedia, launched publicly. A new trend developed in Wikipedia, with the encyclopedia addressing people whose notability stemmed from being a participant in a news story by adding a redirect from their name to the larger story, rather than creating a distinct biographical article.\nOn 9 September 2007, the English Wikipedia gained its two-millionth article, \"El Hormiguero\". There was some controversy in late 2007 when the Volap\u00fck Wikipedia jumped from 797 to over 112,000 articles, briefly becoming the 15th-largest Wikipedia edition, due to automated stub generation by an enthusiast for the Volap\u00fck constructed language. According to the \"MIT Technology Review\", the number of regularly active editors on the English-language Wikipedia peaked in 2007 at more than 51,000, and has since been declining. In April 2007, Wikipedia Version 0.5 article selection release was published.\n2008.\nVarious https:// in many areas continued to expand and refine article contents within their scope. In April 2008, the 10-millionth Wikipedia article was created, and by the end of the year the English Wikipedia exceeded 2.5 million articles.\n2009.\nOn 25 June 2009 at 22:15 UTC, following the death of Michael Jackson, the website temporarily crashed. The Wikimedia Foundation reported nearly a million visitors to Jackson's biography within one hour, probably the most visitors in a one-hour period to any article in Wikipedia's history. By late August 2009, the number of articles in all Wikipedia editions had exceeded 14 million. The three-millionth article on the English Wikipedia, Beate Eriksen, was created on 17 August 2009 at 04:05 UTC. On 27 December 2009, the German Wikipedia exceeded one million articles, becoming the second edition after the English Wikipedia to do so. A \"TIME\" article listed Wikipedia among 2009's best websites. Wikipedia content became licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike license in 2009.\nSecond decade: 2010\u20132019.\n2010.\nOn 24 March, the European Wikipedia servers went offline due to an overheating problem. Failover to servers in Florida turned out to be broken, causing DNS resolution for Wikipedia to fail across the world. The problem was resolved quickly, but due to DNS caching effects, some areas were slower to regain access to Wikipedia than others.\nOn 13 May, the site released a new interface. New features included an updated logo, new navigation tools, and a link wizard. However, the classic interface remained available for those who wished to use it. On 12 December, the English Wikipedia passed the 3.5-million-article mark, while the French Wikipedia's millionth article was created on 21 September. The 1-billionth Wikimedia project edit was performed on 16 April. In early 2010, Wikipedia Version 0.7 article selection release was published.\n2011.\nWikipedia and its users held many celebrations worldwide to commemorate the site's 10th anniversary on 15 January. The site began efforts to expand its growth in India, holding its first Indian conference in Mumbai in November 2011. The English Wikipedia passed the 3.6-million-article mark on 2 April, and reached 3.8 million articles on 18 November. On 7 November 2011, the German Wikipedia exceeded 100 million page edits, becoming the second language edition to do so after the English edition, which attained 500 million page edits on 24 November 2011. The Dutch Wikipedia exceeded 1 million articles on 17 December 2011, becoming the fourth Wikipedia edition to do so.\nOn 3 March 2011, Wikipedia Version 0.8 article selection release was published. The \"Wikimania 2011 \u2013 Haifa, Israel\" stamp was issued by Israel Post on 2 August 2011. This was the first-ever stamp dedicated to a Wikimedia-related project. Between 4 and 6 October 2011, the Italian Wikipedia became intentionally inaccessible in protest against the Italian Parliament's proposed DDL intercettazioni law, which, if approved, would allow any person to force websites to remove information that is perceived as untrue or offensive, without the need to provide evidence. Also in October 2011, Wikimedia announced the launch of Wikipedia Zero, an initiative to enable free mobile access to Wikipedia in developing countries through partnerships with mobile operators.\n2012.\nOn 16 January, Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales announced that the English Wikipedia would shut down for 24 hours on 18 January as part of a protest meant to call public attention to the proposed Stop Online Piracy Act and PROTECT IP Act, two anti-piracy laws under debate in the United States Congress. Calling the blackout a \"community decision\", Wales and other opponents of the laws believed that they would endanger free speech and online innovation. A similar blackout was staged on 10 July by the Russian Wikipedia, in protest against a proposed Russian internet regulation law.\nIn late March 2012, the announced Wikidata, a universal platform for sharing data between all Wikipedia language editions. The US$1.7-million Wikidata project was partly funded by Google, the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, and the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence. Wikimedia Deutschland assumed responsibility for the first phase of Wikidata, and initially planned to make the platform available to editors by December 2012. Wikidata's first phase became fully operational in March 2013.\nIn April 2012, Justin Knapp became the first single contributor to make over one million edits to Wikipedia. Jimmy Wales congratulated Knapp for his work and presented him with the site's \"Special Barnstar\" medal and the \"Golden Wiki\" award for his achievement. Wales also declared that 20 April would be \"Justin Knapp Day\".\nOn 13 July 2012, the English Wikipedia gained its 4-millionth article, Izbat al-Burj. In October 2012, historian and Wikipedia editor Richard J. Jensen opined that the English Wikipedia was \"nearing completion\", noting that the number of regularly active editors had fallen significantly since 2007, despite Wikipedia's rapid growth in article count and readership. According to Alexa Internet, Wikipedia was the world's sixth-most-popular website as of November 2012. Dow Jones ranked Wikipedia fifth worldwide as of December 2012.\n2013.\nOn 22 January 2013, the Italian Wikipedia became the fifth language edition of Wikipedia to exceed 1 million articles, while the Russian and Spanish Wikipedias gained their millionth articles on 11 and 16 May respectively. On 15 July the Swedish and on 24 September the Polish Wikipedias gained their millionth articles, becoming the eighth and ninth Wikipedia editions to do so. On 27 January, the main belt asteroid 274301 was officially renamed \"Wikipedia\" by the Committee for Small Body Nomenclature.\nThe first phase of the Wikidata database, automatically providing interlanguage links and other data, became available for all language editions in March 2013. In April 2013, the French secret service was accused of attempting to censor Wikipedia by threatening a Wikipedia volunteer with arrest unless \"classified information\" about a military radio station was deleted.\nIn July, the VisualEditor editing system was launched, forming the first stage of an effort to allow articles to be edited with a word processor-like interface instead of using wiki markup. An editor specifically designed for smartphones and other mobile devices was also launched.\n2014.\nIn February 2014, a project to make a print edition of the English Wikipedia, consisting of 1,000 volumes and over 1,100,000 pages, was launched by German Wikipedia contributors. The project sought funding through Indiegogo, and was intended to honor the contributions of Wikipedia's editors. On 22 October 2014, the first monument to Wikipedia was unveiled in the Polish town of Slubice.\nOn 8 June, 15 June, and 16 July 2014, the Waray Wikipedia, the Vietnamese Wikipedia and the Cebuano Wikipedia each exceeded the one million article mark. They were the tenth, eleventh and twelfth Wikipedias to reach that milestone. Despite having very few active users, the Waray and Cebuano Wikipedias had a high number of automatically generated articles created by bots.\n2015.\nIn mid-2015, Wikipedia was the world's seventh-most-popular website according to Alexa Internet, down one place from the position it held in November 2012. At the start of 2015, Wikipedia remained the largest general-knowledge encyclopedia online, with a combined total of over 36 million mainspace articles across all 291 language editions. On average, Wikipedia receives a total of 10 billion global pageviews from around 495 million unique visitors every month, including 85 million visitors from the United States alone, where it is the sixth-most-popular site.\n\"Print Wikipedia\" was an art project by Michael Mandiberg that created the ability to print 7473 volumes of Wikipedia as it existed on 7 April 2015. Each volume has 700 pages and only 110 were printed by the artist. On 1 November 2015, the English Wikipedia reached 5,000,000 articles with the creation of an article on \"Persoonia terminalis\", a type of shrub.\n2016.\nOn 19 January 2016, the Japanese Wikipedia exceeded the one million article mark, becoming the thirteenth Wikipedia to reach that milestone. The millionth article was of Wave 224, a World War II submarine of the Imperial Japanese Navy. In mid-2016, Wikipedia was once again the world's sixth-most-popular website according to Alexa Internet, up one place from the position it held in the previous year.\n2017.\nIn mid-2017, Wikipedia was listed as the world's fifth-most-popular website according to Alexa Internet, rising one place from the position it held in the previous year. Wikipedia Zero was made available in Iraq and Afghanistan. On 29 April 2017, online access to Wikipedia was blocked across all language editions in Turkey by the Turkish authorities. This block lasted until 15 January 2020, as the court of Turkey ruled that the block violated human rights. The encrypted Japanese Wikipedia has been blocked in China since 28 December 2017.\n2018.\nOn 13 April 2018, the number of Chinese Wikipedia articles exceeded 1 million, becoming the fourteenth Wikipedia to reach that milestone. The Chinese Wikipedia has been blocked in Mainland China since May 2015. Later in the year, on 26 June, the Portuguese Wikipedia exceeded the one million article mark, becoming the fifteenth Wikipedia to reach that milestone. The millionth article was \"\" (the Pardon of Richard Nixon). During 2018, Wikipedia retained its listing as the world's fifth-most-popular website according to Alexa Internet. One notable development was the use of Artificial Intelligence to create draft articles on overlooked topics.\n2019.\nOn 23 April 2019, Chinese authorities expanded the block of Wikipedia to versions in all languages. The timing of the block coincided with the 30th anniversary of the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre and the 100th anniversary of the May Fourth Movement, resulting in stricter internet censorship in China. In August 2019, according to Alexa.com, Wikipedia fell from fifth-placed to seventh-placed website in the world for global internet engagement.\nThird decade: 2020\u2013present.\n2020.\nOn 23 January 2020, the six millionth article, the biography of Maria Elise Turner Lauder, was added to the English Wikipedia. Despite this growth in articles, Wikipedia's global internet engagement, as measured by Alexa, continued to decline. By February 2020, Wikipedia fell to the eleventh-placed website in the world for global internet engagement. Both Wikipedia's coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic crisis and the supporting edits, discussions, and even deletions were thought to be a useful resource for future historians seeking to understand the period in detail. The World Health Organization collaborated with Wikipedia as a key resource for the dissemination of COVID-19-related information as to help combat the spread of misinformation.\n2021.\nIn January 2021, was noted in the media. On 13 January 2021, the English Wikipedia reached one billion edits, where the billionth edit was made by Steven Pruitt. MIT Press published an open access book of essays \"Wikipedia @ 20: Stories of an Unfinished Revolution\", edited by Joseph Reagle and Jackie Koerner with contributions from prominent Wikipedians, Wikimedians, researchers, journalists, librarians and other experts reflecting on particular histories and themes. By November 2021, Wikipedia had fallen to the thirteenth-placed website in the world for global internet engagement.\n2022.\nOn 6 December 2022, Wikipedian Richard Knipel created the article Artwork title, whose first revision was a draft generated by ChatGPT that Knipel had made minor edits to more closely conform with Wikipedia standards. Knipel stated on a talk page that he believed this was the first time anyone had used ChatGPT to compose a Wikipedia article. The posting of this article was criticized by other editors and sparked controversy within the Wikipedia community, leading to an extensive debate about whether ChatGPT and similar models should be used in writing content for Wikipedia and, if so, to what extent.\n2023.\nIn January 2023, the default Wikipedia desktop interface was changed for the first time since 2010, to Vector 2022. The new interface received abundant criticism from users. Many objections focused on the fixed-width layout, which created excessive white space on the margins on wide monitors, leading to a 90,000-word discussion on whether the new skin should become the default. Swahili Wikipedia unanimously voted to reject the new skin and \"curtly\" demanded a return to the old skin. Other criticism was directed at the Wikimedia Foundation for hiring a design team with limited experience on wikis. Brandon Harris, who was a senior designer at Wikipedia from 2010 to 2014, said: \"Wikimedia Foundation often hires designers who aren't familiar with the community, and they come in and try to make all these changes\u2014running head-first into a buzz saw\u2014and the community understandably resists\".\nAfter consultation and a contest, the first sound logo of Wikimedia (including Wikipedia) was adopted.\nHistory by subject area.\nLook and feel.\nLayout changes in 2023.\nVector 2022, an update to Wikipedia's previous skin Vector 2010, was announced in September 2020, and initially slated for debut in 2021, before being ultimately deployed in January 2023. By January 2023, Wikimedia had made the update available to 300 of its language editions; it was the default for the Arabic and Greek versions.\nVector 2022 features a revised user interface which makes numerous changes to the arrangement of the interface elements. Among them, the language selection menu, previously located to the left of the screen, now is found in the top right corner of the display of the article that is currently read. Additionally, the sidebar is collapsible behind a hamburger button. Vector 2022 additionally increases the margins of the article display, which has the effect of limiting the width of the article; a toggle exists which can decrease the margins and expand the line width of the article to fill the screen. The default size of the text has not been increased, although the Wikimedia Foundation told \"Engadget\" that they hope to make this an option in future. The search function was also updated in Vector 2022, as the suggested results in response to user queries now include images and short descriptions from the pages in question.\nThe Wikimedia Foundation said that the change was motivated by a desire to modernize the site and improve the navigation and editing experience for readers inexperienced with the internet, as the previous skin was deemed \"clunky and overwhelming.\" Tests conducted by the foundation yielded results of a 30 percent increase in user searches, and a 15 percent decrease in scrolling. Early versions of Vector 2022 first went live in 2020 on the French-, Hebrew-, and Portuguese-language Wikipedia sites, as the skin's new features were rolled out to users for testing gradually before its full release. The skin went live as the default skin for readers of Wikimedia sites in 300 (out of 318) languages on 18 January 2023.\nFollowing the mass rollout of Vector 2022, it is still possible to read Wikipedia using the previous skin. However, to do so requires readers to register for a Wikipedia account, and then set their preferences to display Vector 2010 instead. No changes were made to existing Wikipedia skins such as Monobook and Timeless, which also remain available to use.\nWikipedia users were divided on the changes. A request for comment on the English Wikipedia asking the community whether or not Vector 2022 should be deployed as the default skin accumulated over 90,000 words in responses. Critics of the redesign objected most prominently to the white space left empty in the new skin, while other users criticized said critics as having a kneejerk resistance to change. 165 editors participating in the discussion disapproved of the new skin, while 153 were in favor, and nine remained neutral. Despite the larger number of editors who expressed that they did not want Vector 2022 to be deployed in its then-current form, as consensus on Wikipedia is not decided by vote, the discussion was closed in favor of the redesign, considering the positive comments left by other users. The Vector 2022 developers made some changes to the skin in response to the criticisms, such as adding a toggle to enable article content to fill the entire width of the screen. Users on the Swahili Wikipedia unanimously disagreed with the enactment of the new skin.\nJournalists responding to Vector 2022's rollout considered the update and the new features introduced as useful additions, but generally characterized the skin as a minor update that did not fundamentally change their reading experience on Wikipedia. Annie Rauwerda, creator of the Depths of Wikipedia social media accounts, wrote in \"Slate\" that Vector 2022 was not \"dramatically different\" from the previous skin. Rauwerda additionally noted the similarity between the Wikipedia community backlash against the design and previous resistances to similar visual changes on popular sites such as Reddit. Rauwerda, and Mike Pearl of \"Mashable\", commented that users displeased with the change could weigh in on a discussion about the skin, or use the site's built-in customization features to alter their reading experience.\nFundraising.\nEvery year, the Wikimedia Foundation runs fundraising campaigns on Wikipedia to support its operations. These generally last about a month and happen at different times of the year in different countries. In addition to the fundraising banners on Wikipedia itself, there are also email campaigns; some emails invite people to leave the Wikimedia Foundation money in their wills. Revenue has risen every year of the Wikimedia Foundation's existence, reaching US$ as of 30 June 2023, versus expenses of US$. In addition, the Wikimedia Endowment, an organizationally separate fundraising effort begun in 2016, reached $100 million in 2021, five years sooner than planned.\nExternal impact.\nEffect of biographical articles.\nBecause Wikipedia biographies are often updated with new information comes, they are often used as a reference source on the lives of . This has led to attempts to manipulate and falsify Wikipedia articles for promotional or defamatory purposes (Controversies) and has also led to novel uses of the biographical material provided.\nEarly roles of Wales and Sanger.\nWales, along with others, came up with and funded the idea of an open-source, collaborative encyclopedia that would accept contributions from ordinary people. Sanger played an important role in this as Nupedia's editor-in-chief and main employee. In Sanger's introductory message to the Nupedia mailing list, he said that Jimmy Wales \"contacted me and asked me to apply as editor-in-chief of Nupedia. [...] He had had the idea for Nupedia since at least last fall. He tells me that, when thinking about people (particularly philosophers) he knew who could manage this sort of long-term project, he thought I would be perfect for the job. This is indeed my dream job\".\nSanger suggested using a wiki to provide a complementary project for people \"intimidated and bored\" by Nupedia's elaborate processes, and coined the portmanteau \"Wikipedia\" as the project name. This was broadly seen as a way to unblock the growing community of Nupedians who found it hard to contribute. Sanger continued to work on Nupedia while contributing to Wikipedia (including drafting policies such as \"Ignore all rules\" and \"Neutral point of view\") and worked with an outreach lead to build up the community of both Nupedia and Wikipedia editors. Upon departure in March 2002, Sanger emphasized the main issue was purely the cessation of funding for his role, which was not viable part-time, and encouraged others to continue contributing to Wikipedia while noting that Nupedia could not survive without a full-time editor-in-chief. Later that year he stopped contributing to either project, and by 2004 had become publicly critical of Wikipedia. In December 2004 he wrote an essay arguing that Wikipedia was suffering from anti-elitism. In April 2005 he published a two-part memoir of his work on Nupedia and Wikipedia, highlighting his role in their creation and continuing belief that Nupedia deserved to be saved. Later that year Wales began to push back on Sanger's characterization of his role in the project. By 2006, after the launch of Citizendium, Sanger was harshly critical of Wikipedia, describing it as \"broken beyond repair.\"\nIn 2005, Wales described himself simply as the founder of Wikipedia; however, according to Brian Bergstein of the Associated Press, \"Sanger has long been cited as a co-founder.\" Sanger and Wales were referred to as co-founders in various press releases, interviews, and news reports from 2001 and 2002. Before January 2004, Wales did not dispute Sanger's status as co-founder. In 2006, Wales said, \"He used to work for me [...] I don't agree with calling him a co-founder, but he likes the title\". Starting in 2006, when Sanger wrote and was interviewed extensively about the launch of Citizendium, he emphasized his status as co-founder, and these earlier sources that described him as such.\nControversies.\nIn a separate but similar incident, the campaign manager for Cathy Cox for governor of Georgia, Morton Brilliant, resigned after being found to have added negative information to the Wikipedia entries of political opponents. Following media publicity, the incidents tapered off around August 2006.\nNotable forks and derivatives.\nThere are a large number of https://. Other sites also use the MediaWiki software and concept, popularized by Wikipedia. No list of them is maintained. Specialized foreign language forks using the Wikipedia concept include Enciclopedia Libre (Spanish), \"Wikiweise\" (German), \"WikiZnanie\" (Russian), Susning.nu (Swedish), and Baidu Baike (Chinese). Some of these (such as \"Enciclopedia Libre\") use GFDL or compatible licenses as used by Wikipedia, leading to the exchange of material with their respective language Wikipedias. In 2006, Sanger founded Citizendium, based upon a modified version of MediaWiki. The site said it aimed 'to improve on the Wikipedia model with \"gentle expert oversight\", among other things'. In 2006, conservative activist and lawyer Andrew Schlafly founded Conservapedia, based on MediaWiki.\nPublication on other media.\nThe German Wikipedia was the first to be partly published also using other media (rather than online on the internet), including releases on CD in November 2004 and more extended versions on CDs or DVD in April 2005 and December 2006. In December 2005, the publisher Zenodot Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, a sister company of Directmedia, published a 139-page book explaining Wikipedia, its history and policies, which was accompanied by a 7.5 GB DVD containing 300,000 articles and 100,000 images from the German Wikipedia. Originally, Directmedia also announced plans to print the German Wikipedia in its entirety, in 100 volumes of 800 pages each. The publication was due to begin in October 2006, and finish in 2010. In March 2006, however, this project was called off.\nIn September 2008, Bertelsmann published a 1000 pages volume with a selection of popular German Wikipedia articles. Bertelsmann paid voluntarily 1 Euro per sold copy to Wikimedia Deutschland. A free software project has also been launched to make a static version of English Wikipedia available for use on iPods. The \"Encyclopodia\" project was started around March 2006 and can currently be used on 1st to 4th-generation iPods.\nEnglish Wikipedia CD/DVD/Kiwix ZIM file releases.\nAs of June 2022, there have been no more article selection releases since Wikipedia Version 0.8.\nLawsuits.\nIn limited ways, the Wikimedia Foundation is protected by Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act. In the defamation action \"Bauer et al. v. Glatzer et al.\", it was held that Wikimedia had no case to answer because of this section. A similar law in France caused a lawsuit to be dismissed in October 2007. In 2013, a German appeals court or Oberlandesgericht (the Higher Regional Court of Stuttgart) ruled that Wikipedia is a \"service provider\" not a \"content provider\", and as such is immune from liability as long as it takes down content that is accused of being illegal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nWikipedia records and archives.\nWikipedia's project files contain a large quantity of reference and archive material. Useful internal resources on Wikipedia history include:\nHistorical summaries\nMilestones, size and statistics\nDiscussion and debate archives\nOther"}
{"id": "14073", "revid": "50865928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14073", "title": "Hydropower", "text": "Power generation via movement of water\nHydropower (from Ancient Greek -, \"water\"), also known as water power or water energy, is the use of falling or fast-running water to produce electricity or to power machines. This is achieved by converting the gravitational potential or kinetic energy of a water source to produce power. Hydropower is a method of sustainable energy production. Hydropower is now used principally for hydroelectric power generation, and is also applied as one half of an energy storage system known as pumped-storage hydroelectricity.\nHydropower is an attractive alternative to fossil fuels as it does not directly produce carbon dioxide or other atmospheric pollutants and it provides a relatively consistent source of power. Nonetheless, it has economic, sociological, and environmental downsides and requires a sufficiently energetic source of water, such as a river or elevated lake. International institutions such as the World Bank view hydropower as a low-carbon means for economic development.\nSince ancient times, hydropower from watermills has been used as a renewable energy source for irrigation and the operation of mechanical devices, such as gristmills, sawmills, textile mills, trip hammers, dock cranes, domestic lifts, and ore mills. A trompe, which produces compressed air from falling water, is sometimes used to power other machinery at a distance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCalculating the amount of available power.\nA hydropower resource can be evaluated by its available power. Power is a function of the hydraulic head and volumetric flow rate. The head is the energy per unit weight (or unit mass) of water. The static head is proportional to the difference in height through which the water falls. The Dynamic head is related to the velocity of moving water. Each unit of water can do an amount of work equal to its weight times the head.\nThe power available from falling water can be calculated from the flow rate and density of water, the height of fall, and the local acceleration due to gravity:\nformula_1\nwhere\n* formula_2 (work flow rate out) is the useful power output (SI unit: watts)\n* formula_3 (\"eta\") is the efficiency of the turbine (dimensionless)\n* formula_4 is the mass flow rate (SI unit: kilograms per second)\n* formula_5 (\"rho\") is the density of water (SI unit: kilograms per cubic metre)\n* formula_6 is the volumetric flow rate (SI unit: cubic metres per second)\n* formula_7 is the gravitational acceleration (SI unit: meters per second per second)\n* formula_8 (\"Delta h\") is the difference in height between the outlet and inlet (SI unit: metres)\nTo illustrate, the power output of a turbine that is 85% efficient, with a flow rate of 80 cubic metres per second (2800 cubic feet per second) and a head of , is about 97 megawatts:\nformula_9\nOperators of hydroelectric stations compare the total electrical energy produced with the theoretical potential energy of the water passing through the turbine to calculate efficiency. Procedures and definitions for the calculation of efficiency are given in test codes such as ASME PTC 18 and IEC 60041. Field testing of turbines is used to validate the manufacturer's efficiency guarantee. Detailed calculation of the efficiency of a hydropower turbine accounts for the head lost due to flow friction in the power canal or penstock, rise in tailwater level due to flow, the location of the station and effect of varying gravity, the air temperature and barometric pressure, the density of the water at ambient temperature, and the relative altitudes of the forebay and tailbay. For precise calculations, errors due to rounding and the number of significant digits of constants must be considered.\nSome hydropower systems such as water wheels can draw power from the flow of a body of water without necessarily changing its height. In this case, the available power is the kinetic energy of the flowing water. Over-shot water wheels can efficiently capture both types of energy. The flow in a stream can vary widely from season to season. The development of a hydropower site requires analysis of flow records, sometimes spanning decades, to assess the reliable annual energy supply. Dams and reservoirs provide a more dependable source of power by smoothing seasonal changes in water flow. However, reservoirs have a significant environmental impact, as does alteration of naturally occurring streamflow. Dam design must account for the worst-case, \"probable maximum flood\" that can be expected at the site; a spillway is often included to route flood flows around the dam. A computer model of the hydraulic basin and rainfall and snowfall records are used to predict the maximum flood.\nDisadvantages and limitations.\nSome disadvantages of hydropower have been identified. Dam failures can have catastrophic effects, including loss of life, property and pollution of land.\nDams and reservoirs can have major negative impacts on river ecosystems such as preventing some animals from traveling upstream, cooling and de-oxygenating of water released downstream, and loss of nutrients due to settling of particulates. River sediment builds river deltas and dams prevent them from restoring what is lost from erosion. Furthermore, studies found that the construction of dams and reservoirs can result in habitat loss for some aquatic species.Large and deep dam and reservoir plants cover large areas of land which causes greenhouse gas emissions from underwater rotting vegetation. Furthermore, although at lower levels than other renewable energy sources, it was found that hydropower produces methane (CH4) equivalent to almost a billion tonnes of CO2 greenhouse gas a year. This occurs when organic matters accumulate at the bottom of the reservoir because of the deoxygenation of water which triggers anaerobic digestion.\nPeople who live near a hydro plant site are displaced during construction or when reservoir banks become unstable. Another potential disadvantage is that cultural or religious sites may block construction.\nApplications.\nMechanical power.\nCompressed air.\nA plentiful head of water can be made to generate compressed air directly without moving parts. In these designs, a falling column of water is deliberately mixed with air bubbles generated through turbulence or a venturi pressure reducer at the high-level intake. This allows it to fall down a shaft into a subterranean, high-roofed chamber where the now-compressed air separates from the water and becomes trapped. The height of the falling water column maintains compression of the air in the top of the chamber, while an outlet, submerged below the water level in the chamber allows water to flow back to the surface at a lower level than the intake. A separate outlet in the roof of the chamber supplies the compressed air. A facility on this principle was built on the Montreal River at Ragged Shutes near Cobalt, Ontario, in 1910 and supplied 5,000 horsepower to nearby mines.\nElectricity.\nHydroelectricity is the biggest hydropower application. Hydroelectricity generates about 15% of global electricity and provides at least 50% of the total electricity supply for more than 35 countries.\u00a0In 2021, global installed hydropower electrical capacity reached almost 1400 GW, the highest among all renewable energy technologies.\nHydroelectricity generation starts with converting either the potential energy of water that is present due to the site's elevation or the kinetic energy of moving water into electrical energy.\nHydroelectric power plants vary in terms of the way they harvest energy. One type involves a dam and a reservoir. The water in the reservoir is available on demand to be used to generate electricity by passing through channels that connect the dam to the reservoir. The water spins a turbine, which is connected to the generator that produces electricity.\nThe other type is called a run-of-river plant. In this case, a barrage is built to control the flow of water, absent a reservoir. The run-of river power plant needs continuous water flow and therefore has less ability to provide power on demand. The kinetic energy of flowing water is the main source of energy.\nBoth designs have limitations. For example, dam construction can result in discomfort to nearby residents. The dam and reservoirs occupy a relatively large amount of space that may be opposed by nearby communities. Moreover, reservoirs can potentially have major environmental consequences such as harming downstream habitats. On the other hand, the limitation of the run-of-river project is the decreased efficiency of electricity generation because the process depends on the speed of the seasonal river flow. This means that the rainy season increases electricity generation compared to the dry season.\nThe size of hydroelectric plants can vary from small plants called micro hydro, to large plants that supply power to a whole country. As of 2019, the five largest power stations in the world are conventional hydroelectric power stations with dams.\nHydroelectricity can also be used to store energy in the form of potential energy between two reservoirs at different heights with pumped-storage. Water is pumped uphill into reservoirs during periods of low demand to be released for generation when demand is high or system generation is low.\nOther forms of electricity generation with hydropower include tidal stream generators using energy from tidal power generated from oceans, rivers, and human-made canal systems to generating electricity.\nRain power.\nBillions of litres of rainwater can fall, which can generate huge amounts of electrical energy if used in the right way. Research is being done into the different methods of generating power from rain, such as by using the energy in the impact of raindrops. This is in its very early stages, with new and emerging technologies being tested, prototyped and created. Such power has been called rain power. One way in which this has been tried is by using hybrid solar panels called \"all-weather solar panels\" that can generate electricity from both the sun and the rain.\nAccording to zoologist and science and technology educator, Luis Villazon, a 2008 French study estimated that you could use piezoelectric devices, which generate power when they move, to extract 12 milliwatts from a raindrop.[] Over a year, this would amount to less than 1 Wh per square metre \u2013 enough to power a remote sensor. Villazon suggested a better application would be to collect the water from fallen rain and use it to drive a turbine, with an estimated energy generation of 3\u00a0kWh of energy per year for a 185 m2 roof. A microturbine-based system created by three students from the Technological University of Mexico has been used to generate electricity. The Pluvia system \"uses the stream of rainwater runoff from houses' rooftop rain gutters to spin a microturbine in a cylindrical housing. Electricity generated by that turbine is used to charge 12-volt batteries.\"\nThe term rain power has also been applied to hydropower systems which include the process of capturing the rain.\nHistory.\nAncient history.\nEvidence suggests that the fundamentals of hydropower date to ancient Greek civilization. Other evidence indicates that the waterwheel independently emerged in China around the same period. Evidence of water wheels and watermills date to the ancient Near East in the 4th century BC. Moreover, evidence indicates the use of hydropower using irrigation machines to ancient civilizations such as Sumer and Babylonia. Studies suggest that the water wheel was the initial form of water power.\nIn the Roman Empire, water-powered mills were described by Vitruvius by the first century BC. The Barbegal mill, located in modern-day France, had 16 water wheels processing up to 28 tons of grain per day. Roman waterwheels were also used for sawing marble such as the Hierapolis sawmill of the late 3rd century AD. Such sawmills had a waterwheel that drove two crank-and-connecting rods to power two saws. It also appears in two 6th century Eastern Roman sawmills excavated at Ephesus and Gerasa respectively. The crank and connecting rod mechanism of these Roman watermills converted the rotary motion of the waterwheel into the linear movement of the saw blades. \nWater-powered trip hammers and bellows in China, during the Han dynasty (202\u00a0BC \u2013 220\u00a0AD), were initially thought to be powered by water scoops. However, some historians suggested that they were powered by waterwheels. This is since it was theorized that water scoops would not have had the motive force to operate their blast furnace bellows. Many texts describe the Hun waterwheel; some of the earliest ones are the \"Jijiupian\" dictionary of 40\u00a0BC, Yang Xiong's text known as the \"Fangyan\" of 15\u00a0BC, as well as \"Xin Lun,\" written by Huan Tan about 20 AD. It was also during this time that the engineer Du Shi (c.\u00a0AD\u00a031) applied the power of waterwheels to piston-bellows in forging cast iron.\nAncient Indian texts dating back to the 4th century BC refer to the term \"cakkavattaka\" (turning wheel), which commentaries explain as \"arahatta-ghati-yanta\" (machine with wheel-pots attached), however whether this is water or hand powered is disputed by scholars On this basis, Joseph Needham suggested that the machine was a noria. Terry S. Reynolds, however, argues that the \"term used in Indian texts is ambiguous and does not clearly indicate a water-powered device.\" Thorkild Schi\u00f8ler argued that it is \"more likely that these passages refer to some type of tread- or hand-operated water-lifting device, instead of a water-powered water-lifting wheel.\"\nIndia received Roman water mills and baths in the early 4th century AD according to Greek sources. Dams, spillways, reservoirs, channels, and water balance would develop in India during the Mauryan, Gupta and Chola empires.\nAnother example of the early use of hydropower is seen in hushing, a historic method of mining that uses flood or torrent of water to reveal mineral veins. The method was first used at the Dolaucothi Gold Mines in Wales from 75 AD onwards. This method was further developed in Spain in mines such as Las M\u00e9dulas. Hushing was also widely used in Britain in the Medieval and later periods to extract lead and tin ores. It later evolved into hydraulic mining when used during the California Gold Rush in the 19th century.\nThe Islamic Empire spanned a large region, mainly in Asia and Africa, along with other surrounding areas. During the Islamic Golden Age and the Arab Agricultural Revolution (8th\u201313th centuries), hydropower was widely used and developed. Early uses of tidal power emerged along with large hydraulic factory complexes. A wide range of water-powered industrial mills were used in the region including fulling mills, gristmills, paper mills, hullers, sawmills, ship mills, stamp mills, steel mills, sugar mills, and tide mills. By the 11th century, every province throughout the Islamic Empire had these industrial mills in operation, from Al-Andalus and North Africa to the Middle East and Central Asia. Muslim engineers also used water turbines while employing gears in watermills and water-raising machines. They also pioneered the use of dams as a source of water power, used to provide additional power to watermills and water-raising machines. Islamic irrigation techniques including Persian Wheels would be introduced to India, and would be combined with local methods, during the Delhi Sultanate and the Mughal Empire.\nFurthermore, in his book, \"The Book of Knowledge of Ingenious Mechanical Devices\", the Muslim mechanical engineer, Al-Jazari (1136\u20131206) described designs for 50 devices. Many of these devices were water-powered, including clocks, a device to serve wine, and five devices to lift water from rivers or pools, where three of them are animal-powered and one can be powered by animal or water. Moreover, they included an endless belt with jugs attached, a cow-powered shadoof (a crane-like irrigation tool), and a reciprocating device with hinged valves.\n19th century.\nIn the 19th century, French engineer Beno\u00eet Fourneyron developed the first hydropower turbine. This device was implemented in the commercial plant of Niagara Falls in 1895 and it is still operating. In the early 20th century, English engineer William Armstrong built and operated the first private electrical power station which was located in his house in Cragside in Northumberland, England. In 1753, the French engineer Bernard Forest de B\u00e9lidor published his book, \"Architecture Hydraulique\", which described vertical-axis and horizontal-axis hydraulic machines.\nThe growing demand for the Industrial Revolution would drive development as well. At the beginning of the Industrial Revolution in Britain, water was the main power source for new inventions such as Richard Arkwright's water frame. Although water power gave way to steam power in many of the larger mills and factories, it was still used during the 18th and 19th centuries for many smaller operations, such as driving the bellows in small blast furnaces (e.g. the Dyfi Furnace) and gristmills, such as those built at Saint Anthony Falls, which uses the drop in the Mississippi River.\nTechnological advances moved the open water wheel into an enclosed turbine or water motor. In 1848, the British-American engineer James B. Francis, head engineer of Lowell's Locks and Canals company, improved on these designs to create a turbine with 90% efficiency. He applied scientific principles and testing methods to the problem of turbine design. His mathematical and graphical calculation methods allowed the confident design of high-efficiency turbines to exactly match a site's specific flow conditions. The Francis reaction turbine is still in use. In the 1870s, deriving from uses in the California mining industry, Lester Allan Pelton developed the high-efficiency Pelton wheel impulse turbine, which used hydropower from the high head streams characteristic of the Sierra Nevada.\n20th century.\nThe modern history of hydropower begins in the 1900s, with large dams built not simply to power neighboring mills or factories but provide extensive electricity for increasingly distant groups of people. Competition drove much of the global hydroelectric craze: Europe competed amongst itself to electrify first, and the United States' hydroelectric plants in Niagara Falls and the Sierra Nevada inspired bigger and bolder creations across the globe. American and USSR financers and hydropower experts also spread the gospel of dams and hydroelectricity across the globe during the Cold War, contributing to projects such as the Three Gorges Dam and the Aswan High Dam. \nFeeding desire for large scale electrification with water inherently required large dams across powerful rivers, which impacted public and private interests downstream and in flood zones. Inevitably smaller communities and marginalized groups suffered. They were unable to successfully resist companies flooding them out of their homes or blocking traditional salmon passages. The stagnant water created by hydroelectric dams provides breeding ground for pests and pathogens, leading to local epidemics. However, in some cases, a mutual need for hydropower could lead to cooperation between otherwise adversarial nations.\nHydropower technology and attitude began to shift in the second half of the 20th century. While countries had largely abandoned their small hydropower systems by the 1930s, the smaller hydropower plants began to make a comeback in the 1970s, boosted by government subsidies and a push for more independent energy producers. Some politicians who once advocated for large hydropower projects in the first half of the 20th century began to speak out against them, and citizen groups organizing against dam projects increased.\nIn the 1980s and 90s the international anti-dam movement had made finding government or private investors for new large hydropower projects incredibly difficult, and given rise to NGOs devoted to fighting dams. Additionally, while the cost of other energy sources fell, the cost of building new hydroelectric dams increased 4% annually between 1965 and 1990, due both to the increasing costs of construction and to the decrease in high quality building sites. In the 1990s, only 18% of the world's electricity came from hydropower. Tidal power production also emerged in the 1960s as a burgeoning alternative hydropower system, though still has not taken hold as a strong energy contender.\nUnited States.\nEspecially at the start of the American hydropower experiment, engineers and politicians began major hydroelectricity projects to solve a problem of 'wasted potential' rather than to power a population that needed the electricity. When the Niagara Falls Power Company began looking into damming Niagara, the first major hydroelectric project in the United States, in the 1890s they struggled to transport electricity from the falls far enough away to actually reach enough people and justify installation. The project succeeded in large part due to Nikola Tesla's invention of the alternating current motor. On the other side of the country, San Francisco engineers, the Sierra Club, and the federal government fought over acceptable use of the Hetch Hetchy Valley. Despite ostensible protection within a national park, city engineers successfully won the rights to both water and power in the Hetch Hetchy Valley in 1913. After their victory they delivered Hetch Hetchy hydropower and water to San Francisco a decade later and at twice the promised cost, selling power to PG&amp;E which resold to San Francisco residents at a profit.\nThe American West, with its mountain rivers and lack of coal, turned to hydropower early and often, especially along the Columbia River and its tributaries. The Bureau of Reclamation built the Hoover Dam in 1931, symbolically linking the job creation and economic growth priorities of the New Deal. The federal government quickly followed Hoover with the Shasta Dam and Grand Coulee Dam. Power demand in Oregon did not justify damming the Columbia until WWI revealed the weaknesses of a coal-based energy economy. The federal government then began prioritizing interconnected power\u2014and lots of it. Electricity from all three dams poured into war production during WWII.\nAfter the war, the Grand Coulee Dam and accompanying hydroelectric projects electrified almost all of the rural Columbia Basin, but failed to improve the lives of those living and farming there the way its boosters had promised and also damaged the river ecosystem and migrating salmon populations. In the 1940s as well, the federal government took advantage of the sheer amount of unused power and flowing water from the Grand Coulee to build a nuclear site placed on the banks of the Columbia. The nuclear site leaked radioactive matter into the river, contaminating the entire area.\nPost-WWII Americans, especially engineers from the Tennessee Valley Authority, refocused from simply building domestic dams to promoting hydropower abroad. While domestic dam building continued well into the 1970s, with the Reclamation Bureau and Army Corps of Engineers building more than 150 new dams across the American West, organized opposition to hydroelectric dams sparked up in the 1950s and 60s based on environmental concerns. Environmental movements successfully shut down proposed hydropower dams in Dinosaur National Monument and the Grand Canyon, and gained more hydropower-fighting tools with 1970s environmental legislation. As nuclear and fossil fuels grew in the 70s and 80s and environmental activists push for river restoration, hydropower gradually faded in American importance.\nAfrica.\n Foreign powers and IGOs have frequently used hydropower projects in Africa as a tool to interfere in the economic development of African countries, such as the World Bank with the Kariba and Akosombo Dams, and the Soviet Union with the Aswan Dam. The Nile River especially has borne the consequences of countries both along the Nile and distant foreign actors using the river to expand their economic power or national force. After the British occupation of Egypt in 1882, the British worked with Egypt to construct the first Aswan Dam, which they heightened in 1912 and 1934 to try to hold back the Nile floods. Egyptian engineer Adriano Daninos developed a plan for the Aswan High Dam, inspired by the Tennessee Valley Authority's multipurpose dam.\nWhen Gamal Abdel Nasser took power in the 1950s, his government decided to undertake the High Dam project, publicizing it as an economic development project. After American refusal to help fund the dam, and anti-British sentiment in Egypt and British interests in neighboring Sudan combined to make the United Kingdom pull out as well, the Soviet Union funded the Aswan High Dam. Between 1977 and 1990 the dam's turbines generated one third of Egypt's electricity. The building of the Aswan Dam triggered a dispute between Sudan and Egypt over the sharing of the Nile, especially since the dam flooded part of Sudan and decreased the volume of water available to them. Ethiopia, also located on the Nile, took advantage of the Cold War tensions to request assistance from the United States for their own irrigation and hydropower investments in the 1960s. While progress stalled due to the coup d'\u00e9tat of 1974 and following 17-year-long Ethiopian Civil War Ethiopia began construction on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam in 2011.\nBeyond the Nile, hydroelectric projects cover the rivers and lakes of Africa. The Inga powerplant on the Congo River had been discussed since Belgian colonization in the late 19th century, and was successfully built after independence. Mobutu's government failed to regularly maintain the plants and their capacity declined until the 1995 formation of the Southern African Power Pool created a multi-national power grid and plant maintenance program. States with an abundance of hydropower, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Ghana, frequently sell excess power to neighboring countries. Foreign actors such as Chinese hydropower companies have proposed a significant amount of new hydropower projects in Africa, and already funded and consulted on many others in countries like Mozambique and Ghana.\nSmall hydropower also played an important role in early 20th century electrification across Africa. In South Africa, small turbines powered gold mines and the first electric railway in the 1890s, and Zimbabwean farmers installed small hydropower stations in the 1930s. While interest faded as national grids improved in the second half of the century, 21st century national governments in countries including South Africa and Mozambique, as well as NGOs serving countries like Zimbabwe, have begun re-exploring small-scale hydropower to diversify power sources and improve rural electrification.\nEurope.\nIn the early 20th century, two major factors motivated the expansion of hydropower in Europe: in the northern countries of Norway and Sweden, high rainfall and mountains proved exceptional resources for abundant hydropower, and in the south, coal shortages pushed governments and utility companies to seek alternative power sources.\nEarly on, Switzerland dammed the Alpine rivers and the Swiss Rhine, creating, along with Italy and Scandinavia, a Southern Europe hydropower race. In Italy's Po Valley, the main 20th-century transition was not the creation of hydropower but the transition from mechanical to electrical hydropower. 12,000 watermills churned in the Po watershed in the 1890s, but the first commercial hydroelectric plant, completed in 1898, signaled the end of the mechanical reign. These new large plants moved power away from rural mountainous areas to urban centers in the lower plain. Italy prioritized early near-nationwide electrification, almost entirely from hydropower, which powered its rise as a dominant European and imperial force. However, they failed to reach any conclusive standard for determining water rights before WWI.\nModern German hydropower dam construction was built on a history of small dams powering mines and mills in the 15th century. Some parts of the German industry relied more on waterwheels than steam until the 1870s. The German government did not set out building large dams such as the prewar Urft, Mohne, and Eder dams to expand hydropower: they mostly wanted to reduce flooding and improve irrigation. However, hydropower quickly emerged as a bonus for all these dams, especially in the coal-poor south. Bavaria even achieved a statewide power grid by damming the Walchensee in 1924, inspired in part by loss of coal reserves after WWI.\nHydropower became a symbol of regional pride and distaste for northern 'coal barons', although the north also held strong enthusiasm for hydropower. Dam building rapidly increased after WWII, aiming to increase hydropower. However, conflict accompanied the dam building and spread of hydropower: agrarian interests suffered from decreased irrigation, small mills lost water flow, and different interest groups fought over where dams should be located, controlling who benefited and whose homes they drowned.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14074", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14074", "title": "Hydroelectric plant", "text": ""}
{"id": "14075", "revid": "43272954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14075", "title": "Horse Breed", "text": ""}
{"id": "14076", "revid": "46051904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14076", "title": "Horse breed", "text": "Selectively bred populations of domesticated horses\nA horse breed is a selectively bred population of domesticated horses, often with pedigrees recorded in a breed registry. However, the term is sometimes used in a broader sense to define landrace animals of a common phenotype located within a limited geographic region, or even feral \"breeds\" that are naturally selected. Depending on definition, hundreds of \"breeds\" exist today, developed for many different uses. Horse breeds are loosely divided into three categories based on general temperament: spirited \"hot bloods\" with speed and endurance; \"cold bloods,\" such as draft horses and some ponies, suitable for slow, heavy work; and \"warmbloods,\" developed from crosses between hot bloods and cold bloods, often focusing on creating breeds for specific riding purposes, particularly in Europe.\nHorse breeds are groups of horses with distinctive characteristics that are transmitted consistently to their offspring, such as conformation, color, performance ability, or disposition. These inherited traits are usually the result of a combination of natural crosses and artificial selection methods aimed at producing horses for specific tasks. Certain breeds are known for certain talents. For example, Standardbreds are known for their speed in harness racing. Some breeds have been developed through centuries of crossings with other breeds, while others, such as the Morgan horse, originated from a single sire from which all current breed members descend. More than 300\u00a0horse breeds exist in the world today.\nOrigin of breeds.\nModern horse breeds developed in response to a need for \"form to function\", the necessity to develop certain physical characteristics to perform a certain type of work.155 Thus, powerful but refined breeds such as the Andalusian or the Lusitano developed in the Iberian Peninsula as riding horses that also had a great aptitude for dressage,155 while heavy draft horses such as the Clydesdale and the Shire developed out of a need to perform demanding farm work and pull heavy wagons. Ponies of all breeds originally developed mainly from the need for a working animal that could fulfill specific local draft and transportation needs while surviving in harsh environments. However, by the 20th century, many pony breeds had Arabian and other blood added to make a more refined pony suitable for riding. Other horse breeds developed specifically for light agricultural work, heavy and light carriage and road work, various equestrian disciplines, or simply as pets.162\nPurebreds and registries.\nHorses have been selectively bred since their domestication. However, the concept of purebred bloodstock and a controlled, written breed registry only became of significant importance in modern times. Today, the standards for defining and registration of different breeds vary. Sometimes, purebred horses are called \"Thoroughbreds\", which is incorrect; \"Thoroughbred\" is a specific breed of horse, while a \"purebred\" is a horse (or any other animal) with a defined pedigree recognized by a breed registry.\nAn early example of people who practiced selective horse breeding were the Bedouin, who had a reputation for careful breeding practices, keeping extensive pedigrees of their Arabian horses and placing great value upon pure bloodlines. Though these pedigrees were originally transmitted by an oral tradition, written pedigrees of Arabian horses can be found that date to the 14th century. In the same period of the early Renaissance, the Carthusian monks of southern Spain bred horses and kept meticulous pedigrees of the best bloodstock; the lineage survives to this day in the Andalusian horse. One of the earliest formal registries was General Stud Book for Thoroughbreds, which began in 1791 and traced back to the Arabian stallions imported to England from the Middle East that became the foundation stallions for the breed.\nSome breed registries have a closed stud book, where registration is based on pedigree, and no outside animals can gain admittance. For example, a registered Thoroughbred or Arabian must have two registered parents of the same breed.\nOther breeds have a partially closed stud book, but still allow certain infusions from other breeds. For example, the modern Appaloosa must have at least one Appaloosa parent, but may also have a Quarter Horse, Thoroughbred, or Arabian parent, so long as the offspring exhibits appropriate color characteristics. The Quarter Horse normally requires both parents to be registered Quarter Horses, but allows \"Appendix\" registration of horses with one Thoroughbred parent, and the horse may earn its way to full registration by completing certain performance requirements.\nOpen stud books exist for horse breeds that either have not yet developed a rigorously defined standard phenotype, or for breeds that register animals that conform to an ideal via the process of passing a studbook selection process. Most of the warmblood breeds used in sport horse disciplines have open stud books to varying degrees. While pedigree is considered, outside bloodlines are admitted to the registry if the horses meet the set standard for the registry. These registries usually require a selection process involving judging of an individual animal's quality, performance, and conformation before registration is finalized. A few \"registries,\" particularly some color breed registries, are very open and will allow membership of all horses that meet limited criteria, such as coat color and species, regardless of pedigree or conformation.\nBreed registries also differ as to their acceptance or rejection of breeding technology. For example, all Jockey Club Thoroughbred registries require that a registered Thoroughbred be a product of a natural mating, so-called \"live cover\". A foal born of two Thoroughbred parents, but by means of artificial insemination or embryo transfer, cannot be registered in the Thoroughbred studbook. However, since the advent of DNA testing to verify parentage, most breed registries now allow artificial insemination, embryo transfer, or both. The high value of stallions has helped with the acceptance of these techniques because they allow a stallion to breed more mares with each \"collection\" and greatly reduce the risk of injury during mating. Cloning of horses is highly controversial, and at the present time most mainstream breed registries will not accept cloned horses, though several cloned horses and mules have been produced. Such restrictions have led to legal challenges in the United States, sometime based on state law and sometimes based on antitrust laws.\nHybrids.\nHorses can crossbreed with other equine species to produce hybrids. These hybrid types are not breeds, but they resemble breeds in that crosses between certain horse breeds and other equine species produce characteristic offspring. The most common hybrid is the mule, a cross between a \"jack\" (male donkey) and a mare. A related hybrid, the hinny, is a cross between a stallion and a jenny (female donkey). Most other hybrids involve the zebra (see Zebroid). With rare exceptions, most equine hybrids are sterile and cannot reproduce. A notable exception is hybrid crosses between horses and \"Equus ferus przewalskii\", commonly known as Przewalski's horse.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14082", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14082", "title": "Horse breeding", "text": "Human-directed process of selective horse breeding\nHorse breeding is reproduction in horses, and particularly the human-directed process of selective breeding of animals, particularly purebred horses of a given breed. Planned matings can be used to produce specifically desired characteristics in domesticated horses. Furthermore, modern breeding management and technologies can increase the rate of conception, a healthy pregnancy, and successful foaling.\nTerminology.\nThe male parent of a horse, a stallion, is commonly known as the \"sire\" and the female parent, the mare, is called the \"dam\". Both are genetically important, as each parent's genes can be existent with a 50% probability in the foal. Contrary to popular misuse, \"colt\" refers to a young male horse only; \"filly\" is a young female. Though many horse owners may simply breed a family mare to a local stallion in order to produce a companion animal, most professional breeders use selective breeding to produce individuals of a given phenotype, or breed. Alternatively, a breeder could, using individuals of differing phenotypes, create a new breed with specific characteristics.\nA horse is \"bred\" where it is foaled (born). Thus a colt conceived in England but foaled in the United States is regarded as being bred in the US. In some cases, most notably in the Thoroughbred breeding industry, American- and Canadian-bred horses may also be described by the state or province in which they are foaled. Some breeds denote the country, or state, where conception took place as the origin of the foal.\nSimilarly, the \"breeder\", is the person who owned or leased the mare at the time of foaling. That individual may not have had anything to do with the mating of the mare. It is important to review each breed registry's rules to determine which applies to any specific foal.\nIn the horse breeding industry, the term \"half-brother\" or \"half-sister\" only describes horses which have the same dam, but different sires. Horses with the same sire but different dams are simply said to be \"by the same sire\", and no sibling relationship is implied. \"Full\" (or \"own\") siblings have both the same dam and the same sire. The terms paternal half-sibling, and maternal half-sibling are also often used. Three-quarter siblings are horses out of the same dam, and are by sires that are either half-brothers (i.e. same dam) or who are by the same sire.\nThoroughbreds and Arabians are also classified through the \"distaff\" or direct female line, known as their \"family\" or \"&lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;tail-female&lt;/dfn&gt;\" line, tracing back to their taproot foundation bloodstock or the beginning of their respective stud books. The female line of descent always appears at the bottom of a tabulated pedigree and is therefore often known as the \"bottom line\". In addition, the maternal grandfather of a horse has a special term: &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;damsire&lt;/dfn&gt;.\n\"Linebreeding\" technically is the duplication of fourth-generation or more distant ancestors. However, the term is often used more loosely, describing horses with duplication of ancestors closer than the fourth generation. It also is sometimes used as a euphemism for the practice of inbreeding, a practice that is generally frowned upon by horse breeders, though used by some in an attempt to change certain traits.\nEstrous cycle of the mare.\nEffects on the reproductive system during the estrous cycle.\nChanges in hormone levels can have great effects on the physical characteristics of the reproductive organs of the mare, thereby preparing, or preventing, her from conceiving.\nHormones involved in the estrous cycle, during foaling, and after birth.\nThe cycle is controlled by several hormones which regulate the estrous cycle, the mare's behavior, and the reproductive system of the mare. The cycle begins when the increased day length causes the pineal gland to reduce the levels of melatonin, thereby allowing the hypothalamus to secrete GnRH.\nBreeding and gestation.\nWhile horses in the wild mate and foal in mid to late spring, in the case of horses domestically bred for competitive purposes, especially horse racing, it is desirable that they be born as close to January 1 in the northern hemisphere or August 1 in the southern hemisphere as possible, so as to be at an advantage in size and maturity when competing against other horses in the same age group. When an early foal is desired, barn managers will put the mare \"under lights\" by keeping the barn lights on in the winter to simulate a longer day, thus bringing the mare into estrus sooner than she would in nature. Mares signal estrus and ovulation by urination in the presence of a stallion, raising the tail and revealing the vulva. A stallion, approaching with a high head, will usually nicker, nip and nudge the mare, as well as sniff her urine to determine her readiness for mating. During copulation, the stallion usually ejaculates after 6 to 8 pelvic thrusts.\nOnce fertilized, the oocyte (egg) remains in the oviduct for approximately 5.5 more days, and then descends into the uterus. The initial single cell combination is already dividing and by the time of entry into the uterus, the egg might have already reached the blastocyst stage.\nThe gestation period lasts for about eleven months, or about 340 days (normal average range 320\u2013370 days). During the early days of pregnancy, the conceptus is mobile, moving about in the uterus until about day 16 when \"fixation\" occurs. Shortly after fixation, the embryo proper (so called up to about 35 days) will become visible on trans-rectal ultrasound (about day 21) and a heartbeat should be visible by about day 23. After the formation of the endometrial cups and early placentation is initiated (35\u201340 days of gestation) the terminology changes, and the embryo is referred to as a fetus. True implantation \u2013 invasion into the endometrium of any sort \u2013 does not occur until about day 35 of pregnancy with the formation of the endometrial cups, and true placentation (formation of the placenta) is not initiated until about day 40-45 and not completed until about 140 days of pregnancy. The fetus's sex can be determined by day 70 of the gestation using ultrasound. Halfway through gestation the fetus is the size of between a rabbit and a beagle. The most dramatic fetal development occurs in the last 3 months of pregnancy when 60% of fetal growth occurs.\nColts are carried on average about 4 days longer than fillies.\nCare of the pregnant mare.\nDomestic mares receive specific care and nutrition to ensure that they and their foals are healthy. Mares are given vaccinations against diseases such as the Rhinopneumonitis (EHV-1) virus (which can cause miscarriage) as well as vaccines for other conditions that may occur in a given region of the world. Pre-foaling vaccines are recommended 4\u20136 weeks prior to foaling to maximize the immunoglobulin content of the colostrum in the first milk. Mares are dewormed a few weeks prior to foaling, as the mare is the primary source of parasites for the foal.\nMares can be used for riding or driving during most of their pregnancy. Exercise is healthy, though should be moderated when a mare is heavily in foal. Exercise in excessively high temperatures has been suggested as being detrimental to pregnancy maintenance during the embryonic period; however ambient temperatures encountered during the research were in the region of 100 degrees F and the same results may not be encountered in regions with lower ambient temperatures.\nDuring the first several months of pregnancy, the nutritional requirements do not increase significantly since the rate of growth of the fetus is very slow. However, during this time, the mare may be provided supplemental vitamins and minerals, particularly if forage quality is questionable. During the last 3\u20134 months of gestation, rapid growth of the fetus increases the mare's nutritional requirements. Energy requirements during these last few months, and during the first few months of lactation are similar to those of a horse in full training. Trace minerals such as copper are extremely important, particularly during the tenth month of pregnancy, for proper skeletal formation. Many feeds designed for pregnant and lactating mares provide the careful balance required of increased protein, increased calories through extra fat as well as vitamins and minerals. Overfeeding the pregnant mare, particularly during early gestation, should be avoided, as excess weight may contribute to difficulties foaling or fetal/foal related problems.\nFoaling.\nMares due to foal are usually separated from other horses, both for the benefit of the mare and the safety of the soon-to-be-delivered foal. In addition, separation allows the mare to be monitored more closely by humans for any problems that may occur while giving birth. In the northern hemisphere, a special foaling stall that is large and clutter free is frequently used, particularly by major breeding farms. Originally, this was due in part to a need for protection from the harsh winter climate present when mares foal early in the year, but even in moderate climates, such as Florida, foaling stalls are still common because they allow closer monitoring of mares. Smaller breeders often use a small pen with a large shed for foaling, or they may remove a wall between two box stalls in a small barn to make a large stall. In the milder climates seen in much of the southern hemisphere, most mares foal outside, often in a paddock built specifically for foaling, especially on the larger stud farms. Many stud farms worldwide employ technology to alert human managers when the mare is about to foal, including webcams, closed-circuit television, or assorted types of devices that alert a handler via a remote alarm when a mare lies down in a position to foal.\nOn the other hand, some breeders, particularly those in remote areas or with extremely large numbers of horses, may allow mares to foal out in a field amongst a herd, but may also see higher rates of foal and mare mortality in doing so.\nMost mares foal at night or early in the morning, and prefer to give birth alone when possible. Labor is rapid, often no more than 30 minutes, and from the time the feet of the foal appear to full delivery is often only about 15 to 20 minutes. Once the foal is born, the mare will lick the newborn foal to clean it and help blood circulation. In a very short time, the foal will attempt to stand and get milk from its mother. A foal should stand and nurse within one hour after birth.\nTo create a bond with her foal, the mare licks and nuzzles the foal, enabling her to distinguish the foal from others. Some mares are aggressive when protecting their foals, and may attack other horses or unfamiliar humans that come near their newborns.\nAfter birth, a foal's navel is dipped in antiseptic to prevent infection. The foal is sometimes given an enema to help clear the meconium from its digestive tract. The newborn is monitored to ensure that it stands and nurses without difficulty. While most horse births happen without complications, many owners have first aid supplies prepared and a veterinarian on call in case of a birthing emergency. People who supervise foaling should also watch the mare to be sure that she passes the placenta in a timely fashion, and that it is complete with no fragments remaining in the uterus. Retained fetal membranes can cause a serious inflammatory condition (endometritis) and/or infection. If the placenta is not removed from the stall after it is passed, a mare will often eat it, an instinct from the wild, where blood would attract predators.\nFoal care.\nFoals develop rapidly, and within a few hours a wild foal can travel with the herd. In domestic breeding, the foal and dam are usually separated from the herd for a while, but within a few weeks are typically pastured with the other horses. A foal will begin to eat hay, grass and grain alongside the mare at about 4 weeks old; by 10\u201312 weeks the foal requires more nutrition than the mare's milk can supply. Foals are typically weaned at 4\u20138 months of age, although in the wild a foal may nurse for a year.\nHow breeds develop.\nBeyond the appearance and conformation of a specific type of horse, breeders aspire to improve physical performance abilities. This concept, known as matching \"form to function,\" has led to the development of not only different breeds, but also families or bloodlines within breeds that are specialists for excelling at specific tasks.\nFor example, the Arabian horse of the desert naturally developed speed and endurance to travel long distances and survive in a harsh environment, and domestication by humans added a trainable disposition to the animal's natural abilities. In the meantime, in northern Europe, the locally adapted heavy horse with a thick, warm coat was domesticated and put to work as a farm animal that could pull a plow or wagon. This animal was later adapted through selective breeding to create a strong but rideable animal suitable for the heavily armored knight in warfare.\nThen, centuries later, when people in Europe wanted faster horses than could be produced from local horses through simple selective breeding, they imported Arabians and other oriental horses to breed as an outcross to the heavier, local animals. This led to the development of breeds such as the Thoroughbred, a horse taller than the Arabian and faster over the distances of a few miles required of a European race horse or light cavalry horse. Another cross between oriental and European horses produced the Andalusian, a horse developed in Spain that was powerfully built, but extremely nimble and capable of the quick bursts of speed over short distances necessary for certain types of combat as well as for tasks such as bullfighting.\nLater, the people who settled America needed a hardy horse that was capable of working with cattle. Thus, Arabians and Thoroughbreds were crossed on Spanish horses, both domesticated animals descended from those brought over by the Conquistadors, and feral horses such as the Mustangs, descended from the Spanish horse, but adapted by natural selection to the ecology and climate of the west. These crosses ultimately produced new breeds such as the American Quarter Horse and the Criollo of Argentina. In Canada, the Canadian Horse descended from the French stock Louis XIV sent to Canada in the late 17th century.[6] The initial shipment, in 1665, consisted of two stallions and twenty mares from the Royal Stables in Normandy and Brittany, the centre of French horse breeding.[7] Only 12 of the 20 mares survived the trip. Two more shipments followed, one in 1667 of 14 horses (mostly mares, but with at least one stallion), and one in 1670 of 11 mares and a stallion. The shipments included a mix of draft horses and light horses, the latter of which included both pacing and trotting horses.[1] The exact origins of all the horses are unknown, although the shipments probably included Bretons, Normans, Arabians, Andalusians and Barbs.\nIn modern times, these breeds themselves have since been selectively bred to further specialize at certain tasks. One example of this is the American Quarter Horse. Once a general-purpose working ranch horse, different bloodlines now specialize in different events. For example, larger, heavier animals with a very steady attitude are bred to give competitors an advantage in events such as team roping, where a horse has to start and stop quickly, but also must calmly hold a full-grown steer at the end of a rope. On the other hand, for an event known as cutting, where the horse must separate a cow from a herd and prevent it from rejoining the group, the best horses are smaller, quick, alert, athletic and highly trainable. They must learn quickly, have conformation that allows quick stops and fast, low turns, and the best competitors have a certain amount of independent mental ability to anticipate and counter the movement of a cow, popularly known as \"cow sense.\"\nAnother example is the Thoroughbred. While most representatives of this breed are bred for horse racing, there are also specialized bloodlines suitable as show hunters or show jumpers. The hunter must have a tall, smooth build that allows it to trot and canter smoothly and efficiently. Instead of speed, value is placed on appearance and upon giving the equestrian a comfortable ride, with natural jumping ability that shows bascule and good form.\nA show jumper, however, is bred less for overall form and more for power over tall fences, along with speed, scope, and agility. This favors a horse with a good galloping stride, powerful hindquarters that can change speed or direction easily, plus a good shoulder angle and length of neck. A jumper has a more powerful build than either the hunter or the racehorse.\nHistory of horse breeding.\nThe history of horse breeding goes back millennia. Though the precise date is in dispute, humans could have domesticated the horse as far back as approximately 4500 BCE. However, evidence of planned breeding has a more blurry history. It is well known, for example, that the Romans did breed horses and valued them in their armies, but little is known regarding their breeding and husbandry practices: all that remains are statues and artwork. Mankind has plenty of equestrian statues of Roman emperors, horses are mentioned in the Odyssey by Homer, and hieroglyphics and paintings left behind by Egyptians tell stories of pharaohs hunting elephants from chariots. Nearly nothing is known of what became of the horses they bred for hippodromes, for warfare, or even for farming.\nOne of the earliest people known to document the breedings of their horses were the Bedouin of the Middle East, the breeders of the Arabian horse. While it is difficult to determine how far back the Bedouin passed on pedigree information via an oral tradition, there were written pedigrees of Arabian horses by CE 1330. The Akhal-Teke of West-Central Asia is another breed with roots in ancient times that was also bred specifically for war and racing. The nomads of the Mongolian steppes bred horses for several thousand years as well, and the Caspian horse is believed to be a very close relative of Ottoman horses from the earliest origins of the Turks in Central Asia.\nThe types of horse bred varied with culture and with the times. The uses to which a horse was put also determined its qualities, including smooth amblers for riding, fast horses for carrying messengers, heavy horses for plowing and pulling heavy wagons, ponies for hauling cars of ore from mines, packhorses, carriage horses and many others.\nMedieval Europe bred large horses specifically for war, called destriers. These horses were the ancestors of the great heavy horses of today, and their size was preferred not simply because of the weight of the armor, but also because a large horse provided more power for the knight's lance. Weighing almost twice as much as a normal riding horse, the destrier was a powerful weapon in battle meant to act like a giant battering ram that could quite literally run down men on an enemy line.\nOn the other hand, during this same time, lighter horses were bred in northern Africa and the Middle East, where a faster, more agile horse was preferred. The lighter horse suited the raids and battles of desert people, allowing them to outmaneuver rather than overpower the enemy. When Middle Eastern warriors and European knights collided in warfare, the heavy knights were frequently outmaneuvered. The Europeans, however, responded by crossing their native breeds with \"oriental\" type horses such as the Arabian, Barb, and Turkoman horse This cross-breeding led both to a nimbler war horse, such as today's Andalusian horse, but also created a type of horse known as a Courser, a predecessor to the Thoroughbred, which was used as a message horse.\nDuring the Renaissance, horses were bred not only for war, but for haute ecole riding, derived from the most athletic movements required of a war horse, and popular among the elite nobility of the time. Breeds such as the Lipizzan and the now extinct Neapolitan horse were developed from Spanish-bred horses for this purpose, and also became the preferred mounts of cavalry officers, who were derived mostly from the ranks of the nobility. It was during this time that firearms were developed, and so the light cavalry horse, a faster and quicker war horse, was bred for \"shoot and run\" tactics rather than the shock action as in the Middle Ages. Fine horses usually had a well muscled, curved neck, slender body, and sweeping mane, as the nobility liked to show off their wealth and breeding in paintings of the era.\nAfter Charles II retook the British throne in 1660, horse racing, which had been banned by Cromwell, was revived. The Thoroughbred was developed 40 years later, bred to be the ultimate racehorse, through the lines of three foundation Arabian stallions and one Turkish horse.\nIn the 18th century, James Burnett, Lord Monboddo noted the importance of selecting appropriate parentage to achieve desired outcomes of successive generations. Monboddo worked more broadly in the abstract thought of species relationships and evolution of species. The Thoroughbred breeding hub in Lexington, Kentucky was developed in the late 18th century, and became a mainstay in American racehorse breeding.\nThe 17th and 18th centuries saw more of a need for fine carriage horses in Europe, bringing in the dawn of the warmblood. The warmblood breeds have been exceptionally good at adapting to changing times, and from their coach horse beginnings they easily transitioned during the 20th century into a sport horse type. Today's warmblood breeds are frequently used in competitive driving, but are more often seen competing in show jumping or dressage.\nThe Thoroughbred continues to dominate the horse racing world, although its lines have been more recently used to improve warmblood breeds and to develop sport horses. The French saddle horse is an excellent example as is the Irish Sport Horse, the latter being an unusual combination between a Thoroughbred and a draft breed.\nThe American Quarter Horse was developed early in the 18th century, mainly for quarter racing (racing \u00bc of a mile). Colonists did not have racetracks or any of the trappings of Europe that the earliest Thoroughbreds had at their disposal, so instead the owners of Quarter Horses would run their horses on roads that lead through town as a form of local entertainment. As the USA expanded West, the breed went with settlers as a farm and ranch animal, and \"cow sense\" was particularly valued: their use for herding cattle increased on rough, dry terrain that often involved sitting in the saddle for long hours.\nHowever, this did not mean that the original \u00bc-mile races that colonists held ever went out of fashion, so today there are three types: the stock horse type, the racer, and the more recently evolving sport type. The racing type most resembles the finer-boned ancestors of the first racing Quarter Horses, and the type is still used for \u00bc-mile races. The stock horse type, used in western events and as a farm and patrol animal is bred for a shorter stride, an ability to stop and turn quickly, and an unflappable attitude that remains calm and focused even in the face of an angry charging steer. The first two are still to this day bred to have a combination of explosive speed that exceeds the Thoroughbred on short distances clocked as high as 55\u00a0mph, but they still retain the gentle, calm, and kindly temperament of their ancestors that makes them easily handled.\nThe Canadian horse's origin corresponds to shipments of French horses, some of which came from Louis XIV's own stable and most likely were Baroque horses meant to be gentlemen's mounts. These were ill-suited to farm work and to the hardscrabble life of the New World, so like the Americans, early Canadians crossed their horses with natives escapees. In time they evolved along similar lines as the Quarter Horse to the South as both the US and Canada spread westward and needed a calm and tractable horse versatile enough to carry the farmer's son to school but still capable of running fast and running hard as a cavalry horse, a stockhorse, or a horse to pull a conestoga wagon.\nOther horses from North America retained a hint of their mustang origins by being either derived from stock that Native Americans bred that came in a rainbow of color, like the Appaloosa and American Paint Horse, with those East of the Mississippi River increasingly bred to impress and mimic the trends of the upper classes of Europe: The Tennessee Walking Horse and Saddlebred were originally plantation horses bred for their gait and comfortable ride in the saddle as a plantation master would survey his vast lands like an English lord.\nHorses were needed for heavy draft and carriage work until replaced by the automobile, truck, and tractor. After this time, draft and carriage horse numbers dropped significantly, though light riding horses remained popular for recreational pursuits. Draft horses today are used on a few small farms, but today are seen mainly for pulling and plowing competitions rather than farm work. Heavy harness horses are now used as an outcross with lighter breeds, such as the Thoroughbred, to produce the modern warmblood breeds popular in sport horse disciplines, particularly at the Olympic level.\nChoosing breeding stock.\nSome breeders consider the quality of the sire to be more important than the quality of the dam. However, other breeders maintain that the mare is the most important parent. Because stallions can produce far more offspring than mares, a single stallion can have a greater overall impact on a breed. Research from Nagoya University supports the belief that the most important factor affecting a thoroughbred's race performance is the quality of its sire, whereas the effect of the age of its broodmare is negligible. However, the mare may have a greater influence on an individual foal because its physical characteristics influence the developing foal in the womb and the foal also learns habits from its dam when young. Foals may also learn the \"language of intimidation and submission\" from their dam, and this imprinting may affect the foal's status and rank within the herd. Many times, a mature horse will achieve status in a herd similar to that of its dam; the offspring of dominant mares become dominant themselves. (See also Horse behavior.)\nCovering the mare.\nThere are two general ways to \"cover\" or breed the mare:\nAfter the mare is bred or artificially inseminated, she is checked using ultrasound 14\u201316 days later to see if she \"took\", and is pregnant. A second check is usually performed at 28 days. If the mare is not pregnant, she may be bred again during her next cycle.\nIt is considered safe to breed a mare to a stallion of much larger size. Because of the mare's type of placenta and its attachment and blood supply, the foal will be limited in its growth within the uterus to the size of the mare's uterus, but will grow to its genetic potential after it is born. Test breedings have been done with draft horse stallions bred to small mares with no increase in the number of difficult births.\nLive cover.\nWhen breeding live cover, the mare is usually boarded at the stud. She may be \"teased\" several times with a stallion that will not breed to her, usually with the stallion being presented to the mare over a barrier. Her reaction to the teaser, whether hostile or passive, is noted. A mare that is in heat will generally tolerate a teaser (although this is not always the case), and may present herself to him, holding her tail to the side. A veterinarian may also determine if the mare is ready to be bred, by ultrasound or palpating daily to determine if ovulation has occurred. Live cover can also be done in liberty on a paddock or on pasture, although due to safety and efficacy concerns, it is not common at professional breeding farms.\nWhen it has been determined that the mare is ready, both the mare and intended stud will be cleaned. The mare will then be presented to the stallion, usually with one handler controlling the mare and one or more handlers in charge of the stallion. Multiple handlers are preferred, as the mare and stallion can be easily separated should there be any trouble.\nThe Jockey Club, the organization that oversees the Thoroughbred industry in the United States, requires all registered foals to be bred through live cover. Artificial insemination, listed below, is not permitted. Similar rules apply in other countries, such as Australia.\nBy contrast, the U.S. standardbred industry allows registered foals to be bred by live cover, or by artificial insemination (AI) with fresh or frozen (not dried) semen. No other artificial fertility treatment is allowed. In addition, foals bred via AI of frozen semen may only be registered if the stallion's sperm was collected during his lifetime, and used no later than the calendar year of his death or castration.\nArtificial insemination.\nWhereas the various national Thoroughbred associations typically require live cover, by 2009 most horse breeds allowed for the artificial insemination of mares with cooled, frozen or even fresh semen.\nArtificial insemination (AI) has several advantages over live cover, and has a very similar conception rate:\nA stallion is usually trained to mount a phantom (or dummy) mare, although a live mare may be used, and he is most commonly collected using an artificial vagina (AV) which is heated to simulate the vagina of the mare. The AV has a filter and collection area at one end to capture the semen, which can then be processed in a lab. The semen may be chilled or frozen and shipped to the mare owner or used to breed mares \"on-farm\". When the mare is in heat, the person inseminating introduces the semen directly into her uterus using a syringe and pipette.\nAdvanced reproductive techniques.\nOften an owner does not want to take a valuable competition mare out of training to carry a foal. This presents a problem, as the mare will usually be quite old by the time she is retired from her competitive career, at which time it is more difficult to impregnate her. Other times, a mare may have physical problems that prevent or discourage breeding. However, there are now several options for breeding these mares. These options also allow a mare to produce multiple foals each breeding season, instead of the usual one. Therefore, mares may have an even greater value for breeding.\nThe world's first cloned horse, Prometea, was born in 2003. Other notable instances of horse cloning are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14084", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14084", "title": "Heterosexuality", "text": "Attraction between people of the opposite sex or gender\nHeterosexuality is romantic attraction, sexual attraction, or sexual behavior between people of the opposite sex or gender. As a sexual orientation, heterosexuality is \"an enduring pattern of emotional, romantic, and/or sexual attractions\" to people of the opposite sex. It \"also refers to a person's sense of identity based on those attractions, related behaviors, and membership in a community of others who share those attractions.\" Someone who is heterosexual is commonly referred to as \"straight.\"\nAlong with bisexuality and homosexuality, heterosexuality is one of the three main categories of sexual orientation within the heterosexual\u2013homosexual continuum. Across cultures, most people are heterosexual, and heterosexual activity is by far the most common type of sexual activity. Heterosexuality has mostly been viewed as the normative and most socially dominant form of sexual orientation.\nScientists do not know the exact cause of sexual orientation, but they theorize that it is caused by a complex interplay of genetic, hormonal, and environmental influences, and do not view it as a choice. Although no single theory on the cause of sexual orientation has yet gained widespread support, scientists favor biologically based theories. There is considerably more evidence supporting nonsocial, biological causes of sexual orientation than social ones, especially for males.\nThe term \"heterosexual\" or \"heterosexuality\" is usually applied to humans, but heterosexual behavior is observed in all other mammals and in other animals, as it is necessary for sexual reproduction.\nTerminology.\n\"Hetero-\" comes from the Greek word \"\u1f15\u03c4\u03b5\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2\" [h\u00e9teros], meaning \"other party\" or \"another\", used in science as a prefix meaning \"different\"; and the Latin word for sex (that is, characteristic sex or sexual differentiation).\nThe current use of the term \"heterosexual\" has its roots in the broader 19th century tradition of personality taxonomy. The term \"heterosexual\" was coined alongside the word \"homosexual\" by Karl Maria Kertbeny in 1869. The terms were not in current use during the late nineteenth century, but were reintroduced by Richard von Krafft-Ebing and Albert Moll around 1890. The noun came into wider use from the early 1920s, but did not enter common use until the 1960s. The colloquial shortening \"hetero\" is attested from 1933. The abstract noun \"heterosexuality\" is first recorded in 1900. The word \"heterosexual\" was listed in Merriam-Webster's \"New International Dictionary\" in 1923 as a medical term for \"morbid sexual passion for one of the opposite sex\"; however, in 1934 in their \"Second Edition Unabridged\" it is defined as a \"manifestation of sexual passion for one of the opposite sex; normal sexuality\".\nHyponyms of heterosexual include \"heteroflexible\".\nThe word can be informally shortened to \"hetero\". The term \"straight\" originated as a mid-20th century gay slang term for heterosexuals, ultimately coming from the phrase \"to go straight\" (as in \"straight and narrow\"), or stop engaging in homosexual sex. One of the first uses of the word in this way was in 1941 by author G. W. Henry. Henry's book concerned conversations with homosexual males and used this term in connection with people who are identified as ex-gays. It is now simply a colloquial term for \"heterosexual\", having changed in primary meaning over time. Some object to usage of the term \"straight\" because it implies that non-heterosexual people are crooked.\nDemographics.\nIn their 2016 literature review, Bailey \"et al.\" stated that they \"expect that in all cultures the vast majority of individuals are sexually predisposed exclusively to the other sex (i.e., heterosexual)\" and that there is no persuasive evidence that the demographics of sexual orientation have varied much across time or place. Heterosexual activity between only one male and one female is by far the most common type of sociosexual activity.\nAccording to several major studies, 89% to 98% of people have had only heterosexual contact within their lifetime; but this percentage falls to 79\u201384% when either or both same-sex attraction and behavior are reported.\nA 1992 study reported that 93.9% of males in Britain have only had heterosexual experience, while in France the number was reported at 95.9%. According to a 2008 poll, 85% of Britons have only opposite-sex sexual contact while 94% of Britons identify themselves as heterosexual. Similarly, a survey by the UK Office for National Statistics (ONS) in 2010 found that 95% of Britons identified as heterosexual, 1.5% of Britons identified themselves as homosexual or bisexual, and the last 3.5% gave more vague answers such as \"don't know\", \"other\", or did not respond to the question. In the United States, according to a Williams Institute report in April 2011, 96% or approximately 250 million of the adult population are heterosexual.\nAn October 2012 Gallup poll provided unprecedented demographic information about those who identify as heterosexual, arriving at the conclusion that 96.6%, with a margin of error of \u00b11%, of all U.S. adults identify as heterosexual. The Gallup results show:\nIn a 2015 YouGov survey of 1,000 adults of the United States, 89% of the sample identified as heterosexual, 4% as homosexual (2% as homosexual male and 2% as homosexual female) and 4% as bisexual (of either sex).\nBailey \"et al.\", in their 2016 review, stated that in recent Western surveys, about 93% of men and 87% of women identify as completely heterosexual, and about 4% of men and 10% of women as mostly heterosexual.\nAcademic study.\nBiological and environmental.\nNo simple and singular determinant for sexual orientation has been conclusively demonstrated, but scientists believe that a combination of genetic, hormonal, and environmental factors determine sexual orientation. They favor biological theories for explaining the causes of sexual orientation, as there is considerably more evidence supporting nonsocial, biological causes than social ones, especially for males.\nFactors related to the development of a heterosexual orientation include genes, prenatal hormones, and brain structure, and their interaction with the environment.\nPrenatal hormones.\nThe neurobiology of the masculinization of the brain is fairly well understood. Estradiol and testosterone, which is catalyzed by the enzyme 5\u03b1-reductase into dihydrotestosterone, act upon androgen receptors in the brain to masculinize it. If there are few androgen receptors (people with androgen insensitivity syndrome) or too much androgen (females with congenital adrenal hyperplasia), there can be physical and psychological effects. It has been suggested that both male and female heterosexuality are the results of this process. In these studies heterosexuality in females is linked to a lower amount of masculinization than is found in lesbian females, though when dealing with male heterosexuality there are results supporting both higher and lower degrees of masculinization than homosexual males.\nAnimals and reproduction.\nSexual reproduction in the animal world is facilitated through opposite-sex sexual activity, although there are also animals that reproduce asexually, including protozoa and lower invertebrates.\nReproductive sex does not require a heterosexual orientation, since sexual orientation typically refers to a long-term enduring pattern of sexual and emotional attraction leading often to long-term social bonding, while reproduction requires as little as a single act of copulation to fertilize the ovum by sperm.\nSexual fluidity.\nOften, sexual orientation and sexual orientation identity are not distinguished, which can impact accurately assessing sexual identity and whether or not sexual orientation is able to change; sexual orientation identity can change throughout an individual's life, and may or may not align with biological sex, sexual behavior or actual sexual orientation.&lt;ref name=\"Concordance/discordance in SO\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Sexual orientation is stable and unlikely to change for the vast majority of people, but some research indicates that some people may experience change in their sexual orientation, and this is more likely for women than for men. The American Psychological Association distinguishes between sexual orientation (an innate attraction) and sexual orientation identity (which may change at any point in a person's life).\nA 2012 study found that 2% of a sample of 2,560 adult participants reported a change of sexual orientation identity after a 10-year period. For men, a change occurred in 0.78% of those who had identified as heterosexual, 9.52% of homosexuals, and 47% of bisexuals. For women, a change occurred in 1.36% of heterosexuals, 63.6% of lesbians, and 64.7% of bisexuals.\nHeteroflexibility is a form of sexual orientation or situational sexual behavior characterized by minimal homosexual activity in an otherwise primarily heterosexual orientation that is considered to distinguish it from bisexuality. It has been characterized as \"mostly straight\".\nIdentity vs behavior.\nSome researchers observe that behavior and identity sometimes do not match: for instance, some women identify as simultaneously heterosexual and bisexual. Self-identified straight women may have sex with women22 or self-identified straight men may have sex with men.\nSexual orientation change efforts.\nSexual orientation change efforts are methods that aim to change sexual orientation, used to try to convert homosexual and bisexual people to heterosexuality. Scientists and mental health professionals generally do not believe that sexual orientation is a choice. There are no studies of adequate scientific rigor that conclude that sexual orientation change efforts are effective.\nSociety and culture.\nA heterosexual couple, a man and woman in an intimate relationship, form the core of a nuclear family.\nMany societies throughout history have insisted that a marriage take place before the couple settle down, but enforcement of this rule or compliance with it has varied considerably.\nSymbolism.\nHeterosexual symbolism dates back to the earliest artifacts of humanity, with gender symbols, ritual fertility carvings, and primitive art. This was later expressed in the symbolism of fertility rites and polytheistic worship, which often included images of human reproductive organs, such as lingam in Hinduism. Modern symbols of heterosexuality in societies derived from European traditions still reference symbols used in these ancient beliefs. One such image is a combination of the symbol for Mars, the Roman god of war, as the definitive male symbol of masculinity, and Venus, the Roman goddess of love and beauty, as the definitive female symbol of femininity. The unicode character for this combined symbol is \u26a4 (U+26A4).\nHistorical views.\nThere was no need to coin a term such as \"heterosexual\" until terms emerged with which it could be compared and contrasted. Jonathan Ned Katz dates the definition of heterosexuality, as it is used today, to the late 19th century. According to Katz, in the Victorian era, sex was seen as a means to achieve reproduction, and relations between the sexes were not believed to be overtly sexual. The body was thought of as a tool for procreation \u2013 \"Human energy, thought of as a closed and severely limited system, was to be used in producing children and in work, not wasted in libidinous pleasures.\"\nKatz argues that modern ideas of sexuality and eroticism began to develop in America and Germany in the later 19th century. The changing economy and the \"transformation of the family from producer to consumer\" resulted in shifting values. The Victorian work ethic had changed, pleasure became more highly valued and this allowed ideas of human sexuality to change. Consumer culture had created a market for the erotic, pleasure became commoditized. At the same time medical doctors began to acquire more power and influence. They developed the medical model of \"normal love\", in which healthy men and women enjoyed sex as part of a \"new ideal of male-female relationships that included.. an essential, necessary, normal eroticism.\" This model also had a counterpart, \"the Victorian Sex Pervert\", anyone who failed to meet the norm. The basic oppositeness of the sexes was the basis for normal, healthy sexual attraction. \"The attention paid the sexual abnormal created a need to name the sexual normal, the better to distinguish the average him and her from the deviant it.\" The creation of the term \"heterosexual\" consolidated the social existence of the pre-existing heterosexual experience and created a sense of ensured and validated normalcy within it.\nReligious views.\nThe Judeo-Christian tradition has several scriptures related to heterosexuality. The Book of Genesis states that God created women because \"It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him,\", and that \"Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh\"\nFor the most part, religious traditions in the world reserve marriage to heterosexual unions, but there are exceptions including certain Buddhist and Hindu traditions, Unitarian Universalists, Metropolitan Community Church, some Anglican dioceses, and some Quaker, United Church of Canada, and Reform and Conservative Jewish congregations.\nAlmost all religions believe that sex between a man and a woman within marriage is allowed, but there are a few that believe that it is a sin, such as The Shakers, The Harmony Society, and The Ephrata Cloister. These religions tend to view all sexual relations as sinful, and promote celibacy. Some religions require celibacy for certain roles, such as Catholic priests; however, the Catholic Church also views heterosexual marriage as sacred and necessary.\nHeteronormativity and heterosexism.\nHeteronormativity denotes or relates to a world view that promotes heterosexuality as the normal or preferred sexual orientation for people to have. It can assign strict gender roles to males and females. The term was popularized by Michael Warner in 1991. Feminist Adrienne Rich argues that compulsory heterosexuality, a continual and repeating reassertion of heterosexual norms, is a facet of heterosexism. Compulsory heterosexuality is the idea that female heterosexuality is both assumed and enforced by a patriarchal society. Heterosexuality is then viewed as the natural inclination or obligation by both sexes. Consequently, anyone who differs from the normalcy of heterosexuality is deemed deviant or abhorrent.\nHeterosexism is a form of bias or discrimination in favor of opposite-sex sexuality and relationships. It may include an assumption that everyone is heterosexual and may involve various kinds of discrimination against gays, lesbians, bisexuals, asexuals, heteroflexible people, or transgender or non-binary individuals.\nStraight pride is a slogan that arose in the late 1980s and early 1990s and has been used primarily by social conservative groups as a political stance and strategy. The term is described as a response to gay pride adopted by various LGBTQ groups in the early 1970s or to the accommodations provided to gay pride initiatives.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14086", "revid": "50463891", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14086", "title": "Hopewell Centre (Hong Kong)", "text": "Building in Wan Chai, Hong Kong\nHopewell Centre (Chinese: \u5408\u548c\u4e2d\u5fc3) is a , 64-storey skyscraper at 183 Queen's Road East, in Wan Chai, Hong Kong Island in Hong Kong. The tower is the first circular skyscraper in Hong Kong. It is named after Hong Kong\u2013listed property firm Hopewell Holdings Limited, which constructed the building. Hopewell Holdings Limited's headquarters are in the building and its chief executive officer, Gordon Wu, has his office on the top floor.\nDescription.\nConstruction started in 1977 and was completed in 1980. Upon completion, Hopewell Centre surpassed Jardine House as Hong Kong's tallest building. It was also the second tallest building in Asia at the time. It kept its title in Hong Kong until 1989, when the Bank of China Tower was completed. The building is now the 20th tallest building in Hong Kong.\nThe building has a circular floor plan. Although the front entrance is on the 'ground floor', commuters are taken through a set of escalators to the 3rd floor lift lobby. Hopewell Centre stands on the slope of a hill so steep that the building has its back entrance on the 17th floor towards Kennedy Road. There is a circular private swimming pool on the roof of the building built for feng shui reasons because people thought the building resembled a cigarette.\nA revolving restaurant located on the 62nd floor, called \"Revolving 66\", overlooks other tall buildings below and the harbour. It was originally called Revolving 62, but soon changed its name as locals kept calling it Revolving 66. It completes a 360-degree rotation each hour. Passengers take either office lifts (faster) or the scenic lifts (with a view) to the 56/F, where they transfer to smaller lifts up to the 62/F. The restaurant is now named The Grand Buffet.\nThe building comprises several groups of lifts. Lobbies are on the 3rd and 17th floor, and are connected to Queen's Road East and Kennedy Road respectively. A mini-skylobby is on the 56th floor and serves as a transfer floor for diners heading to the 60/F and 62/F restaurants. The building's white 'bumps' between the windows have built in window-washer guide rails.\nThis skyscraper was the filming location for R&amp;B group Dru Hill's music video for \"How Deep Is Your Love,\" directed by Brett Ratner, who also directed the movie Rush Hour, whose soundtrack features the song. The circular private swimming pool is well visible in this music video. This swimming pool has also featured in an Australian television advertisement by one of that country's major gaming companies, Tattersall's Limited, promoting a weekly lottery competition.\nThe skyscraper was also featured on the cover of post-hardcore band Fugazi's 1998 album \"End Hits\".\nIt is connected to the Hopewell Mall, which was opened on 1 November 2024.\nPrivatisation.\nHopewell shares shot up 31 per cent at one point, after the developer unveiled a privatisation plan worth HK$21.26 billion. The company was privatised in 2019 and its stock ticker 54 was removed from the exchange.\nFloors.\nNote 1: To get there, people going to floors 59, 60, 62-64 must transfer to different lifts on floor 56.&lt;br&gt;\nNote 2: The building has two cargo lifts serving floors 2\u201358 and 61.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14087", "revid": "20196532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14087", "title": "Heliopause (astronomy)", "text": ""}
{"id": "14089", "revid": "1318209457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14089", "title": "Harwich, Massachusetts", "text": "Harwich ( ) is a town on Cape Cod in Massachusetts. At the 2020 census it had a population of 13,440. Harwich experiences a seasonal increase to roughly 37,000. The town is a popular vacation spot, located near the Cape Cod National Seashore. Harwich's beaches are on the Nantucket Sound side of Cape Cod. Harwich has three active harbors. Saquatucket, Wychmere and Allen Harbors are all in Harwich Port. The town of Harwich includes the villages of Pleasant Lake, West Harwich, East Harwich, Harwich Port, Harwich Center, North Harwich, Northwest Harwich, and South Harwich. It is named after the English town of Harwich.\nHistory.\nHarwich was first settled by Europeans in 1670 as part of Yarmouth. The town was officially incorporated in 1694, and originally included the lands of the current town of Brewster. Early industry involved fishing and farming. The town is considered by some to be the birthplace of the cranberry industry, with the first commercial operation opened in 1846. There are still many bogs in the town, although the economy is now more centered on tourism and as a residential community. The town is also the site of the start/finish line of the \"Sail Around the Cape\", which rounds the Cape counter-clockwise, returning via the Cape Cod Canal.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and , or 36.97%, is water. The seven villages of Harwich are West Harwich, North Harwich, East Harwich, South Harwich, Harwich Center, Harwich Port and Pleasant Lake. These are also referred to as the Harwiches.\nHarwich is on the southern side of Cape Cod, just west of the southeastern corner. It is bordered by Dennis to the west, Brewster to the north, Orleans to the northeast, Chatham to the east, and Nantucket Sound to the south. Harwich is approximately east of Barnstable, east of the Cape Cod Canal, south of Provincetown, and southeast of Boston.\nThe town shares the largest lake on the Cape, called Long Pond, with the town of Brewster. Long Pond serves as a private airport for planes with the ability to land on water. The village of Pleasant Lake is at the southwest corner of the lake. Numerous other smaller bodies of water dot the town. Sand Pond, a public beach and swimming area, is located off Great Western Road in North Harwich.\nThe shore is home to several harbors and rivers, including the Herring River, Allens Harbor, Wychmere Harbor, Saquatucket Harbor, and the Andrews River. The town is also the home to the Hawksnest State Park, as well as a marina and several beaches, including two on Long Pond. There are also many beaches in West Harwich and South Harwich.\nClimate.\nAccording to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system, Harwich, Massachusetts, has a warm-summer, wet year round, humid continental climate (\"Dfb\"). Dfb climates are characterized by at least one month having an average mean temperature \u2264 32.0\u00a0\u00b0F (\u2264 0.0\u00a0\u00b0C), at least four months with an average mean temperature \u2265 50.0\u00a0\u00b0F (\u2265 10.0\u00a0\u00b0C), all months with an average mean temperature \u2264 71.6\u00a0\u00b0F (\u2264 22.0\u00a0\u00b0C), and no significant precipitation difference between seasons. The average seasonal (Nov\u2013Apr) snowfall total is approximately 30 inches (76\u00a0cm). The average snowiest month is February, which corresponds with the annual peak in nor'easter activity. The plant hardiness zone is 7a, with an average annual extreme minimum air temperature of 4.0\u00a0\u00b0F (\u221215.6\u00a0\u00b0C).\nEcology.\nAccording to the A. W. Kuchler U.S. potential natural vegetation types, Harwich, Massachusetts, would primarily contain a Northeastern oak/pine (\"110\") vegetation type with a Southern mixed forest (\"26\") vegetation form.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 12,386 people, 5,471 households, and 3,545 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 9,450 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 95.41% White, 0.71% Black or African American, 0.19% Native American, 0.22% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 2.03% from other races, and 1.40% from two or more races. 0.96% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 5,471 households, out of which 21.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.4% were married couples living together, 9.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.2% were non-families. 29.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 16.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.20 and the average family size was 2.72.\nIn the town, the population was spread out, with 18.3% under the age of 18, 4.2% from 18 to 24, 22.1% from 25 to 44, 25.8% from 45 to 64, and 29.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 49 years. For every 100 females, there were 84.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 79.7 males.\nThe median income for a household in the town was $41,552, and the median income for a family was $82,070. Males had a median income of $38,948 versus $27,439 for females. The per capita income for the town was $23,063. About 2.9% of families and 15.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 8.4% of those under age 18 and 8.1% of those age 65 or over.\nThe town of Harwich contains several smaller census-designated places (CDPs) for which the U.S. Census reports more focused geographic and demographic information. The CDPs in Harwich are Harwich Center, Harwich Port (including South Harwich), East Harwich and Northwest Harwich (including West Harwich, North Harwich, and Pleasant Lake).\nGovernment.\nHarwich is represented in the Massachusetts House of Representatives as a part of the Fourth Barnstable district, which includes (with the exception of Brewster) all the towns east and north of Harwich on the Cape. The town is represented in the Massachusetts Senate as a part of the Cape and Islands District, which includes all of Cape Cod, Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket except the towns of Bourne, Falmouth, Sandwich and a portion of Barnstable. The town is patrolled by the Second (Yarmouth) Barracks of Troop D of the Massachusetts State Police.\nAfter results from the 2020 census, Massachusetts decreased from 10 to 9 congressional districts due to decreased growth in population. These new boundaries now put Harwich in the 9th congressional district as the 10th no longer exists. Harwich is currently represented by William R. Keating. The state's senior member of the United States Senate is Elizabeth Warren, elected in 2012. The junior senator is Ed Markey, elected in 2013.\nHarwich is governed by the open town meeting form of government, led by a town administrator and a board of selectmen.\nPublic and health services.\nThere are three libraries in the town. The municipal library, the Brooks Free Library in Harwich Center, is the largest and is a member of the Cape Libraries Automated Materials Sharing (CLAMS) library network. There are two smaller non-municipal libraries \u2013 the Chase Library on Route 28 in West Harwich at the Dennis town line, and the Harwich Port Library on Lower Bank Street in Harwich Port.\nHarwich is the site of the Long Pond Medical Center, which serves the southeastern Cape region.\nHarwich has police and fire departments, with one fire and police station headquarters, and Station 2 in East Harwich.\nThere are post offices in Harwich Port, South Harwich, West Harwich, and East Harwich.\nEducation.\nHarwich's schools are part of the Monomoy Regional School District. Harwich Elementary School serves students from pre-school through fourth grade, Monomoy Regional Middle School which serves both Harwich and its joining town, Chatham. This middle school serves grades 5\u20137, and Monomoy Regional High School serves grades 8\u201312 for both Harwich and Chatham. Monomoy's teams are known as the Sharks. Harwich is known for its excellent boys basketball, girls basketball, girls field hockey, softball and baseball teams.\nThe Lighthouse Charter School recently moved into where the Harwich Cinema building was located.\nHarwich is the site of Cape Cod Regional Technical High School, a grades 9\u201312 high school which serves most of Cape Cod. The town is also home to Holy Trinity PreSchool, a Catholic pre-school which serves pre-kindergarten in West Harwich.\nSports and recreation.\nHarwich is home to the Harwich Mariners, an amateur collegiate summer baseball team in the Cape Cod Baseball League. The team plays at B.F.C. Whitehouse Field and has featured dozens of players who went on to careers in Major League Baseball such as Kevin Millar, Josh Donaldson, and DJ LeMahieu.\nSince 1976, the town has hosted the annual Harwich Cranberry Festival, noted for its fireworks display, in September.\nHarwich Port is a popular destination in the summer. The most popular beach in Harwich Port is Bank Street Beach. Harwich has 18 beaches and ponds.\nTransportation.\nRoadways.\nTwo of Massachusetts major routes, U.S. Route 6 and Massachusetts Route 28, cross the town. The town has the southern termini of Routes 39 and 124, and a portion of Route 137 passes through the town. Route 39 leads east through East Harwich to Orleans. Route 28 passes through West Harwich and Harwich Port, connecting the towns of Dennis and Chatham. Route 124 leads from Harwich Center to Brewster, and Route 137 cuts through East Harwich leading from Chatham to Brewster.\nCape Cod Rail Trail.\nA portion of the Cape Cod Rail Trail, as well as several other bicycle routes, are in town. There is no rail service in town, but the Cape Cod Rail Trail rotary is located in North Harwich near Main Street.\nAir travel.\nOther than the occasional sea plane landing on the pond, the nearest airport is in neighboring Chatham; the nearest regional service is at Barnstable Municipal Airport; and the nearest national and international air service is at Logan International Airport in Boston.\nCCRTA bus connections.\nIn recent years parts of Cape Cod have introduced bus service, especially during the summer to help cut down on traffic.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14090", "revid": "30108467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14090", "title": "Hull classification symbol", "text": "US naval inventory classification system\nThe United States Navy, United States Coast Guard, and United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) use a hull classification symbol (sometimes called hull code or hull number) to identify their ships by type and by individual ship within a type. The system is analogous to the pennant number system that the Royal Navy and other European and Commonwealth navies use.\nHistory.\nUnited States Navy.\nThe U.S. Navy began to assign unique Naval Registry Identification Numbers to its ships in the 1890s. The system was a simple one in which each ship received a number which was appended to its ship type, fully spelled out, and added parenthetically after the ship's name when deemed necessary to avoid confusion between ships. Under this system, for example, the battleship \"Indiana\" was USS \"Indiana\" (Battleship No. 1), the cruiser \"Olympia\" was USS \"Olympia\" (Cruiser No. 6), and so on. Beginning in 1907, some ships also were referred to alternatively by single-letter or three-letter codes\u2014for example, USS \"Indiana\" (Battleship No. 1) could be referred to as USS \"Indiana\" (B-1) and USS \"Olympia\" (Cruiser No. 6) could also be referred to as USS \"Olympia\" (C-6), while USS \"Pennsylvania\" (Armored Cruiser No. 4) could be referred to as USS \"Pennsylvania\" (ACR-4). However, rather than replacing it, these codes coexisted and were used interchangeably with the older system until the modern system was instituted on 17 July 1920.\nDuring World War I, the U.S. Navy acquired large numbers of privately owned and commercial ships and craft for use as patrol vessels, mine warfare vessels, and various types of naval auxiliary ships, some of them with identical names. To keep track of them all, the Navy assigned unique identifying numbers to them. Those deemed appropriate for patrol work received section patrol numbers (SP), while those intended for other purposes received \"identification numbers\", generally abbreviated \"Id. No.\" or \"ID;\" some ships and craft changed from an SP to an ID number or vice versa during their careers, without their unique numbers themselves changing, and some ships and craft assigned numbers in anticipation of naval service were never acquired by the Navy. The SP/ID numbering sequence was unified and continuous, with no SP number repeated in the ID series or vice versa so that there could not be, for example, both an \"SP-435\" and an \"Id. No. 435\". The SP and ID numbers were used parenthetically after each boat's or ship's name to identify it; although this system pre-dated the modern hull classification system and its numbers were not referred to at the time as \"hull codes\" or \"hull numbers,\" it was used in a similar manner to today's system and can be considered its precursor.\nUnited States Revenue Cutter Service and United States Coast Guard.\nThe United States Revenue Cutter Service, which merged with the United States Lifesaving Service in January 1915 to form the modern United States Coast Guard, began following the Navy's lead in the 1890s, with its cutters having parenthetical numbers called Naval Registry Identification Numbers following their names, such as (Cutter No. 1), etc. This persisted until the Navy's modern hull classification system's introduction in 1920, which included Coast Guard ships and craft.\nUnited States Coast and Geodetic Survey.\nLike the U.S. Navy, the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey \u2013 a uniformed seagoing service of the United States Government and a predecessor of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) \u2013 adopted a hull number system for its fleet in the 20th century. Its largest vessels, \"Category I\" oceanographic survey ships, were classified as \"ocean survey ships\" and given the designation \"OSS\". Intermediate-sized \"Category II\" oceanographic survey ships received the designation \"MSS\" for \"medium survey ship,\" and smaller \"Category III\" oceanographic survey ships were given the classification \"CSS\" for \"coastal survey ship.\" A fourth designation, \"ASV\" for \"auxiliary survey vessel,\" included even smaller vessels. In each case, a particular ship received a unique designation based on its classification and a unique hull number separated by a space rather than a hyphen; for example, the third Coast and Geodetic Survey ship named \"Pioneer\" was an ocean survey ship officially known as USC&amp;GS \"Pioneer\" (OSS 31). The Coast and Geodetic Survey's system persisted after the creation of NOAA in 1970, when NOAA took control of the Survey's fleet, but NOAA later changed to its modern hull classification system.\nUnited States Fish and Wildlife Service.\nThe Fish and Wildlife Service, created in 1940 and reorganized as the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) in 1956, adopted a hull number system for its fisheries research ships and patrol vessels. It consisted of \"FWS\" followed by a unique identifying number. In 1970, NOAA took control of the seagoing ships of the USFWS's Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, and as part of the NOAA fleet they were assigned new hull numbers beginning with \"FRV,\" for Fisheries Research Vessel, followed by a unique identifying number. They eventually were renumbered under the modern NOAA hull number system.\nThe modern hull classification system.\nUnited States Navy.\nThe U.S. Navy instituted its modern hull classification system on 17 July 1920, doing away with section patrol numbers, \"identification numbers\", and the other numbering systems described above. In the new system, all hull classification symbols are at least two letters; for basic types the symbol is the first letter of the type name, doubled, except for aircraft carriers.\nThe combination of symbol and hull number identifies a modern Navy ship uniquely. A heavily modified or re-purposed ship may receive a new symbol, and either retain the hull number or receive a new one. For example, the heavy gun cruiser was converted to a gun/missile cruiser, changing the hull number to CAG-1. Also, the system of symbols has changed a number of times both since it was introduced in 1907 and since the modern system was instituted in 1920, so ships' symbols sometimes change without anything being done to the physical ship.\nHull numbers are assigned by classification. Duplication between, but not within, classifications is permitted. Hence, CV-1 was the aircraft carrier and BB-1 was the battleship .\nShip types and classifications have come and gone over the years, and many of the symbols listed below are not presently in use. The Naval Vessel Register maintains an online database of U.S. Navy ships showing which symbols are presently in use.\nAfter World War II until 1975, the U.S. Navy defined a \"frigate\" as a type of surface warship larger than a destroyer and smaller than a cruiser. In other navies, such a ship generally was referred to as a \"flotilla leader\", or \"destroyer leader\". Hence the U.S. Navy's use of \"DL\" for \"frigate\" prior to 1975, while \"frigates\" in other navies were smaller than destroyers and more like what the U.S. Navy termed a \"destroyer escort\", \"ocean escort\", or \"DE\". The United States Navy 1975 ship reclassification of cruisers, frigates, and ocean escorts brought U.S. Navy classifications into line with other nations' classifications, at least cosmetically in terms of terminology, and eliminated the perceived \"cruiser gap\" with the Soviet Navy by redesignating the former \"frigates\" as \"cruisers\".\nMilitary Sealift Command.\nIf a U.S. Navy ship's hull classification symbol begins with \"T-\", it is part of the Military Sealift Command, has a primarily civilian crew, and is a United States Naval Ship (USNS) in non-commissioned service \u2013 as opposed to a commissioned United States Ship (USS) with an all-military crew.\nUnited States Coast Guard.\nIf a ship's hull classification symbol begins with \"W\", it is a commissioned cutter of the United States Coast Guard. Until 1965, the Coast Guard used U.S. Navy hull classification codes, prepending a \"W\" to their beginning. In 1965, it retired some of the less mission-appropriate Navy-based classifications and developed new ones of its own, most notably WHEC for \"high endurance cutter\" and WMEC for \"medium endurance cutter\".\nNational Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.\nThe National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), a component of the United States Department of Commerce, includes the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps (or \"NOAA Corps\"), one of the eight uniformed services of the United States, and operates a fleet of seagoing research and survey ships. The NOAA fleet also uses a hull classification symbol system, which it also calls \"hull numbers,\" for its ships.\nAfter NOAA took over the former fleets of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Bureau of Commercial Fisheries in 1970, it initially retained the Coast and Geodetic Survey's hull-number designations for its survey ships and adopted hull numbers beginning with \"FRV\", for \"Fisheries Research Vessel\", for its fisheries research ships. It later adopted a new system of ship classification, which it still uses today. In its modern system, the NOAA fleet is divided into two broad categories, research ships and survey ships. The research ships, which include oceanographic and fisheries research vessels, are given hull numbers beginning with \"R\", while the survey ships, generally hydrographic survey vessels, receive hull numbers beginning with \"S\". The letter is followed by a three-digit number; the first digit indicates the NOAA \"class\" (i.e., size) of the vessel, which NOAA assigns based on the ship's gross tonnage and horsepower, while the next two digits combine with the first digit to create a unique three-digit identifying number for the ship.\nGenerally, each NOAA hull number is written with a space between the letter and the three-digit number, as in, for example, or .\nUnlike in the U.S. Navy system, once an older NOAA ship leaves service, a newer one can be given the same hull number; for example, \"S 222\" was assigned to , then assigned to NOAAS \"Thomas Jefferson\" (S 222), which entered NOAA service after \"Mount Mitchell\" was stricken.\nUnited States Navy hull classification codes.\nThe U.S. Navy's system of alpha-numeric ship designators, and its associated hull numbers, have been for several decades a unique method of categorizing ships of all types: combatants, auxiliaries and district craft. Although considerably changed in detail and expanded over the years, this system remains essentially the same as when formally implemented in 1920. It is a very useful tool for organizing and keeping track of naval vessels, and also provides the basis for the identification numbers painted on the bows (and frequently the sterns) of most U.S. Navy ships.\nThe ship designator and hull number system's roots extend back to the late 1880s when ship type serial numbers were assigned to most of the new-construction warships of the emerging \"Steel Navy\". During the course of the next thirty years, these same numbers were combined with filing codes used by the Navy's clerks to create an informal version of the system that was put in place in 1920. Limited usage of ship numbers goes back even earlier, most notably to the \"Jeffersonian Gunboats\" of the early 1800s and the \"Tinclad\" river gunboats of the Civil War Mississippi Squadron.\nIt is important to understand that hull number-letter prefixes are not acronyms, and should not be carelessly treated as abbreviations of ship type classifications. Thus, \"DD\" does not stand for anything more than \"Destroyer\". \"SS\" simply means \"Submarine\". And \"FF\" is the post-1975 type code for \"Frigate.\"\nThe hull classification codes for ships in active duty in the United States Navy are governed under Secretary of the Navy Instruction 5030.8D.\nWarships.\nWarships are designed to participate in combat operations.\nThe origin of the two-letter code derives from the need to distinguish various cruiser subtypes.\nAircraft carrier type.\nAircraft carriers are ships designed primarily for the purpose of conducting combat operations by aircraft which engage in attacks against airborne, surface, sub-surface and shore targets. Contrary to popular belief, the \"CV\" hull classification symbol does not stand for \"carrier vessel\". \"CV\" derives from the cruiser designation, with one popular theory that the V comes from French \"voler\", \"to fly\", but this has never been definitively proven. The V has long been used by the U.S. Navy for heavier-than-air craft and possibly comes from the French volplane. Aircraft carriers are designated in two sequences: the first sequence runs from CV-1 USS \"Langley\" to the very latest ships, and the second sequence, \"CVE\" for escort carriers, ran from CVE-1 \"Long Island\" to CVE-127 \"Okinawa\" before being discontinued.\nSurface combatant type.\nSurface combatants are ships which are designed primarily to engage enemy forces on the high seas. The primary surface combatants are battleships, cruisers and destroyers. Battleships are very heavily armed and armored; cruisers moderately so; destroyers and smaller warships, less so. Before 1920, ships were called \"&lt;type&gt; no. X\", with the type fully pronounced. The types were commonly abbreviated in ship lists to \"B-X\", \"C-X\", \"D-X\" et cetera\u2014for example, before 1920, would have been called \"USS \"Minnesota\", Battleship number\u00a022\" orally and \"USS \"Minnesota\", B-22\" in writing. After 1920, the ship's name would have been both written and pronounced \"USS \"Minnesota\" (BB-22)\". In generally decreasing size, the types are:\nSubmarine type.\nSubmarines are all self-propelled submersible types (usually started with SS) regardless of whether employed as combatant, auxiliary, or research and development vehicles which have at least a residual combat capability. While some classes, including all diesel-electric submarines, are retired from USN service, non-U.S. navies continue to employ SS, SSA, SSAN, SSB, SSC, SSG, SSM, and SST types. With the advent of new Air Independent Propulsion/Power (AIP) systems, both SSI and SSP are used to distinguish the types within the USN, but SSP has been declared the preferred term. SSK, retired by the USN, continues to be used colloquially and interchangeably with SS for diesel-electric attack/patrol submarines within the USN, and, more formally, by the Royal Navy and British firms such as Jane's Information Group.\nPatrol combatant type.\nPatrol combatants are ships whose mission may extend beyond coastal duties and whose characteristics include adequate endurance and seakeeping, providing a capability for operations exceeding 48\u00a0hours on the high seas without support. This notably included Brown Water Navy/Riverine Forces during the Vietnam War. Few of these ships are in service today.\nAmphibious warfare type.\nAmphibious warfare vessels include all ships having an organic capability for amphibious warfare and which have characteristics enabling long duration operations on the high seas. There are two classifications of craft: amphibious warfare ships, which are built to cross oceans, and landing craft, which are designed to take troops from ship to shore in an invasion.\nThe U.S. Navy hull classification symbol for a ship with a well deck depends on its facilities for aircraft:\nShips\nLanding Craft\nExpeditionary support.\nOperated by Military Sealift Command, have ship prefix \"USNS\", hull code begins with \"T-\".\nMine warfare type.\nMine warfare ships are those ships whose primary function is mine warfare on the high seas.\nIn 1955 all mine warfare vessels except for degaussing vessels had their hull codes changed to begin with \"M\".\nCoastal defense type.\nCoastal defense ships are those whose primary function is coastal patrol and interdiction.\nAuxiliaries.\nAn auxiliary ship is designed to operate in any number of roles supporting combatant ships and other naval operations.\nCombat logistics type.\nShips which have the capability to provide underway replenishment (UNREP) to fleet units.\nMobile logistics type.\nMobile logistics ships have the capability to provide direct material support to other deployed units operating far from home ports.\nSupport ships.\nSupport ships are not designed to participate in combat and are generally not armed. For ships with civilian crews (owned by and/or operated for Military Sealift Command and the Maritime Administration), the prefix T- is placed at the front of the hull classification.\nSupport ships are designed to operate in the open ocean in a variety of sea states to provide general support to either combatant forces or shore-based establishments. They include smaller auxiliaries which, by the nature of their duties, leave inshore waters.\nService type craft.\nService craft are navy-subordinated craft (including non-self-propelled) designed to provide general support to either combatant forces or shore-based establishments. The suffix \"N\" refers to non-self-propelled variants.\nAirships.\nAlthough aircraft, pre-World War II rigid airships were commissioned (no different from surface warships and submarines), flew the U.S. ensign from their stern and carried a United States Ship (USS) designation.\nRigid airships:\nLighter-than-air aircraft (e.g., blimps) continued to fly the U.S. ensign from their stern but were registered as aircraft:\nTemporary designations.\nUnited States Navy Designations (Temporary) are a form of U.S. Navy ship designation, intended for temporary identification use. Such designations usually occur during periods of sudden mobilization, such as that which occurred prior to, and during, World War II or the Korean War, when it was determined that a sudden temporary need arose for a ship for which there was no official Navy designation.\nDuring World War II, for example, a number of commercial vessels were requisitioned, or acquired, by the U.S. Navy to meet the sudden requirements of war. A yacht acquired by the U.S. Navy during the start of World War II might seem desirable to the Navy whose use for the vessel might not be fully developed or explored at the time of acquisition.\nOn the other hand, a U.S. Navy vessel, such as the yacht in the example above, already in commission or service, might be desired, or found useful, for another need or purpose for which there is no official designation.\nNumerous other U.S. Navy vessels were launched with a temporary, or nominal, designation, such as YMS or PC, since it could not be determined, at the time of construction, what they should be used for. Many of these were vessels in the 150 to 200 feet length class with powerful engines, whose function could be that of a minesweeper, patrol craft, submarine chaser, seaplane tender, tugboat, or other. Once their destiny, or capability, was found or determined, such vessels were reclassified with their actual designation.\nUnited States Coast Guard vessels.\nPrior to 1965, U.S. Coast Guard cutters used the same designation as naval ships but preceded by a \"W\" to indicate Coast Guard commission. The U.S. Coast Guard considers any ship over 65 feet in length with a permanently assigned crew, a cutter.\nNational Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration hull codes.\nThe letter is paired with a three-digit number. The first digit of the number is determined by the ship's \"power tonnage,\" defined as the sum of its shaft horsepower and gross tonnage, as follows:\nThe second and third digits are assigned to create a unique three-digit hull number.\nNotes.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWikilink footnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14091", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14091", "title": "Habeas corpus", "text": "Court action challenging unlawful detention\nHabeas corpus () is a legal procedure invoking the jurisdiction of a court to review the unlawful detention or imprisonment of an individual, and request the individual's custodian (usually a prison official) to bring the prisoner to court, to determine whether their detention is lawful. The right to petition for a writ of \"habeas corpus\" has long been celebrated as a fundamental safeguard of individual liberty.\n\"Habeas corpus\" is generally enforced via writ, and accordingly referred to as a writ of \"habeas corpus\". The writ of \"habeas corpus\" is one of what are called the \"extraordinary\", \"common law\", or \"prerogative writs\", which were historically issued by the English courts in the name of the monarch to control inferior courts and public authorities within the kingdom. The writ was a legal mechanism that allowed a court to exercise jurisdiction and guarantee the rights of all the Crown's subjects against arbitrary arrest and detention.\nAt common law the burden was usually on the official to prove that a detention was authorized. \n\"Habeas corpus\" has certain limitations. In some countries, the writ has been temporarily or permanently suspended on the basis of a war or state of emergency, for example with the Habeas Corpus Suspension Act 1794 in Britain, and the Habeas Corpus Suspension Act (1863) in the United States.\nEtymology.\nThe phrase is from the Latin , second person singular present subjunctive active of \"to have\", \"to hold\"; and , accusative singular of \"body\". In reference to more than one person, the phrase is .\nHistory.\nThe writ of \"habeas corpus\" was described in the eighteenth century by William Blackstone as a \"great and efficacious writ in all manner of illegal confinement\". To this day, it is still \"universally known and celebrated as the 'Great Writ of Liberty'\". \nOrigins in England.\n\"Habeas corpus\" originally stems from the Assize of Clarendon of 1166, a reissuance of rights during the reign of Henry\u00a0II of England. The foundations for \"habeas corpus\" are \"wrongly thought\" to have originated in Magna Carta of 1215 but in fact predate it. This charter declared that:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be disseized of his Freehold, or Liberties, or free Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any other wise destroyed; nor will We not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the land.\nHowever, the preceding article of Magna Carta, clause 38, declares:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nWilliam Blackstone cites the first recorded usage of \"habeas corpus ad subjiciendum\" in 1305, during the reign of King Edward\u00a0I. However, other writs were issued with the same effect as early as the reign of Henry\u00a0II in the 12th\u00a0century. Blackstone explained the basis of the writ, saying \"[t]he king is at all times entitled to have an account, why the liberty of any of his subjects is restrained, wherever that restraint may be inflicted.\" The procedure for issuing a writ of \"habeas corpus\" was first codified by the Habeas Corpus Act 1679, following judicial rulings which had restricted the effectiveness of the writ. A previous law (the Habeas Corpus Act 1640) had been passed forty years earlier to overturn a ruling that the command of the king was a sufficient answer to a petition of \"habeas corpus\". The cornerstone purpose of the \"writ of habeas corpus\" was to limit the king's Chancery's ability to undermine the surety of law by allowing courts of justice decisions to be overturned in favour and application of \"equity\", a process managed by the Chancellor (a bishop) with the king's authority. \nThe 1679 codification of \"habeas corpus\" took place in the context of a sharp confrontation between King Charles\u00a0II and Parliament, which was dominated by the then sharply oppositional nascent Whig Party. The Whig leaders had good reasons to fear the king moving against them through the courts (as indeed happened in 1681) and regarded \"habeas corpus\" as safeguarding their own persons. The short-lived parliament which made this enactment came to be known as the \"Habeas Corpus Parliament\" \u2013 being dissolved by the king immediately afterwards.\nDuring the Seven Years' War and later conflicts, the writ was used on behalf of soldiers and sailors pressed into military and naval service. The Habeas Corpus Act 1816 introduced some changes and expanded the territoriality of the legislation. In his 1885 book on the UK's uncodified constitution, \"Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution\", English jurist Albert Venn Dicey wrote that the Habeas Corpus Acts \"declare no principle and define no rights, but they are for practical purposes worth a hundred constitutional articles guaranteeing individual liberty\".\nThe privilege of \"habeas corpus\" has been suspended or restricted several times during English history, most recently during the 18th and 19th centuries. Although internment without trial has been authorised by statute since that time, for example during the two World Wars and the Troubles in Northern Ireland, the \"habeas corpus\" procedure has in modern times always technically remained available to such internees. However, as \"habeas corpus\" is only a procedural device to examine the lawfulness of a prisoner's detention, so long as the detention is in accordance with an Act of Parliament, the petition for \"habeas corpus\" is unsuccessful. Since the passage of the Human Rights Act 1998, the courts have been able to declare an Act of Parliament to be incompatible with the European Convention on Human Rights, but such a declaration of incompatibility has no legal effect unless and until it is acted upon by the government.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States the jurisdiction of federal courts to issue writs of habeas corpus was first granted by the Judiciary Act of 1789, but only for federal prisoners. Federal habeas jurisdiction was not available for state prisoners until after the Civil War when it was authorized on a limited basis by the Habeas Corpus Act of 1867. However, the 1867 statute did not allow review for constitutional error. After the lynching of Leo Frank the Court began to signal that it might allow more expansive habeas review under the habeas statute. Then, in \"Moore v. Dempsey\", the United States Supreme Court, in a decision written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, held that a trial dominated by a mob violated the 14th amendment's due process clause. However, the extreme circumstances of \"Moore\" were considered an exception until 1953 when \"Brown v. Allen\" opened the door for federal review of state court judgments to protect the constitutional rights of criminal defendants.\nThe U.S. Constitution specifically includes the \"habeas\" procedure in the Suspension Clause (Clause\u00a02), located in Article One, Section\u00a09. This states that \"The privilege of the writ of \"habeas corpus\" shall not be suspended, unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it\". Presidents Abraham Lincoln and Ulysses Grant suspended \"habeas corpus\" during the Civil War and Reconstruction for some places or types of cases. During World War II, President Franklin D. Roosevelt suspended habeas corpus. Following the September 11 attacks, President George W. Bush attempted to place Guantanamo Bay detainees outside of the jurisdiction of \"habeas corpus\", but the Supreme Court of the United States overturned this action in \"Boumediene v. Bush\".\nInternational.\nArticle\u00a09 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that \"No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile.\"\nIn the 1950s, American lawyer Luis Kutner began advocating an international writ of \"habeas corpus\" to protect individual human rights. In 1952, he filed a petition for a \"United Nations Writ of Habeas Corpus\" on behalf of William N. Oatis, an American journalist jailed the previous year by the Communist government of Czechoslovakia. Alleging that Czechoslovakia had violated Oatis' rights under the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and that the United Nations General Assembly had \"inherent power\" to fashion remedies for human rights violations, the petition was filed with the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. The commission forwarded the petition to Czechoslovakia, but no other United Nations action was taken. Oatis was released in 1953. Kutner went on to publish numerous articles and books advocating the creation of an \"International Court of Habeas Corpus\".\nBy jurisdiction.\nAustralia.\nThe writ of \"habeas corpus\" as a procedural remedy is part of Australia's common law inheritance. In 2005, the Australian parliament passed the Australian Anti-Terrorism Act 2005. Some legal experts questioned the constitutionality of the act, due in part to limitations it placed on \"habeas corpus\".\nCanada.\n\"Habeas corpus\" rights are part of the English legal tradition inherited by Canada. The rights exist in the common law and have been enshrined in section 10(c) of the \"Charter of Rights and Freedoms\", which states that \"[e]veryone has the right on arrest or detention ... to have the validity of the detention determined by way of \"habeas corpus\" and to be released if the detention is not lawful\". The test for \"habeas corpus\" in Canada was established by the Supreme Court of Canada in \"Mission Institution v Khela\", as follows:To be successful, an application for \"habeas corpus\" must satisfy the following criteria. First, the applicant [i.e., the person seeking \"habeas corpus\" review] must establish that he or she has been deprived of liberty. Once a deprivation of liberty is proven, the applicant must raise a legitimate ground upon which to question its legality. If the applicant has raised such a ground, the onus shifts to the respondent authorities [i.e., the person or institution detaining the applicant] to show that the deprivation of liberty was lawful.Suspension of the writ in Canadian history occurred at multiple times. During the October Crisis in 1970, the \"War Measures Act\" was invoked by the Governor General of Canada on the constitutional advice of Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau, who had received a request from the Quebec Cabinet. The Act was also used to justify German, Slavic, and Ukrainian Canadian internment during World War\u00a0I, and the internment of German-Canadians, Italian-Canadians and Japanese-Canadians during World War\u00a0II. The writ was suspended for several years following the Battle of Fort Erie (1866) during the Fenian Raids, though the suspension was only ever applied to suspects in the Thomas D'Arcy McGee assassination.\nThe writ is available where there is no other adequate remedy. However, a superior court always has the discretion to grant the writ even in the face of an alternative remedy (see \"May v Ferndale Institution\"). Under the \"Criminal Code\" the writ is largely unavailable if a statutory right of appeal exists, whether or not this right has been exercised.\nCouncil of Europe.\nArticle 5 of the European Convention on Human Rights goes further and calls for persons detained to have the right to challenge their detention, providing at article\u00a05.4: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Everyone who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take proceedings by which the lawfulness of his detention shall be decided speedily by a court and his release ordered if the detention is not lawful.\nFrance.\nAs a fundamental human right in the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen drafted by Lafayette in co-operation with Thomas Jefferson, safeguards against arbitrary detention are enshrined in the French Constitution and regulated by the Penal Code. These safeguards are equivalent to those found under the Habeas-Corpus provisions found in Germany, the United States and several Commonwealth countries. The French system of accountability prescribes severe penalties for ministers, police officers and civil and judiciary authorities who either violate or fail to enforce the law.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Article\u00a07 of [1789] Declaration also provides that \"No individual may be accused, arrested, or detained except where the law so prescribes, and in accordance with the procedure it has laid down.\" ... The Constitution further states that \"No one may be arbitrarily detained. The judicial authority, guardian of individual liberty, ensures the observance of this principle under the condition specified by law.\" Its article\u00a05 provides that everyone has the right to liberty and sets forth permissible circumstances under which people may be deprived of their liberty and procedural safeguards in case of detention. In particular, it states that \"anyone deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take proceedings by which the lawfulness of his detention shall be decided speedily by a court and his release ordered if the detention is not lawful\".\nFrance and the United States played a synergistic role in the international team, led by Eleanor Roosevelt, which crafted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The French judge and Nobel Peace Laureate Ren\u00e9 Cassin produced the first draft and argued against arbitrary detentions. Ren\u00e9 Cassin and the French team subsequently championed the \"habeas corpus\" provisions enshrined in the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.\nGermany.\nGermany has constitutional guarantees against improper detention and these have been implemented in statutory law in a manner that can be considered as equivalent to writs of \"habeas corpus\".\nArticle\u00a0104, paragraph\u00a01 of the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany (ratified in 1949) provides that deprivations of liberty may be imposed only on the basis of a specific enabling statute that also must include procedural rules. Article\u00a0104, paragraph\u00a02 requires that any arrested individual be brought before a judge by the end of the day following the day of the arrest. For those detained as criminal suspects, article\u00a0104, paragraph\u00a03 specifically requires that the judge must grant a hearing to the suspect in order to rule on the detention.\nRestrictions on the power of the authorities to arrest and detain individuals also emanate from article\u00a02 paragraph\u00a02 of the Basic Law which guarantees liberty and requires a statutory authorization for any deprivation of liberty. In addition, several other articles of the Basic Law have a bearing on the issue. The most important of these are article 19, which generally requires a statutory basis for any infringements of the fundamental rights guaranteed by the Basic Law while also guaranteeing judicial review; article\u00a020, paragraph\u00a03, which guarantees the rule of law; and article\u00a03 which guarantees equality.\nIn particular, a constitutional obligation to grant remedies for improper detention is required by article\u00a019, paragraph\u00a04 of the Basic Law, which provides as follows: \"Should any person's right be violated by public authority, he may have recourse to the courts. If no other jurisdiction has been established, recourse shall be to the ordinary courts.\"\nIndia.\nIn the Republic of India, the Supreme Court and High Courts possess the authority to issue a writ of \"habeas corpus\", as granted by Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution of India, respectively.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(1) The right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the rights conferred by (Part III) is guaranteed.\n(2) The Supreme Court shall have power to issue directions or orders or writs, including writs in the nature of \"habeas corpus\", mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by (Part III).\n\u2014\u200a&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(1) Notwithstanding anything in article 32, every High Court shall have power, throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to issue to any person or authority, including in appropriate cases, any Government, within those territories directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of \"habeas corpus\", mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.\u2014\u200a\nOn 9 December 1948, during a session of the Constituent Assembly, H.V. Kamath, a member, suggested the removal of specific references to writs in Article 32, expressing concern that such references could restrict judges from establishing new types of writs in the future, while Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the Chairperson of the Drafting Committee, emphasized the significance of retaining references to the writs. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar noted that writs, including \"habeas corpus\", are already part of the Indian legal framework, but the existing writs are vulnerable to modifications through legislative changes, whereby the legislature, particularly with a strong majority, can amend the relevant laws, potentially leading to the suspension of writs like \"habeas corpus\". However, following the Constitution's enactment, which includes explicit references to writs, these writs cannot be easily nullified by any legislative body because the Constitution grants the Supreme Court the authority to issue them.\nThe Indian judiciary, in a catena of cases, has effectively resorted to the writ of \"habeas corpus\" to secure release of a person from illegal detention. In October 2009, the Karnataka High Court heard a \"habeas corpus\" petition filed by the parents of a girl who married a Muslim boy from Kannur district and was allegedly confined in a \"madrasa\" in Malapuram town. In 1976, the \"habeas\" writ was used in the Rajan case, a student victim of torture in local police custody during the nationwide Emergency in India. On 12\u00a0March 2014, Subrata Roy's counsel approached the Chief Justice moving a \"habeas corpus\" petition. It was also filed by the Panthers Party to protest the imprisonment of Anna Hazare, a social activist.\nIreland.\nIn the Republic of Ireland, the writ of \"habeas corpus\" is available at common law and under the Habeas Corpus Acts of 1782 and 1816.\nA remedy equivalent to \"habeas corpus\" is also guaranteed by Article\u00a040 of the 1937 constitution. The article guarantees that \"no citizen shall be deprived of his personal liberty save in accordance with law\" and outlines a specific procedure for the High Court to enquire into the lawfulness of any person's detention. It does not mention the Latin term \"habeas corpus\", but includes the English phrase \"produce the body\".\nArticle\u00a040.4.2\u00b0 provides that a prisoner, or anyone acting on his behalf, may make a complaint to the High Court (or to any High Court judge) of unlawful detention. The court must then investigate the matter \"forthwith\" and may order that the defendant bring the prisoner before the court and give reasons for his detention. The court must immediately release the detainee unless it is satisfied that he is being held lawfully. The remedy is available not only to prisoners of the state, but also to persons unlawfully detained by any private party. However, the constitution provides that the procedure is not binding on the Defence Forces during a state of war or armed rebellion.\nThe full text of Article\u00a040.4.2\u00b0 is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Upon complaint being made by or on behalf of any person to the High Court or any judge thereof alleging that such person is being unlawfully detained, the High Court and any and every judge thereof to whom such complaint is made shall forthwith enquire into the said complaint and may order the person in whose custody such person is detained to \"produce the body\" of such person before the High Court on a named day and to certify in writing the grounds of his detention, and the High Court shall, upon the body of such person being produced before that Court and after giving the person in whose custody he is detained an opportunity of justifying the detention, order the release of such person from such detention unless satisfied that he is being detained in accordance with the law. [italics added]\nThe writ of \"habeas corpus\" continued as part of the Irish law when the state seceded from the United Kingdom in 1922. A remedy equivalent to \"habeas corpus\" was also guaranteed by Article\u00a06 of the Constitution of the Irish Free State, enacted in 1922. That article used similar wording to Article\u00a040.4 of the current constitution, which replaced it 1937.\nThe relationship between the Article\u00a040 and the Habeas Corpus Acts of 1782 and 1816 is ambiguous, and Forde and Leonard write that \"The extent if any to which Article\u00a040.4 has replaced these Acts has yet to be determined\". In \"The State (Ahern) v. Cotter\" (1982) Walsh J. opined that the ancient writ referred to in the Habeas Corpus Acts remains in existence in Irish law as a separate remedy from that provided for in Article\u00a040.\nIn 1941, the Article\u00a040 procedure was restricted by the Second Amendment. Prior to the amendment, a prisoner had the constitutional right to apply to any High Court judge for an enquiry into her detention, and to as many High Court judges as she wished. If the prisoner successfully challenged her detention before the High Court she was entitled to immediate, unconditional release.\nThe Second Amendment provided that a prisoner has only the right to apply to a single judge, and, once a writ has been issued, the President of the High Court has authority to choose the judge or panel of three judges who will decide the case. If the High Court finds that the prisoner's detention is unlawful due to the unconstitutionality of a law the judge must refer the matter to the Supreme Court, and until the Supreme Court's decision is rendered the prisoner may be released only on bail.\nThe power of the state to detain persons prior to trial was extended by the Sixteenth Amendment, in 1996. In 1965, the Supreme Court ruled in the \"O'Callaghan\" case that the constitution required that an individual charged with a crime could be refused bail only if she was likely to flee or to interfere with witnesses or evidence. Since the Sixteenth Amendment, it has been possible for a court to take into account whether a person has committed serious crimes while on bail in the past.\nItaly.\nThe right to freedom from arbitrary detention is guaranteed by Article\u00a013 of the Constitution of Italy, which states: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Personal liberty is inviolable. No one may be detained, inspected, or searched nor otherwise subjected to any restriction of personal liberty except by order of the Judiciary stating a reason and only in such cases and in such manner as provided by the law. In exceptional circumstances and under such conditions of necessity and urgency as shall conclusively be defined by the law, the police may take provisional measures that shall be referred within 48 hours to the Judiciary for validation and which, in default of such validation in the following 48\u00a0hours, shall be revoked and considered null and void. Any act of physical and moral violence against a person subjected to restriction of personal liberty shall be punished. The law shall establish the maximum duration of preventive detention.\nThis implies that within 48 hours every arrest made by a police force must be validated by a court.\nFurthermore, if subject to a valid detention, an arrested can ask for a review of the detention to another court, called the Review Court (\"Tribunale del Riesame\", also known as the Freedom Court, \"Tribunale della Libert\u00e0\").\nMacau.\nIn Macau, the relevant provision is Article 204 in the Code of Penal Processes, which became law in 1996 under Portuguese rule. cases are heard before the Tribunal of Ultimate Instance. A notable case is Case 3/2008 in Macau.\nMalaysia.\nIn Malaysia, the remedy of \"habeas corpus\" is guaranteed by the federal constitution, although not by name. Article\u00a05(2) of the Constitution of Malaysia provides that \"Where complaint is made to a High Court or any judge thereof that a person is being unlawfully detained the court shall inquire into the complaint and, unless satisfied that the detention is lawful, shall order him to be produced before the court and release him\".\nAs there are several statutes, for example, the Internal Security Act 1960, that still permit detention without trial, the procedure is usually effective in such cases only if it can be shown that there was a procedural error in the way that the detention was ordered.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, \"habeas corpus\" may be invoked against the government or private individuals. In 2006, a child was allegedly kidnapped by his maternal grandfather after a custody dispute. The father began \"habeas corpus\" proceedings against the mother, the grandfather, the grandmother, the great-grandmother, and another person alleged to have assisted in the kidnap of the child. The mother did not present the child to the court and so was imprisoned for contempt of court. She was released when the grandfather came forward with the child in late January 2007.\nPakistan.\nIssuance of a writ is an exercise of an extraordinary jurisdiction of the superior courts in Pakistan. A writ of \"habeas corpus\" may be issued by any High Court of a province in Pakistan. Article\u00a0199 of the 1973\u00a0Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, specifically provides for the issuance of a writ of \"habeas corpus\", empowering the courts to exercise this prerogative. Subject to the Article\u00a0199 of the Constitution, \"A High Court may, if it is satisfied that no other adequate remedy is provided by law, on the application of any person, make an order that a person in custody within the territorial jurisdiction of the Court be brought before it so that the Court may satisfy itself that he is not being held in custody without a lawful authority or in an unlawful manner\". The hallmark of extraordinary constitutional jurisdiction is to keep various functionaries of State within the ambit of their authority. Once a High Court has assumed jurisdiction to adjudicate the matter before it, justiciability of the issue raised before it is beyond question. The Supreme Court of Pakistan has stated that the use of words \"in an unlawful manner\" implies that the court may examine whether it was a colorable exercise of the power of authority, if a statute has allowed such detention. The court can then examine whether this was action was taken in bad faith.\nPortugal.\nIn Portugal, article\u00a031 of the Constitution guarantees citizens against improper arrest, imprisonment or detention.\nThe full text of Article\u00a031 is as follows: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Article 31 (\"Habeas corpus\")\nThere are also statutory provisions, most notably the Code of Criminal Procedure, articles 220 and 222 that stipulate the reasons by which a judge may guarantee \"habeas corpus\".\nThe Philippines.\nIn the Bill of Rights of the Philippine constitution, \"habeas corpus\" is guaranteed in terms almost identically to those used in the U.S. Constitution. Article\u00a03, Section\u00a015 of the Constitution of the Philippines states that \"The privilege of the writ of \"habeas corpus\" shall not be suspended except in cases of invasion or rebellion when the public safety requires it\".\nIn 1971, after the Plaza Miranda bombing, the Marcos administration, under Ferdinand Marcos, suspended \"habeas corpus\" in an effort to stifle the oncoming insurgency, having blamed the Filipino Communist Party for the events of 21 August. Many considered this to be a prelude to martial law. After widespread protests, however, the Marcos administration decided to reintroduce the writ. The writ was again suspended when Marcos declared martial law in 1972.\nIn December\u00a02009, \"habeas corpus\" was suspended in Maguindanao as President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo placed the province under martial law. This occurred in response to the Maguindanao massacre.\nIn 2016, President Rodrigo Duterte said he was planning on suspending \"habeas corpus\".\nAt 10\u00a0pm on 23\u00a0May 2017 Philippine time, President Rodrigo Duterte declared martial law in the whole island of Mindanao including Sulu and Tawi-tawi for the period of 60\u00a0days due to the series of attacks mounted by the Maute group, an ISIS-linked terrorist organization. The declaration suspended the writ.\nScotland.\nThe Parliament of Scotland passed a law to have the same effect as \"habeas corpus\" in the 18th century. This is now known as the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Criminal Procedure Act\u00a01701\u00a0(c.\u00a06). It was originally called \"the Act for preventing wrongful imprisonment and against undue delays in trials\". It is still in force although certain parts have been repealed.\nSpain.\nThe present Constitution of Spain states that \"A \"habeas corpus\" procedure shall be provided for by law to ensure the immediate handing over to the judicial authorities of any person illegally arrested\". The statute which regulates the procedure is the \"Law of Habeas Corpus of 24 May 1984\", which provides that a person imprisoned may, on her or his own or through a third person, allege that she or he is imprisoned unlawfully and request to appear before a judge. The request must specify the grounds on which the detention is considered to be unlawful, which can be, for example, that the custodian holding the prisoner does not have the legal authority, that the prisoner's constitutional rights have been violated, or that he has been subjected to mistreatment. The judge may then request additional information if needed, and may issue a \"habeas corpus\" order, at which point the custodian has 24\u00a0hours to bring the prisoner before the judge.\nHistorically, many of the territories of Spain had remedies equivalent to the \"habeas corpus\", such as the privilege of \"manifestaci\u00f3n\" in the Crown of Aragon or the right of the Tree in Biscay.\nTaiwan.\n\"Habeas corpus\" is explicitly stated in article 8 of the Constitution of the Republic of China, in which guarantees that anyone has the right to request a writ of \"habeas corpus\" for himself or any other person that is being detained by any organization or individual other than courts. Also, courts shall not reject the request, nor order the detainer to investigate and report before surrendering the detainee; the detainer must bring the person in question to the court within 24 hours without condition, and the detainee shall be released on the spot if the detention is deemed illegal. The article was further enforced by the Habeas Corpus Act.\nUnited States.\nThe writ of \"habeas corpus ad subjiciendum\" is a civil, not criminal, \"ex parte\" proceeding in which a court inquires as to the legitimacy of a prisoner's custody. Typically, \"habeas corpus\" proceedings are to determine whether the court that imposed sentence on the defendant had jurisdiction and authority to do so, or whether the defendant's sentence has expired. \"Habeas corpus\" is also used as a legal avenue to challenge other types of custody such as pretrial detention or detention by the United States Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement pursuant to a deportation proceeding.\nToday, in the United States, there is a presumption in favour of the decision of a court only when a petitioner is convicted after a fair trial and no longer presumed innocent. A petition for post-conviction habeas review is a civil procedure in the United States, and there is no constitutional right to counsel. Relief, when available, is generally governed by equitable principles.\nEquivalent remedies.\nBiscay.\nIn 1526, the \"Fuero Nuevo of the Se\u00f1or\u00edo de Vizcaya\" (\"New Charter of the Lordship of Biscay\") established a form of \"habeas corpus\" in the territory of the \"Se\u00f1or\u00edo de Vizcaya\", now part of Spain. This revised version of the \"Fuero Viejo\" (Old Charter) of 1451 codified the medieval custom whereby no person could be arbitrarily detained without being summoned first to the Oak of Gernika, an ancestral oak tree located in the outskirts of Gernika under which all laws of the Lordship of Biscay were passed.\nThe New Charter formalised that no one could be detained without a court order (Law 26 of Chapter 9) nor due to debts (Law 3 of Chapter 16). It also established due process and a form of \"habeas corpus\": no one could be arrested without previously having been summoned to the Oak of Gernika and given 30 days to answer the said summons. Upon appearing under the Tree, they had to be provided with accusations and all evidence held against them so that they could defend themselves (Law\u00a07 of Chapter\u00a09).\nNo one could be sent to prison or deprived of their freedom until being formally trialed. No one could be accused of a different crime until their current court trial was over (Law\u00a05 of Chapter\u00a05). Those fearing they were being arrested illegally could appeal to the \"Regimiento General\" that their rights could be upheld. The \"Regimiento\", the executive arm of the Juntas Generales of Biscay, would demand the prisoner be handed over to them, and thereafter the prisoner would be released and placed under the protection of the Regimiento while awaiting trial.\nCrown of Aragon.\nThe Crown of Aragon had a remedy equivalent to the \"habeas corpus\" called the \"manifestaci\u00f3n de personas\", literally, \"demonstration of persons\". According to the right of \"manifestaci\u00f3n\", the Justicia de Aragon, lit. \"Justice of Aragon\", an Aragonese judiciary figure similar to an ombudsman, but with far reaching executive powers, could require a judge, a court of justice, or any other official that they handed over to the \"Justicia\", i.e., that they be \"demonstrated\" to the Justicia, anyone being prosecuted, so as to guarantee that this person's rights were upheld, and that no violence would befall this person prior to their being sentenced.\nThe \"Justicia\" retained the right to examine the judgement passed, and decide whether it satisfied the conditions of a fair trial. If the \"Justicia\" was not satisfied, he could refuse to hand over the accused back to the authorities. The right of \"manifestaci\u00f3n\" acted like a \"habeas corpus\": knowing that the appeal to the \"Justicia\" would immediately follow any unlawful detention, these were effectively illegal. Equally, torture, which had been banned in Aragon since 1325, would never take place.\nIn some cases, people exerting their right of \"manifestaci\u00f3n\" were kept under the Justicia's watch in \"manifestaci\u00f3n\" prisons, famous for their mild and easy conditions, or under house arrest. More generally, however, the person was released from confinement and placed under the \"Justicia's protection\", awaiting for trial. The \"Justicia\" always granted the right of \"manifestaci\u00f3n\" by default, but they only really had to act in extreme cases, as for instance famously happened in 1590 when Antonio P\u00e9rez, the disgraced secretary to Philip\u00a0II of Spain, fled from Castile to Aragon and used his Aragonese ascendency to appeal to the \"Justicia\" for manifestaci\u00f3n right, thereby preventing his arrest at the king's behest.\nThe right of \"manifestaci\u00f3n\" was codified in 1325 in the Declaratio Privilegii generalis passed by the Aragonese Corts under King James\u00a0II of Aragon. It had been practised since the inception of the kingdom of Aragon in the 11th century, and therefore predates the English \"habeas corpus\" itself.\nPoland.\nIn 1430, King W\u0142adys\u0142aw II Jagie\u0142\u0142o of Poland granted the Privilege of Jedlnia, which proclaimed, \"Neminem captivabimus nisi iure victum\" (\"We will not imprison anyone except if convicted by law\"). This revolutionary innovation in civil libertarianism gave some Polish citizens due process\u2013style rights. Originally, the Privilege of Jedlnia was restricted to the nobility, the szlachta. It was extended to cover townsmen in the 1791 Constitution. Importantly, social classifications in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth were not as rigid as in other European countries: townspeople and Jews were sometimes ennobled. The Privilege of Jedlnia provided broader coverage than many subsequently enacted habeas corpus laws, because Poland's nobility constituted an unusually large percentage of the country's total population, which was Europe's largest. As a result, by the 16th century, it was protecting the liberty of between five hundred thousand and a million Poles.\nRoman-Dutch law.\nIn South Africa and other countries whose legal systems are based on Roman-Dutch law, the \"interdictum de homine libero exhibendo\" is the equivalent of the writ of \"habeas corpus\". In South Africa, it has been entrenched in the Bill of Rights, which provides in section\u00a035(2)(d) that every detained person has the right to challenge the lawfulness of the detention in person before a court and, if the detention is unlawful, to be released.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14092", "revid": "47114563", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14092", "title": "Prince Henry the Navigator", "text": "Portuguese prince and governor (1394\u20131460)\nPrince Henry of Portugal, Duke of Viseu (Portuguese: \"Infante Dom Henrique\"; 4 March 1394 \u2013 13 November 1460), better known as Prince Henry the Navigator (), was a Portuguese prince and a central figure in the early days of the Portuguese Empire and in the 15th-century European maritime exploration. Through his administrative direction, he is regarded as the main initiator of what would be known as the Age of Discovery. Henry was the fourth child of King John I of Portugal, who founded the House of Aviz.\nAfter procuring the new caravel ship, Henry was responsible for the early development of Portuguese exploration and maritime trade with other continents through the systematic exploration of Western Africa, the islands of the Atlantic Ocean, and the search for new routes. He encouraged his father to conquer Ceuta (1415), the Muslim port on the North African coast across the Straits of Gibraltar from the Iberian Peninsula. He learned of the opportunity offered by the Saharan trade routes that terminated there, and became fascinated with Africa in general; he was most intrigued by the Christian legend of Prester John and the expansion of Portuguese trade. He is regarded as the patron of Portuguese exploration. He is also considered to be one of the most responsible for developing the slave trade in Western Europe. The prince died on 13 November 1460 in Vila do Bispo, Algarve.\nLife.\nHenry was the third surviving son of King John I and his wife Philippa, sister of King Henry IV of England. He was baptized in Porto, and may have been born there, probably when the royal couple was living in the city's old mint, now called Casa do Infante (Prince's House), or in the region nearby. Another possibility is that he was born at the Monastery of Le\u00e7a do Balio, in Le\u00e7a da Palmeira, during the same period of the royal couple's residence in the city of Porto.\nHenry was 21 when he, his father and brothers captured the Moorish port of Ceuta in northern Morocco. Ceuta had long been a base for Barbary pirates who raided the Portuguese coast, depopulating villages by capturing their inhabitants to be sold in the African slave trade. Following this success, Henry began to explore the coast of Africa, most of which was unknown to Europeans. His objectives included finding the source of the West African gold trade and the legendary Christian kingdom of Prester John, and stopping the pirate attacks on the Portuguese coast.\nAt that time, the cargo ships of the Mediterranean were too slow and heavy to undertake such voyages. Under Henry's direction, a new and much lighter ship was developed, the caravel, which could sail farther and faster. Above all, it was highly maneuverable and could sail \"into the wind\", making it largely independent of the prevailing winds. The caravel used the lateen sail, the prevailing rig in Christian Mediterranean navigation since late antiquity.\nWith this ship, Portuguese mariners freely explored uncharted waters around the Atlantic, from rivers and shallow waters to transoceanic voyages.\nIn 1419, Henry's father appointed him governor of the province of the Algarve.\nResources and income.\nOn May 25, 1420, Henry gained appointment as the Governor of the Military Order of Christ, the Portuguese successor to the Knights Templar, which had its headquarters at Tomar in central Portugal. Henry held this position for the remainder of his life, and the Order was an important source of funds for Henry's ambitious plans, especially his persistent attempts to conquer the Canary Islands, which the Portuguese had claimed to have discovered before the year 1346.\nIn 1425, his second brother the Infante Peter, Duke of Coimbra, made a diplomatic tour of Europe, with an additional charge from Henry to seek out geographic material. Peter returned with a current world map from Venice.\nIn 1431, Henry donated houses for the \"Estudo Geral\" to teach all the sciences\u2014grammar, logic, rhetoric, arithmetic, music, and astronomy\u2014in what would later become the University of Lisbon. For other subjects like medicine or philosophy, he ordered that each room should be decorated according to the subject taught.\nHenry also had other resources. When John I died in 1433, Henry's eldest brother Edward of Portugal became king. He granted Henry all profits from trading within the areas he discovered as well as the sole right to authorize expeditions beyond Cape Bojador. Henry also held a monopoly on tuna fishing in the Algarve. When Edward died eight years later, Henry supported his brother Peter, Duke of Coimbra for the regency during the minority of Edward's son Afonso V, and in return received a confirmation of this levy.\nHenry functioned as a primary organizer of the disastrous expedition to Tangier in 1437 against \u00c7ala Ben \u00c7ala, which ended in Henry's younger brother Ferdinand being given as hostage to guarantee Portuguese promises in the peace agreement. The Portuguese Cortes refused to return Ceuta as ransom for Ferdinand, who remained in captivity until his death six years later. Prince Regent Peter supported Portuguese maritime expansion in the Atlantic Ocean and Africa, and Henry promoted the colonization of the Azores during Peter's regency (1439\u20131448). For most of the latter part of his life, Henry concentrated on his maritime activities and court politics.\nVila do Infante and Portuguese exploration.\nAccording to Jo\u00e3o de Barros, in Algarve, Prince Henry the Navigator repopulated a village that he called Ter\u00e7anabal (from \"ter\u00e7a nabal\" or \"tercena nabal\"). This village was situated in a strategic position for his maritime enterprises and was later called Vila do Infante (\"Estate or Town of the Prince\").\nIt is traditionally suggested that Henry gathered at his villa on the Sagres peninsula a school of navigators and map-makers. However modern historians hold this to be a misconception. He did employ some cartographers to chart the coast of Mauritania after the voyages he sent there, but there was no center of navigation science or observatory in the modern sense of the word, nor was there an organized navigational center.\nReferring to Sagres, sixteenth-century Portuguese mathematician and cosmographer Pedro Nunes remarked, \"from it our sailors went out well taught and provided with instruments and rules which all map makers and navigators should know.\"\nThe view that Henry's court rapidly grew into the technological base for exploration, with a naval arsenal and an observatory, etc., although repeated in popular culture, has never been established. Henry did possess geographical curiosity, and employed cartographers. Jehuda Cresques, a noted cartographer, has been said to have accepted an invitation to come to Portugal to make maps for the infante. Prestage makes the argument that the presence of the latter at the Prince's court \"probably accounts for the legend of the School of Sagres, which is now discredited.\"\nHenry's explorations.\nHenry sponsored voyages, collecting a 20% tax (\"o quinto\") on profits, the usual practice in the Iberian states at the time. The nearby port of Lagos provided a convenient home port for these expeditions. The voyages were made in very small ships, mostly the caravel, a light and maneuverable vessel equipped by lateen sails. Most of the voyages sent out by Henry consisted of one or two ships that navigated by following the coast, stopping at night to tie up along some shore.\nDuring Prince Henry's time and after, the Portuguese navigators discovered and perfected the North Atlantic \"volta do mar\" (the \"turn of the sea\" or \"return from the sea\"): the dependable pattern of trade winds blowing largely from the east near the equator and the returning westerlies in the mid-Atlantic. This was a major step in the history of navigation, when an understanding of oceanic wind patterns was crucial to Atlantic navigation, from Africa and the open ocean to Europe, and enabled the main route between the New World and Europe in the North Atlantic in future voyages of discovery. Although the lateen sail allowed sailing upwind to some extent, it was worth even major extensions of course to have a faster and calmer following wind for most of a journey. Portuguese mariners who sailed south and southwest towards the Canary Islands and West Africa would afterwards sail far to the northwest\u2014that is, away from continental Portugal, and seemingly in the wrong direction\u2014before turning northeast near the Azores islands and finally east to Europe in order to have largely following winds for their full journey. Christopher Columbus used this on his transatlantic voyages.\nMadeira.\nThe first explorations followed not long after the capture of Ceuta in 1415. Henry was interested in locating the source of the caravans that brought gold to the city. During the reign of his father, John I, Jo\u00e3o Gon\u00e7alves Zarco and Trist\u00e3o Vaz Teixeira were sent to explore along the African coast. Zarco, a knight in service to Prince Henry, had commanded the caravels guarding the coast of Algarve from the incursions of the Moors. He had also been at Ceuta.\nIn 1418, Zarco and Teixeira were blown off-course by a storm while making the \"volta do mar\" westward swing to return to Portugal. They found shelter at an island they named Porto Santo. Henry directed that Porto Santo be colonized. The move to claim the Madeiran islands was probably a response to Castile's efforts to claim the Canary Islands. In 1420, settlers then moved to the nearby island of Madeira.\nThe Azores.\nA chart drawn by the Catalan cartographer, Gabriel de Vallseca of Mallorca, has been interpreted to indicate that the Azores were first discovered by Diogo de Silves in 1427. In 1431, Gon\u00e7alo Velho was dispatched with orders to determine the location of \"islands\" first identified by de Silves. Velho apparently got as far as the Formigas, in the eastern archipelago, before having to return to Sagres, probably due to bad weather.\nBy this time the Portuguese navigators had also reached the Sargasso Sea (western North Atlantic region), naming it after the \"Sargassum\" seaweed growing there (\"sarga\u00e7o\" / \"sargasso\" in Portuguese).\nWest African coast.\nIn 1424 Cape Bojador was the most southerly point known to Europeans on the west coast of Africa. For centuries, superstitious seafarers held that beyond the cape lay sea monsters and the edge of the world. However, Prince Henry was determined to know the truth. He was persistent and sent 15 expeditions over a ten-year period to pass the dreaded Cape. Each returned unsuccessful. The captains gave various excuses for having failed. Finally, in 1434 Gil Eanes, the commander of one of Henry's expeditions, became the first known European to pass Cape Bojador.\nUsing the new ship type, the expeditions then pushed onwards. Nuno Trist\u00e3o and Ant\u00e3o Gon\u00e7alves reached Cape Blanco in 1441. The Portuguese sighted the Bay of Arguin in 1443 and built an important \"forte-feitoria\" (a fort protecting a trading post) on the island of Arguin around the year 1448. Dinis Dias soon came across the Senegal River and rounded the peninsula of Cap-Vert in 1444. By this stage the explorers had passed the southern boundary of the desert, and from then on Henry had one of his wishes fulfilled: the Portuguese had circumvented the Muslim land-based trade routes across the western Sahara Desert, and slaves and gold began arriving in Portugal. This rerouting of trade devastated Algiers and Tunis, but made Portugal rich. By 1452, the influx of gold permitted the minting of Portugal's first gold \"cruzado\" coins. A cruzado was equal to 400 reis at the time. From 1444 to 1446, as many as forty vessels sailed from Lagos on Henry's behalf, and the first private mercantile expeditions began.\nAlvise Cadamosto explored the Atlantic coast of Africa and discovered several islands of the Cape Verde archipelago between 1453 and 1456. In his first voyage, which started on 22 March 1455, he visited the Madeira Islands and the Canary Islands. On the second voyage, in 1456, Cadamosto became the first European to reach the Cape Verde Islands. Ant\u00f3nio Noli later claimed the credit. By 1462, the Portuguese had explored the coast of Africa as far as present-day Sierra Leone. Twenty-eight years later, Bartolomeu Dias proved that Africa could be circumnavigated when he reached the southern tip of the continent, now known as the Cape of Good Hope. In 1498, Vasco da Gama became the first European sailor to reach India by sea.\nOrigin of the \"Navigator\" nickname.\nNo one used the nickname \"Henry the Navigator\" to refer to Prince Henry during his lifetime or in the following three centuries. The term was coined by two nineteenth-century German historians: and Gustave de Veer. Later on it was made popular by two British authors who included it in the titles of their biographies of the prince: Henry Major in 1868 and Raymond Beazley in 1895. \nContrary to his brothers, Prince Henry was not praised for his intellectual gifts by his contemporaries. It was only later chroniclers such as Jo\u00e3o de Barros and Dami\u00e3o de G\u00f3is who attributed him a scholarly character and an interest for cosmography. The myth of the \"Sagres school\" allegedly founded by Prince Henry was created in the 18th century, mainly by Samuel Purchas and Abb\u00e9 Pr\u00e9vost. In nineteenth-century Portugal, the idealized vision of Prince Henry as a putative pioneer of exploration and science reached its apogee.\nLegacy.\nHenry is depicted in the Monument of the Discoveries located in Lisbon, featured in the front of the monument.\nIn 1994, the Prince Henry Society in conjunction with the Portuguese government gifted Prince Henry the Navigator Park in New Bedford, Massachusetts.\nFrom 1996 until Portugal's adoption of euro in 2002, he was depicted on the obverse of the largest denomination (10,000) note of the Portuguese escudo.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14094", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14094", "title": "Human cloning", "text": "Creation of a genetically identical copy of a human \nHuman cloning is the creation of a genetically identical copy of a human. The term is generally used to refer to artificial human cloning, which is the reproduction of human cells and tissue. It does not refer to the natural conception and delivery of identical twins. The possibilities of human cloning have raised controversies. These ethical concerns have prompted several nations to pass laws regarding human cloning.\nTwo commonly discussed types of human cloning are \"therapeutic cloning\" and \"reproductive cloning\".\nTherapeutic cloning would involve cloning cells from a human for use in medicine and transplants. It is an active area of research, and is in medical practice over the world. Two common methods of therapeutic cloning that are being researched are somatic-cell nuclear transfer and (more recently) pluripotent stem cell induction.\nReproductive cloning would involve making an entire cloned human, instead of just specific cells or tissues.\nHistory.\nAlthough the possibility of cloning humans had been the subject of speculation for much of the 20th century, scientists and policymakers began to take the prospect seriously in 1969. J. B. S. Haldane was the first to introduce the idea of human cloning, for which he used the terms \"clone\" and \"cloning\", which had been used in agriculture since the early 20th century. In his speech on \"Biological Possibilities for the Human Species of the Next Ten Thousand Years\" at the \"Ciba Foundation Symposium on Man and his Future\" in 1963, he said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is extremely hopeful that some human cell lines can be grown on a medium of precisely known chemical composition. Perhaps the first step will be the production of a clone from a single fertilized egg, as in \"Brave New World\"...\nAssuming that cloning is possible, I expect that most clones would be made from people aged at least fifty, except for athletes and dancers, who would be cloned younger. They would be made from people who were held to have excelled in a socially acceptable accomplishment...\nNobel Prize-winning geneticist Joshua Lederberg advocated cloning and genetic engineering in an article in \"The American Naturalist\" in 1966 and again, the following year, in \"The Washington Post\". He sparked a debate with conservative bioethicist Leon Kass, who wrote at the time that \"the programmed reproduction of man will, in fact, dehumanize him.\" Another Nobel Laureate, James D. Watson, publicized the potential and the perils of cloning in his \"Atlantic Monthly\" essay, \"Moving Toward the Clonal Man\", in 1971.\nWith the cloning of a sheep known as Dolly in 1996 by somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), the idea of human cloning became a hot debate topic. Many nations outlawed it, while a few scientists promised to make a clone within the next few years. The first hybrid human clone was created in November 1998, by Advanced Cell Technology. It was created using SCNT; a nucleus was taken from a man's leg cell and inserted into a cow's egg from which the nucleus had been removed, and the hybrid cell was cultured and developed into an embryo. The embryo was destroyed after 12 days.\nIn 2004 and 2005, Hwang Woo-suk, a professor at Seoul National University, published two separate articles in the journal \" Science\" claiming to have successfully harvested pluripotent, embryonic stem cells from a cloned human blastocyst using SCNT techniques. Hwang claimed to have created eleven different patient-specific stem cell lines. This would have been the first major breakthrough in human cloning. However, in 2006 \"Science\" retracted both of his articles on account of clear evidence that much of his data from the experiments was fabricated.\nIn January 2008, Dr. Andrew French and Samuel Wood of the biotechnology company Stemagen announced that they successfully created the first five mature human embryos using SCNT. In this case, each embryo was created by taking a nucleus from a skin cell (donated by Wood and a colleague) and inserting it into a human egg from which the nucleus had been removed. The embryos were developed only to the blastocyst stage, at which point they were studied in processes that destroyed them. Members of the lab said that their next set of experiments would aim to generate embryonic stem cell lines; these are the \"holy grail\" that would be useful for therapeutic or reproductive cloning.\nIn 2011, scientists at the New York Stem Cell Foundation announced that they had succeeded in generating embryonic stem cell lines, but their process involved leaving the oocyte's nucleus in place, resulting in triploid cells, which would not be useful for cloning.\nIn 2013, a group of scientists led by Shoukhrat Mitalipov published the first report of embryonic stem cells created using SCNT. In this experiment, the researchers developed a protocol for using SCNT in human cells, which differs slightly from the one used in other organisms. Four embryonic stem cell lines from human fetal somatic cells were derived from those blastocysts. All four lines were derived using oocytes from the same donor, ensuring that all mitochondrial DNA inherited was identical. A year later, a team led by Robert Lanza at Advanced Cell Technology reported that they had replicated Mitalipov's results and further demonstrated the effectiveness by cloning adult cells using SCNT.\nIn 2018, the first successful cloning of primates using SCNT was reported with the birth of two live female clones, crab-eating macaques named Zhong Zhong and Hua Hua.\nMethods.\nSomatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT).\nIn somatic cell nuclear transfer (\"SCNT\"), the nucleus of a somatic cell is taken from a donor and transplanted into a host egg cell, which had its own genetic material removed previously, making it an enucleated egg. After the donor somatic cell genetic material is transferred into the host oocyte with a micropipette, the somatic cell genetic material is fused with the egg using an electric current. Once the two cells have fused, the new cell can be permitted to grow in a surrogate or artificially. This is the process that was used to successfully clone Dolly the sheep (see ). The technique, now refined, has indicated that it was possible to replicate cells and reestablish pluripotency, or \"the potential of an embryonic cell to grow into any one of the numerous different types of mature body cells that make up a complete organism\".\nInduced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs).\nCreating induced pluripotent stem cells (\"iPSCs\") is a long and inefficient process. Pluripotency refers to a stem cell that has the potential to differentiate into any of the three germ layers: endoderm (interior stomach lining, gastrointestinal tract, the lungs), mesoderm (muscle, bone, blood, urogenital), or ectoderm (epidermal tissues and nervous tissue). A specific set of genes, often called \"reprogramming factors\", are introduced into a specific adult cell type. These factors send signals in the mature cell that cause the cell to become a pluripotent stem cell. This process is highly studied and new techniques are being discovered frequently on how to improve this induction process.\nDepending on the method used, reprogramming of adult cells into iPSCs for implantation could have severe limitations in humans. If a virus is used as a reprogramming factor for the cell, cancer-causing genes called oncogenes may be activated. These cells would appear as rapidly dividing cancer cells that do not respond to the body's natural cell signaling process. However, in 2008 scientists discovered a technique that could remove the presence of these oncogenes after pluripotency induction, thereby increasing the potential use of iPSC in humans.\nComparing SCNT to reprogramming.\nBoth the processes of SCNT and iPSCs have benefits and deficiencies. Historically, reprogramming methods were better studied than SCNT derived embryonic stem cells (ESCs). However, more recent studies have put more emphasis on developing new procedures for SCNT-ESCs. The major advantage of SCNT over iPSCs at this time is the speed with which cells can be produced. iPSCs derivation takes several months while SCNT would take a much shorter time, which could be important for medical applications. New studies are working to improve the process of iPSC in terms of both speed and efficiency with the discovery of new reprogramming factors in oocytes. Another advantage SCNT could have over iPSCs is its potential to treat mitochondrial disease, as it uses a donor oocyte. No other advantages are known at this time in using stem cells derived from one method over stem cells derived from the other.\nUses and actual potential.\nWork on cloning techniques has advanced understanding of developmental biology in humans. Observing human pluripotent stem cells grown in culture provides great insight into human embryo development, which otherwise cannot be seen. Scientists are now able to better define steps of early human development. Studying signal transduction along with genetic manipulation within the early human embryo has the potential to provide answers to many developmental diseases and defects. Many human-specific signaling pathways have been discovered by studying human embryonic stem cells. Studying developmental pathways in humans has given developmental biologists more evidence toward the hypothesis that developmental pathways are conserved throughout species.\niPSCs and cells created by SCNT are useful for research into the causes of disease, and as model systems used in drug discovery.\nCells produced with SCNT, or iPSCs could eventually be used in stem cell therapy, or to create organs to be used in transplantation, known as regenerative medicine. Stem cell therapy is the use of stem cells to treat or prevent a disease or condition. Bone marrow transplantation is a widely used form of stem cell therapy. No other forms of stem cell therapy are in clinical use at this time. Research is underway to potentially use stem cell therapy to treat heart disease, diabetes, and spinal cord injuries. Regenerative medicine is not in clinical practice, but is heavily researched for its potential uses. This type of medicine would allow for autologous transplantation, thus removing the risk of organ transplant rejection by the recipient. For instance, a person with liver disease could potentially have a new liver grown using their same genetic material and transplanted to remove the damaged liver. In current research, human pluripotent stem cells have been promised as a reliable source for generating human neurons, showing the potential for regenerative medicine in brain and neural injuries.\nEthical implications.\nIn bioethics, the ethics of cloning refers to a variety of ethical positions regarding the practice and possibilities of cloning, especially human cloning. While many of these views are religious in origin, for instance relating to Christian views of procreation and personhood, the questions raised by cloning engage secular perspectives as well, particularly the concept of identity.\nAdvocates support development of therapeutic cloning in order to generate tissues and whole organs to treat patients who otherwise cannot obtain transplants, to avoid the need for immunosuppressive drugs, and to stave off the effects of aging. Advocates for reproductive cloning believe that parents who cannot otherwise procreate should have access to the technology.\nOpposition to therapeutic cloning mainly centers around the status of embryonic stem cells, which has connections with the abortion debate. The moral argument put forward is based on the notion that embryos deserve protection from the moment of their conception because it is at this precise moment that a new human entity emerges, already a unique individual. Since it is deemed unacceptable to sacrifice human lives for any purpose, the argument asserts that the destruction of embryos for research purposes is no longer justifiable.\nSome opponents of reproductive cloning have concerns that technology is not yet developed enough to be safe \u2013 for example, the position of the American Association for the Advancement of Science as of 2014,[ [update]] while others emphasize that reproductive cloning could be prone to abuse (leading to the generation of humans whose organs and tissues would be harvested), and have concerns about how cloned individuals could integrate with families and with society at large.\nMembers of religious groups are divided. Some Christian theologians perceive the technology as usurping God's role in creation and, to the extent embryos are used, destroying a human life; others see no inconsistency between Christian tenets and cloning's positive and potentially life-saving benefits.\nIn popular culture.\nScience fiction has used cloning, most commonly and specifically human cloning, due to the fact that it brings up controversial questions of identity. Humorous fiction, such as \"Multiplicity\" (1996) and the Maxwell Smart feature \"The Nude Bomb\" (1980), have featured human cloning. A recurring sub-theme of cloning fiction is the use of clones as a supply of organs for transplantation. Robin Cook's 1997 novel \"Chromosome 6\", Michael Bay's \"The Island\", and Nancy Farmer's 2002 novel \"House of the Scorpion\" are examples of this; \"Chromosome 6\" also features genetic manipulation and xenotransplantation. The \"Star Wars\" saga makes use of millions of human clones to form the Grand Army of the Republic that participated in the Clone Wars. The series \"Orphan Black\" follows human clones' stories and experiences as they deal with issues and react to being the property of a chain of scientific institutions. In the 2019 horror film \"Us\", the entirety of the United States' population is secretly cloned. Years later, these clones (known as The Tethered) reveal themselves to the world by successfully pulling off a mass genocide of their counterparts. \nIn the 2005 novel \"Never Let Me Go\", Kazuo Ishiguro crafts a subtle exploration into the ethical complications of cloning humans for medical advancement and longevity. \nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
