{"id": "13913", "revid": "38360413", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13913", "title": "Hamas", "text": "Palestinian political and military organization\nThe Islamic Resistance Movement, abbreviated Hamas (an acronym from the ), is a Sunni Islamist Palestinian nationalist political organisation with a military wing known as the al-Qassam Brigades. It has governed the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip since 2007.\nThe Hamas movement was founded by Palestinian Islamic scholar Ahmed Yassin in 1987, after the outbreak of the First Intifada against the Israeli occupation. It emerged from his 1973 Mujama al-Islamiya Islamic charity affiliated with the Muslim Brotherhood. Initially, Hamas was discreetly supported by Israel, as a counter-balance to the secular Palestinian Liberation Organisation (PLO) to prevent the creation of an independent Palestinian state. In the 2006 Palestinian legislative election, Hamas secured a majority in the Palestinian Legislative Council by campaigning on promises of a corruption-free government and advocating for resistance as a means to liberate Palestine from Israeli occupation. In the 2007 Battle of Gaza, Hamas seized control of the Gaza Strip from rival Palestinian faction Fatah, and has since governed the territory separately from the Palestinian National Authority. After Hamas's takeover, Israel significantly intensified existing movement restrictions and imposed a complete blockade of the Gaza Strip. Egypt also began its blockade of Gaza at this time. This was followed by multiple wars with Israel, including those in 2008\u201309, 2012, 2014, 2021, and an ongoing one since 2023, which began with the October 7 attacks.\nHamas has promoted Palestinian nationalism in an Islamic context and initially sought a state in all of former Mandatory Palestine. It began acquiescing to 1967 borders in the agreements it signed with Fatah in 2005, 2006 and 2007. In 2017, Hamas released a new charter that supported a Palestinian state within the 1967 borders without recognizing Israel. Hamas's repeated offers of a truce (for a period of 10\u2013100 years) based on the 1967 borders are seen by many as consistent with a two-state solution, while others state that Hamas retains the long-term objective of establishing one state in former Mandatory Palestine. While the 1988 Hamas charter was widely described as antisemitic, Hamas's 2017 charter removed the antisemitic language and declared Zionists, not Jews, the targets of their struggle. It has been debated whether the charter has reflected an actual change in policy.\nIn terms of foreign policy, Hamas has historically sought out relations with Egypt, Iran, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria and Turkey; some of its relations have been impacted by the Arab Spring. Hamas and Israel have engaged in the protracted Gaza\u2013Israel conflict, as part of the broader Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict. Hamas has attacked Israeli civilians, including through suicide bombings as well as launching rockets at Israeli cities. Australia, Canada, Ecuador, Israel, Japan, New Zealand, Paraguay, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the European Union have designated Hamas as a terrorist organization. In 2018 and 2023, motions at the United Nations to condemn Hamas failed to meet the two-thirds threshold.\nEtymology.\n\"Hamas\" is an acronym of the Arabic phrase or , meaning \"Islamic Resistance Movement\". This acronym, HMS, was glossed in the 1988 Hamas Covenant by the Arabic word () which itself means \"zeal\", \"strength\", or \"bravery\".\nHistory.\nHamas was established in 1987, and allegedly has its origins in Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood movement, which had been active in the Gaza Strip since the 1950s and gained influence through a network of mosques and various charitable and social organizations. Unlike other Palestinian factions, after the Israeli occupation of Gaza in 1967, the Brotherhood in Gaza refused to join the resistance boycott against Israel. In the 1980s, it emerged as a powerful political factor, challenging the influence of the PLO, whose Fatah faction it had played a core role in creating. In December 1987, the Brotherhood adopted a more nationalist and activist line under the name of Hamas. Hamas was initially discreetly supported by Israel as a counter-balance to the secular PLO. During the 1990s and early 2000s, the organization conducted numerous suicide bombings and other attacks against Israel. \nIn the Palestinian legislative election of January 2006, Hamas gained a large majority of seats in the Palestinian Parliament, defeating the ruling Fatah party. After the elections, conflicts arose between Hamas and Fatah, which they were unable to resolve. In June 2007, Hamas defeated Fatah in a series of violent clashes, and since that time Hamas has governed the Gaza portion of the Palestinian territories, while at the same time they were ousted from government positions in the West Bank. Israel and Egypt then imposed an economic blockade on Gaza and largely sealed their borders with the territory.\nAfter acquiring control of Gaza, Hamas-affiliated and other militias launched rocket attacks upon Israel, which Hamas ceased in June 2008 following an Egyptian-brokered ceasefire. The ceasefire broke down late in 2008, with each side accusing the other of responsibility. In late December 2008, Israel attacked Gaza, withdrawing its forces in mid-January 2009. Since 2009, Hamas has faced multiple military confrontations with Israel, notably the 2012 and 2014 Gaza Wars, leading to substantial casualties. Hamas has maintained control over Gaza, often clashing with the Palestinian Authority led by Fatah. Efforts at reconciliation between Hamas and Fatah have seen limited success. Hamas continued to face international isolation and blockades, while engaging in sporadic rocket attacks and tunnel construction activities against Israel.\nOn 7 October 2023, Hamas and other Palestinian militants attacked Israel killing nearly 1,200 Israelis, about two thirds of them civilians. Approximately 250 Israeli civilians and soldiers were taken hostage and brought to the Gaza Strip, with the aim of securing the release of Palestinian prisoners in Israel (as part of a prisoner swap). Hamas said its attack was in response to Israel's continued occupation, blockade of Gaza, and settlements expansion, as well as alleged threats to the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the plight of Palestinians. There are also reports of sexual violence by Hamas militants, allegations that Hamas has denied. Israel responded by invading the Gaza Strip, killing over 70,000 Palestinians, 59.1% of them women, children and the elderly according to a peer-reviewed study in \"The Lancet\".\nOn 31 July 2024, Ismail Haniyeh was assassinated in Tehran, after attending the inauguration ceremony of Iranian president Masoud Pezeshkian. In August 2024, Yahya Sinwar, the leader of Hamas in Gaza, was elected chairman of the group, replacing Haniyeh. Per Hamas officials, he was elected due to his considerable popularity in the Arab and Islamic worlds following the 7 October attacks and his strong connections with Iran and the \"Axis of Resistance,\" an informal Iranian-led political and military coalition. On 16 October 2024, IDF troops killed Sinwar during a routine patrol and a chance encounter in southern Rafah. In January 2025, the \"Wall Street Journal\", citing Israeli sources, reported that Sinwar's younger brother, Mohammed Sinwar (aka \"Shadow\"), was leading Hamas. Its sources said that Israel were \"working hard to find him\" and that he (aka \"Shadow\") along with Izz al-Din Haddad, of al-Qassam Brigades, were the two most senior commanders in the Gaza Strip. On 19 January 2025, a ceasefire between Hamas and Israel went into effect.\nIn January 2025, Hamas confirmed that its senior military chief, Mohammed Deif, was killed by Israel's military in July 2024. On 18 March 2025, Israel broke the ceasefire and shelling of the territory continued. In March 2025, Ismail Barhoum, a member of Hamas\u2019s political bureau was killed in an Israeli attack on Nasser Hospital in Khan Younis. In April 2025, according to the IDF, Yahya Fathi Abd al-Qader Abu Shaar, the head of Hamas' weapons smuggling network, was killed by the Israeli army. In May 2025, there were unconfirmed reports that Mohammed Sinwar, Hamas leader in Gaza and the brother of Yahya Sinwar, and Muhammad Shabana, commander of the Rafah Brigade, were killed by Israeli airstrike in the southern Gaza Strip. In June 2025, the Israeli military confirmed that it had identified the body of Mohammed Sinwar through DNA checks. In August 2025, Abu Obaida, the spokesman for Hamas's armed wing, was killed in an Israeli aerial attack.\nPolicies towards Israel and Palestine.\nHamas' policy towards Israel has evolved. Historically, Hamas envisioned a Palestinian state on all of the territory that belonged to the British Mandate for Palestine (that is, from the Jordan River to the Mediterranean Sea), and in its 1988 Charter framed the Mandate Palestine as \u2018Islamic waqf\u2019 or endowment, under sovereignty of God. With Hamas's 1993 Introductory Memorandum, Hamas broke away from the uncompromising character of their religious frame, and proposed two stages of liberation of Palestine: a short-term objective to establish a Palestinian state in Gaza and the West Bank, and a long-term objective still striving to liberate Mandate Palestine in its entirety. This distinction between \"short-term policy\" and \"long-term solution\" is present in many subsequent documents. The aim of this double policy is to create an authority on a portion of the former Mandatory Palestine, which would eventually lead to the restoration of Islamic sovereignty across all of (Mandatory) Palestine.\nIn 2006, Hamas signed the Palestinian Prisoners' Document which supports the quest for a Palestinian state \"on all territories occupied in 1967\". This document also recognized authority of the President of the Palestinian National Authority to negotiate with Israel. Hamas also signed the Cairo Declaration in 2005, which emphasized the goal of ending the Israeli occupation and establishing a Palestinian state on the 1967 borders. On 2 May 2017, Khaled Mashal, chief of the Hamas Political Bureau, presented a new Charter, in which Hamas accepted the establishment of a Palestinian state \"on the basis of June 4, 1967\" (West Bank, Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem). But the new Charter did not recognize Israel nor relinquish Palestinian claims to all of historical Palestine. Many scholars saw Hamas' acceptance of the 1967 borders as a tacit acceptance of another entity on the other side.\nTruce proposals.\nThe founder of Hamas, sheikh Ahmed Yassin, has offered Israel a ten-year \"hudna\" (armistice) in return for complete Israeli withdrawal from the territories captured in the 1967 war and establishing a Palestinian state in West Bank and Gaza. Later, Yassin has stated that this \"hudna\" could be renewed for 30, 40 or even 100 years.238 Hamas's spokesperson, Ahmed Yousef, has said that a \"hudna\" is more than a ceasefire and it \"obliges parties to use the period to seek a permanent, non-violent resolution to their differences.\" Under Islamic international law, a hudna is a binding and the Qur'an prohibits its violation.\nHamas first proposed a hudna in 1999. In exchange Israel would have to end the occupation of West Bank and Gaza Strip and release all Palestinian prisoners. The 1999 proposal did not mention the issues of the return of the Palestinian refugees or Hamas's recognition of Israel, but interviewed Hamas leaders in 2010 added that the right of return should be accepted in principle by Israel (without direct actual implementation). Israel and Hamas should use the period of calm (armistice) for negotiating these two issues; if they would also be settled the temporary peace would convert into a permanent peace agreement.\nIn 2006, Ismail Haniyeh, shortly after being elected as Prime Minister, sent messages both to US President George W. Bush and to Israel's leaders, offering a long-term truce. Neither Israel nor the United States responded. Haniyeh's proposal reportedly was a fifty-year armistice with Israel, if a Palestinian state is created along the 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital. A Hamas official added that the armistice would renew automatically each time. In mid-2006, University of Maryland's Jerome Segal suggested that a Palestinian state within the 1967 borders and a truce for many years could be considered Hamas's \"de facto\" recognition of Israel. A similar proposal was once again offered by Hamas to Israel in November 2006.\nIn November 2008, in a meeting, on Gaza Strip soil, with 11 European members of parliaments, Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh re-stated that Hamas was willing to accept a Palestinian state \"in the territories of 1967\" (Gaza Strip and West Bank), and offered Israel a long-term truce if Israel recognized the Palestinians' national rights; and stated that Israel rejected this proposal. A Hamas finance minister around 2018 contended that such a \"long-term ceasefire as understood by Hamas and a two-state settlement are the same\".\nAccording to Leila Seurat, the movement's leaders consider that a traditional peace treaty like those in the Western tradition would be tantamount to surrender, while a truce would provide an alternative allowing them to wait for an inversion in the regional balance of power to the Palestinians' advantage. Abusada, a political scientist at Al Azhar University, wrote in 2008 that Hamas talks \"of hudna [temporary ceasefire], not of peace or reconciliation with Israel. They believe over time they will be strong enough to liberate all historic Palestine.\" Some scholars have noted that alongside offering a long-term truce, Hamas retains its objective of establishing one state in former Mandatory Palestine. Hamas originally proposed a 10-year truce, or \"hudna\", to Israel, contingent on the creation of a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders. Sheikh Ahmed Yassin indicated that such truce could be extended for 30, 40, or even 100 years, but it would never signal a recognition of Israel. A Hamas official said that having an indefinite truce with Israel doesn't contradict Hamas's lack of recognition of Israel, comparing it to the Irish Republican Army's willingness to accept a permanent armistice with the United Kingdom without recognizing the UK's sovereignty over Northern Ireland.\nRecognition of Israel.\nHamas leaders have repeatedly emphasized they do not recognize Israel. But Hamas has also repeatedly accepted the 1967 borders in signed agreements (in 2005, 2006, and 2007) and in its 2017 charter. Some scholars saw Hamas' acceptance of the 1967 borders as a tacit acceptance of another entity on the other side, while others state that Hamas retains the long-term objective of establishing one state in former Mandatory Palestine. Whether Hamas would recognize Israel in a future peace agreement is debated. Others argue that the long-term objective and lack of official recognition of Israel is merely maintained as a bargaining chip for future negotiations. Several scholars have compared Hamas's lack of recognition of Israel to Likud's lack of recognition of a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza.\nIn 1995 Hamas repeated its rejection of any recognition of Israel. However, after Hamas won the 2006 elections, it did not implement the 1988 Charter as policy, and instead agreed to work with the existing Palestinian political system.839 In the 2007 Mecca agreement, Hamas agreed to respect previous agreements between Fatah and Israel, including the Oslo Accords in which the PLO recognized Israel. Both in the 2007 agreement and in the 2006 Palestinian Prisoners' Document, Hamas agreed to a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders. Scholars see this as \"implicit\" recognition of Israel because by accepting a Palestinian state limited to the 1967 borders, Hamas acknowledged the existence of an entity on the other side.\nMousa Abu Marzook, then the vice-president of Hamas' Political Bureau, explained his party's position in 2011: while Hamas did not recognize Israel as a state, it considered the existence of Israel as \"amr waqi\" (or fait accompli, meaning something that has happened and cannot be changed). He called this \"de facto recognition\" of Israel. Likewise, Graham Usher writes that while Hamas does not consider Israel to be legitimate, it has accepted Israel as political reality.\nIn 2017, Hamas once again accepted the 1967 borders in its new charter that \"drop[ped] the call for the destruction of Israel from its manifesto\". While it did not abrogate the old charter, Hamas leaders explained that \"The original charter has now become a historical document and part of an earlier stage in our evolution. It will remain in the movement's bookshelf as a record of our past.\" Khaled Mashal stated that the new document reflected \"our position for now.\"\nTareq Baconi, a former analyst at the International Crisis Group currently at Al-Shabaka think-tank, notes that Hamas has said it would accept mutual recognition of Israel in any consensus peace deal approved by other Palestinian parties and the population in a referendum. To explain why it withholds formal recognition, Baconi argues that Hamas has learned from the fact that, in the 1993 Oslo Accords, the PLO made a \"historic concession\" in recognizing Israel on 78% of the land of historic Palestine (along the 1967 borders), but was unable to convince Israel to recognize Palestine on the remaining 22% of the land. Having already recognized Israel, the PLO was unable to use recognition to extract any further concessions from Israel, thus according to Baconi the lesson for Hamas was that you can't negotiate from a position of weakness, and the issue of formal recognition of Israel is kept as bargaining chip for negotiations.\nSome scholars, including Baconi, Ilan Papp\u00e9 and Noam Chomsky, have argued that Hamas has offered more to the Israelis than Israeli major parties including Likud have offered in return to the Palestinians, both with its de facto recognition of the 1967 borders and its pledge to accept the recognition of Israel in any future peace deal that has the consensus and approval of the Palestinian parties and population. Rashid Khalidi said in November 2023: \"It is well-established that Israeli major governing parties like Likud have refused to recognize Palestinian statehood under any conditions, the constant references to \"Judea and Samaria\", and this has only increased in recent times with the Knesset passing a resolution opposing Palestinian statehood.\"\nEvolution of positions.\n1988\u20131992 (first charter).\nIn its early days, Hamas functioned as a social-religious charity center. Its members armed themselves for the ongoing resistance against the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories, and in August 1988 published their first charter in which Hamas stated that \"Israel\" should be \"eliminated\" through a \"clash with the enemies\", a \"struggle against Zionism\" and \"conflict with Israel\".preamble, art. 14, 15, 32 They wrote that 'Palestine', that is all of the territory that belonged to the British Mandate for Palestine (that is, from the Jordan River to the Mediterranean Sea), should be \"liberated\" from \"Zionism\"art. 14 and transformed into an Islamic (Islamic charitable endowment) in which \"followers of all religions can coexist in security and safety\".art. 6, 11 Practically speaking, Hamas is and was at war with Israel's army (later also attacking Israeli civilians) since the spring of 1989, initially as part of the First Intifada, a general protest movement that gradually turned more riotous and violent.\n1992\u20132005.\nIn December 1992, Israeli authorities deported more than 400 Palestinians, suspected to be members of Hamas to Southern Lebanon. In 1999, the Hamas leadership, in a memorandum to European diplomats, proposed a long-term ceasefire with Israel in return for Israeli withdrawal of military troops and civilian illegal settlements from West Bank and Gaza Strip, release of all Palestinian prisoners, and the right of Palestinian self-determination (see also section Truce proposals). Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, founder of Hamas, who was assassinated by Israel in 2004, at unreported date has offered Israel a ten-year \"hudna\" (truce, armistice) in return for establishment of a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza. Yassin later added, the \"hudna\" could be renewed, even for longer periods, but would never signal a recognition of Israel.\nIn 2005, Hamas signed the Palestinian Cairo Declaration, which confirms \"the right of the Palestinian people to resistance in order to end the occupation, establish a Palestinian state with full sovereignty with Jerusalem as its capital\" (etc.), aiming to reconcile several Palestinian factions but not describing specific steps or strategies towards Israel.\n2006\u20132007: 1967 borders and a truce.\nIn March 2006, after winning an absolute majority in the 2006 Palestinian legislative elections, Hamas published its government program in which Hamas claimed sovereignty for the Palestinian territories but did not repeat its claim to all of mandatory Palestine, instead declared their willingness to have contacts with Israel \"in all mundane affairs: business, trade, health, and labor\". The program further stated: \"The question of recognizing Israel is not the jurisdiction of one faction, nor the government, but a decision for the Palestinian people.\"\nSince then until today, spokesmen of Hamas seem to disagree about their attitudes towards Israel, and debates are running as to whether the original 1988 Hamas charter has since March 2006 become obsolete and irrelevant or on the contrary still spells out Hamas's genuine and ultimate goals (see: 1988 Hamas charter, \u00a7 Relevance).\nThe March 2006 Hamas legislative program was further explained on 6 June 2006 by Hamas' MP Riad Mustafa: \"Hamas will never recognize Israel\", but if a popular Palestinian referendum would endorse a peace agreement including recognition of Israel, \"we would of course accept their verdict\".\nAlso on 6 June 2006, Ismail Haniyeh, senior political leader of Hamas and at that time Prime Minister of the Palestinian National Authority, sent a letter to US President George W. Bush (via University of Maryland's Jerome Segal), stating: \"We are so concerned about stability and security in the area that we don't mind having a Palestinian state in the 1967 borders and offering a truce for many years\", and asking Bush for a dialogue with the Hamas government. A similar message he sent to Israel's leaders. Haniyeh had reportedly proposed a fifty-year armistice. Neither Washington nor Israel replied. Nuancing sheikh Ahmed Yassin's statements before 2004 about a \"hudna\" (truce) with Israel (see above), Hamas's (former) senior adviser Ahmed Yousef has said (at unknown date) that a \"hudna\" (truce, armistice) is more than a ceasefire and \"obliges parties to use the period to seek a permanent, non-violent resolution to their differences.\"\nOn 28 June 2006, Hamas signed the which supports the quest for a Palestinian state \"on all territories occupied in 1967\". This document also recognized the PLO as \"the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people\", and states that \"the negotiations\" should be conducted by PLO and President of the Palestinian National Authority and eventual agreements must be ratified by either the Palestinian National Council or a general referendum \"held in the homeland and the Diaspora\". Leila Seurat also notes that this document \"implicitly recognized the June 1967 borders, agreed on the construction of a Palestinian state with Jerusalem as a capital and accepted limitations to the resistance in the territories occupied in 1967\", and was produced following consultations with the entire Political Bureau.\nIn an August 2006 interview with \"The New York Times\", Ismail Haniyeh, senior political leader of Hamas and then Prime Minister of the Palestinian National Authority, said: \"We have no problem with a sovereign Palestinian state over all our lands within the 1967 borders, living in calm.\" In November 2006, Hamas again proposed a truce for many years to Israel in exchange for a Palestinian state in the 1967 borders.\nIn February 2007, Hamas signed the Fatah\u2013Hamas Mecca Agreement, stressing \"the importance of national unity as basis for (...) confronting the occupation\" and \"activate and reform the PLO\", but without further details about how to confront or deal with Israel. At the time of signing that 2007 agreement, Mousa Abu Marzook, Deputy Chairman of the Hamas Political Bureau, underlined \"his\" view of the Hamas position: \"I can recognize the presence of Israel as a fait accompli (amr w\u00e2qi') or, as the French say, a de facto recognition, but this does not mean that I recognize Israel as a state\". More Hamas leaders, through the years, have made similar statements.\nIn June 2007, Hamas , and since then Hamas occasionally fired rockets from the Gaza Strip on Israel, purportedly to retaliate Israeli aggression against the people of Gaza.\n2008\u20132016.\nIn April 2008, former US President Jimmy Carter met with Khaled Mashal, the recognized Hamas leader since 2004. Mashal said to Carter, Hamas would \"accept a Palestinian state on the 1967 borders\" and accept the right of Israel \"to live as a neighbour\" if such a deal would be approved by a referendum among the \"Palestinians\". Nevertheless, Mashal did not offer a unilateral ceasefire (as Carter had suggested him to do). The US State Department showed utter indifference for Mashal's new stance; Israel's Prime Minister Ehud Olmert even refused to meet with Carter in Jerusalem, not to mention paying attention to the new Hamas stance.\nOn 19 June 2008, Hamas and Israel agreed to a six-month cease-fire, which Hamas declared finished at 18 December amidst mutual accusations of breaching the agreed conditions.\nMeanwhile, in November 2008, in a meeting with 11 European members of parliaments, Hamas senior official Ismail Haniyeh repeated what he had written in June 2006 to U.S. President George W. Bush but with one extra condition: \"the Hamas government had agreed to accept a Palestinian state that followed the 1967 borders and to offer Israel a long-term \"hudna\" (truce), if Israel recognized the Palestinians' national rights\" \u2013 a proposal which he said Israel had declined.\nIn September 2009, Ismail Haniyeh, head of the Hamas government in the Gaza Strip, wrote to UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon that Hamas would support any steps leading to a Palestinian state on the 1967 borders: \"We would never thwart efforts to create an independent Palestinian state with borders [from] June 4, 1967, with Jerusalem as its capital.\"\nIn May 2010, Khaled Mashal, chairman of the Hamas Political Bureau (thus Hamas' highest leader), again stated that a state \"Israel\" living next\nto \"a Palestinian state on the borders of 1967\" would be acceptable for Hamas \u2013 but only if a referendum among \"the Palestinian people\" would endorse this arrangement. In November 2010, Ismail Haniyeh, also proposed a Palestinian state on 1967 borders, though added three further conditions: \"resolution of the issue of refugees\", \"the release of Palestinian prisoners\", and \"Jerusalem as its capital\"; and he made the same reservation as Mashal in May 2010 had made, that a Palestinian referendum needed to endorse this arrangement.\nOn 1 December 2010, Ismail Haniyeh (senior Hamas leader, see above), in a news conference in Gaza, repeated his November 2010 message: \"We accept a Palestinian state on the borders of 1967, with Jerusalem as its capital, the release of Palestinian prisoners, and the resolution of the issue of refugees,\" but only if such arrangement would be endorsed by \"a referendum\" held among all Palestinians: in Gaza, West Bank, and the diaspora.\nIn May 2011, Hamas and Fatah signed an agreement in Cairo, agreeing to form a ('national unity') government and appoint the Ministers \"in consensus between them\", but it contained no remarks about how to confront or deal with Israel. In February 2012, Hamas and Fatah signed the Fatah\u2013Hamas Doha Agreement, agreeing (again) to form an interim national consensus government, which (again) did not materialize.\nStill in February 2012, according to the Palestinian authority (either the Fatah branch in West Bank or the Hamas branch in Gaza), Hamas forswore the use of violence against Israel (\"ceasefire\", an Israeli news website called it), followed by a few weeks without violence between Hamas and Israel. But violence between Israel and Palestinian militant groups, in the Gaza Strip and southern Israel, also involving Hamas, would soon resume.\n2017\u20136 Oct 2023 (new charter).\nOn 1 May 2017, after much internal discussion, Hamas and its Hamas Political Bureau chief Khaled Mashal published \"A Document of General Principles and Policies\", also known as the 2017 Hamas charter. In the new charter Hamas accepts a Palestinian state in the 1967 borders, without recognizing Israel. When asked, Hamas leaders explained that \"The original charter has now become a historical document and part of an earlier stage in our evolution. It will remain in the movement's bookshelf as a record of our past.\" Khaled Mashal stated that the new document reflected \"our position for now.\" However, Hamas fell short of formally repudiating the original 1988 charter. According to some analysts Hamas did not formally revoke the old charter so as to not alienate some of its base members, who it feared might join rival Islamist factions.\nAround 2018, a Hamas finance minister has suggested that a \"long-term ceasefire as understood by Hamas [\"hudna\"] and a two-state settlement are the same\". In 2021 Hamas organized and financed a conference among 250 Gaza citizens about the future management of the State of Palestine following the takeover of Israel which was predicted to come soon. According to the conclusions of the conference, the Jewish Israeli fighters would be killed, while the peaceful individuals could be integrated or be allowed to leave. At the same time the highly skilled and educated would be prevented from leaving.\nIn 2020 Ismail Haniyeh said in an interview that one of the principles of Hamas was \"Palestine from the sea to the river.\" In 2022, Yahya Sinwar cautioned Israelis that Hamas would one day \"march through your walls to uproot your regime.\"\n7 Oct 2023\u2013present.\nIn the October 7 attacks, Hamas and associates murdered 767 civilians and killed a further 376 security personnel of the state of Israel. Israel retaliated with warfare in the Gaza Strip, aiming at Hamas militants but also harming much civilian infrastructure and directly killing tens of thousands of civilians, more than 80 percent of casualties. A number of conflicting statements since then were made by Hamas senior leaders regarding the Hamas policy towards Israel.\nOn 24 October, Ghazi Hamad\u2014member of the decision-making Hamas Political Bureau\u2014explained the 7 October attack: \"Israel is a country that has no place on our land. We must remove that country because it constitutes a security, military and political catastrophe to the Arab and Islamic nation\". \"We are called a nation of martyrs and we are proud to sacrifice martyrs\". Hamad called the creation of the Jewish state \"illogical\": \"(...) We are the victims of the occupation. Therefore, nobody should blame us for the things we do\".\nOn 1 November 2023, Ismail Haniyeh, then incumbent highest Hamas leader (but assassinated by Israel 31 July 2024), stated that if Israel agreed to a ceasefire in the Gaza war, if humanitarian corridors would be opened, and aid would be allowed into Gaza,\nHamas would be \"ready for political negotiations for a two-state solution with Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine\". Haniyeh also praised the support of movements in Yemen, Iraq, Syria and Lebanon for the Palestinian struggle.\nIn January 2024 Khaled Mashal, a former Hamas leader, slighted \"The West\" and \"the two-state solution\", saying \"The 1967 borders represent 21% of Palestine, which is practically one fifth of its land, so this cannot be accepted\", and adding that \"our right in Palestine from the sea to the river\" cannot be waived. However, he reiterated that Hamas \"accepts a state on the 1967 borders with Jerusalem as its capital, with complete independence and with the right of return without recognising the legitimacy of the Zionist entity.\"\nHamas Member of Parliament Khalil al-Hayya, also deputy chairman of the Hamas Political Bureau, told the Associated Press in April 2024 that Hamas is willing to agree to a truce of five years or more with Israel and that it would lay down its weapons and convert into a political party if an independent Palestinian state is established along pre-1967 borders. The Associated Press considered this a \"significant concession\", but presumed that Israel would not even want to consider this scenario following the October 2023 attack.\nReactions.\nThe vision that Hamas articulated in its original 1988 charter resembles the vision of certain Zionist groups regarding the same territory, as noted by several authors. This may suggest that Hamas's views were inspired by those Zionist perspectives.\nSeveral (other) authors have interpreted the 1988 Hamas charter as a call for \"armed struggle against Israel\".\nIn 2009, Taghreed El-khodary and Ethan Bronner, writing in the New York Times, said that Hamas' position is that it doesn't recognize Israel's right to exist, but is willing to accept as a compromise a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders.\nWriting for \"Middle Eastern Studies\", Imad Alsoos says that Hamas has both a short and long-term objective: \"The short-term objective aims to establish a Palestinian state in Gaza and the West Bank, while the long-term objective still strives to liberate Mandate Palestine in its entirety. Establishing a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza (as part of a \"hudna\" deal) would be Hamas's interim solution, during which Israel would not be recognized.\nIn mid-2006, University of Maryland's Jerome Segal suggested that a Palestinian state within the 1967 borders and a truce for many years could be considered Hamas's de facto recognition of Israel.\nAs of January 2007, Israeli, American and European news media considered Hamas to be the \"dominant political force\" within the Palestinian territories.\nJournalist Zaki Chehab wrote in 2007 that Hamas's public concessions following the 2006 elections were \"window-dressing\" and that the organisation would never recognize Israel's right to exist.\nAs to the question whether Hamas would be capable to enter into a long-term non-aggression treaty with Israel without being disloyal to their understanding of Islamic law and God's word, \"the Atlantic\" magazine columnist Jeffrey Goldberg in January 2009 stated: \"I tend to think not, though I've noticed over the years a certain plasticity of belief among some Hamas ideologues. Also, this is the Middle East, so anything is possible\".\nProfessor Mohammed Ayoob in his 2020 book, while discussing the 2017 Hamas charter, stated that \"acceptance of the 1967 borders can be interpreted as a de facto acceptance of the preconditions for a two-state solution\".\nReligious policy.\nGaza Strip.\nHamas' Change and Reform electoral list for the 2006 Palestinian legislative election included a Palestinian Christian candidate, Hosam al-Taweel, running as an independent for the Christian reserved seat in Gaza City. Israeli media were surprised by the team. Hosam al-Taweel won the seat, one of six seats reserved for Palestine's Christian minority, with the highest winning vote of the six elected, due to the endorsement of Hamas and other nationalist groups.\nThe gender ideology outlined in the Hamas charter, the importance of women in the religious-nationalist project of liberation is asserted as no lesser than that of males. Their role was defined primarily as one of manufacturing males and caring for their upbringing and rearing, though the charter recognized they could fight for liberation without obtaining their husband's permission and in 2002 their participation in jihad was permitted. The doctrinal emphasis on childbearing and rearing as woman's primary duty is not so different from Fatah's view of women in the First Intifada and it also resembles the outlook of Jewish settlers, and over time it has been subjected to change. A few were worried about imposition of Islamic dress codes, but most Christians in the Gaza Strip said these worries were baseless and they were not worried about the Hamas government.\nIn 1989, during the First Intifada, a few Hamas followers campaigned for polygamy, and insisted women stay at home and be segregated from men. In the course of this campaign, women who chose not to wear the hijab were verbally and physically harassed, with the result that the hijab was being worn 'just to avoid problems on the streets'. The harassment dropped drastically when, after 18 months, the Unified National Leadership of the Uprising (UNLU) condemned it. Polygamy is practised in some Bedouin communities in Israel, and some Palestinians with Israeli citizenship, particularly in the Negev desert (Arabic pronunciation: Naqab) surrounding the Gaza Strip.\nSince Hamas took control of the Gaza Strip in 2007, some of its members have attempted to impose Islamic dress or the hijab head covering on women. The government's \"Islamic Endowment Ministry\" has deployed Virtue Committee members to warn citizens of the dangers of immodest dress, card playing, and dating. There are no government laws imposing dress and other moral standards, and the Hamas education ministry reversed one effort to impose Islamic dress on students. There has also been successful resistance to attempts by local Hamas officials to impose Islamic dress on women. Hamas officials deny having any plans to impose Islamic law, one legislator stating that \"What you are seeing are incidents, not policy,\" and that Islamic law is the desired standard \"but we believe in persuasion\".\nIn 2013, UNRWA canceled its annual marathon in Gaza after Hamas prohibited women from participating in the race.\nIn the West Bank.\nIn 2005, the human rights organization Freemuse released a report titled \"Palestine: Taliban-like attempts to censor music\", which said that Palestinian musicians feared that harsh religious laws against music and concerts will be imposed since Hamas group scored political gains in the Palestinian Authority local elections of 2005.\nThe attempt by Hamas to dictate a cultural code of conduct in the 1980s and early 1990s led to a violent fighting between different Palestinian sectors. Hamas members reportedly burned down stores that stocked videos they deemed indecent and destroyed books they described as \"heretical\".\nIn 2005, an outdoor music-and-dance performance in Qalqiliya was suddenly banned by the Hamas-led municipality, for the reason that such an event would be \"haram\", i.e. forbidden by Islam. The municipality also ordered that music no longer be played in the Qalqiliya zoo, and mufti Akrameh Sabri issued a religious edict affirming the municipality decision. In response, the Palestinian national poet Mahmoud Darwish warned that \"There are Taliban-type elements in our society, and this is a very dangerous sign.\"\nThe Palestinian columnist Mohammed Abd Al-Hamid, a resident of Ramallah, wrote that this religious coercion could cause the migration of artists, and said \"The religious fanatics in Algeria destroyed every cultural symbol, shattered statues and rare works of art and liquidated intellectuals and artists, reporters and authors, ballet dancers and singers\u2014are we going to imitate the Algerian and Afghani examples?\"\nErdo\u011fan's Turkey as a role model.\nSome Hamas members have stated that the model of Islamic government that Hamas seeks to emulate is that of Turkey under the rule of Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan. The foremost members to distance Hamas from the practices of the Taliban and to publicly support the Erdo\u011fan model were Ahmed Yousef and Ghazi Hamad, advisers to Prime Minister Hanieh. Yusuf, the Hamas deputy foreign minister, reflected this goal in an interview with a Turkish newspaper, stating that while foreign public opinion equates Hamas with the Taliban or al-Qaeda, the analogy is inaccurate. Yusuf described the Taliban as \"opposed to everything\", including education and women's rights, while Hamas wants to establish good relations between the religious and secular elements of society and strives for human rights, democracy and an open society. According to professor Yezid Sayigh of King's College in London, how influential this view is within Hamas is uncertain, since both Ahmad Yousef and Ghazi Hamad were dismissed from their posts as advisers to Hamas Prime Minister Ismail Hanieh in October 2007. Both have since been appointed to other prominent positions within the Hamas government. Khaled al-Hroub of the West Bank-based and anti-Hamas Palestinian daily \"Al Ayyam\" added that despite claims by Hamas leaders that it wants to repeat the Turkish model of Islam, \"what is happening on the ground in reality is a replica of the Taliban model of Islam.\"\nCharter and policy documents.\n1988 charter.\nHamas published its charter in August 1988, wherein it defined itself as a chapter of the Muslim Brotherhood and its desire to establish \"an Islamic state throughout Palestine\". The foundational document was written by a single individual, an \"old guard\" member of the Muslim Brotherhood in Gaza isolated from the outside world, and it was made public without going through the usual prior consultation, revision or consensus process, which Hamas leaders regretted in later years. It was then signed on 18 August 1988. It compares Israeli attacks on civilians to that by Nazi Germany. The charter also claims all of historical Palestine but promises religious coexistence under Islam's rule. Article 6 states that the movement's aim is to \"raise the banner of Allah over every inch of Palestine, for under the wing of Islam followers of all religions can coexist in security and safety where their lives, possessions and rights are concerned\". The charter rejects a two-state solution, stating that the conflict cannot be resolved \"except through jihad\".\nMany scholars have pointed out that both the 1988 Hamas's charter and the Likud party platform sought full control of the land, thus denouncing the two-state solution.\n2017 charter.\nIn May 2017, Hamas published a document titled \"A Document of General Principles and Policies\". While this policy document was much shorter than the 1988 charter, and Hamas leaders stated that it did not replace the 1988 charter, it covers some of the same topics and is referred to as the \"2017 charter\". It accepted a Palestinian state in the 1967 borders, without recognizing Israel, which is seen by many as being consistent with a two-state solution, while others state that Hamas retains the long-term objective of establishing one state in former Mandatory Palestine. The charter also argued that armed resistance to occupation is supported by international law. Hamas has described these changes as adaptation within a specific context, as opposed to abandonment of its principles.\nWhile the 1988 Hamas charter was widely described as antisemitic, Hamas's 2017 charter removed the antisemitic language and said Hamas's struggle was with Zionists, not Jews. Some sources maintain its condemnation of Zionists is antisemitic: it describes Zionism as the enemy of all Muslims and a danger to international security, what author J.S. Spoerl in 2020 has disqualified as \"hardly (...) a serious repudiation of anti-Semitism\". Hroub, though not responding directly, disagrees, writing that the 2017 document shows that Hamas is stressing the nationalist/resistance aspects of its purpose, providing a \"clear assertion of the right to a national liberation struggle on the basis of international law.\" Similarly, scholar Joas Wagemakers argues that the 2017 charter clearly omits all anti-Semitic elements and instead takes a nationalist viewpoint. Scholar Le\u00efla Seurat and analyst Tareq Baconi also stress that the charter broadens the movement's tactics by restricting the primacy of armed struggle and complementing it with peaceful forms of resistance.\nOrganization.\nLeadership and structure.\nHamas inherited from its predecessor a tripartite structure under a Shura Council: social services; religious training; military operations. Traditionally it had four distinct functions: (a) a charitable social welfare division (\"dawah\"); (b) a military division for procuring weapons and undertaking operations (\"al-Mujahideen al Filastinun\"); (c) a security service (\"Jehaz Aman\"); and (d) a media branch (\"A'alam\"). Hamas has both an internal leadership within the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, and an external leadership, split between a Gaza group directed by Mousa Abu Marzook from his exile first in Damascus and then in Egypt, and a Kuwaiti group (\"Kuwaidia\") under Khaled Mashal. The Kuwaiti group of Palestinian exiles began to receive extensive funding from the Gulf States after its leader Mashal broke with Yasser Arafat's decision to side with Saddam Hussein in the Invasion of Kuwait, with Mashal insisting that Iraq withdraw. On 6 May 2017, Hamas' Shura Council chose Ismail Haniyeh to become the new leader, to replace Mashal.\nThe exact structure of the organization is unclear as it is shrouded in a veil of secrecy in order to conceal operational activities. Formally, Hamas maintains the wings are separate and independent, but this has been questioned. It has been argued that its wings are both separate and combined for reasons of internal and external political necessity. Communication between the political and military wings of Hamas is made difficult by the thoroughness of Israeli intelligence surveillance and the existence of an extensive base of informants. After the assassination of Abdel Aziz al-Rantisi the political direction of the militant wing was diminished and field commanders were given wider discretional autonomy over operations.\nShura Council and Political Bureau.\nHamas's overarching governing body is the Majlis al-Shura (Shura Council), based on the Quranic concept of consultation and popular assembly (), which Hamas leaders argue provides for democracy within an Islamic framework. As the organization grew more complex and Israeli pressure increased, the Shura Council was renamed the General Consultative Council, with members elected from local council groups. The council elects the 15-member Political Bureau (\"al-Maktab al-Siyasi\") that makes decisions for Hamas. Representatives come from Gaza, the West Bank, leaders in exile and Israeli prisons. The Political Bureau was based in Damascus until January 2012, when Hamas's support for the Syrian opposition to Bashar al-Assad during the Syrian civil war led to the office's relocation to Qatar.\nFinances and funding.\nAs of 2023, almost half of Hamas funding came from the transfers from the Palestinian Authority. Other major sources of funds include taxes collected in the Gaza Strip, transfers from Qatar, Iran and various charities.\nHamas, like its predecessor the Muslim Brotherhood, assumed the administration of Gaza's properties, endowments which extend over 10% of all real estate in the Gaza Strip, with 2,000 acres of agricultural land held in religious trusts, together with numerous shops, rentable apartments and public buildings.\nIn the first five years of the 1st Intifada, the Gaza economy, 50% of which depended on external sources of income, plummeted by 30\u201350% as Israel closed its labor market and remittances from the Palestinian expatriates in the Gulf countries dried up following the 1991\u20131992 Gulf War. At the 1993 Philadelphia conference, Hamas leaders' statements indicated that they read George H. W. Bush's outline of a New World Order as embodying a tacit aim to destroy Islam, and that therefore funding should focus on enhancing the Islamic roots of Palestinian society and promoting jihad, which also means zeal for social justice, in the occupied territories. Hamas became particularly fastidious about maintaining separate resourcing for its respective branches of activity\u2014military, political and social services. It has had a holding company in East Jerusalem (\"Beit al-Mal\"), a 20% stake in Al Aqsa International Bank which served as its financial arm, the Sunuqrut Global Group and al-Ajouli money-changing firm.\nBy 2011, Hamas's budget, calculated to be roughly US$70\u00a0million, derived even more substantially (85%) from foreign, rather than internal Palestinian, sources. Only two Israeli-Palestinian sources figure in a list seized in 2004, while the other contributors were donor bodies located in Jordan, Qatar, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Britain, Germany, the United States, United Arab Emirates, Italy and France. Much of the money raised comes from sources that direct their assistance to what Hamas describes as its charitable work for Palestinians, but investments in support of its ideological position are also relevant, with Persian Gulf States and Saudi Arabia prominent in the latter. Matthew Levitt claims that Hamas also taps money from corporations, criminal organizations and financial networks that support terror. It is also alleged that it engages in cigarette and drug smuggling, multimedia copyright infringement and credit card fraud. The United States, Israel and the EU have shut down many charities and organs that channel money to Hamas, such as the Holy Land Foundation for Relief. Between 1992 and 2001, this group is said to have provided $6.8\u00a0million to Palestinian charities of the $57\u00a0million collected. By 2001, it was alleged to have given Hamas $13\u00a0million, and was shut down shortly afterwards.\nAbout half of Hamas's funding came from states in the Persian Gulf down to the mid-2000s. Saudi Arabia supplied half of the Hamas budget of $50\u00a0million in the early 2000s, but, under US pressure, began to cut its funding by cracking down on Islamic charities and private donor transfers to Hamas in 2004, which by 2006 drastically reduced the flow of money from that area. Iran and Syria, in the aftermath of Hamas's 2006 electoral victory, stepped in to fill the shortfall. Saudi funding, negotiated with third parties including Egypt, remained supportive of Hamas as a Sunni group but chose to provide more assistance to the PNA, the electoral loser, when the EU responded to the outcome by suspending its monetary aid. During the 1980s, Iran began to provide 10% of Hamas's funding, which it increased annually until by the 1990s it supplied $30\u00a0million. It accounted for $22\u00a0million, over a quarter of Hamas's budget, by the late 2000s. According to Matthew Levitt, Iran preferred direct financing to operative groups rather than charities, requiring video proof of attacks. Much of the Iran funding is said to be channeled through Hezbollah. After 2006, Iran's willingness to take over the burden of the shortfall created by the drying up of Saudi funding also reflected the geopolitical tensions between the two, since, though Shiite, Iran was supporting a Sunni group traditionally closely linked with the Saudi kingdom. The US imposed sanctions on Iran's Bank Saderat, alleging it had funneled hundreds of millions to Hamas. The US has expressed concerns that Hamas obtains funds through Palestinian and Lebanese sympathizers of Arab descent in the Foz do Igua\u00e7u area of the tri-border region of Latin America, an area long associated with arms trading, drug trafficking, contraband, the manufacture of counterfeit goods, money-laundering and currency fraud. The State Department adds that confirmatory information of a Hamas operational presence there is lacking.\nAfter 2009, sanctions on Iran made funding difficult, forcing Hamas to rely on religious donations by individuals in the West Bank, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia. Funds amounting to tens of millions of dollars raised in the Gulf states were transferred through the Rafah Border Crossing. These were not sufficient to cover the costs of governing the Strip and running the al Qassam Brigades, and when tensions arose with Iran over support of President Assad in Syria, Iran dropped its financial assistance to the government, restricting its funding to the military wing, which meant a drop from $150\u00a0million in 2012 to $60\u00a0million the following year. A further drop occurred in 2015 when Hamas expressed its criticisms of Iran's role in the Yemeni Civil War.\nIn 2017, the PA government imposed its own sanctions against Gaza, including, among other things, cutting off salaries to thousands of PA employees, as well as financial assistance to hundreds of families in the Gaza Strip. The PA initially said it would stop paying for the electricity and fuel that Israel supplies to the Gaza Strip, but after a year partially backtracked. The Israeli government has allowed millions of dollars from Qatar to be funneled on a regular basis through Israel to Hamas, to replace the millions of dollars the PA had stopped transferring to Hamas. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu explained that letting the money go through Israel meant that it could not be used for terrorism, saying: \"Now that we are supervising, we know it's going to humanitarian causes.\"\nAccording to U.S. officials, as of 2023 Hamas has an investment portfolio that is worth anywhere from 500 million to US$1 billion, including assets in Sudan, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Algeria and the United Arab Emirates. Hamas has denied such allegations.\nIn 2024, financial activity in Gaza is mainly carried out via money changers in order to bypass the international financial authorities. Also in 2024, the European Council added six people to its sanctions list for helping fund Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad, including a senior official from the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps. Three businesses were also added, including companies in Spain and Sudan that functioned as front companies.\nSocial services wing.\nHamas developed its social welfare programme by replicating the model established by Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood. For Hamas, charity and the development of one's community are both prescribed by religion and to be understood as forms of resistance. In Islamic tradition, (lit.\u00a0transl.\u2009\"the call to God\") obliges the faithful to reach out to others by both proselytising and by charitable works, and typically the latter center on the mosques which make use of both endowment resources and charitable donations (, one of the five pillars of Islam) to fund grassroots services such as nurseries, schools, orphanages, soup kitchens, women's activities, library services and even sporting clubs within a larger context of preaching and political discussions. In the 1990s, some 85% of its budget was allocated to the provision of social services. Hamas has been called perhaps the most significant social services actor in Palestine. By 2000, Hamas or its affiliated charities ran roughly 40% of the social institutions in the West Bank and Gaza and, with other Islamic charities, by 2005, was supporting 120,000 individuals with monthly financial support in Gaza. Part of the appeal of these institutions is that they fill a vacuum in the administration by the PLO of the Palestinian territories, which had failed to cater to the demand for jobs and broad social services, and is widely viewed as corrupt. As late as 2005, the budget of Hamas, drawing on global charity contributions, was mostly tied up in covering running expenses for its social programmes, which extended from the supply of housing, food and water for the needy to more general functions such as financial aid, medical assistance, educational development and religious instruction. A certain accounting flexibility allowed these funds to cover both charitable causes and military operations, permitting transfer from one to the other.\nThe infrastructure itself was understood, within the Palestinian context, as providing the soil from which a militant opposition to the occupation would flower. In this regard it differs from the rival Palestinian Islamic Jihad which lacks any social welfare network, and relies on spectacular attacks to recruit adherents. In 2007, through funding from Iran, Hamas managed to allocate at a cost of $60\u00a0million, monthly stipends of $100 for 100,000 workers, and a similar sum for 3,000 fishermen laid idle by Israel's imposition of restrictions on fishing offshore, plus grants totalling $45\u00a0million to detainees and their families. Matthew Levitt argues that Hamas grants to people are subject to a rigorous cost-benefit analysis of how beneficiaries will support Hamas, with those linked to militant activities receiving more than others. Israel holds the families of suicide bombers accountable and bulldozes their homes, whereas the families of Hamas activists who have been killed or wounded during militant operations are given an initial, one-time grant varying between $500\u2013$5,000, together with a $100 monthly allowance. Rent assistance is also given to families whose homes have been destroyed by Israeli bombing though families unaffiliated with Hamas are said to receive less.\nUntil 2007, these activities extended to the West Bank, but, after a PLO crackdown, now continue exclusively in the Gaza Strip. After the 2013 Egyptian coup d'\u00e9tat deposed the elected Muslim Brotherhood government of Mohamed Morsi in 2013, Hamas found itself in a financial straitjacket and has since endeavoured to throw the burden of responsibility for public works infrastructure in the Gaza Strip back onto the Palestinian National Authority, but without success.\nMedia.\nAl-Aqsa TV.\nAl-Aqsa TV is a television channel founded by Hamas. The station began broadcasting in the Gaza Strip on 9 January 2006, less than three weeks before the Palestinian legislative elections. It has shown television programs, including some children's television, which deliver antisemitic messages. Hamas has stated that the television station is \"an independent media institution that often does not express the views of the Palestinian government headed by Ismail Haniyeh or of the Hamas movement\", and that Hamas does not hold antisemitic views. The programming includes ideologically tinged children's shows, news talk, and religiously inspired entertainment. According to the Anti-Defamation League, the station promotes terrorist activity and incites hatred of Jews and Israelis. Al-Aqsa TV is headed by the controversial Fathi Ahmad Hammad, chairman of al-Ribat Communications and Artistic Productions\u2014a Hamas-run company that also produces Hamas's radio station, \"Voice of al-Aqsa\", and its biweekly newspaper, \"The Message\". Hamad has made a number of controversial comments, including a speech in which he reportedly stated: 'you have Jews everywhere and we must attack every Jew on the globe by way of slaughtering and killing'\nAl-Fateh magazine.\n\"Al-Fateh\" (\"the conqueror\") was a Hamas children's magazine, published biweekly in London, and posted online. It began publication in September 2002, and its 108th issue was released in September 2007. The magazine featured stories, poems, riddles, and puzzles, and stated it is for \"the young builders of the future\". According to the Anti-Defamation League, al-Fateh promoted violence and antisemitism, with praise for and encouragement to become suicide bombers, and that it \"regularly included photos of children it claims have been detained, injured or killed by Israeli police, images of children firing slingshots or throwing rocks at Israelis and children holding automatic weapons and firebombs\".\nSocial media.\nHamas has traditionally presented itself as a voice of suffering of the Palestinian people. According to Time magazine, a new social media strategy was employed in the wake of the 7 October attack: Hamas asserted itself as the dominant resistance force in the Middle East by recording and broadcasting the brutality of their attacks.\nAccording to Dr. Harel Horev, historian and researcher of Palestinian affairs at Tel Aviv University, Hamas has used social media to dehumanize Israelis/Jews. According to his research, Hamas took over the most popular accounts on Palestinian networks in a covert manner that did not reveal its involvement. This control gave it the ability to significantly influence the Palestinian discourse online through content that denies the humanity and right to life of Israelis. These included posters, songs and videos glorifying threats; computer games that encourage the murder of Jews; training videos for carrying out effective and indiscriminate stabbing and shooting attacks; and anti-Semitic cartoons as a central means of dehumanizing the Israeli/Jew in the Palestinian online discourse.\nInternal security.\nThe General Security Service, formally part of the Hamas political party, operates akin to a governmental body within Gaza. Under the direct oversight of Hamas leader Yahya Sinwar, it conducts extensive surveillance on Palestinians, compiling files on various individuals including journalists and government critics. This secret police force relies on a network of informants and employs tactics such as censorship and surveillance to maintain control. Before the conflict with Israel, the unit reportedly had a monthly budget of $120,000 and consisted of 856 personnel, including more than 160 individuals paid to spread Hamas propaganda and conduct online attacks against opponents.\nOther powerful internal security bodies in Gaza include Military Intelligence, which focuses on Israel, and the Internal Security Service, an arm of the Interior Ministry.\nCivilian crisis management.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic in Palestine Gaza's Ministry of the Interior formed a crisis management team, headed by Hamas police officer Faiq Al-Mabhouh. Mabhouh played a prominent role in communicating with the public about the changing situation. He appeared in video announcements on Al-Aqsa TV and social media channels, and gave interviews to local media to explain changes in restrictions. The Gaza Strip restrictions took the \"flattening the curve\" approach. The restrictions imposed were similar to most western countries, and more relaxed than the zero COVID policy implemented by China and their neighbors. The Gaza Strip's starter was to avoid total lockdowns using partial measures like weekend lockdowns and curfews. The weekend lockdowns included mosques being closed for Friday prayers. But during times while the mosques were open, one creative measure initiated by Gaza's Health Ministry was to replace the mosque preachers with doctors who gave health information seminars.\nQassam Brigades (military wing).\nThe Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades is Hamas' military wing. While the number of members is known only to the Brigades leadership, Israel estimates the Brigades have a core of several hundred members who receive military style training, including training in Iran and in Syria (before the Syrian Civil War). Additionally, the brigades have an estimated 10,000\u201317,000 operatives, other sources say 15,000\u201340,000 militants, forming a backup force whenever circumstances call for reinforcements for the Brigade. Recruitment training lasts for two years. The group's ideology outlines its aim as the liberation of Palestine and the restoration of Palestinian rights under the dispensations set forth in the Qur'an, and this translates into three policy priorities:\nTo evoke the spirit of Jihad (Resistance) among Palestinians, Arabs, and Muslims; to defend Palestinians and their land against the Zionist occupation and its manifestations; to liberate Palestinians and their land that was usurped by the Zionist occupation forces and settlers.\nAccording to its official stipulations, the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades' military operations are to be restricted to operating only inside Palestine, engaging with Israeli soldiers, and in exercising the right of self-defense against armed settlers. They are to avoid civilian targets, to respect the enemy's humanity by refraining from mutilation, defacement or excessive killing, and to avoid targeting Westerners either in the occupied zones or beyond.\nDown to 2007, the Brigades are estimated to have lost some 800 operatives in conflicts with Israeli forces. The leadership has been consistently undermined by targeted assassinations. Aside from Yahya Ayyash (5 January 1996), it has lost Emad Akel (24 November 1993), Salah Shehade (23 July 2002), Ibrahim al-Makadmeh (8 March 2003), Ismail Abu Shanab (21 August 2003), Ahmed Yassin (22 March 2004), and Abdel Aziz al-Rantisi (17 April 2004).\nThe Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades groups its fighters in 4\u20135 man cells, which in turn are integrated into companies and battalions. Unlike the political section, which is split between an internal and external structure, the Brigades are under a local Palestinian leadership, and disobedience with the decisions taken by the political leadership have been relatively rare.\nAlthough the Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades are an integral part of Hamas, the exact nature of the relationship is hotly debated. They appear to operate at times independently of Hamas, exercising a certain autonomy. Some cells have independent links with the external leadership, enabling them to bypass the hierarchical command chain and political leadership in Gaza. Ilana Kass and Bard O'Neill, likening Hamas's relationship with the Brigades to the political party Sinn F\u00e9in's relationship to the military arm of the Irish Republican Army, quote a senior Hamas official as stating: \"The Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigade is a separate armed military wing, which has its own leaders who do not take their orders from Hamas and do not tell us of their plans in advance.\"\nGaza forces, October 2023.\nDuring the Gaza war, the IDF published its intelligence about the Hamas military in the Strip. They put the strength of the Qassam Brigades there at the start of the war at 30,000 fighters, organized by area in five brigades, consisting in total of 24 battalions and c. 140 companies. Each regional brigade had a number of strongholds and outposts, and included specialised arrays for rocket firing, anti-tank missiles, air defenses, snipers, and engineering.\nSymbols.\nThe flag of Hamas is a green field (a traditionally respected color in Islam) charged in the middle with the writing of the \"Shahada\", an Islamic statement of faith, in white calligraphic script: \"There is no god but God\" and \"Muhammad is the messenger of God\".\nThe emblems of their political and military wings are distinct from each other. The emblem of Hamas' political wing features Islamic and militaristic motifs. It shows two crossed swords in front of the central building of the Al-Aqsa mosque complex, in Jerusalem. The mosque is framed by two Palestinian flags that feature the two statements that comprise the \"Shahada\". Above Al Aqsa is a map of Palestine, matching the borders of Mandatory Palestine. Immediately below the Dome it reads \"Palestine\" and below that in the green banner: \"Islamic Resistance Movement \u2013 Hamas\". The emblem of their Al-Qassam Brigades militant wing does not include a map or a Palestinian flag, the militant wing emblem is a cartoon drawing of a man holding an M16 rifle and a Quran, with his face mostly covered by a black and white Palestinian keffiyeh. He is standing in front of a green flag and the golden dome of the Al-Aqsa mosque, but the building is more stylised than it is in the political wing emblem.\nViolence.\nHamas has used both political activities and violence in pursuit of its goals. For example, while politically engaged in the 2006 Palestinian Territories parliamentary election campaign, Hamas stated in its election manifesto that it was prepared to use \"armed resistance to end the occupation\". Hamas has repeatedly justified its violence by arguing \"People under occupation have a right to resist that occupation\". Hamas also argues its armed resistance only started after decades of Israeli occupation.\nFrom 2000 to 2004, Hamas was responsible for killing nearly 400 Israelis and wounding more than 2,000 in 425 attacks, according to the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs. From 2001 through May 2008, Hamas launched more than 3,000 Qassam rockets and 2,500 mortar attacks into Israel.\nAttacks on civilians.\nHamas have committed massacres targeting Israeli civilians. Hamas's most deadly suicide bombing was an attack on a Netanya hotel on 27 March 2002, in which 30 people were killed and 140 were wounded. The attack has also been referred to as the Passover massacre since it took place on the first night of the Jewish festival of Passover at a Seder.\nHamas has defended suicide attacks as a legitimate aspect of its asymmetric warfare against Israel. In 2003, according to Stephen Atkins, Hamas resumed suicide bombings in Israel as a retaliatory measure after the failure of peace talks and an Israeli campaign targeting members of the upper echelon of the Hamas leadership. but they are considered as crimes against humanity under international law. In a 2002 report, Human Rights Watch stated that Hamas leaders \"should be held accountable\" for \"war crimes and crimes against humanity\" committed by the al-Qassam Brigades.\nIn 2008, Hamas leader Khaled Mashal, offered that Hamas would attack only military targets if the IDF would stop causing the deaths of Palestinian civilians. Following a 19 June 2008, ceasefire, the al-Qassam Brigades ended its rocket attacks and arrested Fatah militants in Gaza who had continued sporadic rocket and mortar attacks against Israel. The al-Qassam Brigades resumed the attacks after the 4 November Israeli incursion into Gaza.\nDuring the October 7 attacks, Hamas infiltrated homes, shot civilians en masse, and took scores of Israeli civilians and soldiers as hostages into Gaza. According to Human Rights Watch, the deliberate targeting of civilians, indiscriminate attacks, and taking of civilians as hostages amount to war crimes under international humanitarian law. During its October 2023 offensive against Israel, Hamas massacred 364 people at the Re'im music festival, while abucting others. During the same offensive, it also was reported that Hamas had massacred the population of the Kfar Aza kibbutz. About 10 percent of the residents of the Be'eri kibbutz were killed. Hamas militants attacked the Psyduck festival, that took place near kibutz Nir Oz, killing 17 Israeli partygoers. Video footage shows children being deliberately killed during the kibbutz attacks, as well as what appears to be an attempt to decapitate a living person using a garden hoe. Forensic teams who examined bodies of victims said many bodies showed signs of torture as well as sexual and gender-based violence, and testimonies to this effect were also collected by Israeli police. Haaretz later reported that forensic pathologists who examined bodies of the victims taken the Shura Base for identification found \"no signs on any of those bodies attesting to sexual relations having taken place or of mutilation of genitalia.\" Not all bodies could be fully examined given the lack of forensic pathologists, and for some conclusions could not be drawn given their deteriorated state. Israeli forensic pathologists in charge of the process clarified later that all bodies had been examined, and some were disfigured or burned. Some of the testimonies were later proven to be false. Detailed reports by the UN and \"The Times\" concluded that Israel's claims about the scale and formally sanctioned, systematic nature of sexual assaults did not stand up to scrutiny.\nRocket attacks on Israel.\nAccording to a 2010 Human Rights Watch report, 15 civilians had been killed in rocket attacks by Hamas and other groups since 2001. Hamas has claimed that its rockets are only aimed at military targets, and that the low quality of its weapons was the cause of the inadvertent civilian casualties. According to Human Rights Watch, statements by Hamas leaders shed doubt on these claims and indicate that targeting of civilians was not accidental. From January 2009, following Operation Cast Lead, Hamas largely stopped launching rocket attacks on Israel and has on at least two occasions arrested members of other groups who have launched rockets, \"showing that it has the ability to impose the law when it wants\". In February 2010, Hamas issued a statement regretting any harm that may have befallen Israeli civilians as a result of Palestinian rocket attacks during the Gaza war. It maintained that its rocket attacks had been aimed at Israeli military targets but lacked accuracy and hence sometimes hit civilian areas. Israel responded that Hamas had boasted repeatedly of targeting and murdering civilians in the media.\nAccording to one report, commenting on the 2014 conflict, \"nearly all the 2,500\u20133,000 rockets and mortars Hamas has fired at Israel since the start of the war seem to have been aimed at towns\", including an attack on \"a kibbutz collective farm close to the Gaza border\", in which an Israeli child was killed. Former Israeli Lt. Col. Jonathan D. Halevi stated that \"Hamas has expressed pride in aiming long-range rockets at strategic targets in Israel including the nuclear reactor in Dimona, the chemical plants in Haifa, and Ben-Gurion Airport\", which \"could have caused thousands\" of Israeli casualties \"if successful\".\nIn July 2008, Barack Obama, then the Democratic presidential candidate, said: \"If somebody was sending rockets into my house, where my two daughters sleep at night, I'm going to do everything in my power to stop that, and I would expect Israelis to do the same thing.\" On 28 December 2008, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said in a statement: \"the United States strongly condemns the repeated rocket and mortar attacks against Israel.\" On 2 March 2009, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton condemned the attacks.\nOn 7 October 2023, Hamas claimed responsibility for a barrage of missile attacks originating from the Gaza Strip.\nGuerrilla warfare.\nHamas has made great use of guerrilla tactics in the Gaza Strip and to a lesser degree the West Bank. It has successfully adapted these techniques over the years since its inception. According to a 2006 report by rival Fatah party, Hamas had smuggled between several hundred and 1,300 tons of advanced rockets, along with other weaponry, into Gaza.\nHamas has used IEDs and anti-tank rockets against the IDF in Gaza. The latter include standard RPG-7 warheads and home-made rockets such as the Al-Bana, Al-Batar and Al-Yasin. The IDF has a difficult, if not impossible, time trying to find hidden weapons caches in Palestinian areas\u2014this is due to the high local support base Hamas enjoys.\nExtrajudicial killings of rivals.\nIn addition to killing Israeli civilians and armed forces, Hamas has also murdered suspected Palestinian Israel collaborators and Fatah rivals. According to the Associated Press, collaborating with Israel is a crime punishable by death in Gaza. Hundreds of Palestinians were executed by both Hamas and Fatah during the First Intifada. In the wake of the 2006 Israeli conflict with Gaza, Hamas was accused of systematically rounding up, torturing and summarily executing Fatah supporters suspected of supplying information to Israel. Human Rights Watch estimates several hundred Gazans were \"maimed\" and tortured in the aftermath of the conflict. Seventy-three Gazan men accused of \"collaborating\" had their arms and legs broken by \"unidentified perpetrators\", and 18 Palestinians accused of helping Israel were executed by Hamas security officials in the first days of the conflict. In November 2012, Hamas's Izzedine al-Qassam brigade publicly executed six Gaza residents accused of collaborating with Israel. According to the witnesses, six alleged informers were shot dead one by one in Gaza City, while the corpse of the sixth victim was tied by a cable to the back of a motorcycle and dragged through the streets. In 2013, Human Rights Watch issued a statement condemning Hamas for not investigating and giving a proper trial to the six men. Their statement was released the day before Hamas issued a deadline for \"collaborators\" to turn themselves in, or they will be pursued \"without mercy\". During the 2014 Israel-Gaza conflict, Hamas executed at least 23 accused collaborators after three of its commanders were assassinated by Israeli forces, with Amnesty International also reporting instances of torture used by Hamas forces. An Israeli source denied that any of the commanders had been targeted on the basis of human intelligence.\nKillings of unarmed people have also occurred during Hamas-Fatah clashes. NGOs have cited a number of summary executions as particular examples of violations of the rules of warfare, including the case of Muhammad Swairki, 28, a cook for Palestinian Authority Chairman Mahmoud Abbas's presidential guard, who was thrown to his death, with his hands and legs tied, from a 15-story apartment building in Gaza City. Hamas security forces reportedly shoot and torture Palestinians who opposed Hamas rule in Gaza. In one case, a Palestinian had criticized Hamas in a conversation on the street with some friends. Later that day, more than a dozen armed men with black masks and red kaffiyeh took the man from his home, and brought him to a solitary area where they shot him three times in the lower legs and ankles. The man told Human Rights Watch that he was not politically active.\nOn 14 August 2009, Hamas fighters stormed the Mosque of extremist cleric Abdel-Latif Moussa. The cleric was protected by at least 100 fighters from Jund Ansar Allah (\"Army of the Helpers of God\"), an Islamist group with links to Al-Qaeda. The resulting battle left at least 13 people dead, including Moussa and six Hamas fighters, and 120 people injured.\nAccording to Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas, during 2014 Israel\u2013Gaza conflict, Hamas killed more than 120 Palestinian youths for defying house arrest imposed on them by Hamas, in addition to 30\u201340 Palestinians killed by Hamas in extrajudicial executions after accusing them of being collaborators with Israel. Referring to the killing of suspected collaborators, a Shin Bet official stated that \"not even one\" of those executed by Hamas provided any intelligence to Israel, while the Shin Bet officially \"confirmed that those executed during Operation Protective Edge had all been held in prison in Gaza in the course of the hostilities\".\nCriticism.\nAside from its use of political violence in pursuit of its goals, Hamas has been widely criticised for a variety of reasons, including the use of antisemitic hate speech by its representatives, frequent calls for the military destruction of Israel, its reported use of human shields and child combatants as part of its military operations, its restriction of political freedoms within the Gaza Strip, and human rights abuses.\nAfter the start of the 2023 war, the European Parliament passed a motion stating the need for Hamas to be eliminated, with US President Biden having expressed the same sentiment. Hamas was accused of having committed genocide against Israelis on 7 October 2023 by 240 legal experts, including jurists and academics.\nAllegations of antisemitism.\nThe 1988 Hamas charter proclaims that jihad against Jews is required until Judgement Day. Article 7 of the 1988 governing charter of Hamas \"openly dedicate(s) Hamas to genocide against the Jewish people\". Authors have characterized the violent language against all Jews in the original Hamas charter as genocidal, incitement to genocide, or antisemitic. The charter attributes collective responsibility to Jews, not just Israelis, for various global issues, including both World Wars. \"The American Interest\" magazine wrote that the charter \"echoes\" Nazi propaganda in claiming that Jews profited during World War II. Jeffrey Goldberg, editor-in-chief of \"The Atlantic\" magazine and others have compared statements in the 1988 charter with those that appear in \"The Protocols of the Elders of Zion\". \nEsther Webman of the Project for the Study of Anti-Semitism at Tel Aviv University wrote in 1998 that Hamas leaflets during the First Intifada \"contained the most extreme anti-Semitic statements\" of all Palestinian factions, but argued that \",anti-Semitism is not the main tenet of Hamas ideology.\" The tone and casting of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as part of an eternal struggle between Muslim and Jews by the Hamas Covenant had become an obstacle for the movement to be able to take part in diplomatic forums involving Western nations. \nHamas has been accused of promoting Holocaust denial. It described Nazi Germany's genocide of European Jews as \"so-called\" and \"an alleged and invented story with no basis\" in a 2000 press release. In 2003, Hamas co-founder and deputy leader Abdel Aziz al-Rantisi claiming that \"Zionists were behind the Nazis' murder of many Jews.\" In 2009, it was involved in a dispute with the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) over the inclusion of Holocaust education in Gaza, with Hamas's Popular Committees for Refugees describing the Holocaust as \"a lie invented by the Zionists\".\nOn the other hand, Hamas has also condemned the Holocaust, antisemitism, and the persecution of Jews. In an op-ed in \"The Guardian\" in January 2006, Khaled Meshaal, the chief of Hamas's political bureau denied antisemitism, on Hamas' part, and he said that the nature of Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict was not religious but political. He also said that Hamas has \"no problem with Jews who have not attacked us\". In 2008, Basem Naim, Minister of Health and Information in Gaza, stated that \"it should be made clear that neither Hamas nor the Palestinian government in Gaza denies the Nazi Holocaust. The Holocaust was not only a crime against humanity but one of the most abhorrent crimes in modern history. We condemn it as we condemn every abuse of humanity and all forms of discrimination on the basis of religion, race, gender or nationality.\"\nHamas' 2017 charter removed the antisemitic language of the original, stating that their struggle is against Zionism and not Jews, while rejecting persecution or denial of rights of any human being on nationalist, religious, or sectarian grounds. It also says that the Jewish question, antisemitism, and the persecution of Jews stem from European history rather than Arab or Muslim heritage, while advancing goals for a Palestinian state that many see as consistent with a two-state solution. In 2025, Hamas stated that what it calls the Gaza genocide is \"the Auschwitz of the 21st century\". \nAhmed Yassin, the founder of Hamas, responded to accusations that \"Hamas hate Jews\" by stating in a 1988 interview:\nElectoral performance.\nLegislative Council.\nIn the 2006 Palestinian legislative election, the party won 44.45% of the vote, becoming the largest party of the Legislative Council.\nPublic opinion.\nA poll conducted in 2021 found that 53% of Palestinians believed Hamas was \"most deserving of representing and leading the Palestinian people\". Only 14% preferred Abbas's Fatah party. At the same time, a majority of Gazans also saw Hamas as corrupt, but were frightened to criticize the group. Polls conducted in September 2023 found that support for Hamas among Palestinians stood at around 27\u201331%.\nPublic opinions of Hamas deteriorated after it took control of the Gaza Strip in 2007. Prior to the takeover, 62% of Palestinians had held a favorable view of the group, while a third had negative views. According to a 2014 Pew Research survey just prior to the 2014 Israel\u2013Gaza conflict, only about a third had positive opinions, and more than half viewed Hamas negatively. Furthermore, 68% of Israeli Arabs viewed Hamas negatively. In July 2014, 65% of Lebanese viewed Hamas negatively. In Jordan and Egypt, roughly 60% viewed Hamas negatively, and in Turkey, 80% had a negative view of Hamas. In Tunisia, 42% had a negative view of Hamas, while 56% of Bangladeshis and 44% of Indonesians had a negative opinion of Hamas.\nHamas popularity surged after the war in July\u2013August 2014 with polls reporting that 81 percent of Palestinians felt that Hamas had \"won\" that war. A June 2021 opinion poll found that 46% of respondents in Saudi Arabia supported rocket attacks on Israel by Hamas during the 2021 Israel\u2013Palestine crisis. A March/April 2023 poll found that 60% of Jordanians viewed Hamas firing rockets at Israel at least somewhat positively.\nFollowing the October 7 attacks and the Gaza war that followed, Hamas's popularity in Gaza fell while increasing in the West Bank. A May 2024 poll by the \"Arab World for Research and Development\", a West Bank-based independent organization, only a quarter of Gazans supported Hamas, while 76% of Palestinians in the West Bank views Hamas positively. Views on the attack among Gazans plummeted from 50% support to 24% in favor from a poll taken in November 2023 to the May 2024 poll. According to the poll conducted by \"The Washington Institute for Near East Policy\" from 14 November to 6 December 2023, 40% of Saudi participants expressed a positive view of Hamas, 95% of Saudis did not believe that Hamas killed civilians during the October 7 attacks, and only 16% of Saudis said Hamas should accept a two-state solution. A poll conducted by the Palestinian Center for Policy and Survey Research between 22 and 25 October 2025, found that 70% of Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza opposed the disarmament of Hamas, even if that means a return to Israeli attacks.\nForeign relations.\nAfter winning the Palestinian elections, Hamas leaders made multi-national diplomatic tours abroad. In April 2006, Mahmoud al-Zahar (then foreign minister) visited Saudi Arabia, Syria, Kuwait, Bahrein, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Libya, Algeria, Sudan and Egypt. He met the Saudi foreign minister Prince Faysal. In Syria he held talks on the issue of Palestinians stuck on the Syrian-Iraqi border. He stated that he unofficially met officials from Western Europe in Qatar who did not wish to be named. In May 2006, Hamas foreign minister visited Indonesia, Malaysia, the Sultanate of Brunei, Pakistan, China, Sri Lanka and Iran. The minister also participated in China\u2013Arab States Cooperation Forum. Ismail Haniyeh in 2006 visited Egypt, Syria, Kuwait, Iran, Lebanon, Qatar and Saudi Arabia.\nHamas has always maintained leadership abroad. The movement is deliberately fragmented to ensure that Israel cannot kill its top political and military leaders. Hamas used to be strongly allied with both Iran and Syria. Iran gave Hamas an estimated $13\u201315\u00a0million in 2011 as well as access to long-range missiles. Hamas's political bureau was once located in the Syrian capital of Damascus before the start of the Syrian civil war. Relations between Hamas, Iran, and Syria began to turn cold when Hamas refused to back the government of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad. Instead, Hamas backed the Sunni rebels fighting against Assad. As a result, Iran cut funding to Hamas, and Iranian ally Hezbollah ordered Hamas members out of Lebanon. Hamas was then forced out of Syria, and subsequently has tried to mend fences with Iran and Hezbollah. Hamas contacted Jordan and Sudan to see if either would open up its borders to its political bureau, but both countries refused, although they welcomed many Hamas members leaving Syria.\nFrom 2012 to 2013, under the short-lived leadership of Muslim Brotherhood President Mohamed Morsi, Hamas had the support of Egypt. After Morsi was removed from office, his successor Abdul Fattah al-Sisi outlawed the Muslim Brotherhood and destroyed the tunnels Hamas built into Egypt. In 2015, Egypt declared Hamas a terrorist organization But this decision was overturned by Egypt in June of the same year. There was a rapprochement between Hamas and Egypt, when a Hamas delegation visited Cairo on 12 March 2016. Hamas has assisted Egypt in controlling the insurgency in Sinai. Hamas denied Egypt's request to deploy its own militants in the Sinai leading to tensions between the two.\nEgypt has occasionally served as mediator between Hamas and Fatah, seeking to unify the two factions. In 2017, Yahya Sinwar visited Cairo for 5 weeks and convinced the Egyptian government to open the Rafah crossing, letting in cement and fuel in exchange for Hamas committing to better relations with Fatah; this subsequently led to the signing of the 2017 Fatah\u2013Hamas Agreement.\nThe United Arab Emirates has been hostile to Hamas, viewing it as the Palestinian equivalent of the Muslim Brotherhood, a designated terrorist organization in the UAE.\nHamas enjoyed close relations with Saudi Arabia in its early years. Saudi Arabia funded most of its operations from 2000 to 2004, but reduced its support due to US pressure. In 2020, many Hamas members in Saudi Arabia were arrested. In 2022, Saudi Arabia began releasing Hamas members from prison. In April 2023, Ismail Haniyeh visited Riyadh, a sign of improving relations. Haniyeh had long sought to visit Saudi Arabia, and his requests to do so had been long ignored up until then.\nDespite its Sunni Islamist ideology, Hamas has been flexible and pragmatic in its foreign policy, moderating and toning down its religious rhetoric when expedient; it has developed strong ties with Iran, and has also established relations with constitutionally secular states such as Syria and Russia. Kyrylo Budanov, the chief of Ukraine's Main Directorate of Intelligence, has accused Russia of supporting Hamas by supplying the group with stolen Ukrainian weaponry, and the National Resistance Center of Ukraine alleged that the Russian Wagner Group trained Hamas militants ahead of the 7 October attacks.\nAccording to AP some North Korean arms were \"likely\" used during the 7 Oct assault on Israel. Ali Barakeh, a Hamas official living in Lebanon, claimed the two are allies.\nHamas leaders reportedly re-established relations with Kuwait, Libya and Oman, all of which reportedly have not had warm relations with Fatah. The cool relationship between Fatah and Kuwait owed to Arafat's support for Saddam during the First Gulf War, which led to the Palestinian exodus from Kuwait (1990\u201391). This rapproachment is in part due to Hamas's policy of non-interference in the internal affairs of Arab countries. Mahmoud al-Zahar stated that Hamas does not \"play the game\" of siding with one Arab nation against another, e.g. in the Gulf War. When Yusuf al-Qaradawi, and other Sunni \"ulema\", called for an uprising against Assad's regime in Syria, Mahmoud al-Zahar maintained that taking sides would harm the Palestinian cause.\nAfter the fall of the Assad regime in Syria, Hamas congratulated the Syrian people for achieving their \"aspirations for freedom and justice,\" and expressed hope that the new Syrian government would continue \"its historical and pivotal role in supporting the Palestinian people.\" In February 2025, Hamas condemned Israeli attacks on Syria.\nTerrorist designation.\nThe United States designated Hamas as a terrorist organisation in 1995, as did Canada in November 2002, and the United Kingdom in November 2021. In May 2021, the Organization of American States designated Hamas as a terrorist organisation. The European Union so designated Hamas's military wing in 2001 and, under US pressure, designated Hamas in 2003. Hamas challenged this decision, which was upheld by the European Court of Justice in July 2017. Japan and New Zealand have designated the military wing of Hamas as a terrorist organisation. The organisation is banned in Jordan. In late February 2024, New Zealand re-designated the entire Hamas organisation as a terror entity. In September 2024, Switzerland approved a draft law on to ban the group. In April 2025, Paraguay expanded its designation of Hamas as a terrorist organisation. In September 2025, Ecuador designated Hamas as a terrorist organization.\nIn April 2025, Hamas filed a legal case in Britain appealing its designation as a terrorist group. The filing argues that Hamas has never engaged in an armed operation outside of historic Palestine and is not a threat to Western nations. Hamas politician Mousa Abu Marzook submitted a written statement arguing, \"Hamas is not a terrorist group. It is a Palestinian Islamic liberation and resistance movement whose goal is to liberate Palestine and confront the Zionist project.\"\nHamas is not regarded as a terrorist organisation by Afghanistan, Algeria, Iran, Russia, Norway, Turkey, China, Egypt, Syria, and Brazil. \"Many other states, including Russia, China, Syria, Turkey and Iran consider the (armed) struggle waged by Hamas to be legitimate.\"\nTobias Buck, a \"Financial Times\" writer, wrote in 2012 that Hamas is \"listed as a terrorist organisation by Israel, the US and the EU, but few dare to treat it that way\", and that in the Arab and Muslim world it had lost its pariah status, as its emissaries are welcomed by Islamic governments. In the early 2010s, Hamas was considered a terrorist group by some governments and academics, while others regarded Hamas as a complex organisation with terrorism as only one component.\nIsraeli policy towards Hamas.\nBenjamin Netanyahu had been Israel's prime minister for most of the two decades preceding the Gaza war, and was criticized for having championed a policy of empowering Hamas in Gaza. This policy was part of a strategy to sabotage a two-state solution by confining the Palestinian Authority to the West Bank and weakening it, and to demonstrate to the Israeli public and western governments that Israel has no partner for peace. This criticism was leveled by several Israeli officials, including former prime minister Ehud Barak, and former head of Shin Bet security services Yuval Diskin. Saudi Arabia and the Palestinian Authority were also critical of Israel under Netanyahu allowing suitcases of Qatari money to be given to Hamas, in exchange for maintaining the ceasefire. An op-ed by Tal Schneider for the \"Times of Israel\" reported after the Hamas attack that Netanyahu's policy to treat the Palestinian Authority as a burden and Hamas as an asset had \"blown up in our faces\".\nQatar and Turkey.\nAccording to Middle East experts, now Hamas has two firm allies: Qatar and Turkey. Both give Hamas public and financial assistance estimated to be in the hundreds of millions of dollars. Qatar has transferred more than $1.8 billion to Hamas. Shashank Joshi, senior research fellow at the Royal United Services Institute, says that \"Qatar also hosts Hamas's political bureau which includes Hamas leader Khaled Meshaal.\" Meshaal also visits Turkey frequently to meet with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan. Erdogan has dedicated himself to breaking Hamas out of its political and economic seclusion. On US television, Erdogan said in 2012 that \"I don't see Hamas as a terror organization. Hamas is a political party.\"\nQatar has been called Hamas' most important financial backer and foreign ally. In 2007, Qatar was, with Turkey, the only country to back Hamas after the group ousted the Palestinian Authority from the Gaza Strip. The relationship between Hamas and Qatar strengthened in 2008 and 2009 when Khaled Meshaal was invited to attend the Doha Summit where he was seated next to the then Qatari Emir Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani, who pledged $250\u00a0million to repair the damage caused by Israel in the Israeli war on Gaza. These events caused Qatar to become the main player in the \"Palestinian issue\". Qatar called Gaza's blockade unjust and immoral, which prompted the Hamas government in Gaza, including former Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh, to thank Qatar for their \"unconditional\" support. Qatar then began regularly handing out political, material, humanitarian and charitable support for Hamas.\nIn 2011, U.S. President Barack Obama personally requested that Qatar, one of the U.S.'s most important Arab allies, provide a base for the Hamas leadership. At the time, the U.S. were seeking to establish communications with Hamas and believed that a Hamas office in Qatar would be easier to access than a Hamas bureau in Iran, the group's main backer.\nIn 2012, Qatar's former Emir, Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani, became the first head of state to visit Gaza under Hamas rule. He pledged to raise $400\u00a0million for reconstruction. Sources say that advocating for Hamas is politically beneficial to Turkey and Qatar because the Palestinian cause draws popular support amongst their citizens at home.\nSpeaking in reference to Qatar's support for Hamas, during a 2015 visit to Palestine, Qatari official Mohammad al-Emadi, said Qatar is using the money not to help Hamas but rather the Palestinian people as a whole. He acknowledges that giving to the Palestinian people means using Hamas as the local contact. Emadi said, \"You have to support them. You don't like them, don't like them. But they control the country, you know.\" Some argue that Hamas's relations with Qatar are putting Hamas in an awkward position because Qatar has become part of the regional Arab problem. Hamas says that having contacts with various Arab countries establishes positive relations which will encourage Arab countries to do their duty toward the Palestinians and support their cause by influencing public opinion in the Arab world. In March 2015, Hamas has announced its support of the Saudi Arabian-led military intervention in Yemen against the Shia Houthis and forces loyal to former President Ali Abdullah Saleh. In a controversial deal, Israel's government under Benjamin Netanyahu supported Qatar's payments to Hamas for many years, in the hope that it would turn Hamas into an effective counterweight to the Palestinian Authority and prevent the establishment of a Palestinian state.\nIn May 2018, Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan tweeted to the Prime Minister of Israel Benjamin Netanyahu that Hamas is not a terrorist organization but a resistance movement that defends the Palestinian homeland against an occupying power. During that period there were conflicts between Israeli troops and Palestinian protestors in the Gaza Strip, due to the decision of the United States to move their embassy to Jerusalem. Also in 2018 the Israel Security Agency accused SADAT International Defense Consultancy (a Turkish private military company with connections to the Turkish government) of transferring funds to Hamas.\nIn February 2020, Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh met with Turkish President Erdo\u011fan. On 26 July 2023, Haniyeh met with Erdo\u011fan and Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas. Behind the meeting was Turkey's effort to reconcile Fatah with Hamas. On 7 October 2023, the day of the attack on Israel, Haniyeh was in Istanbul, Turkey. On 21 October 2023, Haniyeh spoke with Erdo\u011fan about the latest developments in the Gaza war and the current situation in Gaza. On 25 October 2023, Erdo\u011fan said that Hamas was not a terrorist organisation but a liberation group fighting to protect Palestinian lands and people.\nUnited States.\nIn early 2025, the US' Special Envoy for Hostage Affairs, Adam Boehler, talked directly with Hamas in an attempt to secure the release of American hostages. Following these talks, Boehler said that Hamas had proposed a 5 to 10-year ceasefire and a full prisoner exchange, and told Kan News that he \"does believe\" that Hamas would not only lay down its weapons but also leave power in Gaza. He told Fox News that \"Hamas is aiming for a long-term ceasefire. We discussed a cease-fire that includes Hamas disarming, staying out of politics, and ensuring they cannot harm Israel.\" Secretary of State Marco Rubio told reporters that the talks were a \"one-off situation in which our special envoy for hostages, whose job it is to get people released, had an opportunity to talk directly to someone who has control over these people and was given permission and encouraged to do so. He did so.\" According to Ynet, since he was appointed, Boehler has made several \"controversial\" proposals, including everything from U.S. commando raids into Gaza \"and hinting at the possibility of a long-term cease-fire (\"hudna\") between Hamas and Israel.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournal articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13914", "revid": "63286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13914", "title": "History of the graphical user interface", "text": "The history of the graphical user interface, understood as the use of graphic icons and a pointing device to control a computer, covers a five-decade span of incremental refinements, built on some constant core principles. Several vendors have created their own windowing systems based on independent code, but with basic elements in common that define the WIMP \"window, icon, menu and pointing device\" paradigm.\nThere have been important technological achievements, and enhancements to the general interaction in small steps over previous systems. There have been a few significant breakthroughs in terms of use, but the same organizational metaphors and interaction idioms are still in use. Desktop computers are often controlled by computer mice and/or keyboards while laptops often have a pointing stick or touchpad, and smartphones and tablet computers have a touchscreen. The influence of game computers and joystick operation has been omitted.\nEarly research and developments.\nEarly dynamic information devices such as radar displays, where input devices were used for direct control of computer-created data, set the basis for later improvements of graphical interfaces. Some early cathode-ray-tube (CRT) screens used a light pen, rather than a mouse, as the pointing device.\nThe concept of a multi-panel windowing system was introduced by the first real-time graphic display systems for computers: the SAGE Project and Ivan Sutherland's Sketchpad.\nAugmentation of Human Intellect (NLS).\nIn the 1960s, Douglas Engelbart's project at the Augmentation Research Center at SRI International in Menlo Park, California developed the oN-Line System (NLS). This computer incorporated a mouse-driven cursor and multiple windows used to work on hypertext. Engelbart had been inspired, in part, by the memex desk-based information machine suggested by Vannevar Bush in 1945.\nMuch of the early research was based on how young children learn. So, the design was based on the childlike characteristics of hand\u2013eye coordination, rather than use of command languages, user-defined macro procedures, or automated transformation of data as later used by adult professionals.\nEngelbart publicly demonstrated this work at the Association for Computing Machinery / Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (ACM/IEEE)\u2014Computer Society's Fall Joint Computer Conference in San Francisco on December 9, 1968. It was so-called The Mother of All Demos.\nThe development of computers having multiple overlapping and resizable windows on a \"desktop\" is commonly, and incorrectly, attributed to Xerox PARC and its Alto. The Xerox Alto's windowing system was inspired by the DNLS (Display NLS)'s overlapping multi-windowing system, which was operational by early 1973 and used at several ARPA locations. In the DNLS, overlapping windows were referred to as \"display areas\" and could store multiple lines of strings. \nIn 1971, the screen could only be split into two display areas, vertically or horizontally; by early 1973, the full overlapping windowing system was implemented, and was capable of displaying on an Imlac PDS-1. The Xerox Alto greatly improved upon this system by adding the capability to display bitmapped images, buttons, and other graphics in these windows, as opposed to the DNLS's overlapping display areas which could only display strings of text.\nXerox PARC.\nEngelbart's work directly led to the advances at Xerox PARC. Several people went from SRI to Xerox PARC in the early 1970s.\nIn 1973, Xerox PARC developed the Alto personal computer. It had a bitmapped screen, and was the first computer to demonstrate the desktop metaphor and graphical user interface (GUI). Several thousand units were built and were heavily used at PARC, as well as other XEROX offices, and at several universities for many years. The Alto greatly influenced the design of personal computers during the late 1970s and early 1980s, notably the Three Rivers PERQ, the Apple Lisa and Macintosh, and the first Sun workstations.\nThe modern WIMP GUI was first developed at Xerox PARC by Alan Kay, Larry Tesler, Dan Ingalls, David Smith, Clarence Ellis and a number of other researchers. This was introduced in the Smalltalk programming environment. It used windows, icons, and menus (including the first fixed drop-down menu) to support commands such as opening files, deleting files, moving files, etc. In 1974, work began at PARC on Gypsy, the first bitmap What-You-See-Is-What-You-Get (WYSIWYG) cut and paste editor. In 1975, Xerox engineers demonstrated a graphical user interface \"including icons and the first use of pop-up menus\".\nIn 1981 Xerox introduced a pioneering product, Star, a workstation incorporating many of PARC's innovations. Although not commercially successful, Star greatly influenced future developments, for example at Apple, Microsoft and Sun Microsystems.\nQuantel Paintbox.\nReleased by digital imaging company Quantel in 1981, the Paintbox was a color graphical workstation with support for mouse input, but more oriented for graphics tablets; this model also was notable as one of the first systems to implement pop-up menus.\nBlit.\nThe Blit, a graphics terminal, was developed at Bell Labs in 1982.\nLisp machines, Symbolics.\nLisp machines originally developed at MIT and later commercialized by Symbolics and other manufacturers, were early high-end single user computer workstations with advanced graphical user interfaces, windowing, and mouse as an input device. First workstations from Symbolics came to market in 1981, with more advanced designs in the subsequent years.\nLisa, Macintosh, and Apple IIGS.\nBeginning in 1979, started by Steve Jobs and led by Jef Raskin, the Apple Lisa and Macintosh teams at Apple Computer (which included former members of the Xerox PARC group) continued to develop such ideas. The Lisa, released in 1983, featured a document-centric graphical interface atop an advanced hard disk based OS that featured such things as preemptive multitasking and graphically oriented inter-process communication. The comparatively simplified Macintosh, released in 1984 and designed to be lower in cost, was the first commercially successful product to use a multi-panel window interface. A desktop metaphor was used, in which files looked like pieces of paper, file directories looked like file folders, there were a set of desk accessories like a calculator, notepad, and alarm clock that the user could place around the screen as desired, and the user could delete files and folders by dragging them to a trash-can icon on the screen. The Macintosh, in contrast to the Lisa, used a program-centric rather than document-centric design. Apple revisited the document-centric design, in a limited manner, much later with OpenDoc.\nThere is still some controversy over the amount of influence that Xerox's PARC work, as opposed to previous academic research, had on the GUIs of the Apple Lisa and Macintosh, but it is clear that the influence was extensive, because first versions of Lisa GUIs even lacked icons. These prototype GUIs are at least mouse-driven, but completely ignored the WIMP ( \"window, icon, menu, pointing device\") concept. Screenshots of first GUIs of Apple Lisa prototypes show the early designs. Apple engineers visited the PARC facilities (Apple secured the rights for the visit by compensating Xerox with a pre-IPO purchase of Apple stock) and a number of PARC employees subsequently moved to Apple to work on the Lisa and Macintosh GUI. However, the Apple work extended PARC's considerably, adding manipulatable icons, and drag and drop manipulation of objects in the file system (see Macintosh Finder) for example. A list of the improvements made by Apple, beyond the PARC interface, can be read at Folklore.org. Jef Raskin warns that many of the reported facts in the history of the PARC and Macintosh development are inaccurate, distorted or even fabricated, due to the lack of usage by historians of direct primary sources.\nIn 1984, Apple released a television commercial which introduced the Apple Macintosh during the telecast of Super Bowl XVIII by CBS, with allusions to George Orwell's noted novel, \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". The commercial was aimed at making people think about computers, identifying the user-friendly interface as a personal computer which departed from previous business-oriented systems, and becoming a signature representation of Apple products.\nIn 1986, the Apple IIGS was launched with 16-bit CPU and significantly improved graphics and audio. It shipped with a new operating system, Apple GS/OS, with a Finder-like GUI similar to the Macintosh series.\nAgat.\nThe Soviet Union-produced Agat PC featured a graphical interface and a mouse device and was released in 1983.\nSGI 1000 series and MEX.\nFounded 1982, SGI introduced the IRIS 1000 Series in 1983. The first graphical terminals (IRIS 1000) shipped in late 1983, and the corresponding workstation model (IRIS 1400) was released in mid-1984. The machines used an early version of the MEX windowing system on top of the GL2 Release 1 operating environment. Examples of the MEX user interface can be seen in a 1988 article in the journal \"Computer Graphics\", while earlier screenshots can not be found. The first commercial GUI-based systems, these did not find widespread use as to their (discounted) academic list price of $22,500 and $35,700 for the IRIS 1000 and IRIS 1400, respectively. However, these systems were commercially successful enough to start SGI's business as one of the main graphical workstation vendors. In later revisions of graphical workstations, SGI switched to the X window system, which had been developed starting at MIT since 1984 and which became the standard for UNIX workstations.\nVisi On.\nVisiCorp's Visi On was a GUI designed to run on DOS for IBM PCs. It was released in December 1983. Visi On had many features of a modern GUI, and included a few that did not become common until many years later. It was fully mouse-driven, used a bit-mapped display for both text and graphics, included on-line help, and allowed the user to open a number of programs at once, each in its own window, and switch between them to multitask. Visi On did not, however, include a graphical file manager. Visi On also demanded a hard drive in order to implement its virtual memory system used for \"fast switching\", at a time when hard drives were very expensive.\nGEM (Graphics Environment Manager).\nDigital Research (DRI) created GEM as an add-on program for personal computers. GEM was developed to work with existing CP/M and MS-DOS compatible operating systems on business computers such as IBM PC compatibles. It was developed from DRI software, known as GSX, designed by a former PARC employee. Its similarity to the Macintosh desktop led to a copyright lawsuit from Apple Computer, and a settlement which involved some changes to GEM. This was to be the first of a series of \"look and feel\" lawsuits related to GUI design in the 1980s.\nGEM received widespread use in the consumer market from 1985, when it was made the default user interface built into the Atari TOS operating system of the Atari ST line of personal computers. It was also bundled by other computer manufacturers and distributors, such as Amstrad. Later, it was distributed with the best-sold Digital Research version of DOS for IBM PC compatibles, the DR-DOS 6.0. The GEM desktop faded from the market with the withdrawal of the Atari ST line in 1992 and with the popularity of the Microsoft Windows 3.0 in the PC front around the same period of time. The Falcon030, released in 1993 was the last computer from Atari to use GEM.\nDeskMate.\nTandy's DeskMate appeared in the early 1980s on its TRS-80 machines and was ported to its Tandy 1000 range in 1984. Like most PC GUIs of the time, it depended on a disk operating system such as TRSDOS or MS-DOS. The application was popular at the time and included a number of programs like Draw, Text and Calendar, as well as attracting outside investment such as Lotus 1-2-3 for DeskMate.\nMSX-View.\nMSX-View was developed for MSX computers by ASCII Corporation and HAL Laboratory. MSX-View contains software such as Page Edit, Page View, Page Link, VShell, VTed, VPaint and VDraw. An external version of the built-in MSX View of the Panasonic FS-A1GT was released as an add-on for the Panasonic FS-A1ST on disk instead of 512\u00a0KB ROM DISK.\nAmiga Intuition and the Workbench.\nThe Amiga computer was launched by Commodore in 1985 with a GUI called Workbench. Workbench was based on an internal engine developed mostly by RJ Mical, called Intuition, which drove all the input events. The first versions used a blue/orange/white/black default palette, which was selected for high contrast on televisions and composite monitors. Workbench presented directories as drawers to fit in with the \"workbench\" theme. Intuition was the widget and graphics library that made the GUI work. It was driven by user events through the mouse, keyboard, and other input devices.\nDue to a mistake made by the Commodore sales department, the first floppies of AmigaOS (released with the Amiga1000) named the whole OS \"Workbench\". Since then, users and CBM itself referred to \"Workbench\" as the nickname for the whole AmigaOS (including Amiga DOS, Extras, etc.). This common consent ended with release of version 2.0 of AmigaOS, which re-introduced proper names to the installation floppies of AmigaDOS, Workbench, Extras, etc.\nStarting with Workbench 1.0, AmigaOS treated the Workbench as a backdrop, borderless window sitting atop a blank screen. With the introduction of AmigaOS 2.0, however, the user was free to select whether the main Workbench window appeared as a normally layered window, complete with a border and scrollbars, through a menu item.\nAmiga users were able to boot their computer into a command-line interface (also known as the CLI or Amiga Shell). This was a keyboard-based environment without the Workbench GUI. Later they could invoke it with the CLI/SHELL command \"LoadWB\" which loaded Workbench GUI.\nOne major difference between other OS's of the time (and for some time after) was the Amiga's fully multi-tasking operating system, a powerful built-in animation system using a hardware blitter and copper and four channels of 26\u00a0kHz 8-bit sampled sound. This made the Amiga the first multi-media computer years before other OS's.\nLike most GUIs of the day, Amiga's Intuition followed Xerox's, and sometimes Apple's, lead. But a CLI was included which dramatically extended the functionality of the platform. However, the CLI/Shell of Amiga is not just a simple text-based interface like in MS-DOS, but another graphic process driven by Intuition, and with the same gadgets included in Amiga's graphics.library. The CLI/Shell interface integrates itself with the Workbench, sharing privileges with the GUI.\nThe Amiga Workbench evolved over the 1990s, even after Commodore's 1994 bankruptcy.\nAcorn BBC Master Compact.\nAcorn's 8-bit BBC Master Compact shipped with Acorn's first public GUI interface in 1986. Little commercial software, beyond that included on the Welcome disk, was ever made available for the system, despite the claim by Acorn at the time that \"the major software houses have worked with Acorn to make over 100 titles available on compilation discs at launch\". The most avid supporter of the Master Compact appeared to be Superior Software, who produced and specifically labelled their games as 'Master Compact' compatible.\nArthur / RISC OS.\nRISC OS is a series of graphical user interface-based computer operating systems (OSes) designed for ARM architecture systems. It takes its name from the RISC (reduced instruction set computer) architecture supported. The OS was originally developed by Acorn Computers for use with their 1987 range of Archimedes personal computers using the Acorn RISC Machine (ARM) processors. It comprises a command-line interface and desktop environment with a windowing system.\nOriginally branded as the \"Arthur 1.20\" the subsequent \"Arthur 2\" release was shipped under the name RISC OS 2.\nDesktop.\nThe WIMP interface incorporates three mouse buttons (named \"Select\", \"Menu\" and \"Adjust\"), context-sensitive menus, window stack control (i.e. send to back) and dynamic window focus (a window can have input focus at any position on the stack). The Icon bar (Dock) holds icons which represent mounted disc drives, RAM discs, network directories, running applications, system utilities and docked: Files, Directories or inactive Applications. These icons and open windows have context-sensitive menus and support drag-and-drop behaviour. They represent the running application as a whole, irrespective of whether it has open windows.\nThe application has control of the context-sensitive menus, inapplicable menu choices can be 'greyed out' to make them unavailable. Menus have their own titles and may be moved around the desktop by the user. Any menu can have further sub-menus or a new window for complicated choices.\nThe GUI is centered around the concept of files. The Filer displays the contents of a disc. Applications are run from the Filer view and files can be dragged to the Filer view from applications to perform saves. The opposite can perform a load. With their co-operation data can be copied or moved directly between applications by saving (dragging) to another application.\nApplication directories are used to store applications. The OS differentiates them from normal directories through the use of a pling (exclamation mark, also called shriek) prefix. Double-clicking on such a directory launches the application rather than opening the directory. The application's executable files and resources are contained within the directory, but normally they remain hidden from the user. Because applications are self-contained, this allows drag-and-drop installation and removal.\nFiles are normally typed. RISC OS has some predefined types. Applications can supplement the set of known types. Double-clicking a file with a known type will launch the appropriate application to load the file.\nThe RISC OS \"Style Guide\" encourages a consistent look and feel across applications. This was introduced in RISC OS 3 and specifies application appearance and behaviour. Acorn's own main bundled applications were not updated to comply with the guide until RISCOS Ltd's \"Select\" release in 2001.\nFont manager.\nThe outline fonts manager provides spatial anti-aliasing of fonts, the OS being the first operating system to include such a feature, having included it since before January 1989. Since 1994, in RISC OS 3.5, it has been possible to use an outline anti-aliased font in the WindowManager for UI elements, rather than the bitmap system font from previous versions.\nMS-DOS file managers and utility suites.\nBecause most of the very early IBM PC and compatibles lacked any common true graphical capability (they used the 80-column basic text mode compatible with the original MDA display adapter), a series of file managers arose, including Microsoft's DOS Shell, which features typical GUI elements as menus, push buttons, lists with scrollbars and mouse pointer. The name text-based user interface was later invented to name this kind of interface. Many MS-DOS text mode applications, like the default text editor for MS-DOS 5.0 (and related tools, like QBasic), also used the same philosophy. The IBM DOS Shell included with IBM DOS 5.0 (c.\u20091992) supported both text display modes and actual graphics display modes, making it both a TUI and a GUI, depending on the chosen mode.\nAdvanced file managers for MS-DOS were able to redefine character shapes with EGA and better display adapters, giving some basic low resolution icons and graphical interface elements, including an arrow (instead of a coloured cell block) for the mouse pointer. When the display adapter lacks the ability to change the character's shapes, they default to the CP437 character set found in the adapter's ROM. Some popular utility suites for MS-DOS, as Norton Utilities (pictured) and PC Tools used these techniques as well.\nDESQview was a text mode multitasking program introduced in July 1985. Running on top of MS-DOS, it allowed users to run multiple DOS programs concurrently in windows. It was the first program to bring multitasking and windowing capabilities to a DOS environment in which existing DOS programs could be used. DESQview was not a true GUI but offered certain components of one, such as resizable, overlapping windows and mouse pointing.\nApplications under MS-DOS with proprietary GUIs.\nBefore the MS-Windows age, and with the lack of a true common GUI under MS-DOS, most graphical applications which worked with EGA, VGA and better graphic cards had proprietary built-in GUIs. One of the best known such graphical applications was Deluxe Paint, a popular painting software with a typical WIMP interface.\nThe original Adobe Acrobat Reader executable file for MS-DOS was able to run on both the standard Windows 3.x GUI and the standard DOS command prompt. When it was launched from the command prompt, on a machine with a VGA graphics card, it provided its own GUI.\nMicrosoft Windows (16-bit versions).\nWindows 1.0, a GUI for the MS-DOS operating system, was released in 1985. The market's response was less than stellar. Windows 2.0 followed, but it wasn't until the 1990 launch of Windows 3.0, based on Common User Access that its popularity truly exploded. The GUI has seen minor redesigns since, mainly the networking enabled Windows 3.11 and its Win32s 32-bit patch. The 16-bit line of MS Windows were discontinued with the introduction of Windows 95 and Windows NT 32-bit based architecture in the 1990s.\nThe main window of a given application can occupy the full screen in \"maximized\" status. The users must then to switch between maximized applications using the Alt+Tab keyboard shortcut; no alternative with the mouse except for de-maximize. When none of the running application windows are maximized, switching can be done by clicking on a partially visible window, as is the common way in other GUIs.\nIn 1988, Apple sued Microsoft for copyright infringement of the Lisa and Apple Macintosh GUI. The court case lasted 4 years before almost all of Apple's claims were denied on a contractual technicality. Subsequent appeals by Apple were also denied. Microsoft and Apple apparently entered a final, private settlement of the matter in 1997.\nGEOS.\nGEOS was launched in 1986, originally written for the 8-bit home computer Commodore 64, and shortly after, the Apple II. The name was later used by the company as PC/Geos for IBM PC systems, then Geoworks Ensemble. It came with several application programs like a calendar and word processor. A cut-down version served as the basis for America Online's MS-DOS client. Compared to the competing Windows 3.0 GUI, it could run reasonably well on simpler hardware, but its developer had a restrictive policy towards third-party developers that prevented it from becoming a serious competitor. Additionally, it was targeted at 8-bit machines, whilst the 16-bit computer age was dawning.\nThe X Window System.\nThe standard windowing system in the Unix world is the X Window System (commonly X11 or X), first released in the mid-1980s. The W Window System (1983) was the precursor to X; X was developed at MIT as Project Athena. Its original purpose was to allow users of the newly emerging graphic terminals to access remote graphics workstations without regard to the workstation's operating system or the hardware. Due largely to the availability of the source code used to write X, it has become the standard layer for management of graphical and input/output devices and for the building of both local and remote graphical interfaces on virtually all Unix, Linux and other Unix-like operating systems, with the notable exceptions of macOS and Android.\nX allows a graphical terminal user to make use of remote resources on the network as if they were all located locally to the user by running a single module of software called the X server. The software running on the remote machine is called the client application. X's network transparency protocols allow the display and input portions of any application to be separated from the remainder of the application and 'served up' to any of a large number of remote users. X is available today as free software.\nNeWS.\nThe PostScript-based NeWS (Network extensible Window System) was developed by Sun Microsystems in the mid-1980s. For several years SunOS included a window system combining NeWS and the X Window System. Although NeWS was considered technically elegant by some commentators, Sun eventually dropped the product. Unlike X, NeWS was always proprietary software.\nThe 1990s: Mainstream usage of the desktop.\nThe widespread adoption of the PC platform in homes and small businesses popularized computers among people with no formal training. This created a fast-growing market, opening an opportunity for commercial exploitation and of easy-to-use interfaces and making economically viable the incremental refinement of the existing GUIs for home systems.\nAlso, the spreading of high-color and true-color capabilities of display adapters providing thousands and millions of colors, along with faster CPUs and accelerated graphic cards, cheaper RAM, storage devices orders of magnitude larger (from megabytes to gigabytes) and larger bandwidth for telecom networking at lower cost helped to create an environment in which the common user was able to run complicated GUIs which began to favor aesthetics.\nWindows 95 and \"a computer in every home\".\nAfter Windows 3.11, Microsoft started development on a new consumer-oriented version of the operating system. Windows 95 was intended to integrate Microsoft's formerly separate MS-DOS and Windows products and included an enhanced version of DOS, often referred to as MS-DOS 7.0. It also featured a significant redesign of the GUI, dubbed \"Cairo\". While Cairo never really materialized, parts of Cairo found their way into subsequent versions of the operating system starting with Windows 95. Both Win95 and WinNT could run 32-bit applications, and could exploit the abilities of the Intel 80386 CPU, as the preemptive multitasking and up to 4\u00a0GiB of linear address memory space. Windows 95 was touted as a 32-bit based operating system but it was actually based on a hybrid kernel (VWIN32.VXD) with the 16-bit user interface (USER.EXE) and graphic device interface (GDI.EXE) of Windows for Workgroups (3.11), which had 16-bit kernel components with a 32-bit subsystem (USER32.DLL and GDI32.DLL) that allowed it to run native 16-bit applications as well as 32-bit applications. In the marketplace, Windows 95 was an unqualified success, promoting a general upgrade to 32-bit technology, and within a year or two of its release had become the most successful operating system ever produced.\nAccompanied by an extensive marketing campaign, Windows 95 was a major success in the marketplace at launch and shortly became the most popular desktop operating system.\nWindows 95 saw the beginning of the browser wars, when the World Wide Web began receiving a great deal of attention in popular culture and mass media. Microsoft at first did not see potential in the Web, and Windows 95 was shipped with Microsoft's own online service called The Microsoft Network, which was dial-up only and was used primarily for its own content, not internet access. As versions of Netscape Navigator and Internet Explorer were released at a rapid pace over the following few years, Microsoft used its desktop dominance to push its browser and shape the ecology of the web mainly as a monoculture.\nWindows 95 evolved through the years into Windows 98 and Windows ME. Windows ME was the last in the line of the Windows 3.x-based operating systems from Microsoft. Windows underwent a parallel 32-bit evolutionary path, where Windows NT 3.1 was released in 1993. Windows NT (for New Technology) was a native 32-bit operating system with a new driver model, was unicode-based, and provided for true separation between applications. Windows NT also supported 16-bit applications in an NTVDM, but it did not support VxD based drivers. Windows 95 was supposed to be released before 1993 as the predecessor to Windows NT. The idea was to promote the development of 32-bit applications with backward compatibility \u2013 leading the way for more successful NT release. After multiple delays, Windows 95 was released without unicode and used the VxD driver model. Windows NT 3.1 evolved to Windows NT 3.5, 3.51 and then 4.0 when it finally shared a similar interface with its Windows 9x desktop counterpart and included a Start button. The evolution continued with Windows 2000, Windows XP, Windows Vista, then Windows 7. Windows XP and higher were also made available in 64-bit modes. Windows server products branched off with the introduction of Windows Server 2003 (available in 32-bit and 64-bit IA64 or x64), then Windows Server 2008 and then Windows Server 2008 R2. Windows 2000 and XP shared the same basic GUI although XP introduced Visual Styles. With Windows 98, the Active Desktop theme was introduced, allowing an HTML approach for the desktop, but this feature was coldly received by customers, who frequently disabled it. At the end, Windows Vista definitively discontinued it, but put a new SideBar on the desktop.\nMacintosh.\nThe Macintosh's GUI has been revised multiple times since 1984, with major updates including System 7 and Mac OS 8. It underwent its largest revision to date with the introduction of the \"Aqua\" interface in 2001's Mac OS X. It was a new operating system built primarily on technology from NeXTSTEP with UI elements of the original Mac OS grafted on. macOS uses a technology known as Quartz, for graphics rendering and drawing on-screen. Some interface features of macOS are inherited from NeXTSTEP (such as the Dock, the automatic wait cursor, or double-buffered windows giving a solid appearance and flicker-free window redraws), while others are inherited from the old Mac OS operating system (the single system-wide menu-bar). Mac OS X 10.3 introduced features to improve usability including Expos\u00e9, which is designed to make finding open windows easier.\nWith Mac OS X 10.4 released in April 2005, new features were added, including Dashboard (a virtual alternate desktop for mini specific-purpose applications) and a search tool called Spotlight, which provides users with an option for searching through files instead of browsing through folders.\nWith Mac OS X 10.7 released in July 2011, included support for full screen apps and Mac OS X 10.11 (El Capitan) released in September 2015 support creating a full screen split view by pressing the green button on left upper corner of the window or Control+Cmd+F keyboard shortcut.\nGUIs built on the X Window System.\nIn the early days of X Window development, Sun Microsystems and AT&amp;T attempted to push for a GUI standard called OPEN LOOK in competition with Motif. OPEN LOOK was developed from scratch in conjunction with Xerox, while Motif was a collective effort. Motif eventually gained prominence and became the basis for Hewlett-Packard's Visual User Environment (VUE), which later became the Common Desktop Environment (CDE).\nIn 1995 the https:// Point of Sale hospitality application was created by using xlib, the X Window System's low-level protocol client library for its graphical user interface. ViewTouch demonstrates the value of the X Window System in the realm of embedded vertical market applications, reaching beyond merely the use of 'X' to build general purpose desktop environments and gui toolkits.\nIn the late 1990s, there was significant growth in the Unix world, especially among the free software community. New graphical desktop movements grew up around Linux and similar operating systems, based on the X Window System. A new emphasis on providing an integrated and uniform interface to the user brought about new desktop environments, such as KDE Plasma 5, GNOME and Xfce which have supplanted CDE in popularity on both Unix and Unix-like operating systems. The Xfce, KDE and GNOME look and feel each tend to undergo more rapid change and less codification than the earlier OPEN LOOK and Motif environments.\nAmiga.\nLater releases added improvements over the original Workbench, like support for high-color Workbench screens, context menus, and embossed 2D icons with pseudo-3D aspect. Some Amiga users preferred alternative interfaces to standard Workbench, such as Directory Opus Magellan.\nThe use of improved, third-party GUI engines became common amongst users who preferred more attractive interfaces \u2013 such as Magic User Interface (MUI), and ReAction. These object-oriented graphic engines driven by user interface classes and methods were then standardized into the Amiga environment and changed Amiga Workbench to a complete and modern guided interface, with new standard gadgets, animated buttons, true 24-bit-color icons, increased use of wallpapers for screens and windows, alpha channel, transparencies and shadows as any modern GUI provides.\nModern derivatives of Workbench are Ambient for MorphOS, Scalos, Workbench for AmigaOS 4 and Wanderer for AROS.\nThere is a brief article on Ambient and descriptions of MUI icons, menus and gadgets at http:// and images of Zune stay at main https://.\nUse of object-oriented graphic engines dramatically changes the look and feel of a GUI to match actual style guides.\nOS/2.\nOriginally collaboratively developed by Microsoft and IBM to replace DOS, OS/2 version 1.0 (released in 1987) had no GUI at all. Version 1.1 (released 1988) included Presentation Manager (PM), an implementation of IBM Common User Access, which looked a lot like the later Windows 3.1 UI. After the split with Microsoft, IBM developed the Workplace Shell (WPS) for version 2.0 (released in 1992), a quite radical, object-oriented approach to GUIs. Microsoft later imitated much of this look in Windows 95.\nNeXTSTEP.\nThe NeXTSTEP user interface was used in the NeXT line of computers. NeXTSTEP's first major version was released in 1989. It used Display PostScript for its graphical underpinning. The NeXTSTEP interface's most significant feature was the Dock, carried with some modification into Mac OS X, and had other minor interface details that some found made it easier and more intuitive to use than previous GUIs. NeXTSTEP's GUI was the first to feature opaque dragging of windows in its user interface, on a comparatively weak machine by today's standards, ideally aided by http://.\nBeOS.\nBeOS was developed on custom AT&amp;T Hobbit-based computers before switching to PowerPC hardware by a team led by former Apple executive Jean-Louis Gass\u00e9e as an alternative to Mac OS. BeOS was later ported to Intel hardware. It used an object-oriented kernel written by Be, and did not use the X Window System, but a different GUI written from scratch. Much effort was spent by the developers to make it an efficient platform for multimedia applications. Be Inc. was acquired by PalmSource, Inc. (Palm Inc. at the time) in 2001. The BeOS GUI still lives in Haiku, an open-source software reimplementation of the BeOS.\nCurrent trends.\nMobile devices.\nGeneral Magic is the apparent parent of all modern smartphone GUI, i.e. touch-screen based including the iPhone et al. In 2007, with the iPhone and later in 2010 with the introduction of the iPad, Apple popularized the post-WIMP style of interaction for multi-touch screens, with those devices considered to be milestones in the development of mobile devices.\nOther portable devices such as MP3 players and cell phones have been a burgeoning area of deployment for GUIs in recent years. Since the mid-2000s, a vast majority of portable devices have advanced to having high-screen resolutions and sizes. (The Galaxy Note 4's 2,560 \u00d7 1,440 pixel display is an example). Because of this, these devices have their own famed user interfaces and operating systems that have large homebrew communities dedicated to creating their own visual elements, such as icons, menus, wallpapers, and more. Post-WIMP interfaces are often used in these mobile devices, where the traditional pointing devices required by the desktop metaphor are not practical.\nAs high-powered graphics hardware draws considerable power and generates significant heat, many of the 3D effects developed between 2000 and 2010 are not practical on this class of device. This has led to the development of simpler interfaces making a design feature of two dimensionality such as exhibited by the Metro (Modern) UI first used in Windows 8 and the 2012 Gmail redesign.\n3D user interface.\nIn the first decade of the 21st century, the rapid development of GPUs led to a trend for the inclusion of 3D effects in window management. It is based in experimental research in user interface design trying to expand the expressive power of the existing toolkits in order to enhance the physical cues that allow for direct manipulation. New effects common to several projects are scale resizing and zooming, several windows transformations and animations (wobbly windows, smooth minimization to system tray...), composition of images (used for window drop shadows and transparency) and enhancing the global organization of open windows (zooming to virtual desktops, desktop cube, Expos\u00e9, etc.) The proof-of-concept BumpTop desktop combines a physical representation of documents with tools for document classification possible only in the simulated environment, like instant reordering and automated grouping of related documents.\nThese effects are popularized thanks to the widespread use of 3D video cards (mainly due to gaming) which allow for complex visual processing with low CPU use, using the 3D acceleration in most modern graphics cards to render the application clients in a 3D scene. The application window is drawn off-screen in a pixel buffer, and the graphics card renders it into the 3D scene.\nThis can have the advantage of moving some of the window rendering to the GPU on the graphics card and thus reducing the load on the main CPU, but the facilities that allow this must be available on the graphics card to be able to take advantage of this.\nExamples of 3D user-interface software include Xgl and Compiz from Novell, and AIGLX bundled with Red Hat/Fedora. Quartz Extreme for macOS and Windows 7 and Vista's Aero interface use 3D rendering for shading and transparency effects as well as Expos\u00e9 and Windows Flip and Flip 3D, respectively. Windows Vista uses Direct3D to accomplish this, whereas the other interfaces use OpenGL.\nNotebook interface.\nThe notebook interface is widely used in data science and other areas of research. Notebooks allow users to mix text, calculations, and graphs in the same interface which was previously impossible with a command-line interface.\nVirtual reality and presence.\nVirtual reality devices such as the Oculus Rift and Sony's PlayStation VR (formerly Project Morpheus) aim to provide users with presence, a perception of full immersion into a virtual environment.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13916", "revid": "94900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13916", "title": "Harry Potter/Broom", "text": ""}
{"id": "13919", "revid": "48666729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13919", "title": "Hezbollah", "text": "Lebanese Islamist movement and militant group\nHezbollah is a Lebanese Shia Islamist political party and paramilitary group. Hezbollah's paramilitary wing is the Jihad Council, and its political wing is the Loyalty to the Resistance Bloc party in the Lebanese Parliament. Its armed strength was assessed to be equivalent to that of a medium-sized army in 2016.\nHezbollah was founded in 1982 by Lebanese clerics in response to the Israeli invasion of Lebanon. Inspired by the Iranian Revolution of 1979 and Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's model of Islamic governance, Hezbollah established strong ties with Iran. The group was initially supported by 1,500 Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) instructors, who helped unify various Lebanese Shia factions under Hezbollah's leadership. Hezbollah's 1985 manifesto outlined its key objectives, which include expelling Western influence from the region, destroying Israel, pledging allegiance to Iran's supreme leader, and establishing an Islamic government influenced by Iran's political ideology. However, the manifesto also emphasized Lebanese self-determination. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Hezbollah fought against Israeli forces and the South Lebanon Army (SLA), eventually leading to Israel's withdrawal from southern Lebanon in 2000. Hezbollah also played a prominent role in the 2006 Lebanon War and later became involved in the Syrian civil war, where it fought alongside the Syrian government against rebel forces.\nIn 2009, Hezbollah updated their manifesto to oppose political sectarianism, appeal to non-Islamic movements, and promote a national unity government. The updated manifesto has the same basic approach to foreign policy, emphasizing the hegemonic strategies of the US and Israel's role in the region as a forward base for colonizing the region.\nSince the 1990s, Hezbollah has grown into a significant political force in Lebanon. The group operates a vast social services network, including schools and hospitals, and runs a satellite TV station, Al-Manar. Politically, Hezbollah's Loyalty to the Resistance Bloc holds 15 seats in the Lebanese Parliament, making it a powerful player in Lebanon's government. However, the group's influence has led to growing domestic criticism. Following the 2020 Beirut port explosion, Hezbollah was accused of obstructing efforts to hold those responsible accountable, contributing to a decline in public trust. A 2024 Arab Barometer survey found that 55% of Lebanese have \"no trust at all\" in Hezbollah, although it remains popular among the Shia population.\nDespite calls for disarmament under United Nations Security Council resolutions, Hezbollah has expanded its military capabilities. Its armed wing is now considered stronger than the Lebanese Armed Forces, making it one of the most powerful non-state actors in the world. Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah declared in 2021 that the group had 100,000 fighters. Hezbollah has been involved in several high-profile attacks; it is believed to be responsible for the bombing of the US embassy and the American and French barracks bombings in Beirut in 1983, the assassination of Rafic Hariri in 2005, as well as later attacks, including bombings and hijackings. While Hezbollah has been regarded as a resistance movement by some scholars, the entire organization, or its military wing alone, has been designated as a terrorist group by at least 27 countries, as of October 2020, including most Western countries.\nSince October 2023, Hezbollah has been at war with Israel. During this war, Nasrallah was assassinated after 32 years of leading the group, along with other key members of Hezbollah leadership. The conflict has led to an Israeli invasion of Lebanon, and is currently in a ceasefire. On August 7, 2025 in a government meeting specifically addressing the disarmament of Hezbollah, the majority of the government voted to approve the decision. The Lebanese Army was tasked to create a plan ensuring that only the state has control over weapons in Lebanon. The decision is based on a U.S. plan to disarm Hezbollah. On September 5, the Lebanese cabinet approved the Homeland Shield Plan, the LAF's roadmap for the disarmament of all militias in Lebanon and specifically Hezbollah.\nHistory.\nIn 1982, Hezbollah was conceived by Muslim clerics and funded by Iran primarily to fight the Israeli invasion of Lebanon. The 1982 and the 1978 Israeli invasions had created a humanitarian crisis in Lebanon; many villages in the south had been destroyed and large numbers of Shias had been displaced from their homes. In addition, the Shia had long been underrepresented in Lebanese politics. Both these factors fostered resentment among the local Shia population, making them a fertile ground for recruitment. Hezbollah was set up by local Shia committees, under the leadership of Ruhollah Khomeini. Its forces were trained and organized by a contingent of 1,500 Iranian Revolutionary Guards that arrived from Iran with permission from the Syrian government, which occupied Lebanon's eastern highlands, permitted their transit to a base in the Bekaa valley which was in occupation of Lebanon at the time.\nScholars differ as to when Hezbollah came to be a distinct entity. Various sources list the official formation of the group as early as 1982 whereas Diaz and Newman maintain that Hezbollah remained an amalgamation of various violent Shi'a extremists until as late as 1985. Another version states that it was formed by supporters of Sheikh Ragheb Harb, a leader of the southern Shia resistance killed by Israel in 1984. Regardless of when the name came into official use, a number of Shi'a groups were slowly assimilated into the organization, such as Islamic Jihad, Organization of the Oppressed on Earth and the Revolutionary Justice Organization. These designations are considered to be synonymous with Hezbollah by the US, Israel and Canada.\nAccording to Robert Fisk and Israeli General Shimon Shapira the date of 8 June 1982, two days after the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, when 50 Shiite militants ambushed an Israel Defense Forces armored convoy in Khalde south of Beirut, is considered by Hezbollah as the founding myth of their military wing. It was in this battle, delaying the Israeli advance to Beirut for six days, that the future Hezbollah military chief Mustafa Badreddine made his name as a serious commander. According to Shapira, the lightly armed Shia fighters managed to capture an Israeli armored vehicle on that day and paraded it in the Revolutionary Guards' forward operating base in Baalbek, Eastern Lebanon. Fisk writes:\nDown at Khalde, a remarkable phenomenon had taken shape. The Shia militiamen were running on foot into the Israeli gunfire to launch grenades at the Israeli armour, actually moving to within 20 feet of the tanks to open fire at them. Some of the Shia fighters had torn off pieces of their shirts and wrapped them around their heads as bands of martyrdom as the Iranian revolutionary guards had begun doing a year before when they staged their first mass attacks against the Iraqis in the Gulf War a thousand miles to the east. When they set fire to one Israeli armoured vehicle, the gunmen were emboldened to advance further. None of us, I think, realised the critical importance of the events of Khalde that night. The Lebanese Shia were learning the principles of martyrdom and putting them into practice. Never before had we seen these men wear headbands like this; we thought it was another militia affectation but it was not. It was the beginning of a legend which also contained a strong element of truth. The Shia were now the Lebanese resistance, nationalist no doubt but also inspired by their religion. The party of God \u2013 in Arabic, the Hezbollah \u2013 were on the beaches of Khalde that night.\n1980s.\nHezbollah emerged in South Lebanon during a consolidation of Shia militias as a rival to the older Amal Movement. Hezbollah played a significant role in the Lebanese civil war, opposing American forces in 1982\u201383 and opposing Amal and Syria during the 1985\u201388 War of the Camps. However, Hezbollah's early primary focus was ending Israel's occupation of southern Lebanon following Israel's 1982 invasion and siege of Beirut. Amal, the main Lebanese Shia political group, initiated guerrilla warfare. In 2006, former Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak stated, \"When we entered Lebanon ... there was no Hezbollah. We were accepted with perfumed rice and flowers by the Shia in the south. It was our presence there that created Hezbollah.\"\nHezbollah waged an asymmetric war using suicide attacks against the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and Israeli targets outside of Lebanon. Hezbollah is reputed to have been among the first Islamic resistance groups in the Middle East to use the tactics of suicide bombing, assassination, and capturing foreign soldiers, as well as murders and hijackings. Hezbollah also employed more conventional military tactics and weaponry, notably Katyusha rockets and other missiles. At the end of the Lebanese Civil War in 1990, despite the Taif Agreement asking for the \"disbanding of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias\", Syria, which controlled Lebanon at that time, allowed Hezbollah to maintain their arsenal and control Shia areas along the border with Israel.\nAfter 1990.\nIn the 1990s, Hezbollah transformed from a revolutionary group into a political one, in a process which has been described as the \"Lebanonization\" of Hezbollah. Unlike its uncompromising revolutionary stance in the 1980s, Hezbollah conveyed a lenient stance towards the Lebanese state.\nIn 1992, Hezbollah decided to participate in elections, and Ali Khamenei, supreme leader of Iran, endorsed it. Former Hezbollah secretary general, Subhi al-Tufayli, contested this decision, which led to a schism in Hezbollah. Hezbollah won all twelve seats which were on its electoral list. At the end of that year, Hezbollah began to engage in dialog with Lebanese Christians. Hezbollah regards cultural, political, and religious freedoms in Lebanon as sanctified, although it does not extend these values to groups who have relations with Israel.\nIn 1997, Hezbollah formed the multi-confessional Lebanese Brigades to Fight the Israeli Occupation in an attempt to revive national and secular resistance against Israel, thereby marking the \"Lebanonization\" of resistance.\nIslamic Jihad Organization (IJO).\nWhether the Islamic Jihad Organization (IJO) was a \"nom de guerre\" used by Hezbollah or a separate organization, is disputed. According to certain sources, IJO was identified as merely a \"telephone organization\", and whose name was \"used by those involved to disguise their true identity\". Hezbollah reportedly also used another name, \"Islamic Resistance\" (\"al-Muqawama al-Islamiyya\"), for attacks against Israel.\nA 2003 American court decision found IJO was the name used by Hezbollah for its attacks in Lebanon, parts of the Middle East and Europe. The US, Israel and Canada consider the names \"Islamic Jihad Organization\", \"Organization of the Oppressed on Earth\" and the \"Revolutionary Justice Organization\" to be synonymous with Hezbollah.\nAxis of Resistance.\nThe group receives substantial financial and military backing from Iran, by smuggling and other measures, positioning itself as the leading member of the \"Axis of Resistance\", an alliance in opposition to Israel and Western influence in the Middle East. In mid-September 2024, Israel detonated thousands of communication devices distributed to Hezbollah operatives\u2014including pagers and walkie-talkies\u2014exploded simultaneously across Lebanon. The attacks exposed deep vulnerabilities in Hezbollah networks. Following the outcome of the Israeli invasion of Lebanon (2024\u2013present), the 2024 Syrian opposition offensives, the downfall of the Assad regime and the weakening of the Axis of Resistance, Hezbollah has withdrawn the majority of its military infrastructure from southern Lebanon, transferring control to the Lebanese army. This move aligns with the November 2024 U.S.-brokered ceasefire agreement, which mandates Hezbollah's repositioning north of the Litani River and the deployment of approximately 5,000 Lebanese troops to the south. The withdrawal aims to reduce tensions along the Israel-Lebanon border and facilitate the return of displaced civilians. While Hezbollah has removed heavy weaponry, some fighters from southern villages remain with light arms. The situation remains delicate, with ongoing monitoring by international observers to ensure compliance with the ceasefire terms, although Israel has violated the ceasefire terms in near-daily basis.\nDisarmament.\nAs part of the ceasefire agreement that ended the 2024 Israeli invasion of Lebanon, and with mounting pressure from the US, the Lebanese Armed Forces have undertaken efforts to disarm Hezbollah, including in its traditional strongholds in southern Lebanon, with the aid of Israeli intelligence. In May 2025, the Lebanese government had announced that the army had largely achieved its aim. On 5 August 2025, the Lebanese government declared that a plan would be scheduled for the disarmament of the militias after a six-hour cabinet meeting with president Joseph Aoun. According to the Lebanese government, Hezbollah has handed over control of several critical facilities. Information minister Paul Morcos stated that a deadline of the end of 2025 was set for disarmament. \nHezbollah leader Naim Qassem condemned the disarmament proposal, stating: \"The resistance is fine, strong and ready to fight for Lebanon's sovereignty and independence... Hezbollah made heavy sacrifices to defend Lebanon against the Israeli aggression.\" He warned that Hezbollah was prepared to renew attacks on Israel and said all of Lebanon would unite to counter Israel. On 22 August, Qassem threatened a civil war if the disarmament proposal went forward, which prime minister Nawaf Salam condemned as \"completely unacceptable\".\nOn 7 August, the cabinet of ministers approved the objective of the disarmament proposal, ensuring that arms in Lebanon are only possessed by the state. Hezbollah and Amal Movement-affiliated ministers walked out of the cabinet meeting in protest, and thousands of Hezbollah supporters rallied against the approval in the southern suburbs of Beirut. On 5 September, the Lebanese army presented the disarmament plan to the government. On September 5, 2025 General Rodolphe Haykal presented to the Lebanese cabinet the Homeland Shield Plan, its roadmap for the disarmament of all militias in Lebanon, specifically Hezbollah.\nIdeology.\nThe ideology of Hezbollah has been summarized as Shia Islamist radicalism; Hezbollah follows the Islamic Shia theology developed by Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Hezbollah was largely formed with the aid of the Khomeini's followers in the early 1980s in order to spread Islamic revolution and follows a distinct version of Islamic Shia ideology ( or Guardianship of the Islamic Jurists) developed by Khomeini, who was the leader of the \"Islamic Revolution\" in Iran. Although Hezbollah originally aimed to transform Lebanon into an Islamic republic, this goal has been abandoned in favor of a more inclusive approach.\nEarly on, Hezbollah was influenced by ideas from prominent Sunni Islamists. Hezbollah's own rhetoric was Islamist in general, rather than Shia in particular. Hezbollah's position on the Sunni-Shia divide was that instead of dwelling on theological differences, Sunnis and Shias ought to cooperate with one another to oppose the Israeli occupation of Arab lands. To maintain a sense of Muslim unity, Hezbollah avoided direct criticism of Saudi Arabia; even during the 2007 Lebanon's conflict with the Salafis, Al-Manar TV's employees had instructions \"not to talk badly about Saudi Arabia\". This changed, however, after the beginning of the Saudi-led intervention in the Yemeni civil war.\nHezbollah has been described as socially conservative. It is against homosexuality and LGBT rights. In 2023, Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah called for gay people to be killed and said that the LGBT community was a \"threat to society\". The organization also encourages women to wear traditional Islamic veils, especially the full-body chador.\nSome scholars consider Hezbollah to have become a left-wing political movement; including political scientists Anisseh van Engeland and Rachael Rudolph, Imad Salamey, Amal Saad-Ghorayeb, and As'ad Abu Khalil. Salamey described Hezbollah as \"a revolutionary proletarian party with an Islamic manifesto\". Feminist Judith Butler controversially called Hezbollah part of the \"global left\" because they define themselves as anti-imperialist.\nCommunist writer Nahla Chahal wrote that Hezhollah \"is a movement of the Theology of Liberation\".\n1985 manifesto.\nOn 16 February 1985, Sheik Ibrahim al-Amin issued Hezbollah's manifesto. The ideology presented in it was described as radical. Its first objective was to fight against what Hezbollah described as American and Israeli imperialism, including the Israeli occupation of Southern Lebanon and other territories. The second objective was to gather all Muslims into an \"ummah\", under which Lebanon would further the aims of the 1979 Revolution of Iran. It also declared it would protect all Lebanese communities, excluding those that collaborated with Israel, and support all national movements\u2014both Muslim and non-Muslim\u2014throughout the world. \nTranslated excerpts from Hezbollah's original 1985 manifesto read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We are the sons of the \"umma\" (Muslim community)\u00a0...\n...\u00a0We are an \"ummah\" linked to the Muslims of the whole world by the solid doctrinal and religious connection of Islam, whose message God wanted to be fulfilled by the Seal of the Prophets, i.e., Prophet Muhammad.\u00a0... As for our culture, it is based on the Holy Quran, the Sunna and the legal rulings of the \"faqih\" who is our source of imitation\u00a0...\n2009 manifesto.\nOn 30 November 2009, secretary-general Nasrallah presented a new manifesto at Hezbollah's 7th political conference. Besides its introduction, this 32-page document has three chapters on U.S. hegemonic strategies and the impact of globalization; Hezbollah's approach to Lebanon; and Palestinian resistance to Israel. While self-described as a \"rebirth\" document, the manifesto conveys the same basic approach to foreign policy as in the past, according to scholar Benedetta Berti, though it is more \"politically savvy\" and appeals to non-Islamic movements. Still, the manifesto offers new support for Lebanese political institutions, through which it had been making inroads. Notably, it says that it opposes political \"sectarianism\", idealizes a national unity government, and treats the Lebanese army less as an enemy and more as a subordinate military arm.\nAttitudes, statements, and actions concerning Israel and Zionism.\nFrom the inception of Hezbollah to the present, the elimination of the State of Israel has been one of Hezbollah's primary goals. Some translations of Hezbollah's 1985 Arabic-language manifesto state that \"our struggle will end only when this entity [Israel] is obliterated\". According to Hezbollah's Deputy-General, Naim Qassem, the struggle against Israel is a core belief of Hezbollah and the central rationale of Hezbollah's existence.\nHezbollah says that its continued hostilities against Israel are justified as reciprocal to Israeli operations against Lebanon and as retaliation for what they claim is Israel's occupation of Lebanese territory. Israel withdrew from Lebanon in 2000, and their withdrawal was verified by the United Nations as being in accordance with resolution 425 of 19 March 1978; however, Lebanon considers the Shebaa farms\u2014a piece of land captured by Israel from Syria in the 1967 war and considered by the UN to be Syrian territory occupied by Israel\u2014to be Lebanese territory.&lt;ref name=\"SC/6878\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Finally, Hezbollah considers Israel to be an illegitimate state. For these reasons, it justifies its actions as acts of defensive jihad.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf they go from Shebaa, we won't stop fighting them.\u00a0... Our goal is to liberate the 1948 borders of Palestine,\u00a0... The Jews who survive this war of liberation can go back to Germany or wherever they came from. However, that the Jews who lived in Palestine before 1948 will be 'allowed to live as a minority and they will be cared for by the Muslim majority.'\n\u2014 Hezbollah's spokesperson Hassan Ezzedin, about an Israeli withdrawal from Shebaa Farms\nAttitudes and actions concerning Jews and Judaism.\nHezbollah officials have said, on rare occasions, that it is only \"anti-Zionist\" and not anti-Semitic. However, according to scholars, \"these words do not hold up upon closer examination\". Among other actions, Hezbollah actively engages in Holocaust denial and spreads anti-Semitic conspiracy theories.\nVarious antisemitic statements have been attributed to Hezbollah officials. Amal Saad-Ghorayeb, a Lebanese political analyst, argues that although Zionism has influenced Hezbollah's anti-Judaism, \"it is not contingent upon it because Hezbollah's hatred of Jews is more religiously motivated than politically motivated\". Robert S. Wistrich, a historian specializing in the study of anti-Semitism, described Hezbollah's ideology concerning Jews:\nThe anti-Semitism of Hezbollah leaders and spokesmen combines the image of seemingly invincible Jewish power\u00a0... and cunning with the contempt normally reserved for weak and cowardly enemies. Like the Hamas propaganda for holy war, that of Hezbollah has relied on the endless vilification of Jews as 'enemies of mankind,' 'conspiratorial, obstinate, and conceited' adversaries full of 'satanic plans' to enslave the Arabs. It fuses traditional Islamic anti-Judaism with Western conspiracy myths, Third Worldist anti-Zionism, and Iranian Shiite contempt for Jews as 'ritually impure' and corrupt infidels. Sheikh Fadlallah typically insists\u00a0... that Jews wish to undermine or obliterate Islam and Arab cultural identity in order to advance their economic and political domination.\nConflicting reports say Al-Manar, the Hezbollah-owned and operated television station, accused either Israel or Jews of deliberately spreading HIV and other diseases to Arabs throughout the Middle East. Al-Manar was criticized in the West for airing \"anti-Semitic propaganda\" in the form of a television drama depicting a Jewish world domination conspiracy theory. The group has been accused by American analysts of engaging in Holocaust denial. In addition, during its 2006 war, it apologized only for killing Israel's Arabs (i.e., non-Jews).\nIn November 2009, according to the Jewish Telegraphic Agency, Hezbollah pressured a private English-language school in western Beirut \"which asked not to be identified\", to eliminate from its curriculum excerpts from \"The Diary of Anne Frank\", a book of the writings from the diary kept by the Jewish child Anne Frank while she was in hiding with her family during the Nazi occupation of the Netherlands. This was after Hezbollah's member of Lebanese parliament Hussein Hajj Hassan, interviewed on the organization's Al-Manar television channel, criticized the school for \"showing poor judgment in picking out its textbooks\", and asked how long Lebanon would \"remain an open arena for the Zionist invasion of education\".\nIn \"The New Yorker\"'s July 22, 2024 issue, Dexter Filkins, in his report on the border fight between Israel and the organization, quoted a commander of Hezbollah, who had been active in its operations outside Lebanon, stating that the war between the \"Zionist state\" and the \"party of God\" would be \"very simply\" resolved, \"when [the Jews] leave on the same boat they came on\".\nOrganization.\nAt the beginning, many Hezbollah leaders maintained that the movement was \"not an organization, for its members carry no cards and bear no specific responsibilities\", and that the movement does not have \"a clearly defined organizational structure\". Today, as Hezbollah scholar Magnus Ranstorp reports, Hezbollah does actually have a formal governing structure and, in keeping with the principle of Guardianship of the Islamic Jurists (\"velayat-e faqih\"), it \"concentrate[s]\u00a0... all authority and powers\" on its religious leaders, whose decisions, then, \"flow from the \"ulama\" down the entire community\".\nThe supreme decision-making bodies of the Hezbollah were divided between the Majlis al-Shura (Consultative Assembly) which was headed by 12 senior clerical members with responsibility for tactical decisions and supervision of overall Hizballah activity throughout Lebanon, and the Majlis al-Shura al-Karar (the Deciding Assembly), headed by Sheikh Muhammad Hussein Fadlallah and composed of eleven other clerics with responsibility for all strategic matters. Within the Majlis al-Shura, there existed seven specialized committees dealing with ideological, financial, military and political, judicial, informational and social affairs. In turn, the Majlis al-Shura and these seven committees were replicated in each of Hizballah's three main operational areas (the Beqaa, Beirut, and the South).\nSince the Supreme Leader of Iran is the ultimate clerical authority, Hezbollah's leaders have appealed to him \"for guidance and directives in cases when Hezbollah's collective leadership [was] too divided over issues and fail[ed] to reach a consensus\". After the death of Iran's first Supreme Leader, Khomeini, Hezbollah's governing bodies developed a more \"independent role\" and appealed to Iran less often. Since the Second Lebanon War, however, Iran has restructured Hezbollah to limit the power of Hassan Nasrallah, and invested billions of dollars \"rehabilitating\" Hezbollah.\nStructurally, Hezbollah does not distinguish between its political/social activities within Lebanon and its military/\"jihad\" activities against Israel. \"Hezbollah has a single leadership\", according to Naim Qassem, Hezbollah's second in command. \"All political, social and jihad work is tied to the decisions of this leadership\u00a0... The same leadership that directs the parliamentary and government work also leads jihad actions in the struggle against Israel.\"\nIn 2010, Iran's parliamentary speaker Ali Larijani said, \"Iran takes pride in Lebanon's Islamic resistance movement for its steadfast Islamic stance. Hezbollah nurtures the original ideas of Islamic Jihad.\" He also instead charged the West with having accused Iran with support of terrorism and said, \"The real terrorists are those who provide the Zionist regime with military equipment to bomb the people.\"\nFunding.\nFunding of Hezbollah comes from the Iranian government, Lebanese business groups, private persons, businessmen, the Lebanese diaspora involved in African diamond exploration, other Islamic groups and countries, taxes paid by the Shia Lebanese, and crime. Hezbollah says that the main source of its income comes from its own investment portfolios and donations by Muslims.\nWestern sources maintain that Hezbollah receives most of its financial, training, weapons, explosives, political, diplomatic, and organizational aid from Iran and Syria. Iran is said to have given $400 million between 1983 and 1989 through donation. Ostensibly on account of economic problems, Iran temporarily limited funds to humanitarian actions carried on by Hezbollah. During the late 1980s, when there was three-digit inflation in Lebanon due to the collapse of the Lira, the British periodical Middle East International reported that Hezbollah was receiving $3\u20135 million per month from Iran. According to reports subsequently released, Hezbollah received $400\u00a0million from Iran.\nIn 2009, when the United States GAO agency accused members of the Venezuelan government of \"not cooperating fully in the war on drug trafficking\" and claimed that \"drug corruption had reached the ministerial level in Venezuela\", Dorit Shavit, then in charge of Latin America &amp; Caribbean affairs at the Israeli foreign ministry, stated in \"El Tiempo\" that the presence of \"cells of Hezbollah guerrillas\" had increased in recent years in the Guajira Peninsula and on the island of Margarita. The foreign ministry of Venezuela rejected these allegations as \"absurd\".\nIn 2011, Iran earmarked $7 million to Hezbollah's activities in Latin America. Hezbollah has relied also on funding from the Shi'ite Lebanese Diaspora in West Africa, the United States and, most importantly, the Triple Frontier, or tri-border area, along the junction of Paraguay, Argentina, and Brazil. U.S. law enforcement officials have identified an illegal multimillion-dollar cigarette-smuggling fund raising operation and a drug smuggling operation. Nasrallah has repeatedly denied any links between the South American drug trade and Hezbollah, calling such accusations \"propaganda\" and attempts \"to damage the image of Hezbollah\".\nAs of 2018, annual Iranian monetary support for Hezbollah was estimated at $700 million by US officials.\nSocial services.\nHezbollah organizes and maintains an extensive social development program and runs hospitals, news services, educational facilities, and encouragement of Nikah mut'ah. One of its established institutions, Jihad Al Binna's Reconstruction Campaign, is responsible for numerous economic and infrastructure development projects in Lebanon. Hezbollah controls the Martyr's Institute (Al-Shahid Social Association), which pays stipends to \"families of fighters who die\" in battle. An IRIN news report of the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs noted:\nHezbollah not only has armed and political wings\u2014it also boasts an extensive social development program. Hezbollah currently operates at least four hospitals, twelve clinics, twelve schools and two agricultural centres that provide farmers with technical assistance and training. It also has an environmental department and an extensive social assistance program. Medical care is also cheaper than in most of the country's private hospitals and free for Hezbollah members.\nAccording to CNN, \"Hezbollah did everything that a government should do, from collecting the garbage to running hospitals and repairing schools.\" In July 2006, during the war with Israel, when there was no running water in Beirut, Hezbollah was arranging supplies around the city. Lebanese Shiites \"see Hezbollah as a political movement and a social service provider as much as it is a militia\". Hezbollah also rewards its guerrilla members who have been wounded in battle by taking them to Hezbollah-run amusement parks.\nHezbollah is, therefore, deeply embedded in the Lebanese society.\nPolitical activities.\nHezbollah along with Amal is one of two major political parties in Lebanon that represent Shiite Muslims. Unlike Amal, whose support is predominantly in Lebanon's south, Hezbollah maintains broad-based support in all three areas of Lebanon with a majority Shia Muslim population: in the south, in Beirut and its surrounding area, and in the northern Beqaa valley and Hirmil region.\nHezbollah holds 14 of the 128 seats in the Parliament of Lebanon and is a member of the Resistance and Development Bloc. According to Daniel L. Byman, it is \"the most powerful single political movement in Lebanon\". Hezbollah, along with the Amal Movement, represents most of Lebanese Shi'a. Unlike Amal, Hezbollah has not disarmed. Hezbollah participates in the Parliament of Lebanon.\nPolitical alliances.\nHezbollah has been one of the main parties of the March 8 Alliance since March 2005. Although Hezbollah had joined the new government in 2005, it remained staunchly opposed to the March 14 Alliance. On 1 December 2006, these groups began a series of political protests and sit-ins in opposition to the government of Prime Minister Fouad Siniora.\nIn 2006, Michel Aoun and Hassan Nasrallah met in Mar Mikhayel Church, Chiyah, and signed a memorandum of understanding between Free Patriotic Movement and Hezbollah organizing their relation and discussing Hezbollah's disarmament with some conditions. The agreement also discussed the importance of having normal diplomatic relations with Syria and the request for information about the Lebanese political prisoners in Syria and the return of all political prisoners and diaspora in Israel. After this event, Aoun and his party became part of the March 8 Alliance.\nOn 7 May 2008, Lebanon's 17-month-long political crisis spiraled out of control. The fighting was sparked by a government move to shut down Hezbollah's telecommunication network and remove Beirut Airport's security chief over alleged ties to Hezbollah. Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah said the government's decision to declare the group's military telecommunications network illegal was a \"declaration of war\" on the organization, and demanded that the government revoke it.\nHezbollah-led opposition fighters seized control of several West Beirut neighborhoods from Future Movement militiamen loyal to the backed government, in street battles that left 11 dead and 30 wounded. The opposition-seized areas were then handed over to the Lebanese Army. The army also pledged to resolve the dispute and has reversed the decisions of the government by letting Hezbollah preserve its telecoms network and re-instating the airport's security chief.\nAt the end, rival Lebanese leaders reached consensus over Doha Agreement on 21 May 2008, to end the 18-month political feud that exploded into fighting and nearly drove the country to a new civil war. On the basis of this agreement, Hezbollah and its opposition allies were effectively granted veto power in Lebanon's parliament. At the end of the conflicts, National unity government was formed by Fouad Siniora on 11 July 2008, with Hezbollah controlling one ministerial and eleven of thirty cabinet places.\nIn 2018 Lebanese general election, Hezbollah general secretary Hassan Nasrallah presented the names of the 13 Hezbollah candidates. On 22 March 2018, Nasrallah issued a statement outlining the main priorities for the parliamentary bloc of the party, Loyalty to the Resistance, in the next parliament. He stated that rooting out corruption would be the foremost priority of the Loyalty to the Resistance Bloc. The electoral slogan of the party was 'We will construct and we will protect'. Finally Hezbollah held 12 seats and its alliance won the election by gaining 70 out of 128 seats of Parliament of Lebanon.\nIn October 2024, leader of the Free Patriotic Movement, Gebran Bassil, announced that the party was no longer in alliance with Hezbollah. In February 2025, Lebanese Prime Minister Nawaf Salam announced his government, which consists of 24 ministers; the Hezbollah controls two portofolios.; the Public Health Ministry, headed by Rakan Nasredine, and the Labor Ministry, headed by Muhammad Haidar. The Hizbullah and Amal Bloc controls together six portfolios in the government.\nMedia operations.\nHezbollah operates a satellite television station, Al-Manar TV (\"the Lighthouse\"), and a radio station, al-Nour (\"the Light\"). Al-Manar broadcasts from Beirut, Lebanon. Hezbollah launched the station in 1991 with the help of Iranian funds. Al-Manar, the self-proclaimed \"Station of the Resistance\", (\"qanat al-muqawama\") is a key player in what Hezbollah calls its \"psychological warfare against the Zionist enemy\" and an integral part of Hezbollah's plan to spread its message to the entire Arab world. Hezbollah has a weekly publication, \"Al Ahd\", which was established in 1984. It is the only media outlet which is openly affiliated with the organization.\nHezbollah's television station Al-Manar airs programming designed to inspire suicide attacks in Gaza, the West Bank, and Iraq. Al-Manar's transmission in France is prohibited due to its promotion of Holocaust denial, a criminal offense in France. The United States lists Al-Manar television network as a terrorist organization. Al-Manar was designated as a \"Specially Designated Global Terrorist entity\", and banned by the United States in December 2004. It has also been banned by France, Spain and Germany.\nMaterials aimed at instilling principles of nationalism and Islam in children are an aspect of Hezbollah's media operations. The Hezbollah Central Internet Bureau released two video games\u00a0\u2013 \"Special Force\" in 2003 and a sequel, \"\", in 2007\u00a0\u2013 in which players are rewarded with points and weapons for killing Israeli soldiers. In 2012, Al-Manar aired a television special praising an 8-year-old boy who raised money for Hezbollah and said: \"When I grow up, I will be a communist resistance warrior with Hezbollah, fighting the United States and Israel, I will tear them to pieces and drive them out of Lebanon, the Golan and Palestine, which I love very dearly.\"\nSecret services.\nHezbollah's secret services have been called as \"one of the best in the world\", and have even infiltrated the Israeli army. and often collaborate with Hezbollah's secret services.\nIn the summer of 1982, Hezbollah's Special Security Apparatus was created by Hussein al-Khalil, now a \"top political adviser to Nasrallah\"; while Hezbollah's counterintelligence was initially managed by Iran's Quds Force, the organization continued to grow during the 1990s. By 2008, scholar Carl Anthony Wege writes, \"Hizballah had obtained complete dominance over Lebanon's official state counterintelligence apparatus, which now constituted a Hizballah asset for counterintelligence purposes.\" This close connection with Lebanese intelligence helped bolster Hezbollah's financial counterintelligence unit.\nAccording to Ahmad Hamzeh, Hezbollah's counterintelligence service is divided into \"Amn al-Muddad\", responsible for \"external\" or \"encounter\" security; and \"Amn al-Hizb\", which protects the organization's integrity and its leaders. According to Wege, \"Amn al-Muddad\" \"may have received specialized intelligence training in Iran and possibly North Korea\". The organization also includes a military security component, as well as an External Security Organization (\"al-Amn al-Khariji\" or Unit 910) that operates covertly outside Lebanon.\nSuccessful Hezbollah counterintelligence operations include thwarting the CIA's attempted kidnapping of foreign operations chief Hassan Ezzeddine in 1994, the 1997 manipulation of a double agent that led to the Ansariya ambush, and the 2000 kidnapping of alleged Mossad agent Elhanan Tannenbaum. In 2006, Hezbollah collaborated with the Lebanese government to detect Adeeb al-Alam, a former colonel, as an Israeli spy. Hezbollah recruited IDF Lieutenant Colonel Omar al-Heib, who was convicted in 2006 of conducting surveillance for Hezbollah. In 2009, Hezbollah apprehended Marwan Faqih, a garage owner who installed tracking devices in Hezbollah-owned vehicles.\nHezbollah's counterintelligence apparatus uses electronic surveillance and intercept technologies. By 2011, Hezbollah counterintelligence began to use software to analyse cellphone data and detect espionage. Suspicious callers were then subjected to conventional surveillance. In the mid-1990s, Hezbollah was able to \"download unencrypted video feeds from Israeli drones\", and Israeli SIGINT efforts intensified after the 2000 withdrawal from Lebanon. With possible help from Iran and the Russian FSB, Hezbollah augmented its electronic counterintelligence capabilities, and succeeded in 2008 in detecting Israeli bugs near Mount Sannine and in the organization's fiber optic network.\nArmed strength.\nHezbollah does not reveal its armed strength. The Dubai-based Gulf Research Centre estimated in 2006 that Hezbollah's armed wing comprises 1,000 full-time Hezbollah members, along with a further 6,000\u201310,000 volunteers. According to the Iranian Fars News Agency, Hezbollah has up to 65,000 fighters. In October 2023, Al Jazeera cited Hezbollah expert Nicholas Blanford as estimating that Hezbollah has at least 60,000 fighters, including full-time and reservists, and that it had increased its stockpile of missiles from 14,000 in 2006 to about 150,000. It is often described as more militarily powerful than the Lebanese Army. Israeli commander Gui Zur called Hezbollah \"by far the greatest guerrilla group in the world\".\nIn 2010, Hezbollah was believed to have 45,000 rockets. Israeli Defense Forces Chief of Staff Gadi Eisenkot said that Hezbollah possesses \"tens of thousands\" of long- and short-range rockets, drones, advanced computer encryption capabilities, as well as advanced defense capabilities like the SA-6 anti-aircraft missile system.\nHezbollah possesses the Katyusha-122 rocket, which has a range of and carries a warhead. Hezbollah possesses about 100 long-range missiles. They include the Iranian-made Fajr-3 and Fajr-5, the latter with a range of , enabling it to strike the Israeli port of Haifa, and the Zelzal-1, with an estimated range, which can reach Tel Aviv. Fajr-3 missiles have a range of and a warhead. Fajr-5 missiles, extend to , also hold warheads. It was reported that Hezbollah is in possession of Scud missiles that were provided to them by Syria. Syria denied the reports.\nAccording to various reports, Hezbollah is armed with anti-tank guided missiles, namely, the Russian-made AT-3 Sagger, AT-4 Spigot, AT-5 Spandrel, AT-13 Saxhorn-2 'Metis-M', \u0410\u0422-14 Spriggan 'Kornet', Iranian-made Ra'ad (version of AT-3 Sagger), Towsan (version of AT-5 Spandrel), Toophan (version of BGM-71 TOW), and European-made MILAN missiles. These weapons have been used against IDF soldiers, causing many of the deaths during the 2006 Lebanon War. US courts said that North Korea provided armaments to Hezbollah during the 2006 war. A small number of Saeghe-2s, an Iranian-made version of the M47 Dragon, were also used in the war.\nFor air defense, Hezbollah has anti-aircraft weapons that include the ZU-23 artillery and the man-portable, shoulder-fired SA-7 and SA-18 surface-to-air missile (SAM). One of the most effective weapons deployed by Hezbollah has been the C-802 anti-ship missile.\nIn April 2010, U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates claimed that Hezbollah has far more missiles and rockets than the majority of countries, and said that Syria and Iran are providing weapons to the organization. Israel also claims that Syria is providing the organization with these weapons. Syria has denied supplying these weapons and views these claims as an Israeli excuse for an attack. Leaked cables from American diplomats suggest that the United States has been trying unsuccessfully to prevent Syria from \"supplying arms to Hezbollah in Lebanon\", and that Hezbollah has \"amassed a huge stockpile (of arms) since its 2006 war with Israel\"; the arms were described as \"increasingly sophisticated\". Gates added that Hezbollah is possibly armed with chemical or biological weapons, as well as anti-ship missiles that could threaten U.S. ships.\nAs of 2017[ [update]], the Israeli government believe Hezbollah had an arsenal of nearly 150,000 rockets stationed on its border with Lebanon. Some of these missiles are said to be capable of penetrating cities as far away as Eilat. The IDF has accused Hezbollah of storing these rockets beneath hospitals, schools, and civilian homes. Hezbollah has used drones against Israel, by penetrating air defense systems, in a report verified by Nasrallah, who added, \"This is only part of our capabilities.\"\nIsraeli military officials and analysts have drawn attention to the experience and weaponry Hezbollah would have gained from the involvement of thousands of its fighters in the Syrian Civil War. \"This kind of experience cannot be bought\", said Gabi Siboni, director of the military and strategic affairs program at the Institute for National Security Studies at Tel Aviv University. \"It is an additional factor that we will have to deal with. There is no replacement for experience, and it is not to be scoffed at.\"\nMilitary activities.\nHezbollah has a military branch known as the Jihad Council, one component of which is \"Al-Muqawama al-Islamiyya\" (\"The Islamic Resistance\"), and is the possible sponsor of a number of lesser-known militant groups, some of which may be little more than fronts for Hezbollah itself, including the Organization of the Oppressed, the Revolutionary Justice Organization, the Organization of Right Against Wrong, and Followers of the Prophet Muhammad. Some scholars have regarded Hezbollah as a resistance movement.\nUnited Nations Security Council Resolution 1559 called for the disarmament of militia with the Taif agreement at the end of the Lebanese civil war. Hezbollah denounced, and protested against, the resolution. The 2006 military conflict with Israel has increased the controversy. Failure to disarm remains a violation of the resolution and agreement as well as subsequent United Nations Security Council Resolution 1701. Since then both Israel and Hezbollah have asserted that the organization has gained in military strength.\nA Lebanese public opinion poll taken in August 2006 shows that most of the Shia did not believe that Hezbollah should disarm after the 2006 Lebanon war, while the majority of Sunni, Druze and Christians believed that they should. The Lebanese cabinet, under president Michel Suleiman and Prime Minister Fouad Siniora, guidelines state that Hezbollah enjoys the right to \"liberate occupied lands\". In 2009, a Hezbollah commander, speaking on condition of anonymity, said, \"[W]e have far more rockets and missiles [now] than we did in 2006.\"\nLebanese Resistance Brigades.\nThe Lebanese Resistance Brigades (), also known as the Lebanese Brigades to Resist the Israeli Occupation, were formed by Hezbollah in 1997 as a multifaith (Christian, Druze, Sunni and Shia) volunteer force to combat the Israeli occupation of Southern Lebanon. With the Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon in 2000, the organization was disbanded.\nIn 2009, the Resistance Brigades were reactivated, mainly comprising Sunni supporters from the southern city of Sidon. Its strength was reduced in late 2013 from 500 to 200\u2013250 due to residents' complaints about some fighters of the group exacerbating tensions with the local community.\nThe beginning of its military activities: the South Lebanon conflict.\nHezbollah has been involved in several cases of armed conflict with Israel: during the 1982\u20132000 South Lebanon conflict, Hezbollah waged a guerrilla campaign against Israeli forces occupying Southern Lebanon. In 1982, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) was based in Southern Lebanon and was firing Katyusha rockets into northern Israel from Lebanon. Israel invaded Lebanon to evict the PLO, and Hezbollah became an armed organization to expel the Israelis. Hezbollah's strength was enhanced by the dispatching of one thousand to two thousand members of the Iranian Revolutionary Guards and the financial backing of Iran.\nIranian clerics, most notably Fzlollah Mahallati supervised this activity. It became the main politico-military force among the Shia community in Lebanon and the main arm of what became known later as the Islamic Resistance in Lebanon. With the collapse of the SLA, and the rapid advance of Hezbollah forces, Israel withdrew on 24 May 2000 six weeks before the announced 7 July date.\"\nHezbollah held a victory parade, and its popularity in Lebanon rose. Israel withdrew in accordance with 1978's United Nations Security Council Resolution 425. Hezbollah and many analysts considered this a victory for the movement, and since then its popularity has been boosted in Lebanon.\nDisputed attacks.\nBetween 1982 and 1986, there were many attacks blamed on Hezbollah, although Hezbollah denied responsibility. Given that Hezbollah didn't officially exist at the time of many of these attacks (it officially came into existence in 1985) leads some scholars to be skeptical of implicating Hezbollah in these attacks. The first of these attacks were the April 1983 U.S. Embassy bombing and 1983 Beirut barracks bombing, both attributed to Hezbollah by some Western intelligence agencies. Hezbollah denied responsibility for both the embassy bombing and the barracks bombing.\nIn the Lebanon hostage crisis, 105 people were kidnapped between 1982 and 1992. A variety organizations took responsibility for these kidnappings: Organization of Islamic Jih\u0101d for the Liberation of Palestine, Organization for Revolutionary Justice, the Fajr Organization, the Khaybar Brigade, and the Organization of the World's Oppressed. Hezbollah denied kidnapping these individuals, but was blamed anyway. Recent research has shown that the kidnappers were of various political backgrounds, and were often motivated by familial feuds or were looking for monetary ransom.\nSince 1990, terror acts and attempts of which Hezbollah has been blamed include the following bombings and attacks against civilians and diplomats:\nDuring the Bosnian War.\nHezbollah provided fighters to fight on the Bosnian Muslim side during the Bosnian War, as part of the broader Iranian involvement. \"The Bosnian Muslim government is a client of the Iranians\", wrote Robert Baer, a CIA agent stationed in Sarajevo during the war. \"If it's a choice between the CIA and the Iranians, they'll take the Iranians any day.\" By war's end, public opinion polls showed some 86 percent Bosnian Muslims had a positive opinion of Iran. In conjunction, Hezbollah initially sent 150 fighters to fight against the Bosnian Serb Army, the Bosnian Muslims' main opponent in the war. All Shia foreign advisors and fighters withdrew from Bosnia at the end of conflict.\nConflict with Israel.\nOn 25 July 1993, following Hezbollah's killing of seven Israeli soldiers in southern Lebanon, Israel launched Operation Accountability, known in Lebanon as the Seven Day War, during which the IDF carried out their heaviest artillery and air attacks on targets in southern Lebanon since 1982. The aim of the operation was to eradicate the threat posed by Hezbollah and to force the civilian population north to Beirut so as to put pressure on the Lebanese Government to restrain Hezbollah. The fighting ended when an unwritten understanding was agreed to by the warring parties. Apparently, the 1993 understanding provided that Hezbollah combatants would not fire rockets at northern Israel, while Israel would not attack civilians or civilian targets in Lebanon.\nIn April 1996, after continued Hezbollah rocket attacks on Israeli civilians, the Israeli armed forces launched Operation Grapes of Wrath, which was intended to wipe out Hezbollah's base in southern Lebanon. Over 100 Lebanese refugees were killed by the shelling of a UN base at Qana, in what the Israeli military said was a mistake.\nFollowing several days of negotiations, the two sides signed the Grapes of Wrath Understandings on 26 April 1996. A cease-fire was agreed upon between Israel and Hezbollah, which would be effective on 27 April 1996. Both sides agreed that civilians should not be targeted, which meant that Hezbollah would be allowed to continue its military activities against IDF forces inside Lebanon.\n2000 Hezbollah cross-border raid.\nOn 7 October 2000, three Israeli soldiers\u2014Adi Avitan, Staff Sgt. Benyamin Avraham, and Staff Sgt. Omar Sawaidwere\u2014were abducted by Hezbollah while patrolling the border between the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights and Lebanon. The soldiers were killed either during the attack or in its immediate aftermath. Israel Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz said that Hezbollah abducted the soldiers and then killed them. The bodies of the slain soldiers were exchanged for Lebanese prisoners in 2004.\n2006 Lebanon War.\nThe 2006 Lebanon War was a 34-day military conflict in Lebanon and northern Israel. The principal parties were Hezbollah paramilitary forces and the Israeli military. The conflict was precipitated by a cross-border raid during which Hezbollah kidnapped and killed Israeli soldiers. The conflict began on 12 July 2006 when Hezbollah militants fired rockets at Israeli border towns as a diversion for an anti-tank missile attack on two armored Humvees patrolling the Israeli side of the border fence, killing three, injuring two, and seizing two Israeli soldiers.\nIsrael responded with airstrikes and artillery fire on targets in Lebanon that damaged Lebanese infrastructure, including Beirut's Rafic Hariri International Airport, which Israel said that Hezbollah used to import weapons and supplies, an air and naval blockade, and a ground invasion of southern Lebanon. Hezbollah then launched more rockets into northern Israel and engaged the Israel Defense Forces in guerrilla warfare from hardened positions.\nThe war continued until 14 August 2006. Hezbollah was responsible for thousands of Katyusha rocket attacks against Israeli civilian towns and cities in northern Israel, which Hezbollah said were in retaliation for Israel's killing of civilians and targeting Lebanese infrastructure. The conflict is believed to have killed 1,191\u20131,300 Lebanese citizens including combatants and 165 Israelis including soldiers.\n2010 gas field claims.\nIn 2010, Hezbollah claimed that the Dalit and Tamar gas field, discovered by Noble Energy roughly west of Haifa in Israeli exclusive economic zone, belong to Lebanon, and warned Israel against extracting gas from them. Senior officials from Hezbollah warned that they would not hesitate to use weapons to defend Lebanon's natural resources. Figures in the March 14 Forces stated in response that Hezbollah was presenting another excuse to hold on to its arms. Lebanese MP Antoine Zahra said that the issue is another item \"in the endless list of excuses\" meant to justify the continued existence of Hezbollah's arsenal.\n2011 attack in Istanbul.\nIn July 2011, Italian newspaper \"Corriere della Sera\" reported, based on American and Turkish sources, that Hezbollah was behind a bombing in Istanbul in May 2011 that wounded eight Turkish civilians. The report said that the attack was an assassination attempt on the Israeli consul to Turkey, Moshe Kimchi. Turkish intelligence sources denied the report and said, \"Israel is in the habit of creating disinformation campaigns using different papers.\"\n2012 planned attack in Cyprus.\nIn July 2012, a Lebanese man was detained by Cyprus police on possible charges relating to terrorism laws for planning attacks against Israeli tourists. According to security officials, the man was planning attacks for Hezbollah in Cyprus and admitted this after questioning. The police were alerted about the man due to an urgent message from Israeli intelligence. The Lebanese man was in possession of photographs of Israeli targets and had information on Israeli airlines flying back and forth from Cyprus, and planned to blow up a plane or tour bus. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu stated that Iran assisted the Lebanese man with planning the attacks.\n2012 Burgas attack.\nFollowing an investigation into the 2012 Burgas bus bombing terrorist attack against Israeli citizens in Bulgaria, the Bulgarian government officially accused the Lebanese-militant movement Hezbollah of committing the attack. Five Israeli citizens, the Bulgarian bus driver, and the bomber were killed. The bomb exploded as the Israeli tourists boarded a bus from the airport to their hotel.\nTsvetan Tsvetanov, Bulgaria's interior minister, reported that the two suspects responsible were members of the militant wing of Hezbollah; he said the suspected terrorists entered Bulgaria on 28 June and remained until 18 July. Israel had already previously suspected Hezbollah for the attack. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu called the report \"further corroboration of what we have already known, that Hezbollah and its Iranian patrons are orchestrating a worldwide campaign of terror that is spanning countries and continents\". Netanyahu said that the attack in Bulgaria was just one of many that Hezbollah and Iran have planned and carried out, including attacks in Thailand, Kenya, Turkey, India, Azerbaijan, Cyprus and Georgia.\nJohn Brennan, Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, has said that, \"Bulgaria's investigation exposes Hezbollah for what it is\u2014a terrorist group that is willing to recklessly attack innocent men, women and children, and that poses a real and growing threat not only to Europe, but to the rest of the world.\" The result of the Bulgarian investigation comes at a time when Israel has been petitioning the European Union to join the United States in designating Hezbollah as a terrorist organization.\n2015 Shebaa farms incident.\nIn response to an attack against a military convoy comprising Hezbollah and Iranian officers on 18 January 2015 at Quneitra in south of Syria, Hezbollah launched an ambush on 28 January against an Israeli military convoy in the Israeli-occupied Shebaa Farms with anti-tank missiles against two Israeli vehicles patrolling the border, killing 2 and wounding 7 Israeli soldiers and officers, as confirmed by Israeli military.\n2023\u2013present Israel\u2013Hezbollah conflict.\nOn 8 October 2023, Hezbollah launched guided rockets and artillery shells at Israeli-occupied positions in Shebaa Farms during the Gaza war. Israel retaliated with drone strikes and artillery fire on Hezbollah positions near the Golan Heights\u2013Lebanon border. The attacks came after Hezbollah expressed support and praise for the Hamas attacks on Israel. The clashes were the largest escalation between the two countries since the 2006 Lebanon War.\nIn November 2024, a ceasefire deal was signed between Israel and Hezbollah to end 13 months of conflict. According to the agreement, Hezbollah was given 60 days to end its armed presence in southern Lebanon and Israeli forces were obliged to withdraw from the area over the same period. In December 2024, the fall of Assad\u2019s Baathist regime in Syria was another blow to its Lebanese ally, Hezbollah, which was already weakened because of Israeli military actions.\nOn March 31, 2025 a significant development took place as the Lebanese Army and UNIFIL forces entered a major Hezbollah weapons and storage camp in East Zawtar, near the Litani River\u2014one of Hezbollah's largest and most strategic facilities in southern Lebanon. The move follows renewed tensions and Israeli threats to resume military operations, amid accusations of recent rocket fire toward Kiryat Shmona. Joint forces reportedly searched Hezbollah vehicles and found an empty missile launcher. It remains unclear whether Hezbollah consented to the operation. This action is seen as part of efforts to enforce UN Resolution 1701, which calls for disarming illegal groups south of the Litani and reinforcing the army\u2019s presence in the region.\nRearming of Hezbollah.\nSince the 2024 Ceasefire agreement, Hezbollah is rearming itself. According to Israeli and Arab intelligence sources, the organization is using the Beirut seaport and its old smuggling land routes form Syria, for bringing in long range missiles, antitank missiles, artillery and rockets. It is also reported that, Hezbollah is manufacturing weapons. The efforts take place mainly in the suburbs of Beirut and the Bekaa Valley.\nAssassination of Rafic Hariri.\nOn 14 February 2005, former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafic Hariri was killed, along with 21 others, when his motorcade was struck by a roadside bomb in Beirut. He had been PM during 1992\u20131998 and 2000\u20132004. In 2009, the United Nations special tribunal investigating the murder of Hariri reportedly found evidence linking Hezbollah to the murder.\nIn August 2010, in response to notification that the UN tribunal would indict some Hezbollah members, Hassan Nasrallah said Israel was looking for a way to assassinate Hariri as early as 1993 in order to create political chaos that would force Syria to withdraw from Lebanon, and to perpetuate an anti-Syrian atmosphere [in Lebanon] in the wake of the assassination. He went on to say that in 1996 Hezbollah apprehended an agent working for Israel by the name of Ahmed Nasrallah\u2014no relation to Hassan Nasrallah\u2014who allegedly contacted Hariri's security detail and told them that he had solid proof that Hezbollah was planning to take his life. Hariri then contacted Hezbollah and advised them of the situation. Saad Hariri responded that the UN should investigate these claims.\nOn 30 June 2011, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, established to investigate the death of Hariri, issued arrest warrants against four senior members of Hezbollah, including Mustafa Badreddine.&lt;ref name=\"BBC-30/6\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; On 3 July, Hassan Nasrallah rejected the indictment and denounced the tribunal as a plot against the party, vowing that the named persons would not be arrested under any circumstances.&lt;ref name=\"BBC-3/7\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nOn 18 August 2020, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon found Salim Ayyash, a senior operative in Hezbollah, guilty in absentia of five charges including the intentional murder of Hariri with premeditation by using explosive materials.\nInvolvement in the Syrian Civil War.\nHezbollah has long been an ally of the Syrian Ba'athist regime, led by the Al-Assad family. Hezbollah has helped the Syrian government during the Syrian civil war in its fight against the Syrian opposition, which Hezbollah has described as a Zionist plot to destroy its alliance with al-Assad against Israel. Geneive Abdo opined that Hezbollah's support for al-Assad in the Syrian war has \"transformed\" it from a group with \"support among the Sunni for defeating Israel in a battle in 2006\" into a \"strictly Shia paramilitary force\". Hezbollah also fought against the Islamic State.\nIn August 2012, the United States sanctioned Hezbollah for its alleged role in the war. General Secretary Nasrallah denied Hezbollah had been fighting on behalf of the Syrian government, stating in a 12 October 2012, speech that \"right from the start the Syrian opposition has been telling the media that Hizbullah sent 3,000 fighters to Syria, which we have denied\". However, according to the Lebanese \"Daily Star\" newspaper, Nasrallah said in the same speech that Hezbollah fighters helped the Syrian government \"retain control of some 23 strategically located villages [in Syria] inhabited by Shiites of Lebanese citizenship\". Nasrallah said that Hezbollah fighters have died in Syria doing their \"jihadist duties\".\nIn 2012, Hezbollah fighters crossed the border from Lebanon and took over eight villages in the Al-Qusayr District of Syria. On 16\u201317 February 2013, Syrian opposition groups claimed that Hezbollah, backed by the Syrian military, attacked three neighboring Sunni villages controlled by the Free Syrian Army (FSA). An FSA spokesman said, \"Hezbollah's invasion is the first of its kind in terms of organisation, planning and coordination with the Syrian regime's air force.\" Hezbollah said three Lebanese Shiites, \"acting in self-defense\", were killed in the clashes with the FSA. Lebanese security sources said that the three were Hezbollah members. In response, the FSA allegedly attacked two Hezbollah positions on 21 February; one in Syria and one in Lebanon. Five days later, it said it destroyed a convoy carrying Hezbollah fighters and Syrian officers to Lebanon, killing all the passengers.\nIn January 2013, a weapons convoy carrying SA-17 anti-aircraft missiles to Hezbollah was destroyed allegedly by the Israeli Air Force. A nearby research center for chemical weapons was also damaged. A similar attack on weapons destined for Hezbollah occurred in May of the same year.\nThe leaders of the March 14 alliance and other prominent Lebanese figures called on Hezbollah to end its involvement in Syria and said it is putting Lebanon at risk. Subhi al-Tufayli, Hezbollah's former leader, said, \"Hezbollah should not be defending the criminal regime that kills its own people and that has never fired a shot in defense of the Palestinians.\" He said, \"those Hezbollah fighters who are killing children and terrorizing people and destroying houses in Syria will go to hell.\"\nThe Consultative Gathering, a group of Shia and Sunni leaders in Baalbek-Hermel, also called on Hezbollah not to \"interfere\" in Syria. They said, \"Opening a front against the Syrian people and dragging Lebanon to war with the Syrian people is very dangerous and will have a negative impact on the relations between the two.\" Walid Jumblatt, leader of the Progressive Socialist Party, also called on Hezbollah to end its involvement and claimed that, \"Hezbollah is fighting inside Syria with orders from Iran.\"\nEgyptian President Mohamed Morsi condemned Hezbollah by saying, \"We stand against Hezbollah in its aggression against the Syrian people. There is no space or place for Hezbollah in Syria.\" Support for Hezbollah among the Syrian public has weakened since the involvement of Hezbollah and Iran in propping up the Assad regime during the civil war.\nOn 12 May 2013, Hezbollah with the Syrian army attempted to retake part of Qusayr. In Lebanon, there has been \"a recent increase in the funerals of Hezbollah fighters\" and \"Syrian rebels have shelled Hezbollah-controlled areas\".\nOn 25 May 2013, Nasrallah announced that Hezbollah is fighting in the Syrian Civil War against Islamic extremists and \"pledged that his group will not allow Syrian militants to control areas that border Lebanon\". He confirmed that Hezbollah was fighting in the strategic Syrian town of Al-Qusayr on the same side as Assad's forces. In the televised address, he said, \"If Syria falls in the hands of America, Israel and the takfiris, the people of our region will go into a dark period.\"\nInvolvement in Iranian-led intervention in Iraq.\nBeginning in July 2014, Hezbollah sent an undisclosed number of technical advisers and intelligence analysts to Baghdad in support of the Iranian intervention in Iraq (2014\u2013present). Shortly thereafter, Hezbollah commander Ibrahim al-Hajj was reported killed in action near Mosul.\nLatin America operations.\nHezbollah operations in South America began in the late 20th century, centered around the Arab population which had moved there following the 1948 Arab-Israeli War and the 1985 Lebanese Civil War. One particular form of alleged activity is money laundering. The \"Los Angeles Times\" said that the group was more active in the 1990s, especially during the 1992 Israeli embassy bombing in Argentina, though its relevance grew more unclear as time progressed. \"Vox\" writes that following the adoption of the Patriot Act in 2001, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) would promote the term of narcoterrorism and arrest individuals with no prior history of being involved in terrorism, suggesting skepticism towards the reports of large-scale collusion between alleged terrorist groups and cartels.\nIn 2002, Hezbollah was reported to be openly operating in Ciudad del Este, Paraguay. Beginning in 2008, the DEA began with Project Cassandra to work against reported Hezbollah activities in regards to Latin American drug trafficking. The investigation by the DEA reported that Hezbollah made about a billion dollars a year and trafficked thousands of tons of cocaine into the United States. Another destination for cocaine trafficking done by Hezbollah are nations within the Gulf Cooperation Council. In 2013, Hezbollah was accused of infiltrating South America and having ties with Latin American drug cartels.\nOne area of operations is in the region of the Triple Frontier, where Hezbollah has been alleged to be involved in the trafficking of cocaine; officials with the Lebanese embassy in Paraguay have worked to counter American allegations and extradition attempts. In 2016, it was alleged that money gained from drug sales was used to purchase weapons in Syria. In 2018, \"Infobae\" reported that Hezbollah was operating in Colombia under the name Organization of External Security. That same year, Argentine police arrested individuals alleged to be connected to Hezbollah's criminal activities within the nation.\nThe \"Los Angeles Times\" noted in 2020 that at the time, Hezbollah served as a \"bogeyman of sorts\" and that \"[p]undits and politicians in the U.S., particularly those on the far right, have long issued periodic warnings that Hezbollah and other Islamic groups pose a serious threat in Latin America\". Various allegations have been made that Cuba, Nicaragua and Venezuela aid Hezbollah in its operations in the region. Israeli reports about the presence of Hezbollah in Latin America raised questions amongst Latin American analysts based in the United States while experts say that reports of presence in Latin America are exaggerated.\nSouthern Pulse director and analyst Samuel Logan said \"Geopolitical proximity to Tehran doesn't directly translate into leniency of Hezbollah activity inside your country\" in an interview with the Pulitzer Center. William Neuman in his 2022 book \"Things Are Never So Bad That They Can't Get Worse\" said that claims of Hezbollah's presence in Latin America was \"in reality, minimal\", writing that the Venezuelan opposition raised such allegations to persuade the United States into believing that the nation faced a threat from Venezuela in an effort to promote foreign intervention.\nUnited States operations.\nAli Kourani, the first Hezbollah operative to be convicted and sentenced in the United States, was under investigation since 2013 and worked to provide targeting and terrorist recruiting information to Hezbollah's Islamic Jihad Organization. The organization had recruited a former resident of Minnesota and a military linguist, Mariam Tala Thompson, who disclosed \"identities of at least eight clandestine human assets; at least 10 U.S. targets; and multiple tactics, techniques and procedures\" before she was discovered and successfully prosecuted in a U.S. court.\nOther.\nIn 2010, Ahbash and Hezbollah members were involved in a street battle which was perceived to be over parking issues, both groups later met to form a joint compensation fund for the victims of the conflict.\nAccording to Reuters, in 2024, commanders from Hezbollah and Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps were reported to be involved in Yemen, overseeing and directing Houthi attacks on Red Sea shipping.\nFinances/economy.\nSince it was established, Hezbollah has been heavily dependent on Iran's IRGC for funds and equipment that often arrive through Syria. According to US officials, it received an annual sum of up to $700 million. During the 1990's and 2000's it became part of the Lebanese government and financial systems, while expanding its activities overseas through various businesses, smuggling, and money laundering, mainly in South America and West Africa.According to Dr. Eitan Azani and Ms. Lorena Atiyas-Lvovsky at the Reichman University Institute of Counter Terrorism, the Lebanese Shiite diaspora in Africa and Latin America\u2019s Triple Frontier send contributions or forced donations in cash and via other informal transfer systems. Following the 2006 conflict with Israel, Iran increased its financial support of Hezbollah. In 2016, the DEA\u2019s \u201cProject Cassandra\u201d said that part of Hezbollah\u2019s security wing, called the \u201cBusiness Affairs Component,\u201d was helping to move drug money around, allegedly using this money to buy weapons for the war in Syria. Western sanctions targeted Hezbollah financial channels and caused the organization to shift to clandestine operations that included money laundering, and in recent years more into cryptocurrency.\nThe latest reports in Canada, show that the country has long been a hub of Hezbollah\u2019s financial networks. As of 2025, the organization continues its activity in Canada, using car trade making a profit of cars shipped through the The Port of Montreal. In 2024 Canada launched Operation Vector in which it prevented the smuggling of 598 cars with the estimated value of $34.5 million. Other financial networks include fake charities, money laundering, cryptocurrencies, money services businesses (MSBs) and informal value transfer systems (IVTS) like hawalas.\nIsraeli asset-seizure orders and blockchain-analytics reports indicate that, in the year preceding the attacks, Hezbollah, alongside Hamas and PIJ, raised funds via cryptocurrencies. During this period, Hezbollah is reported to have received roughly $3.7 million. The groups may also have routed funds between each other\u2019s crypto wallets; PIJ and Hezbollah alone are thought to have exchanged up to $12 million in cryptocurrency since 2021.\nAfter the 2023-2025 war with Israel, Nicholas Blanford of the Atlantic Council think tank, stated that Hezbollah is faced with a multifaceted crisis like none it had seen in the past, with its efforts to reconstitute itself being hampered by access to long-term finances. The strengthened national government, again in charge of reconstruction, stated that the much needed financial aid from foreign donors is conditioned on establishing a state monopoly on arms, which is still in part resisted by Hezbollah. This follows a statement from May 2025 by the US State Department conditioning Washington's support of sustainable reconstruction on Hezbollah \"laying down their arms.\"\nStarting in February 2025 and following Israeli threats, Lebanon's government barred commercial flights between Beirut and Tehran, making it harder to smuggle funds from Iran. Israel\u2019s military claimed that Hezbollah used to bring in cash from Iran using civilian aircraft, and threatened to take action to stop flights. The IDF declared on 25 June 2025 that it had killed an Iranian official in charge of money transfers from Iran to armed groups in the region, after also assassinating a south Lebanese middleman whose currency exchange firm allegedly helped funnel some of this money to Hezbollah.\nDuring the September 2021 fuel shortage, Hezbollah received a convoy of 80 tankers carrying oil/diesel fuel from Iran.\nAttacks on Hezbollah leaders.\nHezbollah has also been the target of bomb attacks and kidnappings. These include:\nTargeting policy.\nAfter the September 11, 2001 attacks, Hezbollah condemned al-Qaeda for targeting civilians in the World Trade Center, but remained silent on the attack on The Pentagon. Hezbollah also denounced the massacres in Algeria by Armed Islamic Group, Al-Gama'a al-Islamiyya attacks on tourists in Egypt, the murder of Nick Berg, and ISIL attacks in Paris.\nAlthough Hezbollah has denounced certain attacks on civilians, some people accuse the organization of the bombing of an Argentine synagogue in 1994. Argentine prosecutor Alberto Nisman, Marcelo Martinez Burgos, and their \"staff of some 45 people\" said that Hezbollah and their contacts in Iran were responsible for the 1994 bombing of a Jewish cultural center in Argentina, in which \"[e]ighty-five people were killed and more than 200 others injured\".\nIn August 2012, the United States State Department's counter-terrorism coordinator Daniel Benjamin said that Hezbollah \"is not constrained by concerns about collateral damage or political fallout that could result from conducting operations there [in Europe]\".\nForeign relations.\nHezbollah has close relations with Iran. It also has ties with the leadership in Syria, specifically President Hafez al-Assad, until his death in 2000, supported it. It is also a close Assad ally, and its leader pledged support to the embattled Syrian leader. Although Hezbollah and Hamas are not organizationally linked, Hezbollah provides military training as well as financial and moral support to the Sunni Palestinian group. Furthermore, Hezbollah was a strong supporter of the Second Intifada.\nAmerican and Israeli counter-terrorism officials claim that Hezbollah has (or had) links to Al Qaeda, although Hezbollah's leaders deny these allegations. Also, some al-Qaeda leaders, like Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and Wahhabi clerics, consider Hezbollah to be heretics. But United States intelligence officials speculate that there has been contact between Hezbollah and low-level al-Qaeda figures who fled Afghanistan for Lebanon. However, Michel Samaha, Lebanon's former minister of information, has said that Hezbollah has been an important ally of the government in the war against terrorist groups, and described the \"American attempt to link Hezbollah to al-Qaeda\" to be \"astonishing\".\nIn April 2025, a multinational investigation involving Spain, France, Germany, and the United Kingdom uncovered a Hezbollah logistics network operating in Europe. Authorities arrested multiple individuals connected to the procurement of drone components intended for explosive-laden UAVs. The parts matched those used by Hezbollah in attacks on Israel, highlighting the group's international supply chain and ongoing drone development efforts.\nPublic opinion.\nAs of 2024, Hezbollah's support within Lebanon is limited, especially after being blamed for the 2020 Beirut port explosion and the obstruction of accountability efforts. According to a 2024 Arab Barometer survey, 55 percent of Lebanese have \"no trust at all\" in the group. Support remains concentrated primarily among the Shiite population.\nAccording to Michel Samaha, Lebanon's minister of information, Hezbollah is seen as \"a legitimate resistance organization that has defended its land against the Israeli occupying force, and consistently stood up to the Israeli army\". Samaha was sentenced for smuggling explosives to carry out terrorist attacks in Lebanon with the help of the Syrian regime.\nAccording to a survey released by the \"Beirut Center for Research and Information\", of 800 citizens polled between 24 and 26 July 2006, during the 2006 Lebanon War, \"showed 87 percent support for Hizbullah's [\"sic\"] retaliatory attacks on northern Israel\". a rise of 29 percentage points from a similar poll conducted in February. More striking, however, was the level of support for Hezbollah's resistance from Sunni communities. \"Eighty percent of Christians polled supported Hizbullah [\"sic\"] along with 80 percent of Druze and 89 percent of Sunnis.\"\nIn a poll of Lebanese adults taken in 2004, 6% of respondents gave unqualified support to the statement \"Hezbollah should be disarmed\". 41% reported unqualified disagreement. A poll of Gaza Strip and West Bank residents indicated that 79.6% had \"a very good view\" of Hezbollah, and most of the remainder had a \"good view\". Polls of Jordanian adults in December 2005 and June 2006 showed that 63.9% and 63.3%, respectively, considered Hezbollah to be a legitimate resistance organization. In the December 2005 poll, only 6% of Jordanian adults considered Hezbollah to be terrorist.\nA July 2006 \"USA Today\"/Gallup poll found that 83% of the 1,005 Americans polled blamed Hezbollah, at least in part, for the 2006 Lebanon War, compared to 66% who blamed Israel to some degree. Additionally, 76% disapproved of the military action Hezbollah took in Israel, compared to 38% who disapproved of Israel's military action in Lebanon. A poll in August 2006 by ABC News and \"The Washington Post\" found that 68% of the 1,002 Americans polled blamed Hezbollah, at least in part, for the civilian casualties in Lebanon during the 2006 Lebanon War, compared to 31% who blamed Israel to some degree. Another August 2006 poll by CNN showed that 69% of the 1,047 Americans polled believed that Hezbollah is unfriendly towards, or an enemy of, the United States.\nIn 2010, a survey of Muslims in Lebanon showed that 94% of Lebanese Shia supported Hezbollah, while 84% of the Sunni Muslims held an unfavorable opinion of the group.\nSome public opinion has started to turn against Hezbollah for their support of Syrian President Assad's attacks on the opposition movement in Syria. Crowds in Cairo shouted out against Iran and Hezbollah, at a public speech by Hamas President Ismail Haniya in February 2012, when Hamas changed its support to the Syrian opposition.\nView of Hezbollah.\nA November 2020 poll in Lebanon performed by the pro-Israel, American Washington Institute for Near East Policy declared that support for Hezbollah is declining significantly. Below is a table of the results of their polls.\nDesignation as a terrorist organization or resistance movement.\nHezbollah's status as a legitimate political party, a terrorist group, a resistance movement, or some combination thereof is a contentious issue.\nAs of October 2020, Hezbollah or its military wing are considered terrorist organizations by at least 26 countries, as well as by the European Union and since 2017 by most member states of the Arab League, with the exception of Iraq and Lebanon, where Hezbollah is the most powerful political party. In June 2024, the Arab League leadership has announced that it no longer views Hezbollah as a terrorist organization.\nThe countries that have designated Hezbollah a terrorist organization include: the Gulf Cooperation Council, and their members Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, United Arab Emirates, as well as Argentina, Canada, Colombia, Ecuador, Estonia, Germany, Honduras, Israel, Paraguay, Kosovo, Lithuania, Serbia, Slovenia, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States, and Guatemala.\nThe EU differentiates between Hezbollah's political wing and military wing, banning only the latter, though Hezbollah itself does not recognize such a distinction. Hezbollah maintains that it is a legitimate resistance movement fighting for the liberation of Lebanese territory.\nThere is a \"wide difference\" between American and Arab perception of Hezbollah. Several Western countries officially classify Hezbollah or its external security wing as a terrorist organization, and some of their violent acts have been described as terrorist attacks. However, throughout most of the Arab and Muslim worlds, Hezbollah is referred to as a resistance movement, engaged in national defense. Even within Lebanon, sometimes Hezbollah's status as either a \"militia\" or \"national resistance\" has been contentious. In Lebanon, although not universally supported, Hezbollah is widely seen as a legitimate national resistance organization defending Lebanon, and has been described by the Lebanese information minister as an important ally in fighting terrorist groups.\nThe United Nations Security Council has never listed Hezbollah as a terrorist organization under its sanctions list, although some of its members have done so individually. The United Kingdom listed Hezbollah's military wing as a terrorist organization until May 2019 when the entire organization was proscribed, and the United States lists the entire group as such. Russia has considered Hezbollah a legitimate sociopolitical organization, and the People's Republic of China remains neutral and maintains contacts with Hezbollah.\nIn May 2013, France and Germany released statements that they will join other European countries in calling for an EU-blacklisting of Hezbollah as a terror group. In April 2020 Germany designated the organization\u2014including its political wing\u2014as a terrorist organization, and banned any activity in support of Hezbollah.\nIn the Western world.\nThe United States Department of State has designated Hezbollah a terrorist organization since 1995. The group remains on Foreign Terrorist Organization and Specially Designated Terrorist lists. According to the Congressional Research Service, \"The U.S. government holds Hezbollah responsible for...attacks and hostage takings targeting Americans in Lebanon during the 1980s, including the bombing of the U.S. Embassy in Beirut in April 1983 and the bombing of the U.S. Marine barracks in October 1983, which together killed 258 Americans. Hezbollah's operations outside of Lebanon, including its participation in bombings of Israeli and Jewish targets in Argentina during the 1990s and...training and liaison activities with Shiite insurgents in Iraq, have cemented the organization's reputation among U.S. policy makers as a capable and deadly adversary with potential global reach.\" In 2015, the US Director of National Intelligence removed Hezbollah from the list of \"active terrorist threats\" while Hezbollah remained designated as terrorist by the US, and Hezbollah officials were sanctioned for their role in facilitating military activity in the Syrian Civil War. In May 2025, senior Hezbollah officials and financial facilitators around new sanctions, were targeted by the US, for their role in coordinating financial transfers to the Iran-backed group.\nThe UK was the first government to attempt to make a distinction between Hezbollah's political and military wings, declaring the latter a terrorist group in 2008. In 2019, the UK Government proscribed the entirety of Hezbollah as an organisation due to the difficulties in distunishing between the political and military wings, as a way of limiting its influence in the UK. In 2012, British Foreign Minister Hague \"urged the EU to place Hezbollah's military wing on its list of terrorist organizations\". The US urged the EU to classify Hezbollah as a terrorist organization. In light of findings implicating Hezbollah in the 2012 Burgas bus bombing, Bulgaria, there was discussion within the EU to label Hezbollah's military wing as a terrorist group. In 2013, the EU agreed to blacklist Hezbollah's military wing over its role in the Syrian conflict. The European Union, France and New Zealand have proscribed Hezbollah's military wing, but do not list Hezbollah as a whole as a terrorist organization. During the Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon, French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin stated that \"France condemns Hezbollah's attacks, and all types of terrorist attacks which may be carried out against soldiers, or possibly Israel's civilian population.\" Italian Foreign Minister Massimo D'Alema differentiated the wings of Hezbollah: \"Apart from their well-known terrorist activities, they also have political standing and are socially engaged.\" Germany does not maintain its list, having chosen to adopt the EU list. However, German officials have indicated they would support designating Hezbollah a terrorist organization. The Netherlands regards Hezbollah as terrorist discussing it as such in reports of its intelligence and security service and in official answers by its Foreign Minister. Serbia, which designated Iran-backed Hezbollah entirely as a terrorist organization, fully implement measures to restrict Hezbollah's operations and financial activities.\nIn the midst of the 2006 conflict between Hezbollah and Israel, Russia's government declined to include Hezbollah in a list of terrorist organizations stating that it lists only organizations which represent \"the greatest threat to the security of our country\". Prior to the release of the list, Russian Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov called \"on Hezbollah to stop resorting to any terrorist methods, including attacking neighboring states\". Argentine prosecutors hold Hezbollah, and its financial supporters in Iran, responsible for the 1994 AMIA Bombing of a Jewish cultural center, described as \"the worst terrorist attack on Argentine soil\", in which \"85 people were killed and more than 200 others injured\". The Gulf Cooperation Council, Canada, Israel, and Australia have classified Hezbollah as a terrorist organization.\nThe UN does not maintain a terrorist list, however, it has made repeated calls for Hezbollah to disarm and accused the group of destabilizing the region and causing harm to Lebanese civilians. Human rights organizations Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have accused Hezbollah of committing war crimes against Israeli civilians.\nIn the Arab and Muslim world.\nIn 2006, Hezbollah was regarded as a legitimate resistance movement throughout most of the Arab and Muslim world. Furthermore, most of the Sunni Arab world sees Hezbollah as an agent of Iranian influence, and therefore, would like to see their power in Lebanon diminished. Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia have condemned Hezbollah's actions, saying that \"the Arabs and Muslims can't afford to allow an irresponsible and adventurous organization like Hezbollah to drag the region to war\" and calling it \"dangerous adventurism\".\nAfter an alleged 2009 Hezbollah plot in Egypt, the Egyptian regime of Hosni Mubarak officially classified Hezbollah as a terrorist group. Following the 2012 Presidential elections the new government recognized Hezbollah as a \"real political and military force\" in Lebanon. The Egyptian ambassador to Lebanon, Ashraf Hamdy, stated that, \"Resistance in the sense of defending Lebanese territory\u00a0... That's their primary role. We\u00a0... think that as a resistance movement they have done a good job to keep on defending Lebanese territory and trying to regain land occupied by Israel is legal and legitimate.\"\nDuring the Bahraini uprising, Bahrain foreign minister Khalid ibn Ahmad Al Khalifah labeled Hezbollah a terrorist group and accused them of supporting the protesters. On 10 April 2013, Bahrain blacklisted Hezbollah as a terrorist group, being the first Arab state in this regard.\nWhile Hezbollah has supported popular uprisings in Egypt, Yemen, Bahrain and Tunisia, Hezbollah publicly sided with Iran and Syria during the 2011 Syrian uprising. This position has prompted criticism from anti-government Syrians. As Hezbollah supported other movements in the context of the Arab Spring, anti-government Syrians have stated that they feel \"betrayed\" by a double standard allegedly applied by the movement. Following Hezbollah's aid in Assad government's victory in Qusayr, anti-Hezbollah editorials began regularly appearing in the Arabic media and anti-Hezbollah graffiti has been seen in southern Lebanon.\nIn March 2016, Gulf Cooperation Council designated Hezbollah as a terrorist organization due to its alleged attempts to undermine GCC states, and Arab League followed the move, with reservation by Iraq and Lebanon. In the summit, Lebanese Foreign Minister Gebran Bassil said that \"Hezbollah enjoys wide representation and is an integral faction of the Lebanese community\", while Iraqi Foreign Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari said PMF and Hezbollah \"have preserved Arab dignity\" and those who accuse them of being terrorists are terrorists themselves. The Saudi delegation walked out of the meeting. Israel's Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu called the step, \"'important' and 'even amazing'\".\nA day before the move by the Arab League, Hezbollah leader Nasrallah said that, \"Saudi Arabia is angry with Hezbollah since it is daring to say what only a few others dare to say against its royal family.\"\nIn 2020, a German security contractor accused Qatar of financing Hezbollah. In September 2021, U.S' Secretary of State, Antony Blinken commended the combined efforts taken by the United States and the Government of Qatar against Hezbollah financial network which involved the abuse of international financial system by using global networks of financiers and front companies to spread terrorism. In July 2022, Qatar participated in a 30-nation meeting led by the United States to counter Hezbollah, according to Axios.\nIn June 2024, the Arab League Assistant Secretary-General Hossam Zaki has announced that the Arab League no longer considers Hezbollah a terrorist organization.\nIn Lebanon.\nIn an interview during the 2006 Lebanon War, then-President Emile Lahoud stated, \"Hezbollah enjoys utmost prestige in Lebanon, because it freed our country\u00a0... even though it is very small, it stands up to Israel.\" Following the 2006 War, other Lebanese including members of the government were resentful of the large damage sustained by the country and saw Hezbollah's actions as unjustified \"dangerous adventurism\" rather than legitimate resistance. They accused Hezbollah of acting on behalf of Iran and Syria. An official of the Future Movement, part of the March 14 Alliance, warned that Hezbollah \"has all the characteristics of a terrorist party\", and that Hezbollah is moving Lebanon toward the Iranian Islamic system of government.\nIn August 2008, Lebanon's cabinet completed a policy statement which recognized \"the right of Lebanon's people, army, and resistance to liberate the Israeli-occupied Shebaa Farms, Kafar Shuba Hills, and the Lebanese section of Ghajar village, and defend the country using all legal and possible means\".\nGebran Tueni, a late conservative Orthodox Christian editor of an-Nahar, referred to Hezbollah as an \"Iranian import\" and said \"they have nothing to do with Arab civilization\". Tuen\u00ed believed that Hezbollah's evolution is cosmetic, concealing a sinister long-term strategy to Islamicize Lebanon and lead it into a ruinous war with Israel.\nBy 2017, a poll showed that 62% of Lebanese Christians believed that Hezbollah was doing a \"better job than anyone else in defending Lebanese interests in the region, and they trust it more than other social institutions\".\nScholarly views.\nAcademics specializing in a wide variety of the social sciences believe that Hezbollah is an example of an Islamic terrorist organization. Such scholars and research institutes include the following:\nViews of foreign legislators.\nJ. Gresham Barrett brought up legislation in the U.S. House of Representatives which, among other things, referred to Hezbollah as a terrorist organization. Congress members Tom Lantos, Jim Saxton, Thad McCotter, Chris Shays, Charles Boustany, Alcee Hastings, and Robert Wexler referred to Hezbollah as a terrorist organization in their speeches supporting the legislation. Shortly before a speech by Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, U.S. Congressman Dennis Hastert said, \"He [Maliki] denounces terrorism, and I have to take him at his word. Hezbollah is a terrorist organization.\"\nIn 2011, a bipartisan group of members of Congress introduced the Hezbollah Anti-Terrorism Act. The act ensures that no American aid to Lebanon will enter the hands of Hezbollah. On the day of the act's introduction, Congressman Darrell Issa said, \"Hezbollah is a terrorist group and a cancer on Lebanon. The Hezbollah Anti-Terrorism Act surgically targets this cancer and will strengthen the position of Lebanese who oppose Hezbollah.\"\nIn a Sky News interview during the 2006 Lebanon war, British MP George Galloway said that Hezbollah is \"not a terrorist organization\".\nFormer Swiss member of parliament, Jean Ziegler, said in 2006: \"I refuse to describe Hezbollah as a terrorist group. It is a national movement of resistance.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13920", "revid": "50622263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13920", "title": "Homeland", "text": "Place associated with a collective identity\nA homeland is a place where a national or ethnic identity has formed. The definition can also mean simply one's country of birth. When used as a proper noun, the Homeland, as well as its equivalents in other languages, often has ethnic nationalist connotations. A homeland may also be referred to as a \"fatherland\", a \"motherland\", or a \"mother country\", depending on the culture and language of the nationality in question.\nMotherland.\nMotherland refers to a \"mother country\", i.e. the place in which somebody grew up or had lived for a long enough period that somebody has formed their own cultural identity, the place that one's ancestors lived for generations, or the place that somebody regards as home, or a Metropole in contrast to its colonies. People often refer to Mother Russia as a personification of the Russian nation. The Philippines is also considered as a motherland which is derived from the word \"Inang Bayan\" which means \"Motherland\". Within the British Empire, many natives in the colonies came to think of Britain as the mother country of one, large nation. India is often personified as Bharat Mata (Mother India). The French commonly refer to France as \"la m\u00e8re patrie\"; Hispanic countries that were former Spanish viceroyalties commonly referred to Spain as \"la Madre Patria\". Armenians refer to Armenia as \"Mer Hayrenik\" (lit: mother homeland.). Kathleen Ni Houlihan is a mythical symbol of Irish nationalism found in literature and art including work by W.B. Yeats and Se\u00e1n O'Casey, She was an emblem during colonial rule, and became associated with the Irish Republican Army in Northern Ireland, especially during The Troubles.\nFatherland.\nFatherland is the nation of one's \"fathers\", \"forefathers\", or ancestors. The word can also mean the country of nationality, the country in which somebody grew up, the country that somebody's ancestors lived in for generations, or the country that somebody regards as home, depending on how the individual uses it. It can be viewed as a nationalist concept, in so far as it is evocative of emotions related to family ties and links them to national identity and patriotism. It can be compared to motherland and homeland, and some languages will use more than one of these terms.\nThe Ancient Greek \"patris\", fatherland, led to \"patrios\", \"of our fathers\" and thence to the Latin \"patriota\" and Old French \"patriote\", meaning compatriot; from these the English word patriotism is derived. Romans and the subjects of Rome saw Italy as the fatherland (\"patria\" or \"terrarum parens\") of the Roman Empire, in contrast to Roman provinces. The related Ancient Roman word \"Patria\" led to similar forms in modern Romance languages.\nThe term fatherland is used throughout Europe where a Germanic language is spoken. In Dutch \"vaderland\" is used in the national anthem, \"Het Wilhelmus\", which lyrics are written around 1570. It is also common to refer to the national history as \"vaderlandse geschiedenis\".\nIn German, the term \"Vaterland\" became more prominent in the 19th century. It appears in numerous patriotic songs and poems, such as Hoffmann's song \"Lied der Deutschen\" which became the national anthem in 1922. German government propaganda used its appeal to nationalism when making references to Germany and the state. It was used in \"Mein Kampf\", and on a sign in a German concentration camp, also signed, Adolf Hitler.\nBecause of the use of \"Vaterland\" in Nazi-German war propaganda, the term \"Fatherland\" in English has become associated with domestic British and American anti-Nazi propaganda during World War II. This is not the case in Germany itself, or in other Germanic speaking and Eastern European countries, where the word remains used in the usual patriotic contexts.\nTerms equating \"Fatherland\" in Germanic languages:\nA corresponding term is often used in Slavic languages, in:\nOther groups that refer to their native country as a \"fatherland\".\nGroups with languages that refer to their native country as a \"fatherland\" include:\nRomance languages.\nIn Romance languages, a common way to refer to one's home country is \"Patria/P\u00e1tria/Patrie\" which has the same connotation as \"Fatherland\", that is, the nation of our parents/fathers (From the Latin, Pater, father). As \"patria\" has feminine gender, it is usually used in expressions related to one's mother, as in Italian \"la Madrepatria\", Spanish \"la Madre Patria\" or Portuguese \"a P\u00e1tria M\u00e3e\" (Mother Fatherland). Examples include:\nIn Hebrew.\nJews, especially Modern-Day Israelis, use several different terms, all referring to Israel, including:\nLand of one's home.\nIn some languages, there are additional words that refer specifically to the place where one is home to, but is narrower in scope than one's nation, and often have some sort of nostalgic, fantastic, heritage connection, for example:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13921", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13921", "title": "History of extinct nations and states", "text": ""}
{"id": "13924", "revid": "42879567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13924", "title": "Hani Hanjour", "text": "Saudi terrorist and 9/11 hijacker (1972\u20132001)\nHani Salih Hasan Hanjour (; 30 August 1972\u00a0\u2013 11 September 2001) was a Saudi terrorist and a member of al-Qaeda who was the hijacker-pilot of American Airlines Flight 77, crashing the plane into the Pentagon as part of the September 11 attacks in 2001.\nHanjour first went to the United States in 1991, studying English for less than two months at an American higher education institution before returning to Saudi Arabia early the next year. He returned to the United States in 1996, studying English in California before he began taking flying lessons in Florida and then Arizona. He received his commercial pilot certificate in 1999, and went back to his native Saudi Arabia to find a job as a commercial pilot. Hanjour applied to civil aviation school in Jeddah, but was turned down. Hanjour left his family in late 1999, telling them that he would be traveling to the United Arab Emirates to find work. According to Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Osama bin Laden or Mohammed Atef identified Hanjour at an Afghanistan training camp as a trained pilot and selected him to participate in the 11 September attacks.\nHanjour arrived in the United States again in December 2000. He joined up with Nawaf al-Hazmi in San Diego. They immediately left for Arizona, where Hanjour engaged in refresher pilot training. In April 2001, they relocated to Falls Church, Virginia and then Paterson, New Jersey in late May where Hanjour took additional flight training.\nHanjour returned to the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area on 2 September 2001, checking into a motel in Laurel, Maryland. On 11 September, Hanjour boarded American Airlines Flight 77, took control of the aircraft after his team of hijackers helped subdue the pilots, passengers, and crew, and flew the plane into the Pentagon as part of the 11 September attacks. The crash killed all 64 passengers on board the aircraft and 125 people in the Pentagon.\nWhile in Florida and Arizona, Hanjour befriended and trained with Rayed Mohammed Abdullah Ali, a fellow Saudi Arabian who emigrated to Manawat\u016b-Whanganui in 2006 to train as a pilot. He was deported from his Palmerston North home after his links to Hanjour were exposed.\nEarly life and education.\nHanjour was one of seven children, born to a food-supply businessman in Ta'if, Saudi Arabia. During his youth, Hanjour wanted to drop out of school to become a flight attendant, although his brother Abdulrahman discouraged this route, and tried to help him focus on his studies.\nAccording to his eldest brother, Hanjour traveled to Afghanistan in the late 1980s as a teenager to participate in the conflict against the Soviet Union. The Soviets had already withdrawn by the time he arrived in the country and he instead worked for a relief agency.\nCareer.\nEarly 1990s.\nHanjour was the first to arrive in the United States, much earlier than other hijackers. He first came to the United States in 1991 to study English for a few months. He arrived for the English language program on 3 October 1991, and stayed until early February 1992, when he returned to Saudi Arabia. Hanjour claimed that he was interested in being an airplane mechanic and claimed that such a position was considered highly in Saudi Arabia. In December 1991 Hanjour informed friends that he missed Saudi Arabia and would be leaving the United States due to homesickness. Hanjour was the only hijacker to visit the United States prior to any intentions for a large-scale attack and was not linked to the Hamburg cell in Germany, which composed of the three hijackers who were taking flight lessons to become pilots. He was the first to receive a license out of the three other men, most likely due to arriving to the U.S. prior to the preparations for the attacks.\nOver the next five years, Hanjour remained in Saudi Arabia, helping the family manage a lemon and date farm near Ta'if. His family often reminded Hanjour that he was getting past the age where he ought to get married and start a family, but Hanjour insisted he wanted to settle down more. While in Saudi Arabia, Hanjour applied for a job with Saudi Arabian Airlines, but was turned down due to poor grades. The airline told Hanjour they would consider him if he obtained a commercial pilot's license in the United States.\n1996.\nIn April 1996, Hanjour returned to the United States, staying with family friends, Susan and Adnan Khalil, in Miramar, Florida, for a month before heading to Oakland, California, to study English and attend flight school. Hanjour was admitted to the Sierra Academy of Aeronautics, but before beginning flight training, the academy arranged for Hanjour to take intensive English courses at ESL Language Center in Oakland. The flight school also arranged for Hanjour to stay with a host family, with whom he moved in on 20 May 1996. Hanjour completed the English program in August, and in early September 1996, he attended a single day of ground school courses at the Sierra Academy of Aeronautics before withdrawing, citing financial worries about the $35,000 cost.\nHanjour left Oakland in September and moved to Phoenix, Arizona, paying $4,800 for lessons at CRM Flight Cockpit Resource Management in Scottsdale. Receiving poor marks, Hanjour dropped out of flight school, and returned to Saudi Arabia at the end of November 1996.\nLate 1990s.\nHanjour re-entered the United States on 15 November 1997, taking additional English courses in Florida, then returning to Phoenix, where he shared an apartment with Bandar al-Hazmi.\nAfter arriving in Florida in November 1997, Hanjour met a man Rayed Mohammed Abdullah Ali, a mutual friend through Bandar al-Hazmi. Al-Hamzi had suggested that Ali train to be a pilot in Florida. Hanjour and Ali subsequently trained together both in Florida and Arizona, and became friends. Ali was a leader at the Islamic Cultural Centre in Phoenix where, the FBI says, he \"reportedly gave extremist speeches at the mosque\".&lt;ref name=\"Pilot with 9/11 links found in NZ\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; This, however, was disputed by a mosque staff member, who told the \"New Zealand Herald\" in June 2006 that Ali \"was never a leader for the mosque and he never gave speeches at the mosque\".\nThe \"9/11 Commission Report\" reported that Abdullah attended the same Phoenix flight school as Hanjour and records show the pair used a flight simulator together on 23 June 2001. Ali later emigrated to New Zealand, where he settled in Auckland and then in Palmerston North to train as a pilot. He was identified as a friend and colleague of Hanjour in July 2006, less than six months after he first arrived in New Zealand. Immigration Minister David Cunliffe said that Ali \"was directly associated with persons responsible for the terrorist attacks in the United States on Sept. 11, 2001\".\nIn December, he resumed training at CRM Flight Cockpit Resource Management for a few weeks, before pursuing training at Arizona Aviation. Bandar al-Hazmi and Hanjour stayed in Arizona, continued taking flight lessons at Arizona Aviation throughout 1998 and early 1999. After moving out of Bandar's place in March, Hanjour lived in several apartments in Tempe, Mesa and Phoenix. In February, financial records showed that Hanjour had taken a trip to Las Vegas, Nevada. In addition to flight training at Arizona Aviation, Hanjour enrolled in flight simulator classes at the Sawyer School of Aviation where he made only three or four visits. Lotfi Raissi would begin taking lessons at the same school a month after Hanjour quit, part of what piqued the FBI's interest in Raissi.\nAn FBI informant named Aukai Collins claims he told the FBI about Hanjour's activities during 1998, giving them Hanjour's name and phone number, and warning them that more and more foreign-born Muslims seem to be taking flying lessons. The FBI admits it paid Collins to monitor the Islamic and Arab communities in Phoenix at the time, but denies Collins told them anything about Hanjour.\nHanjour gained his FAA commercial pilot certificate in April 1999, getting a \"satisfactory\" rating from the examiner. After receiving his commercial pilot certificate, Hanjour went on to train at other flight schools for more advanced flying. This caused concern among the instructors as they thought \u201che was so bad a pilot and spoke such poor English that they contacted the Federal Aviation Administration to verify that his license was not a fake.\u201d The FAA verified his license and offered to provide him with English language tutors. Hanjour's bank records indicate that he travelled to Ontario, Canada, in March 1999 for an unknown reason.\nHe traveled to Saudi Arabia to get a job working with Saudi Arabian Airlines as a commercial pilot but was rejected by a civil aviation school in Jeddah. His brother, Yasser, relayed that Hanjour, frustrated, \"turned his attention toward religious texts and cassette tapes of militant Islamic preachers.\" He told his family in late 1999 he was heading to the United Arab Emirates to find work. However, it is likely that he headed to al-Qaeda training camps in Afghanistan. He was known by al-Qaeda as Urwa al-Taa'ifi.\n2000.\nIn May 2000, a third person accompanied Nawaf al-Hazmi and Khalid al-Mihdhar to Sorbi's Flying Club where he waited on the ground as they took a flight lesson. It has been theorized this may have been Hanjour.\nIn September Hanjour again sent his $110 registration to the ELS Language Center, which leased space on Holy Names College campus in Oakland, California, to continue his English studies. He also applied for another U.S. student visa. Although he was accepted, after the attacks, it would be reported that his visa application was 'suspicious'. Granted an F-1 student visa in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, September 2000, he failed to reveal that he had previously traveled to the U.S. He never turned up for classes at the ELS Language Center, and when the school contacted its Saudi representative, he reported that he could not find Hanjour either.\nOn 5 December, Hanjour opened a CitiBank account in Deira, Dubai. On 8 December, Hanjour was recorded flying into the Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport, and is thought to have met with Nawaf al-Hazmi in San Diego shortly thereafter.\n2001.\nHanjour came back to San Diego in December 2000, frequently visiting Abdussattar Shaikh's house, which was shared with Nawaf al-Hazmi and Khalid al-Mihdhar. During this time Hanjour may have visited the San Diego Zoo in February, as a security guard recalls having to page his name to reclaim a lost briefcase containing cash and Arabic documents and later recognized his photograph. Shortly afterwards, the three hijackers moved out of Shaikh's house to Falls Church, Virginia.\nThe ELS Language Center at Oakland University said Hanjour reached a level of proficiency sufficient to \"survive very well in the English language\". However, in January 2001, Arizona JetTech flight school managers reported him to the FAA at least five times because his English was inadequate for the commercial pilot certificate he had already obtained. It took him five hours to complete an oral exam meant to last just two hours, said Peggy Chevrette. Hanjour failed UA English classes with a 0.26 GPA and a JetTech manager said \"He could not fly at all.\" The certificate was a requirement for him to join the Saudi Arabian pilot's academy. His FAA certificate had become invalid late in 1999 when he failed to take a mandatory medical examination. In February, Hanjour began advanced simulator training in Mesa, Arizona.\nHe and al-Hazmi moved out of Mesa at the end of March, and they were in Falls Church, Virginia, by 4 April. Falls Church was the location of the Dar al-Hijrah mosque in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. Anwar Al-Awlaki was the recently appointed new Imam whom al-Hazmi had met with in San Diego.\nAt the mosque, Hanjour and al-Hazmi soon met Eyad Alrababah, a Jordanian who later pleaded guilty to document fraud and was deported. They had told him that they were looking for an apartment to rent, and he found a friend who rented them an apartment in Alexandria where they stayed. On 4 April 2001, Hanjour asked to forward his utility deposits to 3159 Row Street, Falls Church, Virginia, which was the same address as the mosque.\nWhen police raided the Hamburg apartment of Ramzi bin al-Shibh (the \"20th hijacker\") while investigating the 9/11 attacks, Awlaki's telephone number was found among bin al-Shibh's personal contact information.\nOn 2 May 2001, two new roommates joined them in Virginia: Majed Moqed and Ahmed al-Ghamdi, both of whom had just flown into the United States from the Middle East.\nAlrababah later suggested they all go together to look at apartments in Fairfield, Connecticut. On 8 May, Alrababah, Hanjour, al-Hazmi, Moqed, and al-Ghamdi traveled to Fairfield to look for housing. While there, they also called several local flight schools. They then travelled briefly to Paterson to look at that area as well. Rababah has contended that, after this trip, he never saw any of the men again.\nSometime at the end of May 2001, Hanjour rented a one-bedroom apartment in Paterson, New Jersey. He lived there with at least one roommate and was visited by several other hijackers, including Mohamed Atta. During his time in New Jersey, he and al-Hazmi rented three different cars including a sedan in June that Hanjour cosigned with the alias \"Hani Saleh Hassan\". He later made his last phone call to his family back in Saudi Arabia, during which he claimed to be phoning from a payphone in the United Arab Emirates, where he was supposedly still working.\nHanjour, along with at least five other future hijackers, are believed to have traveled to Las Vegas several times in mid-2001, where they allegedly drank alcohol, gambled, and visited lap dancing clubs.\nOn 20 July, Hanjour flew to the Montgomery County Airpark in Maryland from New Jersey on a practice flight with fellow hijacker Nawaf al-Hazmi.\nOn 1 August, Hanjour and al-Mihdhar returned to Falls Church to obtain fraudulent documentation at a 7-Eleven convenience store where an illegal side business operated for such a service. There they met Luis Martinez-Flores, himself also an illegal immigrant, who agreed to help them for a $100 fee. They drove together to a DMV office at a mall in nearby Springfield, Virginia, where Martinez-Flores gave them a false address in Falls Church to use, and signed legal forms attesting that they lived there. Hanjour and al-Mihdhar were then granted state identity cards. (Martinez-Flores was later sentenced to 21 months in prison for aiding them, and giving false testimony to police.) On that same day, Hanjour was stopped by police for driving a Toyota Corolla in a zone in Arlington, Virginia, for which he paid a $70 fine.\nEmployees at Advance Travel Service in Totowa, New Jersey later claimed that Moqed and Hanjour had both purchased tickets there. They claimed that Hanjour spoke very little English, and Moqed did most of the speaking. Hanjour requested a seat in the front row of the airplane. Their credit card failed to authorize, and after being told the agency did not accept personal checks, the pair left to withdraw cash. They returned shortly afterwards and paid the $1,842.25 total in cash.\nHanjour began making cross-country flights in August to test security, and tried to rent a plane from Freeway Airport in Maryland; though he was declined after exhibiting difficulty controlling and landing a single-engine Cessna 172. He moved out of his New Jersey apartment on 1 September, and was photographed four days later using an ATM with fellow hijacker Majed Moqed in Laurel, Maryland, where all five Flight 77 hijackers had purchased a 1-week membership in a local Gold's Gym. There, Hanjour claimed that his first name translated as \"warrior\" when a gym employee asked if there was an English translation of their Arabic names. (\"Hani\" actually translates as \"contented.\")\nOn 10 September 2001, Hanjour, al-Mihdhar, and al-Hazmi checked into the Marriott Residence Inn in Herndon, Virginia where Saleh Ibn Abdul Rahman Hussayen, a prominent Saudi government official, was staying. No evidence was ever uncovered that they had met, or knew of each other's presence.\n9/11 attacks and death.\nAt 7:35\u00a0a.m. on 11 September 2001, Hanjour arrived at the passenger security checkpoint at Washington Dulles International Airport, west of Washington, D.C., en route to board American Airlines Flight 77.\nSome earlier reports stated he may not have had a ticket or appeared on any manifest, however he was documented by the 9/11 Commission as having been assigned to seat 1B in first class, and reported to have bought a single first-class ticket from Advance Travel Service in Totowa. In the security tape footage released in 2004, Hanjour appears to walk through the metal detector without setting it off, which likely means that agents at the terminal were not looking at any warning signal that indicated if he had weapons. With this, it allowed Hanjour to board Flight 77 without any authorization.\nThe flight was scheduled to depart at 8:10, but ended up departing 10 minutes late from Gate D26 at Dulles. The last normal radio communications from the aircraft to air traffic control occurred at 08:50:51. At 08:54, Flight 77 began to deviate from its normal, assigned flight path and turned south, and then hijackers set the flight's autopilot heading for Washington, D.C. Passenger Barbara Olson called her husband, United States Solicitor General Ted Olson, and reported that the plane had been hijacked and that the assailants had box cutters and knives. Using the flight intercom, Hanjour announced the flight was hijacked. As Flight 77 was 5 miles (8.0\u00a0km) west-southwest of the Pentagon, it made a 330-degree turn. At the end of the turn, it was descending through 2,200 feet (670 m), pointed toward the Pentagon and downtown Washington. Hanjour advanced the throttles to maximum power and dove towards the Pentagon at a speed of over . At 09:37:46, Hanjour crashed the Boeing 757 into the west fa\u00e7ade of the Pentagon, killing himself and all 63 passengers and 6 crew members aboard along with 125 on the ground in the Pentagon. While level above the ground and seconds from the crash, the airplane's wings knocked over light poles and its right engine smashed into a power generator, creating a smoke trail seconds before smashing into the Pentagon. In the recovery process at the Pentagon, remains of all five Flight 77 hijackers were identified through a process of elimination, as not matching any DNA samples for the victims, and put into custody of the FBI.\nFamily denial.\nAfter the 11 September attacks, Hanjour's family in Saudi Arabia vehemently stated that they could not, and would not, believe he had been involved as one of the hijacker pilots, and also stated that he had phoned them just eight hours prior to the hijackings and his voice did not sound strange or unusual at all.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOthers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "13925", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13925", "title": "Hyaenidae", "text": ""}
{"id": "13926", "revid": "33145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13926", "title": "Hyena", "text": "Family of carnivoran mammals\nHyenas or hyaenas ( ; from Ancient Greek , ) are feliform carnivoran mammals belonging to the family Hyaenidae (). With just four extant species (each in its own genus), it is the fifth-smallest family in the order Carnivora and one of the smallest in the class Mammalia. Despite their low diversity, hyenas are unique and vital components of most African ecosystems.\nAlthough phylogenetically closer to felines and viverrids, hyenas are behaviourally and morphologically similar to canids in several elements due to convergent evolution: both hyenas and canines are non-arboreal, cursorial hunters that catch prey with their teeth rather than claws. Both eat food quickly and may store it, and their calloused feet with large, blunt, nonretractable claws are adapted for running and making sharp turns. However, hyenas' grooming, scent marking, defecation habits, mating, and parental behavior are consistent with the behavior of other feliforms.\nHyenas feature prominently in the folklore and mythology of human cultures that live alongside them. Hyenas are commonly viewed as frightening and worthy of contempt. In some cultures, hyenas are thought to influence people's spirits, rob graves, and steal livestock and children. Other cultures associate them with witchcraft, using their body parts in traditional medicine.\nEvolution.\nOrigins.\nHyenas originated in the jungles of Miocene Eurasia 22\u00a0million years ago, when most early feliform species were still largely arboreal. The first ancestral hyenas were likely similar to the modern African civet; one of the earliest hyena species described, \"Plioviverrops\", was a lithe, civet-like animal that inhabited Eurasia 20\u201322\u00a0million years ago, and is identifiable as a hyaenid by the structure of the middle ear and dentition. The lineage of \"Plioviverrops\" prospered and gave rise to descendants with longer legs and more pointed jaws, a direction similar to that taken by canids in North America.\nHyenas then diversified into two distinct types: lightly built dog-like hyenas and robust bone-crushing hyenas. Although the dog-like hyenas thrived 15\u00a0million years ago (with one taxon having colonised North America), most became extinct after a change in climate, along with the arrival of canids into Eurasia. Of the dog-like hyena lineage, only the insectivorous aardwolf survived, while the bone-crushing hyenas (including the extant spotted, brown, and striped hyenas) became the undisputed top scavengers of Eurasia and Africa.\nRise and fall of the dog-like hyenas.\nThe descendants of \"Plioviverrops\" reached their peak 15\u00a0million years ago, with more than 30 species having been identified. Unlike most modern hyena species, which are specialised bone-crushers, these dog-like hyenas were nimble-bodied, wolfish animals; one species among them was \"Ictitherium viverrinum\", which was similar to a jackal. The dog-like hyenas were numerous; in some Miocene fossil sites, the remains of \"Ictitherium\" and other dog-like hyenas outnumber those of all other carnivores combined. The decline of the dog-like hyenas began 5\u20137\u00a0million years ago during a period of climate change, exacerbated by canids crossing the Bering land bridge to Eurasia. One species, \"Chasmaporthetes ossifragus\", managed to cross the land bridge into North America, being the only hyena to do so. \"Chasmaporthetes\" managed to survive for some time in North America by deviating from the endurance-running and bone-crushing niches monopolized by canids and developing into a cheetah-like sprinter. Most of the dog-like hyenas had died off by 1.5\u00a0million years ago.\nBone-crushing hyenas.\nBy 10\u201314\u00a0million years ago, the hyena family had split into two distinct groups: dog-like hyenas and bone-crushing hyenas. The arrival of the ancestral bone-crushing hyenas coincided with the decline of the similarly built family Percrocutidae. The bone-crushing hyenas survived the changes in climate and the arrival of canids, which wiped out the dog-like hyenas, though they never crossed into North America, as their niche there had already been taken by the dog subfamily Borophaginae. By 5\u00a0million years ago, the bone-crushing hyenas had become the dominant scavengers of Eurasia, primarily feeding on large herbivore carcasses felled by sabre-toothed cats. One genus, \"Pachycrocuta\", was a mega-scavenger that could splinter the bones of elephants. Starting in the early Middle Pleistocene, \"Pachycrocuta\" was replaced by the smaller \"Crocuta\" and \"Hyena\", which corresponds to a general faunal change, perhaps in connection to the Mid-Pleistocene transition.\nRise of modern hyenas.\nThe four extant species are the striped hyena (\"Hyaena hyaena\"), the brown hyena (\"Parahyaena brunnea\"), the spotted hyena (\"Crocuta crocuta\"), and the aardwolf (\"Proteles cristata\").\nThe aardwolf can trace its lineage directly back to \"Plioviverrops\" 15\u00a0million years ago, and is the only survivor of the dog-like hyena lineage. Its success is partly attributed to its insectivorous diet, for which it faced no competition from canids crossing from North America. It is likely that its unrivaled ability to digest the terpene excretions from soldier termites is a modification of the strong digestive system its ancestors used to consume fetid carrion.\nThe striped hyena may have evolved from \"Hyaenictitherium namaquensis\" of Pliocene Africa. Striped hyena fossils are common in Africa, with records going back as far as the Villafranchian. As fossil striped hyenas are absent from the Mediterranean region, it is likely that the species is a relatively late invader to Eurasia, having likely spread outside Africa only after the extinction of spotted hyenas in Asia at the end of the Ice Age. The striped hyena occurred for some time in Europe during the Pleistocene, having been particularly widespread in France and Germany. It also occurred in Montmaurin, Hollabrunn in Austria, the Furninha Cave in Portugal and the Genista Caves in Gibraltar. The European form was similar in appearance to modern populations, but was larger, being comparable in size to the brown hyena.\nThe spotted hyena (\"Crocuta crocuta\") diverged from the striped and brown hyena 10\u00a0million years ago. Its direct ancestor was the Indian \"Crocuta sivalensis\", which lived during the Villafranchian. Ancestral spotted hyenas probably developed social behaviours in response to increased pressure from rivals on carcasses, thus forcing them to operate in teams. Spotted hyenas evolved sharp carnassials behind their crushing premolars, therefore they did not need to wait for their prey to die, and thus became pack hunters as well as scavengers. They began forming increasingly larger territories, necessitated by the fact that their prey was often migratory, and long chases in a small territory would have caused them to encroach into another clan's turf. Spotted hyenas spread from their original homeland during the Middle Pleistocene, and quickly colonised a very wide area from Europe, to southern Africa and China. \nThe eventual disappearance of the spotted hyena from Europe has traditionally been attributed to the end of the last glacial period and a subsequent displacement of open grassland by closed forests, which favoured wolves and humans instead. However, analyses have shown that climate change alone is insufficient to explain the spotted hyena's disappearance from Europe, suggesting that other factors \u2013 such as human pressure \u2013 must have played a role. This suggests that the events must be seen within the broader context of late-Quaternary extinctions, as the late Pleistocene and early Holocene saw the disappearance of many primarily large mammals from Europe and the world.\nExpansion or duplication of the olfatory receptor gene family has been found in all 4 extant species, which would have led to the evolution of the more specialised feeding habits of hyenas.\nExpansion in immune-related gene families was also found in the spotted hyena, striped hyena and brown hyena, which would have led to the evolution of the scavenging in these species. Mutations and variants were also found in digestion-related genes (\"ASH1L\", \"PTPN5\", \"PKP3\", \"AQP10\"). One of these digestion-related genes has variants also related to enhanced bone mineralisation (\"PTPN5\"), while other have also a role in inflammatory skin responses (\"PKP3\").\nIn aardwolves, expansion of genes related to toxin response were found (Lipocalin and UDP Glucuronosyltransferase gene families), which would have led to the evolution of the feeding of termites Trinervitermes in this species. Mutations and variants in genes related to craniofacial shape were also found (\"GARS\", \"GMPR\", \"STIP1\", \"SMO\" and \"PAPSS2\"). Another gene is related to protective epidermis function (\"DSC1\").\nGenera of the Hyaenidae (extinct and recent).\nThe list follows McKenna and Bell's \"Classification of Mammals\" for prehistoric genera (1997) and Wozencraft (2005) in Wilson and Reeders \"Mammal Species of the World\" for extant genera. The percrocutids are, in contrast to McKenna and Bell's classification, not included as a subfamily into the Hyaenidae, but as the separate family Percrocutidae, although they are generally grouped as sister-taxa to hyenas. However, as of 2024[ [update]] many experts consider them members of Hyaenidae. Furthermore, the living brown hyena and its closest extinct relatives are not included in the genus \"Pachycrocuta\", but in the genus \"Parahyaena\". However, some research has suggested \"Parahyaena\" may be synonymous with \"Pachycrocuta\", making the brown hyena the only extant member of this genus.\nPhylogeny.\nThe following cladogram illustrates the phylogenetic relationships between extant and extinct hyaenids based on the morphological analysis by Werdelin &amp; Solounias (1991), as updated by Turner et al. (2008).\nA more recent molecular analysis agrees on the phylogenetic relationship between the four extant hyaenidae species (Koepfli \"et al\", 2006).\nCharacteristics.\nBuild.\nHyenas have relatively short torsos and are fairly massive and wolf-like in build, but have lower hind quarters, high withers and their backs slope noticeably downward towards their rumps. The forelegs are high, while the hind legs are very short and their necks are thick and short. Their skulls superficially resemble those of large canids, but are much larger and heavier, with shorter facial portions. Hyenas are digitigrade, with the fore and hind paws having four digits each and sporting bulging pawpads. Like canids, hyenas have short, blunt, non-retractable claws. Their pelage is sparse and coarse with poorly developed or absent underfur. Most species have a rich mane of long hair running from the withers or from the head. With the exception of the spotted hyena, hyaenids have striped coats, which they likely inherited from their viverrid ancestors. Their ears are large and have simple basal ridges and no marginal bursa. Their vertebral columns, including the cervical region, are of limited mobility. Hyenas have no baculum. Hyenas have one more pair of ribs than canids do, and their tongues are rough like those of felids and viverrids. Males in most hyena species are larger than females, though the spotted hyena is an exception, as it is the female of the species that outweighs and dominates the male. Also, unlike other hyenas, the female spotted hyena's external genitalia closely resembles that of the male.\nTheir dentition is similar to that of the canid, but is more specialised for consuming coarse food and crushing bones. The carnassials, especially the upper, are very powerful and are shifted far back to the point of exertion of peak pressure on the jaws. The other teeth, save for the underdeveloped upper molars, are powerful, with broad bases and cutting edges. The canines are short, but thick and robust. Labiolingually, their mandibles are much stronger at the canine teeth than in canids, reflecting the fact that hyenas crack bones with both their anterior dentition and premolars, unlike canids, which do so with their post-carnassial molars. The strength of their jaws is such that both striped and spotted hyenas have been recorded to kill dogs with a single bite to the neck without breaking the skin. The spotted hyena is renowned for its strong bite proportional to its size, but a number of other animals (including the Tasmanian devil) are proportionately stronger. The aardwolf has greatly reduced cheek teeth, sometimes absent in the adult, but otherwise has the same dental formula as the other three species. The dental formula for all hyena species is: 3.1.4.13.1.3.1\nAlthough hyenas lack perineal scent glands, they have a large pouch of naked skin located at the anal opening. Large anal glands above the anus open into this pouch. Several sebaceous glands are present between the openings of the anal glands and above them. These glands produce a white, creamy secretion that the hyenas paste onto grass stalks. The odor of this secretion is very strong, smelling of boiling cheap soap or burning, and can be detected by humans several meters downwind. The secretions are primarily used for territorial marking, though both the aardwolf and the striped hyena will spray them when attacked.\nBehavior.\nHyenas groom themselves often like felids and viverrids, and their way of licking their genitals is very cat-like (sitting on the lower back, legs spread with one leg pointing vertically upward). They defecate in the same manner as other Carnivora, though they never raise their legs as canids do when urinating, as urination serves no territorial function for them. Instead, hyenas mark their territories using their anal glands, a trait found also in viverrids and mustelids, but not canids and felids. When attacked by lions or dogs, striped and brown hyenas will feign death, though the spotted hyena will defend itself ferociously. The spotted hyena is very vocal, producing a number of different sounds consisting of whoops, grunts, groans, lows, giggles, yells, growls, laughs and whines. The striped hyena is comparatively silent, its vocalizations being limited to a chattering laugh and howling.\nMating between hyenas involves a number of short copulations with brief intervals, unlike canids, who generally engage in a single, drawn out copulation. Spotted hyena cubs are born almost fully developed, with their eyes open and erupting incisors and canines, though lacking adult markings. In contrast, striped hyena cubs are born with adult markings, closed eyes and small ears. Hyenas do not regurgitate food for their young and male spotted hyenas play no part in raising their cubs, though male striped hyenas do so.\nThe striped hyena is primarily a scavenger, though it will also attack and kill any animals it can overcome, and will supplement its diet with fruit. The spotted hyena, though it also scavenges occasionally, is an active pack hunter of medium to large sized ungulates, which it catches by wearing them down in long chases and dismembering them in a canid-like manner. Spotted hyenas may kill as many as 95% of the animals they eat.\nThe aardwolf is primarily an insectivore, specialised for feeding on termites of the genus \"Trinervitermes\" and \"Hodotermes\", which it consumes by licking them up with its long, broad tongue. An aardwolf can eat 300,000 \"Trinervitermes\" on a single outing.\nExcept for the aardwolf, hyenas are known to drive off larger predators, like lions, from their kills, despite having a reputation in popular culture for being cowardly. Hyenas are primarily nocturnal animals, but sometimes venture from their lairs in the early-morning hours. With the exception of the highly social spotted hyena, hyenas are generally not gregarious animals, though the striped and brown hyenas may live in family groups and congregate at kills.\nSpotted hyenas are one of the few mammals other than bats known to survive infection with rabies virus and have shown little or no disease-induced mortality during outbreaks in sympatric carnivores, in part due to the high concentration of antibodies present in their saliva. Despite this perceived unique disease resistance, little is known about the immune system of spotted hyenas, and even less is known about other Hyaenidae species.\nRelationships with humans.\nFolklore, mythology and literature.\nSpotted hyenas vary in their folkloric and mythological depictions, depending on the ethnic group from which the tales originate. It is often difficult to know whether spotted hyenas are the specific hyena species featured in such stories, particularly in West Africa, as both spotted and striped hyenas are often given the same names. In West African tales, spotted hyenas are sometimes depicted as bad Muslims who challenge the local animism that exists among the Beng in C\u00f4te d'Ivoire. \nIn East Africa, Tabwa mythology portrays the spotted hyena as a solar animal that first brought the sun to warm the cold earth, while West African folklore generally shows the hyena as symbolizing immorality, dirty habits, the reversal of normal activities, and other negative traits. In Tanzania, there is a belief that witches use spotted hyenas as mounts. In the Mtwara Region of Tanzania, it is believed that a child born at night while a hyena is crying will likely grow up to be a thief. In the same area, hyena feces are believed to enable a child to walk at an early age, thus it is not uncommon in that area to see children with hyena dung wrapped in their clothes. The Kaguru of Tanzania and the Kujamaat of southern Senegal view hyenas as inedible and greedy hermaphrodites. A mythical African tribe called the Bouda is reputed to have members able to transform into hyenas. A similar myth occurs in Mans\u00f4a. These \"werehyenas\" are killed when discovered, and do not revert to human form once dead.\nStriped hyenas are often referred to in Middle Eastern literature and folklore, typically as symbols of treachery and stupidity. In the Near and Middle East, striped hyenas are generally regarded as physical incarnations of jinns. Arab writer al-Qazw\u012bn\u012b (1204\u20131283) spoke of a tribe of people called \"al-\u1e0caby\u016bn\" meaning \"hyena people\". In his book \"'Aj\u0101'ib Al-Makhl\u016bq\u0101t\" he wrote that should one of this tribe be in a group of 1,000 people, a hyena could pick him out and eat him. A Persian medical treatise written in 1376 tells how to cure cannibalistic people known as \"kaftar\", who are said to be \"half-man, half-hyena\". al-Dam\u012br\u012b in his writings in \"\u1e24away\u0101n al-Kubr\u0101\" (1406) wrote that striped hyenas were vampiric creatures that attacked people at night and sucked the blood from their necks. He also wrote that hyenas only attacked brave people. Arab folklore tells of how hyenas can mesmerise victims with their eyes or sometimes with their pheromones. \nIn a similar vein to al-Dam\u012br\u012b, the Greeks until the end of the 19th century believed that the bodies of werewolves, if not destroyed, would haunt battlefields as vampiric hyenas that drank the blood of dying soldiers. The image of striped hyenas in Afghanistan, India and Palestine is more varied. Though feared, striped hyenas were also symbolic of love and fertility, leading to numerous varieties of love medicine derived from hyena body parts. Among the Baluch and in northern India, witches or magicians are said to ride striped hyenas at night.\nThe striped hyena is mentioned in the Bible. The Arabic word for the hyena, or (plural ), is alluded to in a valley in Israel known as Shaqq-ud-Diba` (meaning \"cleft of the hyenas\") and Wadi-Abu-Diba` (meaning \"valley of the hyenas\"). Both places have been interpreted by some scholars as being the Biblical Valley of Tsebo`im mentioned in 1 Samuel 13:18. In modern Hebrew, the word for hyena and hypocrite are both the same: \"tsavua\". Though the Authorized King James Version of the Bible interprets the term \"`ayit tsavua`\" (found in Jeremiah 12:9) as \"speckled bird\", Henry Baker Tristram argued that it was most likely a hyena being mentioned.\nThe vocalization of the spotted hyena resembling hysterical human laughter has been alluded to in numerous works of literature: \"to laugh like a hy\u00e6na\" or a \"hyen\" was a common simile, and is featured in \"The Cobbler's Prophecy\" (1594), Webster's \"Duchess of Malfi\" (1623) and Shakespeare's \"As You Like It\", Act IV. Sc.1.\n\"Die Strandjutwolf\" (The brown hyena) is an allegorical poem by the renowned South African poet, N. P. van Wyk Louw, which evokes a sinister and ominous presence.\nAttacks on humans.\nOrdinarily, striped hyenas are extremely timid around humans, though they may show bold behaviors towards people at night. On rare occasions, striped hyenas have preyed on humans.\nAmong hyenas, only the spotted and striped hyenas have been known to become man-eaters. Hyenas are known to have preyed on humans in prehistory: human hair has been found in fossilized hyena dung dating back 195,000 to 257,000 years. Some paleontologists believe that competition and predation by cave hyenas (\"Crocuta crocuta spelaea\") in Siberia was a significant factor in delaying human colonization of Alaska. Hyenas may have occasionally stolen human kills, or entered campsites to drag off the young and weak, much as modern spotted hyenas do in Africa. The oldest Alaskan human remains coincide with roughly the same time cave hyenas became extinct, leading some paleontologists to infer that hyena predation prevented humans from crossing the Bering Strait earlier. \nHyenas readily scavenge from human corpses; in Ethiopia, hyenas were reported to feed extensively on the corpses of victims of the 1960 attempted coup and the Red Terror. Hyenas habituated to scavenging on human corpses may develop bold behaviors towards living people: hyena attacks on people in southern Sudan increased during the Second Sudanese Civil War, when human corpses were readily available to them.\nSpotted hyenas have been known to prey on humans in modern times, but such incidents are rare. However, attacks on humans by spotted hyenas are likely to be underreported. Man-eating spotted hyenas tend to be very large specimens; a pair of man-eating hyenas, responsible for killing 27 people in Mulanje, Malawi in 1962, weighed in at 72\u00a0kg (159\u00a0lb) and 77\u00a0kg (170\u00a0lb) after being shot. A 1903 report describes spotted hyenas in the Mzimba district of Angoniland waiting at dawn outside people's huts to attack them when they opened their doors. Victims of spotted hyenas tend to be women, children and sick or infirm men; Theodore Roosevelt wrote in 1908\u20131909 in Uganda that spotted hyenas regularly killed sufferers of African sleeping sickness as they slept outside in camps. \nSpotted hyenas are widely feared in Malawi, where they have been known to attack people at night, particularly during the hot season when people sleep outside. A spate of hyena attacks was reported in Malawi's Phalombe plain, with five deaths recorded in 1956, five in 1957 and six in 1958. This pattern continued until 1961, when eight people were killed. Attacks occurred most commonly in September, when people slept outdoors and bush fires made the hunting of wild game difficult for the hyenas. A 2004 news report stated that 35 people were killed by spotted hyenas in a 12-month period in Mozambique along a 20-km stretch of road near the Tanzanian border.\nIn the 1880s, a hyena was reported to have attacked humans, especially sleeping children, over a three-year period in the I\u011fd\u0131r Province of Turkey, with 25 children and 3 adults being wounded in one year. The attacks provoked local authorities into announcing a reward of 100 rubles for every hyena killed. Further attacks were reported later in some parts of the South Caucasus, particularly in 1908. Instances are known in Azerbaijan of striped hyenas killing children sleeping in courtyards during the 1930s and 1940s. In 1942, a sleeping guard was mauled in his hut by a hyena in Qal\u0131ncaq (Golyndzhakh). Cases of children being taken by hyenas by night are known in southeast Turkmenistan's Bathyz Nature Reserve. A further attack on a child was reported around Serakhs in 1948. Several attacks have occurred in India; in 1962, 9 children were thought to have been taken by hyenas in the town of Bhagalpur in the Bihar State in a six-week period, and 19 children up to the age of four were killed by hyenas in Karnataka in 1974. A survey of wild animal attacks during a five-year period in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh reported that hyenas had attacked three people, causing fewer deaths than wolves, gaur, boar, elephants, tigers, leopards and sloth bears.\nHyenas as food and medicine.\nHyenas have occasionally been used for food and medicinal purposes in Somalia. Some Muslims consider it halal in Islam although this is disputed by other Muslims. This practice dates back to the times of the Ancient Greeks and Romans, who believed that different parts of the hyena's body were effective means to ward off evil and to ensure love and fertility.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13927", "revid": "40561299", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13927", "title": "Hyaena", "text": ""}
{"id": "13928", "revid": "50938274", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13928", "title": "Hershey\u2013Chase experiment", "text": "DNA experiment\nThe Hershey\u2013Chase experiments were a series of experiments conducted in 1952 by Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase that helped to confirm that DNA is genetic material. \nWhile DNA had been known to biologists since 1869, many scientists still assumed at the time that proteins carried the information for inheritance because DNA appeared to be an inert molecule, and, since it is located in the nucleus, its role was considered to be phosphorus storage. In their experiments, Hershey and Chase showed that when bacteriophages, which are composed of DNA and protein, infect bacteria, their DNA enters the host bacterial cell, but most of their protein does not. Hershey and Chase and subsequent discoveries all served to prove that DNA is the hereditary material.\nHershey shared the 1969 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine with Max Delbr\u00fcck and Salvador Luria for their \"discoveries concerning the genetic structure of viruses\".\nHistorical background.\nIn the early twentieth century, biologists thought that proteins carried genetic information. This was based on the belief that proteins were more complex than DNA. Phoebus Levene's influential \"tetranucleotide hypothesis\", which incorrectly proposed that DNA was a repeating set of identical nucleotides, supported this conclusion. The results of the Avery\u2013MacLeod\u2013McCarty experiment, published in 1944, suggested that DNA was the genetic material, but there was still some hesitation within the general scientific community to accept this, which set the stage for the Hershey\u2013Chase experiment.\nHershey and Chase, along with others who had done related experiments, confirmed that DNA was the biomolecule that carried genetic information. Before that, Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn McCarty had shown that DNA led to the transformation of one strain of \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" to another. The results of these experiments provided evidence that DNA was the biomolecule that carried genetic information.\nMethods and results.\nHershey and Chase needed to be able to examine different parts of the phages they were studying separately, so they needed to distinguish the phage subsections. Viruses were known to be composed of a protein shell and DNA, so they chose to uniquely label each with a different elemental isotope. This allowed each to be observed and analyzed separately. Since phosphorus is contained in DNA but not amino acids, radioactive phosphorus-32 was used to label the DNA contained in the T2 phage. Radioactive sulfur-35 was used to label the protein sections of the T2 phage, because sulfur is contained in protein but not DNA.\nHershey and Chase inserted the radioactive elements in the bacteriophages by adding the isotopes to separate media within which bacteria were allowed to grow for 4 hours before bacteriophage introduction. When the bacteriophages infected the bacteria, the progeny contained the radioactive isotopes in their structures. This procedure was performed once for the sulfur-labeled phages and once for phosphorus-labeled phages.\nThe labeled progeny were then allowed to infect unlabeled bacteria. The phage coats remained on the outside of the bacteria, while genetic material entered. Disruption of phage from the bacteria by agitation in a blender followed by centrifugation allowed for the separation of the phage coats from the bacteria. These bacteria were lysed to release phage progeny. The progeny of the phages that were labeled with radioactive phosphorus remained labeled, whereas the progeny of the phages labeled with radioactive sulfur were unlabeled. Thus, the Hershey\u2013Chase experiment helped to confirm that DNA, not protein, is the genetic material.\nHershey and Chase showed that the introduction of deoxyribonuclease (referred to as DNase), an enzyme that breaks down DNA, into a solution containing the labeled bacteriophages did not introduce any 32P into the solution. This demonstrated that the phage is resistant to the enzyme while intact. Additionally, they were able to plasmolyze the bacteriophages so that they went into osmotic shock, which effectively created a solution containing most of the 32P and a heavier solution containing structures called \"ghosts\" that contained the 35S and the protein coat of the virus. It was found that these \"ghosts\" could adsorb to bacteria that were susceptible to T2, although they contained no DNA and were simply the remains of the original viral capsule. They concluded that the protein protected the DNA from DNase, but that once the two were separated and the phage was inactivated, the DNase could hydrolyze the phage DNA.\nExperiment and conclusions.\nHershey and Chase were also able to prove that the DNA from the phage is inserted into the bacteria shortly after the virus attaches to its host. Using a high-speed blender they were able to force the bacteriophages from the bacterial cells after adsorption. The lack of 32P-labeled DNA remaining in the solution after the bacteriophages had been allowed to adsorb to the bacteria showed that the phage DNA was transferred into the bacterial cell. The presence of almost all the radioactive 35S in the solution showed that the protein coat that protects the DNA before adsorption stayed outside the cell.\nHershey and Chase concluded that DNA, not protein, was the genetic material. They determined that a protective protein coat was formed around the bacteriophage, but that the internal DNA is what conferred its ability to produce progeny inside a bacterium. They showed that, in growth, protein has no function, while DNA has some function. They determined this from the amount of radioactive material remaining outside of the cell. Only 20% of the 32P remained outside the cell, demonstrating that it was incorporated with DNA in the cell's genetic material. All of the 35S in the protein coats remained outside the cell, showing it was not incorporated into the cell, and that protein is not the genetic material.\nHershey and Chase's experiment concluded that little sulfur-containing material entered the bacterial cell. However no specific conclusions can be made regarding whether material that is sulfur-free enters the bacterial cell after phage adsorption. Further research was necessary to conclude that it was solely bacteriophages' DNA that entered the cell and not a combination of protein and DNA where the protein did not contain any sulfur.\nDiscussion.\nConfirmation.\nHershey and Chase concluded that protein was not likely to be the hereditary genetic material. However, they did not make any conclusions regarding the specific function of DNA as hereditary material, and only said that it must have some undefined role.\nConfirmation and clarity came a year later in 1953, when James D. Watson and Francis Crick correctly hypothesized, in their journal article \"\", the double helix structure of DNA, and suggested the copying mechanism by which DNA functions as hereditary material. Furthermore, Watson and Crick suggested that DNA, the genetic material, is responsible for the synthesis of the thousands of proteins found in cells. They had made this proposal based on the structural similarity that exists between the two macromolecules: both protein and DNA are linear sequences of monomers (amino acids and nucleotides, respectively).\nOther experiments.\nOnce the Hershey\u2013Chase experiment was published, the scientific community generally acknowledged that DNA was the genetic code material. This discovery led to a more detailed investigation of DNA to determine its composition as well as its 3D structure. Using X-ray crystallography, the structure of DNA was discovered by James Watson and Francis Crick with the help of previously documented experimental evidence by Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin.\nKnowledge of the structure of DNA led scientists to examine the nature of genetic coding and, in turn, understand the process of protein synthesis. George Gamow proposed that the genetic code was composed of sequences of three DNA base pairs known as triplets or codons which represent one of the twenty amino acids. Genetic coding helped researchers to understand the mechanism of gene expression, the process by which information from a gene is used in protein synthesis. Since then, much research has been conducted to modulate steps in the gene expression process. These steps include transcription, RNA splicing, translation, and post-translational modification which are used to control the chemical and structural nature of proteins. Moreover, genetic engineering gives engineers the ability to directly manipulate the genetic materials of organisms using recombinant DNA techniques. The first recombinant DNA molecule was created by Paul Berg in 1972 when he combined DNA from the monkey virus SV40 with that of the lambda phage.\nExperiments on hereditary material during the time of the Hershey\u2013Chase experiment often used bacteriophages as a model organism. Bacteriophages lend themselves to experiments on hereditary material because they incorporate their genetic material into their host cell's genetic material (making them useful tools), they multiply quickly, and they are easily collected by researchers.\nLegacy.\nThe Hershey\u2013Chase experiment, its predecessors, such as the Avery\u2013MacLeod\u2013McCarty experiment, and successors served to unequivocally establish that hereditary information was carried by DNA. This finding has numerous applications in forensic science, crime investigation and genealogy. It provided the background knowledge for further applications in DNA forensics, where DNA fingerprinting uses data originating from DNA, not protein sources, to deduce genetic variation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13929", "revid": "41665273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13929", "title": "History of religion", "text": "The history of religion is the written record of human religious feelings, thoughts, and ideas. This period of religious history begins with the invention of writing about 5,200 years ago (3200 BCE). The prehistory of religion involves the study of religious beliefs that existed prior to the advent of written records. One can also study comparative religious chronology through a timeline of religion, or the interrelationships and historical diversification of religious ideologies through the use of evolutionary philosophy and broad comparativism. Writing played a major role in standardizing religious texts regardless of time or location and making easier the memorization of prayers and divine rules.\nThe concept of \"religion\" was formed in the 16th and 17th centuries. Sacred texts like the Bible, the Quran, and others did not have a word or even a concept of religion in the original languages and neither did the people or the cultures in which these sacred texts were written.\nThe word \"religion\" as used in the 21st century does not have an obvious pre-colonial translation into non-European languages. The anthropologist Daniel Dubuisson writes that \"what the West and the history of religions in its wake have objectified under the name 'religion' is ... something quite unique, which could be appropriate only to itself and its own history\".\nHistory of study.\nThe school of religious history called the , a late 19th-century German school of thought, originated the systematic study of religion as a socio-cultural phenomenon. It depicted religion as evolving with human culture, from polytheism to monotheism.\nThe emerged at a time when scholarly study of the Bible and of church history flourished in Germany and elsewhere (see higher criticism, also called the \"historical-critical method\"). The study of religion is important: religion and similar concepts have often shaped civilizations' law and moral codes, social structure, art and music.\nIn order to better understand the origin and current diversity of religious belief systems throughout the world, recent studies have attempted to focus on historical interrelationships and diversification of all major organized religions, applying modern evolutionary philosophy to the comparative analysis of putative ideological groups. These studies take an agnostic, pluralistic approach in the hope of moving beyond chauvinistic cultural tribalism, which is increasingly interfering with our ability to understand \"other\" cultures and address growing global challenges.\nOrigin.\nThe earliest archeological evidence interpreted by some as suggestive of the emergence of religious ideas dates back several hundred thousand years, to the Middle and Lower Paleolithic periods: some archaeologists conclude that the apparently intentional burial of archaic humans, Neanderthals and even \"Homo naledi\" as early as 300,000 years ago is proof that religious ideas already existed, but such a connection is entirely conjectural. Other evidence that some infer as indicative of religious ideas includes symbolic artifacts from Middle Stone Age sites in Africa. However, the interpretation of early Paleolithic artifacts, with regard to how they relate to religious ideas, remains controversial. Archeological evidence from more recent periods is less controversial. Scientists generally interpret a number of artifacts from the Upper Paleolithic (50,000\u201313,000 BCE) as representing religious ideas. Examples of Upper Paleolithic remains that some associate with religious beliefs include the lion man, the Venus figurines, and the elaborate ritual burial from Sungir.\nIn the 19th century, researchers proposed various theories regarding the origin of religion, challenging earlier claims of a Christianity-like urreligion. Early theorists, such as Edward Burnett Tylor (1832\u20131917) and Herbert Spencer (1820\u20131903), emphasized the concept of animism, while archaeologist John Lubbock (1834\u20131913) used the term \"fetishism\". Meanwhile, the religious scholar Max M\u00fcller (1823\u20131900) theorized that religion began in hedonism and the folklorist Wilhelm Mannhardt (1831\u20131880) suggested that religion began in \"naturalism\" \u2013 by which he meant mythological explanations for natural events. All of these theories have been widely criticized since then; there is no broad consensus regarding the origin of religion.\nPre-pottery Neolithic A (PPNA) G\u00f6bekli Tepe, the oldest potentially religious site yet discovered anywhere includes circles of erected massive T-shaped stone pillars, the world's oldest known megaliths decorated with abstract, enigmatic pictograms and carved-animal reliefs. The site, near the home place of original wild wheat, was built before the so-called Neolithic Revolution, i.e., the beginning of agriculture and animal husbandry around 9000 BCE. But the construction of G\u00f6bekli Tepe implies organization of an advanced order not hitherto associated with Paleolithic, PPNA, or PPNB societies. The site, abandoned around the time the first agricultural societies started, is still being excavated and analyzed, and thus might shed light on the significance it had, if any, for the religions of older, foraging communities, as well as for the general history of religions.\nThe Pyramid Texts from ancient Egypt, the oldest known religious texts in the world, date to between 2400 and 2300 BCE.\nThe earliest records of Indian religion are the Vedas, composed c.\u20091500\u20131200 BCE during the Vedic Period.\nSurviving early copies of religious texts include:\nAxial age.\nSome historians have labelled the period from 900 to 200 BCE as the \"axial age\", a term coined by German-Swiss philosopher Karl Jaspers (1883\u20131969). According to Jaspers, in this era of history \"the spiritual foundations of humanity were laid simultaneously and independently... And these are the foundations upon which humanity still subsists today.\" Intellectual historian Peter Watson has summarized this period as the foundation time of many of humanity's most influential philosophical traditions, including monotheism in Persia and Canaan, Platonism in Greece, Buddhism and Jainism in India, and Confucianism and Taoism in China. These ideas would become institutionalized in time \u2013 note for example Ashoka's role in the spread of Buddhism, or the role of Neoplatonic philosophy in Christianity at its foundation.\nThe historical roots of Jainism in India date back to the 9th century BCE with the rise of Parshvanatha and his non-violent philosophy.\nMiddle Ages.\nWorld religions of the present day established themselves throughout Eurasia during the Middle Ages by:\nDuring the Middle Ages, Muslims came into conflict with Zoroastrians during the Muslim conquest of Persia (633\u2013654); Christians fought against Muslims during the Arab\u2013Byzantine wars (7th to 11th centuries), the Crusades (1095 onward), the Reconquista (718\u20131492), the Ottoman wars in Europe (13th century onwards) and the Inquisition; Shamanism was in conflict with Buddhists, Taoists, Muslims and Christians during the Mongol invasions and conquests (1206\u20131337); and Muslims clashed with Hindus and Sikhs during the Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent (8th to 16th centuries).\nMany medieval religious movements continued to emphasize mysticism, such as the Cathars and related movements in the West, the Jews in Spain (see Zohar), the Bhakti movement in India and Sufism in Islam. Monotheism and related mysticisms reached definite forms in Christian Christology and in Islamic Tawhid. Hindu monotheist notions of Brahman likewise reached their classical form with the teaching of Adi Shankara (788\u2013820).\nModern Ages.\nFrom the 15th century to the 19th century, European colonisation resulted in the spread of Christianity to Sub-Saharan Africa, and the Americas, Australia and the Philippines. The invention of the printing press in the 15th century played a major role in the rapid spread of the Protestant Reformation under leaders such as Martin Luther (1483\u20131546) and John Calvin (1509\u20131564). Wars of religion broke out, culminating in the Thirty Years' War which ravaged Central Europe between 1618 and 1648. The 18th century saw the beginning of secularisation in Europe, a trend which gained momentum after the French Revolution broke out in 1789. By the late 20th century, religion had declined in most of Europe.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\nShamanism and ancestor worship.\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPolytheism.\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDualism.\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13930", "revid": "6653047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13930", "title": "House music", "text": "Genre of electronic dance music\nHouse music, or simply house, is a genre of electronic dance music characterized by a repetitive four-on-the-floor beat and a typical tempo of 115\u2013130 beats per minute. It was created by DJs and music producers from Chicago's underground club culture and evolved slowly in the early/mid 1980s as DJs began altering disco songs to give them a more mechanical beat. By early 1988, house became mainstream and supplanted the typical '80s music beat.\nHouse was created and pioneered by DJs and producers in Chicago such as Frankie Knuckles, Ron Hardy, Jesse Saunders, Chip E., Joe Smooth, Steve \"Silk\" Hurley, Farley \"Jackmaster\" Funk, Marshall Jefferson, Phuture, and others. House music initially expanded to New York City, then internationally to cities such as London, and ultimately became a worldwide phenomenon.\nHouse has a large influence on pop music, especially dance music. It was incorporated into works by major international artists including Whitney Houston, Mariah Carey, Janet Jackson, Madonna, Pet Shop Boys, Kylie Minogue and Lady Gaga, and produced many mainstream hits such as \"Pump Up the Jam\" by Technotronic, \"French Kiss\" by Lil Louis, \"Show Me Love\" by Robin S., and \"Push the Feeling On\" by the Nightcrawlers. Many house DJs also did and continue to do remixes for pop artists. House music has remained popular on radio and in clubs while retaining a foothold on the underground scenes across the globe.\nCharacteristics.\nIn its most typical form, the genre is characterized by repetitive 4/4 rhythms including bass drums, off-beat hi-hats, snare drums, claps, and/or snaps at a tempo of between 120 and 130 beats per minute (bpm); synthesizer riffs; deep basslines; and often, but not necessarily, sung, spoken or sampled vocals. In house, the bass drum is usually played on beats one, two, three, and four, and the snare drum, claps, or other higher-pitched percussion on beats two and four. The drumbeats in house music are almost always provided by an electronic drum machine, often a Roland TR-808, TR-909, or a TR-707. Claps, shakers, snare drum, or hi-hat sounds are used to add syncopation. One of the signature rhythm riffs, especially in early Chicago house, is built on the clave pattern. Congas and bongos may be added for an African sound, or metallic percussion for a Latin feel.\nSometimes, the drum sounds are \"saturated\" by boosting the gain to create a more aggressive edge. One classic subgenre, acid house, is defined through the squelchy sounds created by the Roland TB-303 bass synthesizer. House music could be produced on \"cheap and consumer-friendly electronic equipment\" and used sound gear, which made it easier for independent labels and DJs to create tracks. The electronic drum machines and other gear used by house DJs and producers were formerly considered \"too cheap-sounding\" by \"proper\" musicians. House music producers typically use sampled instruments, rather than bringing session musicians into a recording studio. Even though a key element of house production is layering sounds, such as drum machine beats, samples, synth basslines, and so on, the overall \"texture...is relatively sparse\". Unlike pop songs, which emphasize higher-pitched sounds like melody, in house music, the lower-pitched bass register is most important.\nHouse tracks typically involve an intro, a chorus, various verse sections, a midsection, and a brief outro. Some tracks do not have a verse, taking a vocal part from the chorus and repeating the same cycle. House music tracks are often based on eight-bar sections which are repeated. They are often built around bass-heavy loops or basslines produced by a synthesizer and/or around samples of disco, soul, jazz-funk, or funk songs. DJs and producers creating a house track to be played in clubs may make a \"seven or eight-minute 12-inch mix\"; if the track is intended to be played on the radio, a \"three-and-a-half-minute\" radio edit is used. House tracks build up slowly, by adding layers of sound and texture, and by increasing the volume.\nHouse tracks may have vocals like a pop song, but some are \"completely minimal instrumental music\". If a house track does have vocals, the vocal lines may also be simple \"words or phrases\" that are repeated.\nOrigins of the term \"house\".\nOne book from 2009 states the name \"house music\" originated from a Chicago club called the Warehouse that was open from 1977 to 1982. Clubbers to the Warehouse were primarily black gay men, who came to dance to music played by the club's resident DJ, Frankie Knuckles, who fans refer to as the \"godfather of house\". Frankie began the trend of splicing together different records when he found that the records he had were not long enough to satisfy his audience of dancers. After the Warehouse closed in 1983, eventually the crowds went to Knuckles' new club, The Power House, later to be called The Power Plant, and the club was renamed, yet again, into Music Box with Ron Hardy as the resident DJ. The 1986 documentary, \"House Music in Chicago\", by filmmaker Phil Ranstrom, captured opening night at The Power House, and stands as the only film or video to capture a young Frankie Knuckles in this early era, right after his departure from The Warehouse.\nIn the Channel 4 documentary \"Pump Up the Volume\", Knuckles remarks that the first time he heard the term \"house music\" was upon seeing \"we play house music\" on a sign in the window of a bar on Chicago's South Side. One of the people in the car joked, \"you know that's the kind of music you play down at the Warehouse!\" In self-published statements, South-Side Chicago DJ Leonard \"Remix\" Rroy claimed he put such a sign in a tavern window because it was where he played music that one might find in one's home; in his case, it referred to his mother's soul and disco records, which he worked into his sets.\nChicago house artist Farley \"Jackmaster\" Funk was quoted as saying, \"In 1982, I was DJing at a club called The Playground and there was this kid named Leonard 'Remix' Rroy who was a DJ at a rival club called The Rink. He came over to my club one night, and into the DJ booth and said to me, 'I've got the gimmick that's gonna take all the people out of your club and into mine \u2013 it's called House music'. Now, where he got that name from or what made him think of it I don't know, so the answer lies with him\".\nChicago artist Chip E.'s 1985 song \"It's House\" may also have helped to define this new form of electronic music. However, Chip E. himself lends credence to the Knuckles association, claiming the name came from methods of labeling records at the Importes Etc. record store, where he worked in the early 1980s. Bins of music that DJ Knuckles played at the Warehouse nightclub were labelled \"As Heard at the Warehouse\" in the store, shortened to \"House\". Patrons later asked for new music for the bins, which Chip E. implies was a demand the shop tried to meet by stocking newer local club hits.\nIn a 1986 interview, when Rocky Jones, the club DJ who ran Chicago-based DJ International Records, was asked about the \"house\" moniker, and he did not mention Importes Etc., Frankie Knuckles, or the Warehouse by name. However, he agreed that \"house\" was a regional catch-all term for dance music, and that it was once synonymous with older disco music before it became a way to refer to \"new\" dance music.\nLarry Heard, a.k.a. \"Mr. Fingers\", claims that the term \"house\" came from DJs creating music in their house or at home using synthesizers and drum machines, such as the Roland TB-303, Roland TR-808, and TR-909. These synthesizers were used to create the acid house subgenre. Juan Atkins, a pioneer of Detroit techno, claims the term \"house\" reflected the association of particular tracks with particular clubs and DJs, considered their \"house\" records.\nDance style.\nAt least three styles of dancing are associated with early house music: jacking, footwork and lofting. These styles include a variety of techniques and sub-styles, including skating, stomping, vosho, pouting cat, and shuffle steps (also see Melbourne shuffle). House music dancing styles can include movements from many other forms of dance, such as waacking, voguing, capoeira, jazz dance, Lindy Hop, tap dance, and even modern dance. House dancing is associated with a complete freedom of expression.\nOne of the primary elements in house dancing is \"the jack\" or \"jacking\" \u2014 a style created in the early days of Chicago house that left its trace in numerous record titles such as \"Time to Jack\" by Chip E. from the \"Jack Trax\" EP (1985), \"Jack'n the House\" by Farley \"Jackmaster\" Funk (1985) or \"Jack Your Body\" by Steve \"Silk\" Hurley (1986). It involves moving the torso forward and backward in a rippling motion matching the beat of the music, as if a wave were passing through it.\nSocial and political aspects.\nEarly house lyrics contained generally positive, uplifting messages, but spoke especially to those who were considered to be outsiders, especially African Americans, Latinos, and the gay subculture. The house music dance scene was one of the most integrated and progressive spaces in the 1980s; the black and gay populations, as well as other minority groups, were able to dance together in a positive environment.\nHouse music DJs aimed to create a \"dream world of emotions\" with \"stories, keywords and sounds\", which helped to \"glue\" communities together. Many house tracks encourage the audience to \"release yourself\" or \"let yourself go\", which is further encouraged by the continuous dancing, \"incessant beat\", and use of club drugs, which can create a trance-like effect on dancers. Frankie Knuckles once said that the Warehouse club in Chicago was like \"church for people who have fallen from grace\". House record producer Marshall Jefferson compared it to \"old-time religion in the way that people just get happy and screamin'\". The role of a house DJ has been compared to a \"secular type of priest\".\nSome house lyrics contained messages calling for equality, unity, and freedom of expression beyond racial or sexual differences (e.g. \"Can You Feel It\" by Fingers Inc., 1987, or \"Follow Me\" by Aly-Us, 1992). Later on in the 1990s, independently from the Chicago scene, the idea of Peace, Love, Unity &amp; Respect (PLUR) became a widespread set of principles for the rave culture.\nHistory.\nInfluences and precursors.\nOne of the main influences of house was disco, house music having been defined as a genre which \"...picked up where disco left off in the late 1970's\". Like disco DJs, house DJs used a \"slow mix\" to \"lin[k] records together\" into a mix. In the post-disco club culture during the early 1980s, DJs from the gay scene made their tracks \"less pop-oriented\", with a more mechanical, repetitive beat and deeper basslines, and many tracks were made without vocals, or with wordless melodies. Disco became so popular by the late 1970s that record companies pushed even non-disco artists (R&amp;B and soft rock acts, for example) to record disco songs. When the backlash against disco started, known as \"Disco Demolition Night\", held in Chicago, ironically the city where house music would be created a few years later, dance music went from being produced by major labels to being created by DJs in the underground club scene. That is until several years later by 1988, when major labels would begin signing acts from this new dance genre.\nWhile disco was associated with lush orchestration, with string orchestra, flutes and horn sections, various later disco songs incorporated sounds produced with synthesizers and electronic drum machines, and some compositions were entirely electronic: one of the earliest examples includes Italian composer Giorgio Moroder's late 1970s productions such as Donna Summer's hit single \"I Feel Love\" (1977), or albums like Cerrone's \"Supernature\" (1977), Kraftwerk's \"The Man-Machine\" (1978), Yellow Magic Orchestra's synth- and disco-pop productions from \"Yellow Magic Orchestra\" (1978) or \"Solid State Survivor\" (1979), and several early 1980s productions by Hi-NRG groups like Lime, Trans-X and Bobby O.\nAlso important for the development of house were audio mixing and editing techniques earlier explored by disco, garage house and post-disco DJs, record producers, and audio engineers such as Walter Gibbons, Tom Moulton, Jim Burgess, Larry Levan, M &amp; M, and others.\nWhile most post-disco disc jockeys primarily stuck to playing their conventional ensemble and playlist of dance records, Frankie Knuckles and Ron Hardy, two influential DJs of house music, were known for their unusual and non-mainstream playlists and mixing. Knuckles, often credited as \"the Godfather of House\" and resident DJ at the Warehouse club in Chicago from 1977 to 1982, worked primarily with early disco music with a hint of new and different post-punk or post-disco music. Knuckles started out as a disco DJ, but when he moved from New York City to Chicago, he changed from the typical disco mixing style of playing records one after another; instead, he mixed different songs together, including Philadelphia soul and Euro disco. He also explored adding a drum machine and a reel-to-reel tape player so he could create new tracks, often with a boosted deep register and faster tempos. Knuckles said: \"Kraftwerk were main components in the creation of house music in Chicago. Back in the early '80s, I mixed our '80s Philly sound with the electro beats of Kraftwerk and the Electronic body music bands of Europe.\"\nRon Hardy produced unconventional DIY mixtapes which he later played straight-on in the successor of the Warehouse, the Music Box (reopened and renamed in 1983 after Knuckles left). Like Frankie Knuckles, Hardy \"combined certain sounds, remixing tracks with added synths and drum machines\", all \"refracted through the futurist lens of European music\". Marshall Jefferson, who would later appear with the 1986 house classic \"Move Your Body (The House Music Anthem)\" (originally released on Trax Records), describes how he got involved in house music after hearing Ron Hardy's music in the Music Box:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I wasn't even into dance music before I went to the Music Box [...]. I was into rock and roll. We would get drunk and listen to rock and roll. We didn't give a fuck, we were like 'Disco Sucks!' and all that. I hated dance music 'cos I couldn't dance. I thought dance music was kind of wimpy, until I heard it at like Music Box volume.\"\u2014\u200a\nA precursor to house music is the Colonel Abrams' hit song \"Trapped\", which was produced by Richard James Burgess in 1984 and has been referred to as a proto-house track and a precursor to \"garage house music\", a subgenre also called \"garage music\" that actually consisted of the New York City/New Jersey scene of the main genre.\nThe electronic instrumentation and minimal arrangement of Charanjit Singh's \"\" (1982), an album of Indian ragas performed in a disco style and anticipated the sounds of acid house music, but it is not known to have had any influence on the genre prior to the album's rediscovery in the 21st century. According to Hillegonda C. Rietveld, \"elements of hip hop/rap music can be found in contemporary house tracks\", with hip hop acting as an \"accent or inflection\" that is inserted into the house sound.\nThe constant bass drum in house music may have arisen from DJs experimenting with adding drum machines to their live mixes at clubs, underneath the records they were playing.\n1980s: Chicago house, acid house and deep house.\nIn the early 1980s, Chicago radio jocks Hot Mix 5 from WBMX radio station (among them Farley \"Jackmaster\" Funk), and club DJs Ron Hardy and Frankie Knuckles played a range of styles of dance music, including older disco records (mostly Philly disco and Salsoul tracks), electro funk tracks by artists such as Afrika Bambaataa, newer Italo disco, Arthur Baker, and John Robie, and electronic pop. Some DJs made and played their own edits of their favorite songs on reel-to-reel tape, and sometimes mixed in electronic effects, drum machines, synthesizers and other rhythmic electronic instrumentation.\nThe hypnotic electronic dance song \"On and On\", produced in 1984 by Chicago DJ Jesse Saunders and co-written by Vince Lawrence, had typical elements of the early house sound, such as the Roland TB-303 bass synthesizer and minimal vocals, as well as a Roland TR-808 drum machine and a Korg Poly-61 synthesizer. It also utilized the bassline from Player One's disco record \"Space Invaders\" (1979). \"On and On\" is sometimes cited as the \"first house record\", even though it was a remake of a Disco Bootleg \"On and On\" by Florida producer Mach. Other examples from around that time, such as J.M. Silk's \"Music is the Key\" (1985), have also been referred to as the first house tracks.\nStarting in 1985 and 1986, more and more Chicago DJs began producing and releasing original compositions. These compositions used newly affordable electronic instruments and enhanced styles of disco and other dance music they already favored. These homegrown productions were played on Chicago radio stations and in local clubs catering mainly to black, Mexican American, and gay audiences. Subgenres of house, including deep house and acid house, quickly emerged and gained traction.\nDeep house's origins can be traced to Chicago producer Mr. Fingers's relatively jazzy, soulful recordings \"Mystery of Love\" (1985) and \"Can You Feel It?\" (1986). According to author Richie Unterberger, it moved house music away from its \"posthuman tendencies back towards the lush\" soulful sound of early disco music.\nAcid house, a rougher and more abstract subgenre, arose from Chicago artists' experiments with the squelchy sounds of the Roland TB-303 bass synthesizer that define the genre. Its origin on vinyl is generally cited as Phuture's \"Acid Tracks\" (Trax Records, 1987). Phuture, a group founded by Nathan \"DJ Pierre\" Jones, Earl \"Spanky\" Smith Jr., and Herbert \"Herb J\" Jackson, is credited with having been the first to use the TB-303 in the house music context. The group's 12-minute \"Acid Tracks\" was recorded to tape and played by DJ Ron Hardy at the Music Box, supposedly already by 1985. Hardy once played it four times over the course of an evening until the crowd responded favorably.\nClub play of house tracks by pioneering Chicago DJs such as Ron Hardy and Lil Louis, local dance music record shops such as Importes Etc., State Street Records, Loop Records, Gramaphone Records and the popular Hot Mix 5 shows on radio station WBMX-FM helped popularize house music in Chicago. Later, visiting DJs and producers from Detroit fell into the genre. Trax Records and DJ International Records, Chicago labels with wider distribution, helped popularize house music inside and outside of Chicago.\nThe first major success of house music outside the U.S. is considered to be Farley \"Jackmaster\" Funk's \"Love Can't Turn Around\" (feat. Jesse Saunders and performed by Darryl Pandy), which peaked at number 10 in the UK singles chart in 1986. Around that time, UK record labels started releasing house music by Chicago acts, but as the genre grew popular, the UK itself became one of the new hot spots for house, acid house and techno music, experiencing the so-called second summer of love between 1988 and 1989.\nDetroit and techno.\nIn Detroit during the early and mid-1980s, a new kind of electronic dance music began to emerge around Juan Atkins, Derrick May and Kevin Saunderson, known as the Belleville Three. The artists fused eclectic, futuristic sounds into a signature Detroit dance sound that was a main influence for the later techno genre. Their music included strong influences from Chicago house, although the term \"house\" played a less important role in Detroit than in Chicago, and the term \"techno\" was established instead. In early 1983, a white-label single for Depeche Mode's single \"Get the Balance Right!\" found its way to Saunderson and May, who both played the single in clubs. Saunderson later said that the song was \"the first house [music] record.\" One of their most successful hits was a vocal house track named \"Big Fun\" by Inner City, a group produced by Kevin Saunderson, in 1988.\nAnother major and even earlier influence on the Detroit artists was electronic music in the tradition of Germany's Kraftwerk. Atkins had released electro music in that style with his group Cybotron as early as 1981. Cybotron's best known songs are \"Cosmic Cars\" (1982) and \"Clear\" (1983); a 1984 release was titled \"Techno City\". In 1988, Atkins produced the track \"Techno Music\", which was featured on an influential compilation that was initially planned to be named \"The House Sound of Detroit\", but was renamed into \"Techno! The New Dance Sound of Detroit\" after Atkins' song.\nThe 1987 song \"Strings of Life\" by Derrick May (under the name Rhythm Is Rhythm) represented a darker, more intellectual strain of early Detroit electronic dance music. It is considered a classic in both the house and techno genre and shows the connection and the \"boundary between house and techno.\" It made way to what was later known as \"techno\" in the internationally known sense of the word, referring to a harder, faster, colder, more machine-driven and minimal sound than house, as played by Detroit's Underground Resistance and Jeff Mills.\nUK: Acid house, rave culture and the Second Summer of Love.\nWith house music already important in the 1980s dance club scene, eventually house penetrated the UK singles chart. London DJ \"Evil\" Eddie Richards spun at dance parties as resident at the Clink Street club. Richards' approach to house focuses on the deep basslines. Nicknamed the UK's \"Godfather of House\", he and Clink co-residents Kid Batchelor and Mr. C played a key role in early UK house. House first charted in the UK in Wolverhampton following the success of the Northern Soul scene. The record generally credited as the first house hit in the UK was Farley \"Jackmaster\" Funk's \"Love Can't Turn Around\", which reached number 10 in the UK singles chart in September 1986.\nIn January 1987, Chicago DJ/artist Steve \"Silk\" Hurley's \"Jack Your Body\" reached number one in the UK, showing it was possible for house music to achieve crossover success in the main singles chart. The same month also saw Raze enter the top 20 with \"Jack the Groove\", and several other house hits reached the top ten that year. Stock Aitken Waterman (SAW) expensively produced productions for Mel and Kim, including the number-one hit \"Respectable\", added elements of house to their previous Europop sound. SAW session group Mirage scored top-ten hits with \"Jack Mix II\" and \"Jack Mix IV\", medleys of previous electro and Europop hits rearranged in a house music style. Key labels in the rise of house music in the UK included:\nIn March 1987, the UK tour of influential US DJs such as Knuckles, Jefferson, Fingers Inc. (Heard), and Adonis on the DJ International Tour boosted house's popularity in the UK. Following the success of MARRS' \"Pump Up The Volume\" in October, from 1987 to 1989, UK acts such as The Beatmasters, Krush, Coldcut, Yazz, Bomb The Bass, S-Express, and Italy's Black Box opened the doors to house music success on the UK charts. Early British house music quickly set itself apart from the original Chicago house sound. Many of the early hits were based on sample montage, and unlike the US soulful vocals, in UK house, rap was often used for vocals (far more than in the US), and humor and wit was an important element.\nThe second best-selling British single of 1988 was an acid house record, the Coldcut-produced \"The Only Way Is Up\" by Yazz. One of the early club anthems, \"Promised Land\" by Joe Smooth, was covered and charted within a week by UK band The Style Council. Europeans embraced house, and began booking important American house DJs to play at the big clubs, such as Ministry of Sound, whose resident, Justin Berkmann brought in US pioneer Larry Levan.\nThe house music club scene in cities such as Birmingham, Leeds, Sheffield, Wolverhampton, and London were provided with dance tracks by many underground pirate radio stations. Club DJs also brought in new house styles, which helped bolster this music genre. The earliest UK house and techno record labels, such as Warp Records and Network Records (formed out of Kool Kat records), helped introduce American and later Italian dance music to Britain. These labels also promoted UK dance music acts. By the end of the 1980s, UK DJs Jen\u00f6, Thomas, Markie and Garth moved to San Francisco and called their group the Wicked Crew. The Wicked Crew's dance sound transmitted UK styles to the US, which helped to trigger the birth of the US west coast's rave scene.\nThe manager of Manchester's Factory nightclub and co-owner of The Ha\u00e7ienda, Tony Wilson, also promoted acid house culture on his weekly TV show. The UK midlands also embraced the late 1980s house scene with illegal parties and raves and more legal dance clubs such as The Hummingbird.\nChicago's second wave: Hip house and ghetto house.\nWhile the acid house hype spawned in the UK and Europe, in Chicago it reached its peak around 1988 and then declined in popularity. Instead, a crossover of house and hip-hop music, known as hip house, became popular. Tyree Cooper's single \"Turn Up the Bass\" featuring Kool Rock Steady from 1988 was an influential breakthrough for this subgenre, although the British trio the Beatmasters claimed having invented the genre with their 1986 release \"Rok da House\". Another notable figure in the hip house scene was Fast Eddie with \"Hip House\" and \"Yo Yo Get Funky!\" (both 1988). Even Farley \"Jackmaster\" Funk engaged in the genre, releasing \"Free at Last\", a song to free James Brown from jail that featured The Hip House Syndicate, in 1989, and producing a \"Real Hip House\" compilation on his label, House Records, in 1990.\nThe early 1990s saw new Chicago house artists emerge, such as Armando Gallop, who had released seminal acid house records since 1987, but became even more influential by co-founding the new Warehouse nightclub in Chicago (on 738 W. Randolph Street) in which he also was resident DJ from 1992 until 1994, and founding Warehouse Records in 1988.\nAnother important figure during the early to mid-1990s and until the 2000s was DJ and producer Paul Johnson, who released the Warehouse-anthem \"Welcome to the Warehouse\" on Armando's label in 1994 in collaboration with Armando himself. He also had part in the development of an entirely new kind of Chicago house sound, \"ghetto house\", which was prominently released and popularized through the Dance Mania record label. It was originally founded by Jesse Saunders in 1985 but passed on to Raymond Barney in 1988. It featured notable ghetto house artists like DJ Funk, DJ Deeon, DJ Milton, Paul Johnson and others. The label is regarded as hugely influential in the history of Chicago house music, and has been described as \"ghetto house's Motown\".\nOne of the prototypes for Dance Mania's new ghetto house sound was the single \"(It's Time for the) Percolator\" by Cajmere, also known as Green Velvet, from 1992. Cajmere started the labels Cajual Records and Relief Records, the latter combining the sound of Chicago, acid, and ghetto house with the harder sound of techno. By the early 1990s, artists of note on those two labels included Dajae, DJ Sneak, Derrick Carter, DJ Rush, Paul Johnson, Joe Lewis, and Glenn Underground.\nNew York and New Jersey: Garage house and the \"Jersey sound\".\nWhile house became popular in UK and continental Europe, the scene in the US had still not progressed beyond a small number of clubs in Chicago, Detroit, New York City, and Newark. In New York and Newark, the terms \"garage house\", \"garage music\", or simply \"garage\", and \"Jersey sound\", or \"New Jersey house\", were coined for a deeper, more soulful, R&amp;B-derived subgenre of house that was developed in the Paradise Garage nightclub in New York City and Club Zanzibar in Newark, New Jersey, during the early-to-mid 1980s. It is argued that garage house predates the development of Chicago house, as it is relatively closer to disco than other dance styles. As Chicago house gained international popularity, New York and New Jersey's music scene was distinguished from the \"house\" umbrella.\nIn comparison to other forms of house music, garage house, and Jersey sound include more gospel-influenced piano riffs and female vocals. The genre was popular in the 1980s in the United States and in the 1990s in the United Kingdom. DJs playing it include Tony Humphries at Club Zanzibar, Larry Levan, who was resident DJ at the Paradise Garage from 1977 to 1987, Todd Terry, Kerri Chandler, Masters at Work, Junior Vasquez, and others.\nIn the late 1980s, Nu Groove Records launched and nurtured the careers of Rheji Burrell and Rhano Burrell, collectively known as Burrell (after a brief stay on Virgin America via Timmy Regisford and Frank Mendez). Nu Groove also had a stable of other NYC underground scene DJs. The Burrells created the \"New York Underground\" sound of house, and they did more than 30 releases on this label featuring this sound.\nThe emergence of New York's DJ and producer Todd Terry in 1988 demonstrated the continuum from the underground disco approach to a new and commercially successful house sound. Terry's cover of Class Action's \"Weekend\" (mixed by Larry Levan) shows how Terry drew on newer hip-hop influences, such as the quicker sampling and the more rugged basslines.\nIbiza.\nHouse was also being developed by DJs and record producers in the booming dance club scene in Ibiza, notably when DJ Alfredo, the father of Balearic house, began his residency at Amnesia in 1983. While no house artists or labels came from Ibiza at the time, mixing experiments and innovations done by Ibiza DJs helped to influence the house style. By the mid-1980s, a distinct Balearic mix of house was discernible. Several influential clubs in Ibiza, such as Amnesia, with DJ Alfredo at the decks, were playing a mix of rock, pop, disco, and house. These clubs, fuelled by their distinctive sound and copious consumption of the club drug Ecstasy (MDMA), began to influence the British scene. By late 1987, DJs such as Trevor Fung, Paul Oakenfold and Danny Rampling were bringing the Ibiza sound to key UK clubs such as the Ha\u00e7ienda in Manchester. Ibiza influences also spread to DJs working London clubs, such as Shoom in Southwark, Heaven, Future, and Spectrum.\nOther regional scenes.\nBy the late 1980s, house DJing and production had moved to the US's west coast, particularly to San Francisco, Oakland, Los Angeles, Fresno, San Diego, and Seattle. Los Angeles saw an explosion of underground raves, where DJs mixed dance tracks. Los Angeles DJs Marques Wyatt and Billy Long spun at Jewel's Catch One. In 1989, the Los-Angeles-based former EBN-OZN singer/rapper Robert Ozn started indie house label One Voice Records. Ozn released the Mike \"Hitman\" Wilson remix of Dada Nada's \"Haunted House\", which garnered club and mix show radio play in Chicago, Detroit, and New York as well as in the UK and France. The record went up to number five on the \"Billboard\" Club Chart, marking it as the first house record by a white artist to chart in the US. Dada Nada, the moniker for Ozn's solo act, did his first releases in 1990, using a jazz-based deep house style. The Frankie Knuckles and David Morales remix of Dada Nada's \"Deep Love\" (One Voice Records in the US, Polydor in the UK), featuring Ozn's lush, crooning vocals and jazzy improvisational solos by muted trumpet, underscored deep house's progression into a genre that integrated jazz and pop songwriting and song forms (unlike acid house and techno). The Twilight Zone (1980\u201389) located on Richmond Street in Toronto's entertainment district was the first after hours club to regularly feature New York and Chicago DJs that first spun house music in Canada. The venue was the first international gig destination for both Frankie Knuckles and David Morales. One of the club's owners, Tony Assoon, would make regular trips to New York in order to purchase funk, underground disco and house records to play on his regular Saturday night slot.\nThe Montreal Scene.\nHistorically deeply influenced by musical trends coming from England, France, and the US, Montreal has developed a distinct house music scene.\nShaped more specifically by the impact of UK's techno scene, France's French Touch movement, and American DJs and club owners such as Angel Moraes, David Morales, and Danny Tenaglia, the city has evolved to become a distinct dance music hub.\nEver since the middle of the 1990s and early 2000s, an ever-growing number of house music festivals take place in the city throughout the year, including Igloofest, Nuit blanche, Piknic Electronik, Mutek, Ile Soniq, Montr\u00e9al Pride, and the Black and Blue festival.\nSouth Africa.\nKwaito was created during the 1980s, in South Africa during the collapse or near-end of the apartheid regime. It was popularized by the likes of Trompies, Mdu Masilela, Arthur Mafokate, Boom Shaka, Mandoza, Brown Dash, Oskido and many others. Brenda Fassie released a song titled, \"Le Kwaito\" and Boom Shaka, Bongo Maffin as well as TKZee performed in London.\n1990s.\nIn 1990, Italo house group Black Box's big hit \"Everybody Everybody\" reached US Billboard Hot 100.\nIn Britain, further experiments in the genre boosted its appeal. House and rave clubs such as Lakota and Cream emerged across Britain, hosting house and dance scene events. The 'chilling out' concept developed in Britain with ambient house albums such as The KLF's \"Chill Out\" and \"Analogue Bubblebath\" by Aphex Twin. The Godskitchen superclub brand also began in the midst of the early 1990s rave scene. After initially hosting small nights in Cambridge and Northampton, the associated events scaled up at the Sanctuary Music Arena in Milton Keynes, in Birmingham, and in Leeds. A new indie dance scene also emerged in the 1990s. In New York, bands such as Deee-Lite, with Bootsy Collins, furthered house's international influence.\nIn England, one of the few licensed venues was the Eclipse, which attracted people from up and down the country as it was open until the early hours. Due to the lack of licensed, legal dance event venues, house music promoters began organising illegal events in unused warehouses, aeroplane hangars, and in the countryside. The Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 was a government attempt to ban large rave dance events featuring music with \"repetitive beats\", due to law enforcement allegations that these events were associated with illegal club drugs. There were a number of \"Kill the Bill\" demonstrations by rave and electronic dance music fans. The Spiral Tribe dance event at Castle Morten was the last of these illegal raves, as the bill, which became law in November 1994, made unauthorised house music dance events illegal in the UK. Despite the new law, the music continued to grow and change, as typified by Leftfield with \"Release the Pressure\", which introduced dub and reggae into the house sound.\nA new generation of clubs such as Liverpool's Cream and the Ministry of Sound were opened to provide a venue for more commercial house sounds. Major record companies began to open \"superclubs\" promoting their own groups and acts. These superclubs entered into sponsorship deals initially with fast food, soft drink, and clothing companies. Flyers in clubs in Ibiza often sported many corporate logos from sponsors. A new subgenre, Chicago hard house, was developed by DJs such as Bad Boy Bill, DJ Lynnwood, DJ Irene, and Richard \"Humpty\" Vission, mixing elements of Chicago house, funky house, and hard house. Additionally, producers such as George Centeno, Darren Ramirez, and Martin \"Nemesis\" Cairo developed the Los Angeles Hard House sound. Similar to gabber or hardcore techno from the Netherlands, this was associated with the \"rebel\", underground club subculture of the time.\nTowards the end of the 1990s and into the 2000s, French DJ/producers such as Daft Punk, Bob Sinclar, Stardust, Cassius, St. Germain and DJ Falcon began producing a new sound in Paris' club scene. Together, they laid the groundwork for what would be known as the French house movement. They combined the harder-edged-yet-soulful philosophy of Chicago house with the melodies of obscure funk records. By using new digital production techniques blended with the retro sound of old-school analog synthesizers, they created a new sound and style that influenced house music around the world.\nAfro house (ostensibly or was also simply referred to as 'house' before being categorized or titled as an official sub-genre) was emerging in South Africa, during or slightly before this period according to various natives especially due to seemingly the emergence simultaneously during or shortly after kwaito and was being popularized globally in various locations such as in the United States. Former, kwaito artists such as Oskido and DJ Tira are also associated with, the genre.\n2000s.\nChicago Mayor Richard M. Daley proclaimed 10 August 2005, to be \"House Unity Day\" in Chicago, in celebration of the \"21st anniversary of house music\" (actually the 21st anniversary of the founding of Trax Records, an independent Chicago-based house label). The proclamation recognized Chicago as the original home of house music and that the music's original creators \"were inspired by the love of their city, with the dream that someday their music would spread a message of peace and unity throughout the world\". DJs such as Frankie Knuckles, Marshall Jefferson, Paul Johnson, and Mickey Oliver celebrated the proclamation at the Summer Dance Series, an event organized by Chicago's Department of Cultural Affairs.\nIt was during this decade that vocal house became firmly established, both in the underground and as part of the pop market, and labels such as Defected Records, Roul\u00e9, and Om were at the forefront of the emerging sound. In the mid-2000s, fusion genres such as electro house and fidget house emerged. This fusion is apparent in the crossover of musical styles by artists such as Dennis Ferrer and Booka Shade, with the former's production style having evolved from the New York soulful house scene and the latter's roots in techno. Numerous live performance events dedicated to house music were founded during the course of the decade, including Shambhala Music Festival and major industry sponsored events like Miami's Winter Music Conference. The genre even gained popularity through events like Creamfields. In the late 2000s, house style witnessed renewed chart success thanks to acts such as Daft Punk, Deadmau5, Fedde Le Grand, David Guetta, and Calvin Harris.\nAfro house increased in popularity in other regions such as London and the genre's solidified emergence accelerated, resulting in it becoming preeminent, it also appeared to have been attributed to \"giving rise to\" the UK funky, scene.\n2010s.\nDuring the 2010s, multiple new sounds in house music were developed by DJs, producers, and artists. Sweden pioneered the \"Mainstage progressive house\" genre with the emergence of Sebastian Ingrosso, Axwell, and Steve Angello. While all three artists had solo careers, when they formed a trio called Swedish House Mafia, it showed that house could still produce chart-topping hits, such as their 2012 single \"Don't You Worry Child\", which cracked the Billboard top 10. Avicii was a Swedish DJ/artist known for his hits such as \"Hey Brother\", \"Wake Me Up\", \"Addicted to You\", \"The Days\", \"The Nights\", \"Levels\", \"Waiting for Love\", \"Without You\", and \"I Could Be the One\" with Nicky Romero. Fellow Swedish DJ/artist Alesso collaborated with Calvin Harris, Usher, and David Guetta. In France, Justice blended garage and alternative rock influences into their pop-infused house tracks, creating a big and funky sound.\nDuring the 2010s, in the UK and in the US, many records labels stayed true to the original house music sound from the 1980s. It includes labels like Dynamic Music, Defected Records, Dirtybird, Fuse London, Exploited, Pampa, Cajual Records, Hot Creations, Get Physical, and Pets Recordings.\nFrom the Netherlands coalesced the concept of \"Dirty Dutch\", an electro house subgenre characterized by abrasive lead synths and darker arpeggios, with prominent DJs being Chuckie, Hardwell, Laidback Luke, Afrojack, R3hab, Bingo Players, Quintino, and Alvaro. Elsewhere, fusion genres derivative of 2000s progressive house returned, especially with the help of DJs/artists Calvin Harris, David Guetta, Zedd, Eric Prydz, Mat Zo, Above &amp; Beyond, and Fonzerelli in Europe.\n Diplo, a DJ/producer from Tupelo, Mississippi, blended underground sounds with mainstream styles. As he came from the southern US, Diplo fused house music with rap and dance/pop, while also integrating more obscure southern US genres. Other North Americans playing house music include the Canadian Deadmau5 (known for his unusual mask and unique musical style), Kaskade, Steve Aoki, Porter Robinson, and Wolfgang Gartner. The growing popularity of such artists led to the emergence of electro house and progressive house sounds in popular music, such as singles like David Guetta feat. Avicii's \"Sunshine\" and Axwell's remix of \"In The Air\".\nBig room house became increasingly popular since 2010, through international dance music festivals such as Tomorrowland, Ultra Music Festival, and Electric Daisy Carnival. In addition to these popular examples of house, there has also been a reunification of contemporary house and its roots. Many hip hop and R&amp;B artists also turned to house music to add a mass appeal and dance floor energy to the music they produce. Tropical house went onto the top 40 on the UK singles Chart in 2015 with artists such as Kygo and Jonas Blue. In the mid-2010s, the influences of house began to also be seen in Korean K-pop music, examples of this being f(x)'s single \"4 Walls\" and SHINee's title track, \"View\".\nLater in the 2010s, a more traditional house sound came to the forefront of the mainstream in the UK, with Calvin Harris's singles \"One Kiss\" and \"Promises\", with the latter also incorporating elements of nu-disco and Italo house. These singles both went to No.1 in the UK.\nGqom was developed from kwaito predominantly in Durban, it was popularized globally as artists who popularized and pioneered the genre for instance Babes Wodumo and Distruction Boyz were nominated for the MTV Europe Music Award for Best African Act, collaborated with Major Lazer, featured on the Black Panther (soundtrack) and DJ Lag, , album.\nAfro tech presumably began to initially emerge as artists like Black Coffee for example ostensibly started experimenting with what appeared to be a departed sound, similar to afro house however led by a more techno-like sound. Moreover, seemingly definitely not conventional techno nor deep house such as demonstrated in the song \"We Dance Again\" featuring Nakhane. The song won the Breakthrough of the Year award at the DJ Awards. The genre is both a sub-genre as well as fusion genre of afro house, there are also opinions that it is \"still\" afro house.\n2020s.\nIn the late 2010s and early 2020s, exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, one of the South African offshoots of house music, called amapiano, became popular first in South Africa, and then later spread to London and elsewhere worldwide, largely due to online music distribution. Amapiano draws heavily from earlier kwaito house music of South Africa and from jazz and chill-out music. In 2022, the music portal Beatport added an \"amapiano\" genre to its catalogue.\nDuring the late 2010s and early 2020s and partially due to YouTube music channels, closely related house subgenres Brazilian bass and slap house became popular worldwide, drawing from deep house and menacing basslines of tech house.\nFred Again, United Kingdom-born DJ, released a song in 2021 called Marea (We've Lost Dancing) about the pandemic. He wrote this song to express his sadness about losing the house music scene including clubs, music festivals, and being able to dance with one another. This is another example of how COVID-19 affected the house music scene.\nIn 2019, the DJ Awards introduced an additional new Afro house category. Da Capo won the award.\nIn 2020, American singer Lady Gaga released \"Chromatica\", which was her return to her dance roots towards deep house, French house, electro house, and disco house.\nIn 2022, Canadian rapper Drake released \"Honestly, Nevermind\", which was a departure from his signature hip hop, R&amp;B, and trap music sound, and moved towards house music and its derivativates: Jersey club, and ballroom. South African, artist Black Coffee and German music producers, collective Keinemusik(Crue/Kloud) were amongst the list of co-producers on the album. American singer Beyonc\u00e9's album \"Renaissance\", also released in 2022, incorporated ballroom house and gqom.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13936", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13936", "title": "Higher-order predicate", "text": ""}
{"id": "13937", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13937", "title": "Hanover, New Hampshire", "text": "Town in the United States\nHanover is a town located along the Connecticut River in Grafton County, New Hampshire, United States. As of the 2020 census, its population was 11,870. The town is home to the Ivy League university Dartmouth College, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory, and Hanover High School. The Appalachian Trail crosses the town, connecting with a number of trails and nature preserves.\nMost of the population resides in the Hanover census-designated place (CDP)\u2014the main village of the town. Located at the junctions of New Hampshire routes 10, 10A, and 120, the Hanover CDP recorded a population of 9,078 people at the 2020 census. The town is part of the Lebanon\u2013Claremont micropolitan area and also contains the smaller villages of Etna and Hanover Center.\nHistory.\nHanover was chartered by Governor Benning Wentworth on July 4, 1761, and in 1765\u20131766 its first European inhabitants arrived, the majority from Connecticut. Although the surface is uneven, the town developed into an agricultural community. Dartmouth College was established in 1769 beside the town common at a village called \"the Plain\"\u2014an extensive and level tract of land a mile (1.6 kilometers) from the Connecticut River, and about above it.\nAt one point in its history, the southwest corner of Hanover, site of \"The Plain\", was known as \"Dresden\", which in the 1780s joined other disgruntled New Hampshire towns along the Connecticut River that briefly defected to what was then the independent Vermont Republic. After various political posturings, however, the towns returned to New Hampshire at the heated insistence of George Washington. One remnant of this era is that the name \"Dresden\" is still used in the Dresden School District, an interstate school district serving both Hanover and Norwich, Vermont\u2014the first and one of the few interstate school districts in the nation.\nThe film \"Winter Carnival\" (1939) was shot in Hanover.\nEtymology.\n\"Hannover\" (with a double n, as it was spelled in the 1761 charter and in its German original form as well) was named either after a local parish in Sprague, Connecticut, or after the German House of Hanover (which originated in 1635 as a cadet branch of the House of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg when George, Duke of Brunswick moved to the city of Hannover) in honor of the reigning British-Hanoverian king, George III. Today, the original Hannover is the capital and largest city of Lower Saxony, the second-largest state in Germany. The name of the German city is thought to derive from the Low German form of what is \"\" in German, which translates into \"high shore\" in English, and describes the high shore of the Leine river at the site, and at the time, of the first known settlement (near today's street At the High Shore).\nWhile it is likely that the name \"Dresden\" derived from Dresden in Germany, it has also been suggested that it could derive directly from the old Sorbian word \"drezg\" (\"forest\") or \"Drezd'ane\", for an inhabitant of a forest.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which are land and are water, comprising 2.21% of the town. The primary settlement in Hanover, where over 75% of the town's population resides, is in the southwestern corner of the town and is defined as the Hanover census-designated place (CDP). It contains the areas around Dartmouth College and the intersections of New Hampshire Routes 10, 10A, and 120. The CDP has a total area of , of which are land and are water.\nHanover borders the towns of Lyme, Canaan, and Enfield, New Hampshire; Norwich, Vermont; and the city of Lebanon, New Hampshire. Inside the limits of Hanover are the small rural villages of Etna and Hanover Center.\nThe highest point in Hanover is the north peak of Moose Mountain, at above sea level. Hanover lies fully within the Connecticut River watershed.\nThere are a number of trails and nature preserves in Hanover, and the majority of these trails are suitable for snowshoes and cross-country skis. The Velvet Rocks Trail, located on the Appalachian Trail, has a number of rock climbing and bouldering spots.\nClimate.\nAccording to the K\u00f6ppen Climate Classification system, Hanover has a hot-summer humid continental climate, abbreviated \"Dfa\" on climate maps. The hottest temperature recorded in Hanover was on August 2, 1975, while the coldest temperature recorded was on February 16, 1943.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 11,260 people, 3,119 households, and 1,797 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 3,278 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 81.0% White, 3.4% Black, 0.8% Native American, 10.8% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.7% from other races, and 3.2% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.9% of the population.\nThere were 3,119 households, out of which 27.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.5% were married couples living together, 4.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 42.4% were non-families. 31.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 16.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.37 and the average family size was 2.95.\nIn the town, the population was spread out, with 27.8% at or under the age of 19, 25.5% from 20 to 24, 14.4% from 25 to 44, 18.6% from 45 to 64, and 13.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 23 years.\nFor the period 2010\u20132014, the estimated median income for a household in the town was $94,063, and the median income for a family was $129,000. Male full-time workers had a median income of $87,550 versus $53,141 for females. The per capita income for the town was $34,140. About 2.0% of families and 12.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.4% of those under age 18 and 4.8% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment.\nIn the New Hampshire Senate, Hanover is included in the 5th District and is represented by Democrat Suzanne Prentiss. On the New Hampshire Executive Council, Hanover is in the 1st District and is represented by Republican Joseph Kenney. In the United States House of Representatives, Hanover is a part of New Hampshire's 2nd congressional district and is currently represented by Democrat Maggie Goodlander.\nNo Republican presidential nominee has received over 40 percent of the vote in the town since George H. W. Bush in 1988.\nEconomy.\nHypertherm, White Mountains Insurance Group, and Daat Research Corp. are based in Hanover.\nInfrastructure.\nWater.\nThe Hanover Water Company supplies water for downtown Hanover from several local reservoirs. The company is owned by Dartmouth College (52.8%) and the Town of Hanover (47.2%), with management by the Town of Hanover under a contract. In 2000, all full-time company employees became town employees. In recent years, the town has spent over $20\u00a0million to upgrade main water lines, and will undergo another $6\u00a0million project to build a new water treatment plant. Outside the downtown area, residents rely on private wells that are not maintained by the town.\nOther utilities.\nFairPoint Communications furnishes telephone communication. The municipality provides sewage treatment.\nPlaudits.\nCNN and \"Money\" magazine rated Hanover the sixth best place to live in America in 2011, and the second best in 2007. \"This just might be the best college town,\" read the headline of a story in the January\u2013February 2017 issue of \"Yankee\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13938", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13938", "title": "High Performance Serial Bus", "text": ""}
{"id": "13939", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13939", "title": "High performance serial bus", "text": ""}
{"id": "13940", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13940", "title": "Holy Communion", "text": ""}
{"id": "13942", "revid": "11642524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13942", "title": "HMS Beagle", "text": "10-gun brig-sloop of the Royal Navy; notably carried Charles Darwin\nHMS \"Beagle\" was a 10-gun brig-sloop of the Royal Navy, one of more than 100 ships of this class. The vessel, constructed at a cost of \u00a37,803, was launched on 11 May 1820 from the Woolwich Dockyard on the River Thames. Later reports say the ship took part in celebrations of the coronation of George IV, passing under the old London Bridge, and was the first rigged man-of-war afloat upriver of the bridge. There was no immediate need for \"Beagle\", so she \"lay in ordinary\", moored afloat but without masts or rigging. She was then adapted as a survey barque and took part in three survey expeditions.\nThe second voyage of HMS \"Beagle\" is notable for carrying the recently graduated naturalist Charles Darwin around the world. While the survey work was carried out, Darwin travelled and researched geology, natural history and ethnology onshore. He gained fame by publishing his diary journal, best known as \"The Voyage of the Beagle\", and his findings played a pivotal role in the formation of his scientific theories on evolution and natural selection.\nDesign and construction.\nThe of 10-gun brig-sloops was designed by Sir Henry Peake in 1807, and eventually over 100 were constructed. The working drawings for HMS \"Beagle\" and HMS \"Barracouta\" were issued to the Woolwich Dockyard on 16 February 1817, and amended in coloured ink on 16 July 1817 with modifications to increase the height of the bulwarks (the sides of the ship extended above the upper deck) by an amount varying from at the stem to at the stern. \"Beagle\"'s keel was laid in June 1818, construction cost \u00a37,803, and the ship was launched on 11 May 1820.\nThe first reported task of the ship was a part in celebrations of the coronation of King George IV; in his 1846 \"Journal\", John Lort Stokes said that the ship was taken up the River Thames to salute the coronation, passing through the old London Bridge, and was the first rigged man-of-war afloat upriver of the bridge.\nFirst voyage (1826\u20131830).\nCaptain Pringle Stokes was appointed captain of \"Beagle\" on 7 September 1825, and the ship was allocated to the surveying section of the Hydrographic Office. On 27 September 1825 \"The Beagle\" docked at Woolwich to be repaired and fitted out for her new duties. Her guns were reduced from ten cannon to six and a mizzen mast was added to improve her handling, thereby changing her from a brig to a bark (or barque).\n\" The Beagle\" set sail from Plymouth on 22 May 1826 on her first voyage, under the command of Captain Stokes. The mission was to accompany the larger ship HMS \"Adventure\" (380\u00a0tons) on a hydrographic survey of Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego, under the overall command of the Australian Captain Phillip Parker King, commander and surveyor.\nOn 3 March 1827, in the Barbara Channel, the \"Beagle\" encountered a boat with survivors of the sealer , which had wrecked in Cockburn Channel on 16 December 1826. Stokes sent two launches to rescue the other survivors who were encamped there.\nFaced with the more difficult part of the survey in the desolate waters of Tierra del Fuego, Captain Stokes fell into a deep depression. At Port Famine on the Strait of Magellan, he locked himself in his cabin for 14 days, then after getting over-excited and talking of preparing for the next cruise, shot himself on 2 August 1828. Following four days of delirium, Stokes recovered slightly, but then his condition deteriorated and he died on 12 August 1828. Captain Parker King then replaced Stokes with the First Lieutenant of \"Beagle\", Lieutenant William George Skyring as commander, and both ships sailed to Montevideo. On 13 October, King sailed \"Adventure\" to Rio de Janeiro for refitting and provisions. During this work Rear Admiral Sir Robert Otway, commander in chief of the South American station, arrived aboard and announced his decision that \"Beagle\" was also to be brought to Montevideo for repairs, and that he intended to supersede Skyring. When \"Beagle\" arrived, Otway put the ship under the command of his aide, Flag Lieutenant Robert FitzRoy.\nThe 23-year-old aristocrat FitzRoy proved an able commander and meticulous surveyor. In one incident a group of Fuegians stole a ship's boat, and FitzRoy took their families on board as hostages. Eventually, he held two men, a girl and a boy, who was given the name of Jemmy Button, and these four native Fuegians were taken back with them when \"Beagle\" returned to England on 14 October 1830. During their brief sojourn in England, Boat Memory, the most promising of the four, died of smallpox.\nDuring this survey, the Beagle Channel was identified and named after the ship.\nThe log book from the first voyage, in Captain FitzRoy's handwriting, was acquired at auction at Sotheby's by the \"Museo Naval de la Naci\u00f3n\" (under the administration of the Argentine Navy) located in Tigre, Buenos Aires Province, Argentina, where it is now preserved.\nSecond voyage (1831\u20131836).\nFitzRoy had been given reason to hope that the South American Survey would be continued under his command, but when the Lords of the Admiralty appeared to abandon the plan, he made alternative arrangements to return the Fuegians. A kind uncle heard of this and contacted the Admiralty. Soon afterwards FitzRoy heard that he was to be appointed commander of to go to Tierra del Fuego, but due to her poor condition \"Beagle\" was substituted for the voyage. FitzRoy was re-appointed as commander on 27 June 1831 and \"Beagle\" was commissioned on 4 July 1831 under his command, with Lieutenants John Clements Wickham and Bartholomew James Sulivan.\n\"Beagle\" was immediately taken into dock at Devonport for extensive rebuilding and refitting. As she required a new deck, FitzRoy had the upper-deck raised considerably, by aft and forward. The \"Cherokee\"-class ships had the reputation of being \"coffin\" brigs, which handled badly and were prone to sinking. Apart from increasing headroom below, the raised deck made \"Beagle\" less liable to top-heaviness and possible capsize in heavy weather by reducing the volume of water that could collect on top of the upper deck, trapped aboard by the gunwales. Additional sheathing added to the hull added about seven tons to her burthen and perhaps fifteen to her displacement.\nThe ship was one of the first to be fitted with the lightning conductor invented by the English scientist William Snow Harris. FitzRoy spared no expense in her fitting out, which included 22 chronometers, and five examples of the \"Sympiesometer\", a kind of mercury-free barometer patented by Alexander Adie which was favoured by FitzRoy as giving the accurate readings required by the Admiralty. To reduce magnetic interference with the navigational instruments, FitzRoy proposed replacing the iron guns with brass guns, but the Admiralty turned this request down. (When the ship reached Rio de Janeiro in April 1832, he used his own funds for replacements: the ship now had a \"six-pound boat-carronade\" on a turntable on the forecastle, two brass six-pound guns before the main-mast, and aft of it another four brass guns; two of these were nine-pound, and the other two six-pound.)\nFitzRoy had found a need for expert advice on geology during the first voyage, and had resolved that if on a similar expedition, he would \"endeavour to carry out a person qualified to examine the land; while the officers, and myself, would attend to hydrography.\" Command in that era could involve stress and loneliness, as shown by the suicide of Captain Stokes, and FitzRoy's own uncle Viscount Castlereagh had committed suicide under stress of overwork. His attempts to get a friend to accompany him fell through, and he asked his friend and superior Captain Francis Beaufort to seek a gentleman naturalist as a self-financing passenger who would give him company during the voyage. A sequence of inquiries led to Charles Darwin, a young gentleman on his way to becoming a rural clergyman, joining the voyage. FitzRoy was influenced by the physiognomy of Lavater, and Darwin recounted in his autobiography that he was nearly \"rejected, on account of the shape of my nose! He was an ardent disciple of Lavater, &amp; was convinced that he could judge a man's character by the outline of his features; &amp; he doubted whether anyone with my nose could possess sufficient energy &amp; determination for the voyage.\"\n\"Beagle\" was originally scheduled to leave on 24 October 1831, but because of delays in her preparations the departure was delayed until December. Setting forth on what was to become a ground-breaking scientific expedition, she departed from Devonport on 10 December. Due to bad weather her first stop was just a few miles ahead, at Barn Pool, on the west side of Plymouth Sound. \"Beagle\" left anchorage from Barn Pool on 27 December, passing the nearby town of Plymouth. After completing extensive surveys in South America she returned via New Zealand, Sydney, Hobart Town (6 February 1836), to Falmouth, Cornwall, England, on 2 October 1836.\nDarwin had kept a diary of his experiences, and combined this with details from his scientific notes as the book titled \"Journal and Remarks\", published in 1839 as the third volume of the official account of the expedition. This travelogue and scientific journal was widely popular, and was reprinted many times with various titles and a revised second edition, becoming known as \"The Voyage of the Beagle\". \nThird voyage (1837\u20131843).\nIn the six months after returning from the second voyage, some light repairs were made and \"Beagle\" was commissioned to survey large parts of the coast of Australia under the command of Commander John Clements Wickham, who had been a lieutenant on the second voyage, with assistant surveyor Lieutenant John Lort Stokes who had been a midshipman on the first voyage of \"Beagle\", then mate and assistant surveyor on the second voyage (no relation to Pringle Stokes). They left Woolwich on 9 June 1837, towed by HM Steamer \"Boxer\", and after reaching Plymouth spent the remainder of the month adjusting their instruments. They set off from Plymouth Sound on the morning of 5 July 1837, and sailed south with stops for observations at Tenerife, Bahia and Cape Town.\nThey reached the Swan River (modern Perth, Western Australia) on 15 November 1837. Their survey started with the western coast between there and the Fitzroy River, Western Australia, then surveyed both shores of the Bass Strait at the southeast corner of the continent. To aid \"Beagle\" in her surveying operations in Bass Strait, the Colonial cutter \"Vansittart\", of Van Diemen's Land, was loaned by Sir John Franklin, Lieutenant-Governor of Van Diemen's Land, and placed under the command of Mr Charles Codrington Forsyth, the senior mate, assisted by Mr Pasco, another of her mates. In May 1839, they sailed north to survey the shores of the Arafura Sea opposite Timor. When Wickham fell ill and resigned, the command was taken over in March 1841 by Lieutenant John Lort Stokes who continued the survey. The third voyage was completed in 1843.\nThe exploration of the Gulf of Carpentaria revealed two major rivers, the Albert River and the Flinders River.\nNumerous places around the coast were named by Wickham, and subsequently by Stokes when he became captain, often honouring eminent people or the members of the crew. On 9 October 1839 Wickham named Port Darwin, which was first sighted by Stokes, in honour of their former shipmate Charles Darwin. They were reminded of him (and his \"geologising\") by the discovery there of a new fine-grained sandstone. A settlement there became the town of Palmerston in 1869, and was renamed Darwin in 1911 (not to be confused with the present day city of Palmerston near Darwin).\nDuring this survey, the Beagle Gulf was named after the ship.\n\"Nicotiana benthamiana\", a species of tobacco used from the 1990s as a platform for the production of recombinant pharmaceutical proteins, was first collected for scientific study on the north coast of Australia by Benjamin Bynoe during this voyage.\nFinal years.\nIn 1845, \"Beagle\" was refitted as a static coastguard watch vessel like many similar watch ships stationed in rivers and harbours throughout the nation. She was transferred to HM Customs and Excise to control smuggling on the Essex coast in the navigable waterways beyond the north bank of the Thames Estuary. She was moored mid-river in the River Roach which forms part of an extensive maze of waterways and marshes known as The River Crouch and River Roach Tidal River System, located around and to the south and west of Burnham-on-Crouch. This large maritime area has a tidal coastline of , part of Essex's of coastline \u2013 the largest coastline in the United Kingdom. In 1851, oyster companies and traders who cultivated and harvested the \"Walflete\" or \"Walfleet\" oyster (\"Ostrea edulis\"), petitioned for the Customs and Excise watch vessel \"WV-7\" (ex HMS \"Beagle\") to be removed as she was obstructing the river and its oyster-beds. In the 1851 Navy List dated 25 May, it showed her renamed \"Southend \"W.V. No. 7\" at Paglesham\". In 1870, she was sold to \"Messrs Murray and Trainer\" to be broken up.\nPossible resting place.\nInvestigations started in 2000 by a team led by Robert Prescott of the University of St Andrews found documents confirming that \"W.V. 7\" was \"Beagle\", and noted a vessel matching her size shown midstream on the River Roach in Essex (in Paglesham Reach) on the 1847 hydrographic survey chart. A later chart showed a nearby indentation to the north bank of Paglesham Reach near the Eastend Wharf and near Waterside Farm. This could have been a dock for \"W.V. 7\" \u2013 \"Beagle\". Site investigations found an area of marshy ground some deep on the tidal river-bank, about west of the boat-house. This discovery matched the chart position and many fragments of pottery of the correct period were found in the same area.\nSurveys in November 2003 showed that there are the remains of substantial material within the dock that could be parts of the ship itself. An old anchor of 1841 pattern was excavated. It was also found that the 1871 census recorded a new farmhouse in the name of William Murray and Thomas Rainer, leading to speculation that they were the 1870 purchasers of the ship, \"Messrs Murray and Trainer\". The farmhouse was demolished in the 1940s, but a nearby boathouse incorporated timbers matching knee timbers used in \"Beagle\". Two more large anchors similar to the one excavated from the ship's present location are known to have been found in neighbouring villages. It is believed that the ship carried four anchors.\nTheir investigations featured in a BBC television programme which showed how each watch ship would have accommodated seven coastguard officers, drawn from other areas to minimise collusion with the locals. Each officer had about three rooms to house his family, forming a small community. They would use small boats to intercept smugglers, and the investigators found a causeway giving access at low tide across the soft mud of the river bank. Apparently the next coastguard station along was \"Kangaroo\", a sister ship of \"Beagle\".\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13943", "revid": "86247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13943", "title": "Hergenroether", "text": ""}
{"id": "13945", "revid": "1317505634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13945", "title": "History of St Albans", "text": "English municipal history\nSt Albans is a town located in Hertfordshire, England. It was originally founded as Verlamion a settlement belonging to the Catuvellauni (a Celtic tribe or state of southeastern Britain before the Roman conquest, attested by inscriptions into the 4th century). It was subsequently transformed into the Roman settlement of Verulamium from where it grew into a \"municipium\" around AD 50.\nAfter the Anglo-Saxon settlement it was known as Verlamacaestir.\nIt later became known as St Albans because of its association with Saint Alban.\nRoman.\nThe Roman city of Verulamium, the third largest town in Roman Britain after Londinium and Colchester, was built alongside the Celtic settlement in the valley of the River Ver nearer to the present city centre. The settlement was granted the rank of \"municipium\" around AD\u00a050, meaning that its citizens had what were known as \"Latin Rights\", a lesser citizenship status than a \"colonia\" possessed. It grew to a significant town, and as such received the attentions of Boudica of the Iceni in 61, when Verulamium was sacked and burnt on her orders: a black ash layer has been recorded by archaeologists, thus confirming the Roman written record. It grew steadily; by the early 3rd century, it covered an area of about , behind a deep ditch and wall. It was encircled by gated walls in AD 275. Verulamium contained a forum, basilica and a theatre, much of which were damaged during two fires, one in 155 and the other in around 250. One of the few extant Roman inscriptions in Britain is found on the remnants of the forum (see Verulamium Forum inscription). The town was rebuilt in stone rather than timber at least twice over the next 150 years.\nEarly Christianity.\nThe city is named after St Alban, a convert to Christianity who, according to medieval sources, lived in the Roman city. He was martyred in either the third or fourth century. Bede's \"Ecclesiastical History\" gives an account of Alban being beheaded on a hill outside the city. This suggests that the cathedral, built on a hill above the Roman city, may have been built on the site of his martyrdom. However, the cathedral could alternatively be on the site of his burial. Widespread cults of saints began in cemeteries outside of Roman cities. The site of Alban's burial remains a topic for investigation. The site of a Roman burial was uncovered near the Cathedral in the late 20th century, in the area of demolished medieval cloisters, probably extending beneath the present building, but there is no evidence of a connection with Alban.\nBede referred to a Roman church dedicated to St Alban, built \"when peaceable Christian times were restored\" (possibly the fourth century) and still in use in Bede's time. In 429 Germanus of Auxerre visited the church and subsequently promoted the cult of St Alban. John Morris argued that the church was probably built in 396\u20138. It has been suggested that several unearthed remains might have been Roman churches but there is no certain archaeological evidence. An archaeological excavation in 1978, directed by Martin Biddle, failed to find Roman remains on the site of the chapter house of the medieval abbey, but recent investigation has uncovered a basilica near the cathedral, supporting the contention that it is \"the oldest continuous site of Christian worship in Great Britain\".\nSome historians doubt the historicity of St Alban and argue that his cult was invented by Germanus.\nLater medieval period.\nThe Abbots of St Albans diverted Watling Street away from the ruins of Verulamium into the medieval town.\nThree main roads date from the medieval period\u2014Holywell Hill, St Peter's Street, and Fishpool Street\u2014each of which had a pilgrim church founded in the ninth century by Abbot Ulsinus at the entrance to the town: St Stephen's, St Peter's and St Michael's respectively. The foundation of the town's markets is also attributed to this time.\nModern.\nEarly Modern.\nAs part of the dissolution of the monasteries, Henry VIII closed the Abbey in 1539 and took possession of the town, it remained crown property for the next fourteen years. In 1553, Henry's son Edward VI sold the abbey, the governance of the town, and the market (by letters patent) to a group of local merchants and landowners. The town became borough with a mayor. The mayor, assisted by ten burgesses and serving for up to three years, had executive and judicial powers. The first mayor was John Lockey. The Lady Chapel became part of St Albans School and the Great Gatehouse was used as a prison until the 19th century, when the school took it over.\nIn 1555, during the reign of Queen Mary I, a Protestant baker from Yorkshire, George Tankerfield, was brought from London and burnt to death on Romeland for his refusal to accept the Roman Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation.\nDuring the English Civil War (1642\u201345) the town sided with parliament but was largely unaffected by the conflict.\nEighteenth century.\nThe bridge over the River Ver in St Michael's Street, adjacent to Kingsbury Watermill and not far from St Michael's Church, dates from 1765 and is believed to be the oldest extant bridge in Hertfordshire. It is Grade II listed. According to a contemporary account of the Second Battle of St Albans in 1461, another bridge existed on this site previously (recorded in 1505 as \"Pons de la Maltemyll\" - Malt Mill Bridge). It is thought that the Romans had built a bridge here by the 3rd century AD. The ford alongside the current bridge, which is known to have existed for 2,000 years, is traditionally believed to be Alban's crossing point on his way to his execution.\nNineteenth century.\nBefore the 20th century, St Albans was a rural market town, a Christian pilgrimage site, and the first coaching stop of the route to and from London, accounting for its numerous old inns. Victorian St Albans was small and had little industry. It grew slowly, 8-9% per decade between 1801 and 1861, compared to the 31% per decade growth of London in the same period. The railway arrived relatively late. In 1869 the extension of the city boundaries was opposed by the Earl of Verulam and many of the townsfolk, but there was rapid expansion and much building at the end of the century, and between 1891 and 1901 the population grew by 37%.\nPopulation of St Albans in the Nineteenth Century\nThe medieval road pattern was amended from the 18th century onwards. London Road was constructed in 1754, Hatfield Road in 1824 and Verulam Road in 1833. Verulam Road was created (as part of Thomas Telford's large-scale improvement of sections of the London to Holyhead road) specifically to aid the movement of stage coaches, since St Albans was the first major stop on the coaching route north from London. Victoria Street was called Sweetbriar Lane until 1876.\nThere were three railway stations in the town, two of which are still active: St Albans Abbey and St Albans City. The first, St Albans Abbey, was opened by the London and North Western Railway on 5 May 1858 as the terminus of the Abbey Line, a branch line from Watford Junction. This was followed by the Midland Railway Company's station, now known as St Albans City, which opened on 1 October 1868 on the main line from Bedford to London. There was also a third railway station in the city centre, St Albans (London Road), which was opened on 16 October 1865 by the Great Northern Railway on its Hatfield and St Albans branch. This branch line closed to passengers in 1951.\nIn 1877, in response to a public petition, Queen Victoria issued the second royal charter, which granted city status to the borough and Cathedral status to the former Abbey Church. The new diocese was established in the main from parts of the large Diocese of Rochester. The Abbey Church of St Alban had fallen into disrepair, despite work done on it under Sir George Gilbert Scott in 1860\u20131877, and some thought it ought to be allowed to decline into romantic ruin, but in the latter year, under the chairmanship of the Earl of Verulam, a restoration committee was formed, of which Edmund Beckett (later Lord Grimthorpe) became the dominant member. Grimthorpe put up \u00a3130,000 of his own money and by sheer force of personality brought about a restoration of the church (1880\u20131883) in Neo-Gothic style, sparking the ire of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings. Nicholas Pevsner said that the Abbey \"is the only one of the major churches of England that has a West Front completely, or almost completely, Victorian.\" However, it seems reasonable to assume that, without Grimthorpe's money the Abbey Church would now be a ruin like many other former monastic churches.\nThe original St Albans Football Club was founded in October 1881, if folded in 1904. The present day St Albans City Football Club was founded on 13 April 1908. The club's home ground is Clarence Park, which was donated to the city by Sir John Blundell and opened on 23 July 1894.\nThe aforementioned transport links attracted a seed merchant, Samuel Ryder, to locate his business in St Albans, which eventually moved to offices and a large purpose-built packing seed hall on Holywell Hill, which is now a Caf\u00e9 Rouge restaurant. He served as Mayor of St Albans in 1905, and remained a councillor for several years after his term of office. In later life, Ryder began to suffer from poor health and was advised to take up golf as exercise. He joined the local Verulam Golf Club, making large donations to the club including the famous Ryder Cup and sponsorship of the tournament.\nRalph Chubb, the poet and printer, lived on College Street in St Albans from 1892 to 1913, and attended St Albans School. His work frequently references the Abbey of St Albans, and he ascribed mystical significance to the geography and history of the town.\nAnother St Albans writer, Charles Williams, lived as boy and young man in Victoria Street from 1894 to 1917. He also attended St Albans School.\nTwentieth century.\nThe pioneering filmmaker Arthur Melbourne-Cooper was born in St Albans in 1874 at 99 London Road. He became a noted figure in the history of film when he began to explore the new art of moving photography in the mid-1900s. By 1908, he had set up a production base, the Alpha Production Works in Bedford Park Road, later moving to larger premises at Alma Road. Among the pioneering films he shot in St Albans was the animated fantasy, \"Dreams of Toyland\" (1908). He also established a film theatre on London Road to present his productions to the paying public, the Alpha Picture House, which opened on 27 July 1908, Hertfordshire's first permanent cinema. The cinema changed hands several times, variously known as the Poly, the Regent, the Capitol and the Odeon. It was replaced by a new Art Deco building in 1931, and the cinema continued in operation until 1995. In 2014 the building was restored and re-opened as the Odyssey Cinema.\nDuring World War I in September 1916, following an attack on St Albans, the German Airship SL 11 became the first airship to be brought down over England. \nIn the inter-war years St Albans, in common with much of the surrounding area, became a centre for emerging high-technology industries, most notably aerospace. Nearby Radlett was the base for Handley Page Aircraft Company, while Hatfield became home to de Havilland. St Albans itself became a centre for the Marconi plc company, specifically, Marconi Instruments. Marconi (later part of the General Electric Company) remained the city's largest employer (with two main plants) until the 1990s. A third plant - working on top secret defence work - also existed. All of these industries are now gone from the area.\nThe city expanded rapidly after World War II, as government policy promoted the creation of New Towns and the expansion of existing towns around London. The local authority built large housing estates at Cottonmill (to the south), Mile House (to the south-east) and New Greens (to the north). The Marshalswick area to the north-east was also expanded, completing a programme of mainly private house building begun before the war.\nIn 1974 St Albans City Council, St Albans Rural District Council and Harpenden Town Council were merged, as part of a major national re-organisation of local government in the UK, to form St Albans District Council.\nTwenty-first century.\nIn 2011 the population of the St Albans City and District was 140,664, up 9% on the 2001 population of 129,005.\n By 2021 the population had risen a further 5.4% to 148,700.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13948", "revid": "302677", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13948", "title": "Head end", "text": "Head end may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "13951", "revid": "49292782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13951", "title": "Hitachi 6309", "text": "Hitachi variant of the Motorola 6809 8-bit microprocessor\nThe 6309 is Hitachi's CMOS version of the Motorola 6809 microprocessor, released in late 1982. It was initially marketed as a low-power version of the 6809, without reference to its many internal improvements. \nWhile in \"Emulation Mode\" it is fully compatible with the 6809. To the 6809 specifications, it adds higher clock rates, enhanced features, new instructions, and additional registers. Most of the new instructions were added to support the additional registers, as well as up to 32-bit math, hardware division, bit manipulations, and block transfers. The 6309 is generally 30% faster in native mode than the 6809.\nThis information was never published by Hitachi. The April 1988 issue of \"Oh! FM\", a Japanese magazine for Fujitsu personal computer users, contained the first description of the 6309's additional capabilities. Later, Hirotsugu Kakugawa posted details of the 6309's new features and instructions to comp.sys.m6809. This led to the development of NitrOS-9 for the Tandy Color Computer 3.\nDifferences from the Motorola 6809.\nThe 6309 differs from the 6809 in several key areas.\nProcess technology.\nThe 6309 is fabricated in CMOS technology, while the 6809 is an NMOS device. As a result, the 6309 requires less power to operate than the 6809.\nAlthough it is a dynamic design (the datasheet specifies a 500\u00a0kHz minimum clocking frequency and it will lose its state when the clock speed is too low), it can be paused for up to 15 cycles. This is useful for direct memory access as it allows external devices to pause the CPU to release the memory bus, read or write small amounts of memory, and then unpause the CPU again. No other logic is required.\nClock speed.\nThe 6309 has B (2\u00a0MHz) versions as the 6809 does. However, a \"C\" speed rating was produced with either a 3.0 or 3.5\u00a0MHz maximum clock rate, depending on which datasheet is referenced. (Several Japanese computers had 63C09 CPUs clocked with a 3.58\u00a0MHz colorburst crystal, so the 3.5 rating seems most likely). Anecdotal and individual reports indicate that the 63C09 variant can be clocked at 5\u00a0MHz with no ill effects. Like the 6809, the Hitachi CPU comes in both internal and external clock versions (HD63B/C09 and HD63B/C09E respectively)\nComputational efficiency.\nWhen switched into 6309 Native Mode (as opposed to the default 6809-compatible mode) many key instructions will complete in fewer clock cycles. This often improves execution speeds by up to 30%.\nAdditional instructions.\nMost of the new instructions are modifications of existing instructions to handle the existence of the additional registers, such as load, store, add, and the like. Genuine 6309 additions include inter-register arithmetic, block transfers, hardware division, and bit-level manipulations. Further, 16 bit registers D and W can be target of 16 bit arithmetic with carry and 16 bit shift and rotate operations. On 6809, these operations are limited to 8 bit operands.\nDespite the user-friendliness of the additional instructions, analysis by 6809 programming gurus indicates that many of the new instructions are actually slower than the equivalent 6809 code, especially in tight loops. Careful analysis should be done to ensure that the programmer uses the most efficient code for the particular application.\nMost of new instructions use opcode prefixes that makes them slower by one cycle when compared to similar 6809 instruction. On other side, 6309 native mode executes many instructions faster by one or more cycles. Here is a timing comparison of an 8 bit LD instruction for 'A' register and 'E' register on 6809 and 6309:\nAlso inter-register operations and new 16 bit operations are somewhat mixed bag. Depending on addressing mode and 6309 mode, equivalent 6809 code can be faster. For illustration, let us look on timing of exclusive or instruction.\nAs table above indicates, exclusive or of 16 bit register D with immediate parameter can be replaced by two 8 bit instructions EORA imm, EORB imm and it will execute faster when 6309 runs in emulation mode. Though one should realize that sequence of 8 bit instructions EORA imm, EORB imm is not exact equivalent of 16 bit EORD imm instruction as condition code CC register is set according result of 8 bit operation in first case and according result of 16 bit operation in second case. \nSimilar issue is with inter-register EORR instruction. It accepts both 8 bit and 16 bit operands and it always executes within 4 cycles. However, for 8 bit operands, it is faster to use EORA imm or EORB imm instructions when appropriate. Further, when 6309 is running in native mode, instructions EORA direct, EORB direct take only 3 cycles, one cycle less than inter-register operation.\nAdditional hardware features.\nIt is possible to change the mode of operation for the FIRQ interrupt. Instead of stacking the PC and CC registers (normal 6809 behavior) the FIRQ interrupt can be set to stack the entire register set, as the IRQ interrupt does. In addition, the 6309 has two possible trap modes, one for an illegal instruction fetch and one for division by zero. The illegal instruction fetch is not maskable, and many TRS-80 Color Computer users reported that their 6309's were \"buggy\" when in reality it was an indicator of enhanced and unknown features.\nUndocumented features.\nThere is an additional register, called M, used for temporary storage that is available to use as well.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13952", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13952", "title": "Home Computers", "text": ""}
{"id": "13953", "revid": "50995801", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13953", "title": "Hominy", "text": "Food item consisting of dried nixtamalized corn\nHominy is a Mesoamerican (Mexican) food item produced from dried maize (corn) kernels that have been treated with an alkali, in a process called nixtamalization ( is the Nahuatl word for \"hominy\"). \"Lye hominy\" is a type of hominy made with lye.\nHistory.\nThe process of nixtamalization has been fundamental to Mesoamerican cuisine since ancient times. The lime used to treat the maize can be obtained from several different materials. Among the Lacandon Maya who inhabited the tropical lowland regions of eastern Chiapas, the caustic powder was obtained by toasting freshwater shells over a fire for several hours. In the highland areas of Chiapas and throughout much of the Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula, Belize River valley and Pet\u00e9n Basin, limestone was used to make slaked lime for steeping the shelled kernels. The Maya used nixtamal to produce beers that more resembled \"chicha\" than \"pulque\". When bacteria were introduced to nixtamal it created a type of sourdough.\nThe process of nixtamalization spread from Mesoamerica northwards through various indigenous tribes of North America. European settlers first encountered the dish in eastern North America, with the word hominy being an anglicization of the Powhatan word \"rokaham\u0115n.\"\nHominy grits became a poverty food during the Great Depression in the United States. Because of this, there is still a stigma associated with the dish, particularly among survivors of the Great Depression in the Southern United States.\nProduction.\nTo make hominy, mature dry field corn (maize) is treated by soaking and cooking the grain in a dilute solution of lye or lime. The alkaline solution dissolves hemicellulose, the major adhesive component of the grain's cell walls, which loosens the hulls from the kernels and softens the corn. Also, soaking the corn in lye or lime kills the seed's germ, which keeps it from sprouting while in storage. Finally, in addition to providing a source of dietary calcium, the lye or lime reacts with the corn so that the nutrient niacin can be assimilated by the digestive tract. People consume hominy in intact kernels, grind it into sand-sized particles for grits, or into flour.\nIn Mexican cuisine, hominy is finely ground to make masa (Spanish for \"dough\"). Fresh masa that has been dried and powdered is called \"masa seca\" or \"masa harina\". Some of the corn oil breaks down into emulsifying agents (monoglycerides and diglycerides), and facilitates bonding the corn proteins to each other. The divalent calcium in lime acts as a cross-linking agent for protein and polysaccharide acidic side chains. Cornmeal from untreated ground corn cannot form a dough with the addition of water, but the chemical changes in masa (a.k.a. \"masa nixtamalera\") make dough formation possible, for tortillas and other food.\nRecipes.\nIn Mexican cuisine, people cook masa nixtamalera with water to make a thick, gruel-like beverage called . When they make it with chocolate and sugar, it becomes . Adding anise and piloncillo to this mix creates , a popular breakfast drink.\nThe English term \"hominy\" derives from the Powhatan language word for prepared maize (cf. Chickahominy). Many other Indigenous American cultures also made hominy, and integrated it into their diet. Cherokees, for example, made hominy grits by soaking corn in a weak lye solution produced by leaching hardwood ash with water, and then beating it with a (), or corn beater. They used grits to make a traditional hominy soup ( ) that they let ferment ( ), cornbread, dumplings ( ), or, in post-contact times, fried with bacon and green onions.\nHominy recipes include (a Mexican stew of hominy and pork, chicken, or other meat), hominy bread, hominy chili, hog 'n' hominy, casseroles and fried dishes. In Latin America there is a variety of dishes referred to as . Hominy can be ground coarsely for grits, or into a fine mash dough () used extensively in Latin American cuisine. Many islands in the West Indies, notably Jamaica, also use hominy (known as cornmeal or \"polenta\", though different from Italian polenta) to make a sort of porridge with corn starch or flour to thicken the mixture and condensed milk, vanilla, and nutmeg. In the Philippines, hominy (made from a local waxy corn cultivar ) is the main component of dessert binatog.\nRockihominy, a popular trail food in the 19th and early 20th centuries, is dried corn, roasted to a golden brown, then ground to a very coarse meal, almost like hominy grits. Hominy is also used as animal feed.\nNutrition.\nCanned hominy (drained) is composed of 83% water, 14% carbohydrates, 1% protein, and 1% fat (table). In a 100-gram serving, hominy provide 72 calories and is a good source (10\u201319% of the Daily Value) of zinc. Hominy also supplies dietary fiber. Other nutrients are in low amounts (table).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13955", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13955", "title": "W. Heath Robinson", "text": "British illustrator (1872\u20131944)\nWilliam Heath Robinson (31 May 1872\u00a0\u2013 13 September 1944) was an English cartoonist, illustrator and artist who drew whimsically elaborate machines to achieve simple objectives.\nThe earliest citation in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" for the use of \"Heath Robinson\" as a noun describing any unnecessarily complex and implausible contrivance is from 1917. The phrase \"Heath Robinson contraption\" perhaps most commonly describes temporary fixes using ingenuity and whatever is to hand, often string and tape, or unlikely cannibalisations. Its continuing popularity was likely linked to Britain's shortages during the Second World War and the need to \"make do and mend\".\nEarly life.\nWilliam Heath Robinson was born in Hornsey Rise, London, on 31 May 1872 into a family of artists in Stroud Green, Finsbury Park, North London. His grandfather Thomas, his father Thomas Robinson (1838\u20131902) and brothers Thomas Heath Robinson (1869\u20131954) and Charles Robinson (1870\u20131937) all worked as illustrators. His uncle Charles was an illustrator for \"The Illustrated London News\".\nCareer.\nHis early career involved illustrating books \u2013 among others: Hans Christian Andersen's \"Danish Fairy Tales and Legends\" (1897), \"The Arabian Nights\" (1899), \"Tales from Shakespeare\" (1902), \"Gargantua and Pantagruel\" (1904), \"Twelfth Night\" (1908), \"Andersen's Fairy Tales\" (1913), \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" (1914), Charles Kingsley's \"The Water-Babies\" (1915) and Walter de la Mare's \"Peacock Pie\" (1916). Robinson was one of the leading illustrators selected by Percy Bradshaw for inclusion in his \"The Art of the Illustrator\" (1917\u20131918) which presented a separate portfolio for each of twenty illustrators.\nRobinson served as a consultant at the Percy Bradshaw's The Press Art School, a school teaching painting, drawing, and illustration by correspondence. The consultants commented on the work submitted by the students.32 In the course of his work, Robinson wrote and illustrated three children's books, \"The Adventures of Uncle Lubin\" (1902), \"Bill the Minder\" (1912) and \"Peter Quip in Search of a Friend\" (1922). \"Uncle Lubin\" is regarded as the start of his career in the depiction of unlikely machines.\nDuring the First World War, he drew large numbers of cartoons, depicting ever-more-unlikely secret weapons being used by the combatants, and the American Expeditionary Force in France.\nAfter the war, his work was included in the painting event in the art competition at the 1932 Summer Olympics.\nAs well as producing a steady stream of humorous drawings for magazines and advertisements, in 1934 he published a collection of his favourites as \"Absurdities\", such as:\nMost of his cartoons have since been reprinted many times in multiple collections.\nIn 1935 the Great Western Railway (GWR) commissioned him to create a set of cartoons on the theme of the GWR itself, which they then published as \"Railway Ribaldry\". The Foreword (by GWR) notes that the cartoonist was given a free hand to re-imagine the history of the line for the amusement of its customers. The result is a 96-page softback book with alternating full-page cartoons and smaller vignettes, all on pertinent subjects.\nThe machines he drew were frequently powered by steam boilers or kettles, heated by candles or a spirit lamp and usually kept running by balding, bespectacled men in overalls. There would be complex pulley arrangements, threaded by lengths of knotted string. Robinson's cartoons were so popular that in Britain the term \"Heath Robinson\" is used to refer to an improbable, rickety machine barely kept going by incessant tinkering. (The corresponding term in the U.S. is \"Rube Goldberg\", after the American cartoonist born just over a decade later, with an equal devotion to odd machinery. Similar \"inventions\" have been drawn by cartoonists in many countries, with the Danish Storm Petersen being on par with Robinson and Goldberg.)\nOne of his most famous series of illustrations was that which accompanied the first \"Professor Branestawm\" book written by Norman Hunter. The stories told of the eponymous professor who was brilliant, eccentric and forgetful and provided a perfect backdrop for Robinson's drawings.\nAround 1928, Robinson was commissioned to design a range of nursery ware for W. R. Midwinter, a Staffordshire pottery firm. Scenes from sixteen nursery rhymes (some illustrated with more than one vignette) were printed on ware ranging from eggcups to biscuit barrels, each with a decorative border of characterful children's faces. Titled \"Fairyland on China\", the range was favourably reviewed in the trade press.\nThe last project Robinson worked on shortly before he died was illustrations for Lilian M. Clopet's short story collection \"Once Upon a Time\", which was published in 1944.\nOne of the automatic analysis machines built for Bletchley Park during the Second World War to assist in the decryption of German message traffic was named \"Heath Robinson\" in his honour. It was a direct predecessor to the Colossus, the world's first programmable digital electronic computer.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1903 he married Josephine Latey, the daughter of newspaper editor John Latey. In 1908 the Robinsons moved to Pinner, Middlesex His house in Moss Lane is commemorated by a blue plaque.\nIn 1918 the Heath Robinsons moved to Cranleigh, Surrey where they had their fifth child Thomas Latez. Their daughter Ida attended St Catherine's School, Bramley and their son Oliver attended Cranleigh School. Heath Robinson drew designs and illustrations for local institutions and schools. Heath Robinson was too old to enlist for the First World War; he took on two German POWs to garden after the Armistice. In 1929 the Heath Robinsons returned to London where his two oldest children were now working.\nDeath and legacy.\nHe died in September 1944, during the Second World War, and is buried in East Finchley Cemetery.\nThe Heath Robinson Museum opened in October 2016 to house a collection of nearly 1,000 original artworks owned by The William Heath Robinson Trust. The museum is in Memorial Park, Pinner, close to where the artist lived and worked.\nIn popular culture.\nThe name \"Heath Robinson\" became part of common parlance in the UK for complex inventions that achieved absurdly simple results following its use as services slang during the 1914\u20131918 First World War.\nThe spotting table used by the Royal Observer Corps during the Battle of Britain to determine the bearing and altitude of an incoming German raid before calling it in to the sector plotting room was known, affectionately, as \"the Heath Robinson.\"\nIn the \"Wallace and Gromit\" films, Wallace often invents Heath Robinson-like machines, with some inventions being direct references.\nDuring the Falklands War (1982), British Harrier aircraft lacked their conventional \"chaff\"-dispensing mechanism. Therefore, Royal Navy engineers designed an impromptu delivery system of welding rods, split pins and string which allowed six packets of chaff to be stored in the speedbrake well and deployed in flight. Due to its improvised and ramshackle nature it was often referred to as the \"Heath Robinson chaff modification\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13956", "revid": "29918470", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13956", "title": "Heraclius", "text": "Byzantine emperor from 610 to 641\nHeraclius (; c.\u2009575\u00a0\u2013 11 February 641) was Byzantine emperor from 610 to 641. His rise to power began in 608, when he and his father, Heraclius the Elder, the Exarch of Africa, led a revolt against the unpopular emperor Phocas.\nHeraclius's reign was marked by several military campaigns. The year Heraclius came to power, the empire was threatened on multiple frontiers. Heraclius immediately took charge of the Byzantine\u2013Sasanian War of 602\u2013628. The first battles of the campaign ended in defeat for the Byzantines; the Persian army fought their way to the Bosphorus but Constantinople was protected by impenetrable walls and a strong navy, and Heraclius was able to avoid total defeat. Soon after, he initiated reforms to rebuild and strengthen the military. Heraclius drove the Persians out of Asia Minor and pushed deep into their territory, defeating them decisively in 627 at the Battle of Nineveh. The Persian Shah Khosrow II was overthrown and executed by his son Kavad II, who soon sued for a peace treaty, agreeing to withdraw from all occupied territory. This way peaceful relations were restored to the two deeply strained empires.\nHeraclius soon lost many of his newly regained lands to the Rashidun Caliphate. Emerging from the Arabian Peninsula, the Arabs quickly conquered the Sasanian Empire. In 636, the Arabs marched into Roman Syria, defeating Heraclius's brother Theodore. Within a short period of time, the Arabs conquered Mesopotamia, Armenia and Egypt. Heraclius responded with reforms which allowed his successors to combat the Arabs and avoid total destruction.\nHeraclius entered diplomatic relations with the Croats and Serbs in the Balkans. He tried to repair the schism in the Christian church in regard to the non-Chalcedonians, by promoting a compromise doctrine called monothelitism. The Church of the East (commonly called Nestorian) was also involved in the process. Eventually, this project of unity was rejected by all sides of the dispute.\nOrigins.\nHeraclius was the eldest son of Heraclius the Elder, who is almost universally recognized as being of Armenian origin. His mother, Epiphania, was probably of Cappadocian origin. Walter Kaegi considers Heraclius' Armenian origin \"probable\" and speculates that he was presumably \"bilingual (Armenian and Greek) from an early age, but even this is uncertain\". According to the 7th century Armenian historian Sebeos, Heraclius was related to the Arsacid dynasty of Armenia. Elizabeth Redgate considers his Armenian origin likely. Anthony Kaldellis argues that there is no primary source that says that Heraclius [the Elder] was an Armenian and that the assertion is based on an erroneous reading of Theophylact Simocatta. In a letter, Priscus, a general who had replaced Heraclius the Elder, wrote to him \"to leave the army and return to his own city in Armenia\". Kaldellis interprets it as the command headquarters of Heraclius the Elder, and not his hometown. Beyond that, there is little specific information known about his origin. His father was a general during Emperor Maurice's war with Shah Bahram Chobin, usurper of the Sasanian Empire, during 590. After the war, Maurice appointed Heraclius the Elder to the position of Exarch of Africa.\nEarly life.\nRevolt against Phocas and accession.\nIn 608, Heraclius the Elder renounced his loyalty to the Emperor Phocas, who had overthrown Maurice six years earlier. The rebels issued coins showing both Heraclii dressed as hypatos, though neither of them explicitly claimed the imperial title at this time. Heraclius's younger cousin Nicetas launched an overland invasion of Egypt; by 609, he had defeated Phocas's general Bonosus and secured the province. Meanwhile, the younger Heraclius sailed eastward with another force via Sicily and Cyprus.\nAs he approached Constantinople, he made contact with prominent leaders and planned an attack to overthrow aristocrats in the city. When he reached the capital, the Excubitors, an elite Imperial Guard unit led by Phocas's son-in-law Priscus, deserted to Heraclius, and he entered the city without serious resistance. When Heraclius captured Phocas, he asked him \"Is this how you have ruled, wretch?\" Phocas's reply\u2014\"And will you rule better?\"\u2014so enraged Heraclius that he beheaded Phocas on the spot. He later had the genitalia removed from the body because Phocas had raped the wife of Photius, a powerful politician in the city.\nOn 5 October 610, Heraclius was crowned in the Chapel of St. Stephen within the Great Palace. He then married Fabia, who took the name Eudokia. After her death in 612, he married his niece Martina in 613; this second marriage was considered incestuous and was very unpopular. In the reign of Heraclius's two sons, the divisive Martina was to become the center of power and political intrigue. Despite widespread hatred for Martina in Constantinople, Heraclius took her on campaigns with him and refused attempts by Patriarch Sergius to prevent and later dissolve the marriage.\nByzantine\u2013Sasanian War of 602\u2013628.\nInitial Persian advantage.\nDuring his Balkan campaigns, Emperor Maurice and his family were murdered by Phocas in November 602 after a mutiny. Khosrow II of the Sasanian Empire had been restored to his throne by Maurice, and they had remained allies until the latter's death. Thereafter, Khosrow seized the opportunity to attack the Byzantine Empire and reconquer Mesopotamia. Khosrow had at his court a man who claimed to be Maurice's son Theodosius, and Khosrow demanded that the Byzantines accept this Theodosius as emperor.\nThe war initially went the Persians' way, partly because of Phocas's brutal repression and the succession crisis that ensued as the general Heraclius sent his nephew Nicetas to attack Egypt, enabling his son Heraclius the younger to claim the throne in 610. Phocas, an unpopular ruler who is invariably described in historical sources as a \"tyrant\" (in its original meaning of the word, i.e. illegitimate king by the rules of succession), was eventually deposed by Heraclius, who sailed to Constantinople from Carthage with an icon affixed to the prow of his ship.\nBy this time, the Persians had conquered Mesopotamia and the Caucasus, and in 611 they overran Syria and entered Anatolia. A major counter-attack led by Heraclius two years later was decisively defeated outside Antioch by Shahrbaraz and Shahin, and the Roman position collapsed; the Persians devastated parts of Asia Minor and captured Chalcedon across from Constantinople on the Bosporus.\nOver the following decade the Persians were able to conquer Palestine and Egypt (by mid-621, the whole province was in their hands) and to devastate Anatolia, while the Avars and Slavs took advantage of the situation to overrun the Balkans, bringing the Empire to the brink of destruction. In 613, the Persian army took Damascus with the help of the Jews, seized Jerusalem in 614, damaging the Church of the Holy Sepulchre and capturing the True Cross, and afterwards capturing Egypt in 617 or 618. When the Sasanians reached Chalcedon in 615, it was at this point, according to Sebeos, that Heraclius had agreed to stand down and was about ready to allow the Byzantine Empire to become a Persian client state, even permitting Khosrow II to choose the emperor. In a letter delivered by his ambassadors, Heraclius acknowledged the Persian empire as superior, described himself as Khosrow II's \"obedient son, one who is eager to perform the services of your serenity in all things\", and even called Khosrow II the \"supreme emperor\". Khosrow II nevertheless rejected the peace offer, and arrested Heraclius' ambassadors.\nWith the Persians at the very gate of Constantinople, Heraclius thought of abandoning the city and moving the capital to Carthage, but the powerful church figure Patriarch Sergius convinced him to stay. Safe behind the walls of Constantinople, Heraclius was able to sue for peace in exchange for an annual tribute of a thousand talents of gold, a thousand talents of silver, a thousand silk robes, a thousand horses, and a thousand virgins to the Persian King. The peace allowed him to rebuild the Empire's army by slashing non-military expenditure, devaluing the currency, and melting down, with the backing of Patriarch Sergius, Church treasures to raise the necessary funds to continue the war.\nByzantine counter-offensive and resurgence.\nOn 4 April 622, Heraclius left Constantinople, entrusting the city to Sergius and general Bonus as regents of his son. He assembled his forces in Asia Minor, probably in Bithynia, and, after he revived their broken morale, he launched a new counter-offensive, which took on the character of a holy war; an acheiropoietos image of Christ was carried as a military standard.\nThe Roman army proceeded to Armenia, inflicted a defeat on an army led by a Persian-allied Arab chief, and then won a victory over the Persians under Shahrbaraz. Heraclius would stay on campaign for several years. On 25 March 624, he again left Constantinople with his wife, Martina, and his two children; after he celebrated Easter in Nicomedia on 15 April, he campaigned in the Caucasus, winning a series of victories in Armenia against Khosrow and his generals Shahrbaraz, Shahin, and Shahraplakan. In the same year the Visigoths succeeded in recapturing Cartagena, capital of the western Byzantine province of Spania, resulting in the loss of one of the few minor provinces that had been conquered by the armies of Justinian\u00a0I. In 626 the Avars and Slavs supported by a Persian army commanded by Shahrbaraz, besieged Constantinople, but the siege ended in failure (the victory was attributed to the icons of the Virgin which were led in procession by Sergius about the walls of the city), while a second Persian army under Shahin suffered another crushing defeat at the hands of Heraclius's brother Theodore.\nWith the Persian war effort disintegrating, Heraclius was able to bring the Gokturks of the Western Turkic Khaganate, under Ziebel, who invaded Persian Transcaucasia. Heraclius exploited divisions within the Persian Empire, keeping Shahrbaraz neutral by convincing him that Khosrow had grown jealous of him and had ordered his execution. Late in 627 he launched a winter offensive into Mesopotamia, where, despite the desertion of his Turkish allies, he defeated the Persians under Rhahzadh at the Battle of Nineveh. Continuing south along the Tigris he sacked Khosrow's great palace at Dastagird and was only prevented from attacking Ctesiphon by the destruction of the bridges on the Nahrawan Canal. Discredited by this series of disasters, Khosrow was overthrown and killed in a coup led by his son Kavad II, who at once sued for peace, agreeing to withdraw from all occupied territories. In 629 Heraclius restored the True Cross to Jerusalem in a majestic ceremony.\nHeraclius took for himself the ancient Persian title of \"King of Kings\" after his victory. Later on, starting in 629, he styled himself as \"Basileus\", the Greek word for \"sovereign\", and that title was used by the Byzantine emperors for the next 824 years. The reason Heraclius chose this title over previous Roman terms such as \"Augustus\" has been attributed by some scholars to his Armenian origins.\nHeraclius's defeat of the Persians ended a war that had been going on intermittently for almost 400 years and led to instability in the Persian Empire. Kavad II died only months after assuming the throne, plunging Persia into several years of dynastic turmoil and civil war. Ardashir III, Heraclius's ally Shahrbaraz, and Khosrow's daughters Boran and Azarmidokht all succeeded to the throne within months of each other. Only when Yazdegerd III, a grandson of Khosrow II, succeeded to the throne in 632 was there stability. But by then the Sasanid Empire was severely disorganised, having been weakened by years of war and civil strife over the succession to the throne.\nThe war had been devastating, and left the Byzantines in a much-weakened state. Within a few years both empires were overwhelmed by the onslaught of the Arabs, ultimately leading to the Arab conquest of Persia and the fall of the Sasanian dynasty in 651.\nByzantine\u2013Arab wars.\nBy 630, the Arabs had unified all the tribes of the Hijaz, previously too divided to pose a serious military challenge to the Byzantines or the Persians. They composed one of the most powerful states in the region. The first conflict between the Byzantines and the Arabs was the Battle of Mu'tah in September 629. A small Arabs skirmishing force attacked the province of Arabia in response to the Arab ambassador's death at the hands of the Ghassanid Roman governor, but were repulsed. Since the engagement was a Byzantine victory, there was no apparent reason to make changes to the military organization of the region. The Roman military wasn't accustomed to fighting Arab armies at scale, much like the Islamic forces of Hijaz who had no prior experience in their engagements against the Romans. Even the Strategicon of Maurice, a manual of war praised for the variety of enemies it covers, does not mention warfare against Arabs at any length. The religious zeal of the Arab army, which was a recent development following the rise of Islam, ultimately contributed to the latter's success in its campaigns against the Romans.\nThe following year, the Arabs launched an offensive into the Arabah south of Lake Tiberias, taking al-Karak. Other raids penetrated into the Negev, reaching as far as Gaza. The Battle of Yarmouk in 636 resulted in a crushing defeat for the larger Byzantine army; within three years, the Levant had been lost again. Heraclius died of an illness on 11 February 641; and most of Egypt had fallen by that time as well.\nLegacy.\nThe territories recovered by his defeat of the Persians were relinquished again in the Arab conquests. The recovery of the eastern areas of the Roman Empire from the Persians once again raised the problem of religious unity centering on the understanding of the true nature of Christ. Most of the inhabitants of these provinces were Miaphysites who rejected the Council of Chalcedon. Heraclius tried to promote a compromise doctrine called Monothelitism but this philosophy was rejected as heretical by both sides of the dispute. For this reason, Heraclius was viewed as a heretic and a bad ruler by some later religious writers. After the Miaphysite provinces were finally lost to the Arabs, Monotheletism rather lost its \"raison d'\u00eatre\" and was eventually abandoned.\nThe Croats and Serbs of Byzantine Dalmatia initiated diplomatic relations and dependencies with Heraclius. The Serbs, who briefly lived in Macedonia, became \"foederati\" and were baptized at the request of Heraclius (before 626). At his request, Pope John IV (640\u2013642) sent Christian teachers and missionaries to Duke Porga and his Croats, who practiced Slavic paganism. He also created the office of sakellarios, a comptroller of the treasury.\nUp to the 20th century he was credited with establishing the Thematic system but modern scholarship now points more to the 660s, under Constans II.\nEdward Gibbon, in \"The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\", wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Of the characters conspicuous in history, that of Heraclius is one of the most extraordinary and inconsistent. In the first and last years of a long reign, the emperor appears to be the slave of sloth, of pleasure, or of superstition, the careless and impotent spectator of the public calamities. But the languid mists of the morning and evening are separated by the brightness of the meridian sun; the Arcadius of the palace arose the Caesar of the camp; and the honor of Rome and Heraclius was gloriously retrieved by the exploits and trophies of six adventurous campaigns. [...] Since the days of Scipio and Hannibal, no bolder enterprise has been attempted than that which Heraclius achieved for the deliverance of the empire.\nAccording to Leo Donald Davis and Romilly James Heald Jenkins, one of the most important legacies of Heraclius was changing the official language of the Empire from Latin to Greek. Although, Anthony Kaldellis states that Heraclius passed no laws formally implementing Greek as an official language, and that usage of Greek was widespread throughout the Empire.\nRecovery of the True Cross.\nHeraclius was long remembered favourably by the Western church for his reputed recovery of the True Cross from the Persians. As Heraclius approached the Persian capital during the final stages of the war, Khosrow fled from his favourite residence\u2014Dastagird near Baghdad\u2014without offering resistance. Meanwhile, some of the Persian grandees freed Khosrow's eldest son Kavad II, who had been imprisoned by his father, and proclaimed him King on the night of 23\u201324 February, 628. Kavad, however, was mortally ill and was anxious that Heraclius should protect his infant son Ardeshir. So, as a goodwill gesture, he sent the True Cross with a negotiator in 628.\nAfter a tour of the Empire, Heraclius returned the cross to Jerusalem on 21 March 629 or 630. For Christians of Western Medieval Europe, Heraclius was the \"first crusader\". The iconography of the emperor appeared in the sanctuary at Mont Saint-Michel (c.\u20091060), and then it became popular, especially in France, the Italian Peninsula, and the Holy Roman Empire. The story was included in the \"Golden Legend\", the famous 13th-century compendium of hagiography, and he is sometimes shown in art, as in \"The History of the True Cross\" sequence of frescoes painted by Piero della Francesca in Arezzo, and a similar sequence on a small altarpiece by Adam Elsheimer (St\u00e4del, Frankfurt). Both of these show scenes of Heraclius and Constantine I's mother Saint Helena, traditionally responsible for the excavation of the cross. The scene usually shown is Heraclius carrying the cross; according to the \"Golden Legend\", he insisted on doing this as he entered Jerusalem, against the advice of the Patriarch. At first, when he was on horseback (shown above), the burden was too heavy, but after he dismounted and removed his crown it became miraculously light, and the barred city gate opened of its own accord.\nLocal tradition suggests that the Late Antique Colossus of Barletta depicts Heraclius.\nSome scholars disagree with this narrative, Professor Constantin Zuckerman going as far as to suggest that the True Cross was actually lost, and that the wood contained in the allegedly-still-sealed reliquary brought to Jerusalem by Heraclius in 629 was a fake. In his analysis, the hoax was designed to serve the political purposes of both Heraclius and his former foe, the Persian general Shahrbaraz.\nIslamic view of Heraclius.\nIn early Islamic and Arab histories, Heraclius is the most popular Roman emperor, who is discussed at length. Owing to his role as Roman emperor at the time Islam emerged, he is remembered in Arabic literature, such as the Islamic hadith and sira. He is also indirectly mentioned in Sura Ar-Rum and his victory against Sassanid empire was prophesied here. In the third and fourth verses, the Muslim community is promised that the Byzantines will reverse their defeat into a victory and retake Jerusalem \"in a few years' time\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAccording to Islamic traditions, a letter was sent from Muhammad to Heraclius, through the Muslim envoy Dihyah bin Khalifah al-Kalbi, although Shahid suggests that Heraclius may never have received it. He also advances that more positive sub-narratives surrounding the letter contain little credence. According to Nadia El Cheikh, Arab historians and chroniclers generally did not doubt the authenticity of Heraclius' letter due to the documentation of such letters in the majority of both early and later sources. Furthermore, she notes that the formulation and the wordings of different sources are very close and the differences are ones of detail: They concern the date on which the letter was sent and its exact phrasing. Muhammad Hamidullah, an Islamic research scholar, argues for the authenticity of the letter sent to Heraclius, and in a later work reproduces what is claimed to be the original letter.\nThe account as transmitted by Muslim historians is translated as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAccording to Islamic reports, Muhammad dispatched Dihyah al-Kalbi to carry the epistle to \"Caesar\" through the government of Bosra after the Byzantine defeat of the Persians and reconquest of Jerusalem. Islamic sources say that after the letter was read to him, he was so impressed by it that he gifted the messenger of the epistle with robes and coinage. Alternatively, he also put it on his lap. He then summoned Abu Sufyan ibn Harb to his court, at the time an adversary to Muhammad but a signatory to the then-recent Treaty of Hudaybiyyah, who was trading in the region of Syria at the time. Asked by Heraclius about the man claiming to be a prophet, Abu Sufyan responded, speaking favorably of Muhammad's character and lineage and outlining some directives of Islam. Heraclius was seemingly impressed by what he was told of Muhammad, and felt that Muhammad's claim to prophethood was valid. Later reportedly he wrote to a certain religious official in Rome to confirm if Muhammad's claim of prophethood was legitimate, and, after receiving the reply to his letter, called the Roman assembly saying, \"If you desire salvation and the orthodox way so that your empire remain firmly established, then follow this prophet,\" to the rejection of the council. Heraclius eventually decided against conversion but the envoy was returned to Medina with the felicitations of the emperor. Described in Tarikh al-Tabari that, then Heraclius sent Dehia Kalbi to invite the Christian priest , Dagatir converted to Islam and called the people to Islam by witnessing Muhammad as Ahmad described in the Bible. The people of Rome were enraged and immediately beat him to death.\nScholarly historians disagree with this account, arguing that any such messengers would have received neither an imperial audience or recognition, and that there is no evidence outside of Islamic sources suggesting that Heraclius had any knowledge of Islam.\nThis letter is mentioned in Sahih Al Bukhari.\nThe Swahili \"Utendi wa Tambuka\", an epic poem composed in 1728 at Pate Island (off the shore of present-day Kenya) and depicting the wars between the Muslims and Byzantines from the former's point of view, is also known as \"Kyuo kya Here\u1e33ali\" (\"The Book of Heraclius\"). In that work, Heraclius is portrayed as declining the Prophet's request to renounce his belief in Christianity: he is therefore defeated by the Muslim forces.\nIn Muslim tradition, he is seen as a just ruler of great piety, who had direct contact with the emerging Islamic forces. The 14th-century scholar Ibn Kathir (d. 1373) went even further, stating that \"Heraclius was one of the wisest men and among the most resolute, shrewd, deep and opinionated of kings. He ruled the Romans with great leadership and splendor.\" Ibn al-Jawzi claimed that the competence of the Roman king always mirrored that of the Muslim king, and that Heraclius \"wrote for his people books and dizzied his people's enemies\", much like his contemporary Umar I. Historians such as Nadia Maria El-Cheikh and Lawrence Conrad note that Islamic histories even go so far as claiming that Heraclius recognized Islam as the true faith and Muhammad as its prophet, by comparing Islam to Christianity.\nIslamic historians often cite a letter in which they claim Heraclius wrote to Muhammad: \"I have received your letter with your ambassador and I testify that you are the messenger of God found in our New Testament. Jesus, son of Mary, announced you.\" According to the Muslim sources reported by El-Cheikh, he tried to convert the ruling class of the Empire, but they resisted so strongly that he reversed course and claimed that he was just testing their faith in Christianity. El-Cheikh notes that these accounts of Heraclius add \"little to our historical knowledge\" of the emperor; rather, they are an important part of \"Islamic kerygma,\" attempting to legitimize Muhammad's status as a prophet.\nMost Western academic historians view such traditions as biased and proclamatory and of little historical value. Furthermore, they argue that any messengers sent by Muhammad to Heraclius would not have received an imperial audience or recognition. According to Kaegi, there is no evidence outside of Islamic sources to suggest Heraclius ever heard of Islam, and it is possible that he and his advisors actually viewed the Muslims as some special sect of Jews.\nFamily and personal life.\nHeraclius had epispadias, meaning that his urethra was on the upper side of the shaft of his penis, rather than at the tip. When urinating, the urine would flow upward toward his face. To prevent the mess, he would place a wooden plank on his belly. He is the earliest known case of epispadias in medical history.\nHeraclius was married twice: first to Fabia Eudokia, a daughter of Rogatus, and then to his niece Martina. He had two children with Fabia (Eudoxia Epiphania and Heraclius Constantine) and at least nine with Martina, many of whom were sickly children. Of Martina's children at least two were disabled, which was seen as punishment for the illegality of the marriage: Fabius had a paralyzed neck and Theodosius was a deaf-mute. The latter married Nike, daughter of the Persian general Shahrbaraz, or daughter of Niketas, cousin of Heraclius.\nHeraclius was succeeded by two of his children: Heraclius Constantine, his son with Eudokia, and Martina's son Heraclius (Heraclonas). Constantine was crowned co-emperor (\"augustus\") on 22 January 613, at the age of 8 months. Heraclonas was made \"caesar\" on 1 January 632, aged 6, and was later crowned \"augustus\" on 4 July 638. A third son, David, was also crowned in 641 under the regnal name of \"Tiberius\". They ruled for a few months in 641, but were eventually succeeded by Constans II, the son of Heraclius Constantine, by the end of the year.\nHeraclius had at least one illegitimate son, John Athalarichos, who conspired against Heraclius with his cousin, the magister Theodorus, and the Armenian noble David Saharuni. When Heraclius discovered the plot, he had Athalarichos's nose and hands cut off, and he was exiled to Prinkipo, one of the Princes' Islands. Theodorus received the same treatment, but was sent to Gaudomelete (possibly modern-day Gozo Island) with additional instructions to cut off one leg.\nDuring the last years of Heraclius's life, it became evident that a struggle was taking place between Heraclius Constantine and Martina, who was trying to position her son Heraclonas to assume the throne. When Heraclius died, he devised the empire to both Heraclius Constantine and Heraclonas to rule jointly with Martina as empress.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13957", "revid": "50521813", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13957", "title": "Henry the Fowler", "text": "King of East Francia from 919 to 936\nHenry the Fowler ( or \"\"; ; c.\u2009876 \u2013 2 July 936) was the duke of Saxony from 912 and the king of East Francia from 919 until his death in 936. As the first non-Frankish king of East Francia, he established the Ottonian dynasty of kings and emperors, and he is generally considered to be the founder of the medieval German state, known until then as East Francia. An avid hunter, he obtained the epithet \"the Fowler\" because he was allegedly fixing his birding nets when messengers arrived to inform him that he was to be king.\nHe was born into the Liudolfing line of Saxon dukes. His father Otto I of Saxony died in 912 and was succeeded by Henry. The new duke launched a rebellion against the king of East Francia, Conrad I of Germany, over the rights to lands in the Duchy of Thuringia. They reconciled in 915 and on his deathbed in 918, Conrad recommended Henry as the next king, considering the duke the only one who could hold the kingdom together in the face of internal revolts and external Magyar raids.\nHenry was elected and crowned king in 919. He went on to defeat the rebellious dukes of Bavaria and Swabia, consolidating his rule. Through successful warfare and a dynastic marriage, Henry acquired Lotharingia as a vassal in 925. Unlike his Carolingian predecessors, Henry did not seek to create a centralized monarchy, ruling through federated autonomous stem duchies instead. Henry built an extensive system of fortifications and mobile heavy cavalry across Germany to neutralize the Magyar threat and in 933 routed them at the Battle of Riade, ending Magyar attacks for the next 21 years and giving rise to a sense of German nationhood. Henry greatly expanded German hegemony in Europe with his army's defeat of the Slavs in 929 at the Battle of Lenzen along the Elbe river, by compelling the submission of Duke Wenceslaus I of Bohemia through an invasion of the Duchy of Bohemia the same year and by conquering Danish realms in Schleswig in 934. Henry's hegemonic status north of the Alps was acknowledged by the kings Rudolph of West Francia and Rudolph II of Upper Burgundy, who both accepted a place of subordination as allies in 935. Henry planned an expedition to Rome to be crowned emperor by the pope, but the design was thwarted by his death. Henry prevented a collapse of royal power, as had happened in West Francia, and left a much stronger kingdom to his successor Otto I. He was buried at Quedlinburg Abbey, established by his wife Matilda in his honour.\nFamily.\nBorn in Memleben, in what is now Saxony-Anhalt, Henry was the son of Otto the Illustrious, Duke of Saxony, and his wife Hedwiga, who was probably the daughter of Henry of Franconia.\nIn 906 he married Hatheburg of Merseburg, daughter of the Saxon count Erwin. She had previously been a nun. The marriage was annulled in 909 because her vows as a nun were deemed by the church to remain valid. She had already given birth to Henry's son Thankmar. The annulment placed a question mark over Thankmar's legitimacy. Later that year he married Matilda, daughter of Dietrich of Ringelheim, Count in Westphalia. Matilda bore him three sons and two daughters, Hedwig and Gerberga, and founded many religious institutions, including the Quedlinburg Abbey where Henry and Matilda are buried. She was later canonized.\nHis son Otto I, traditionally known as \"Otto the Great\", continued his father's work of unifying all German tribes into a single kingdom and greatly expanded the king's powers. He installed members of his family in the kingdom's most important duchies, subjected the clergy to his personal control, defeated the Magyars and conquered the Kingdom of Italy.\nRule.\nHenry became Duke of Saxony after his father's death in 912. An able ruler, he continued to strengthen the position of his duchy within the weakening kingdom of East Francia, and was frequently in conflict with his neighbors to the South in the Duchy of Franconia.\nOn 23 December 918 Conrad I, king of East Francia and Franconian duke, died. Although Henry had rebelled against Conrad I between 912 and 915 over the lands in Thuringia, Conrad recommended Henry as his successor. Kingship now changed from the Franks to the Saxons, who had suffered greatly during the conquests of Charlemagne and were proud of their identity. Henry, as Saxon, was the first non-Frank on the throne.\nConrad's choice was conveyed by his brother, duke Eberhard III of Franconia at the Imperial Diet of Fritzlar in 919. The assembled Franconian and Saxon nobles elected Henry to be king with other regional dukes not participating in the election. Archbishop Heriger of Mainz offered to anoint Henry according to the usual ceremony, but he refused \u2013 the only king of his time not to undergo that rite \u2013 allegedly because he wished to be king not by the church's but by the people's acclaim.\nHenry, who was elected to kingship by only the Saxons and Franconians at Fritzlar, had to subdue the other dukes.\nDuke Burchard II of Swabia soon swore fealty to the new king, but when he died, Henry appointed a noble from Franconia to be the new duke.\nDuke Arnulf of Bavaria, lord over a realm of impressive extent, with \"de facto\" powers of a king and at times even named so in documents, proved a much harder nut to crack. He would not submit until Henry defeated him in two campaigns in 921.\nIn the short remnant of a more lengthy text, \"Fragmentum de Arnulfo duce Bavariae ()\", the author gives a very lively impression of the disconcert Henry's claims caused in Bavaria:\nThe piece abruptly starts with a clause. It relates that Henry I (\"Saxo Heimricus\"), following the advice of an unnamed bishop, had invaded the Bavarian kingdom (\"regnum Baioariae\") in a hostile way. Decidedly, it hints at the unlawfulness of this encroachment, namely in that Bavaria was a territory in which none of Henry's forefathers had ever possessed even a foot (gressum pedis) of land. This was also the reason \u2013 by God's will (Dei nutu) \u2013 for him having been defeated in this first campaign. This can be seen as proof that Henry did campaign against Bavaria, and Arnulf, more than once.\nIn the second chapter, the unknown chronicler hints that Henry's predecessor on the throne, Conrad I, had also invaded Bavaria in an equally unlawful and hostile (non regaliter, sed hostiliter) fashion. Conrad is said to have marauded through the land, murdering and pillaging, having made many children orphans (orphanos) and women widows (viduas). Ratisbon, the duke's seat, was set to light and looted. After Conrad committed all these crimes (peccatis), it reports that divine providence (divino nutu) forced him to withdraw. The reason for this is not mentioned.\nThe last section is a eulogy to Duke Arnulf who is described as a glorious leader (gloriosus dux), being blessed by heaven (ex alto) with all kinds of virtues, brave and dynamic. He alone had saved his people from the scourge of the Saxons (de sevienti gladio paganorum) and given them back their freedom.\nThis panegyric to the Bavarian duke is unparalleled for its time and underlines his position of power in the southeast of the East Frankish realm, so endangered by disintegration, so that \"Arnulf ... nearly [found] the same resonance in the scarce historiography of his time, as did King Henry\".\nHenry besieged Arnulf's residence at Ratisbon and forced the duke into submission. Arnulf had crowned himself as king of Bavaria in 919, but in 921 renounced the crown and submitted to Henry while maintaining significant autonomy and the right to mint his own coins.\nIn his time, the king was considered \"primus inter pares (first among equals)\". The king and princes formulated policies together and the position of the monarchy could only be consolidated gradually. Even under Otto the Great and later monarchs, consensus building would remain important. \nWars over Lotharingia.\nIn 920, the king of West Francia, Charles the Simple, invaded and marched as far as Pfeddersheim near Worms, but retreated when he learned that Henry was organizing an army. On 7 November 921, Henry and Charles met and concluded the Treaty of Bonn, in which Henry was recognized as the east Frankish king and Charles rule in Lotharingia was recognized. Henry then saw an opportunity to take Lotharingia when a civil war over royal succession began in West Francia after the coronation of King Robert I. In 923 Henry crossed the Rhine twice, capturing a large part of the duchy. The eastern part of Lotharingia was left in Henry's possession until October 924.\nIn 925 Duke Gilbert of Lotharingia rebelled. Henry invaded the duchy and besieged Gilbert at Z\u00fclpich (Tolbiac), captured the town, and became master of a large portion of his lands. Allowing Gilbert to remain in power as duke, Henry arranged the marriage of his daughter Gerberga to his new vassal in 928. Thus he brought that realm, which had been lost in 910, back into the kingdom as the fifth stem duchy.\nWars with Magyars.\nThe threat of Magyar raiders improved his situation, as all the dukes and nobles realized that only a strong state could defend their lands against barbarian incursions.\nIn 919 Henry was defeated by the Magyars in the Battle of P\u00fcchen, hardly escaping from being killed in battle, managing to take refuge in the town of P\u00fcchen.\nIn 921 the Magyars once again invaded East Francia and Italy. Although a sizable Magyar force was defeated near Bleiburg in the Bavarian March of Carinthia by Eberhard and the Count of Meran and another group was routed by Liutfried, count of Elsass (French reading: Alsace), the Magyars continued raiding East Francia.\nHenry, having captured a Hungarian prince, managed to arrange a ten-year truce in 924, though he agreed to pay annual tribute. By doing so he and the dukes gained time to build new fortified towns and to train a new elite cavalry force. Henry built fortified settlements as a defense against Magyar and Slav invaders. In 932 Henry refused to pay the annual tribute to the Magyars. When they began raiding again, Henry, with his improved army in 933 at the Battle of Riade, crushed the Magyars so completely that they never returned to the northern lands of Henry's kingdom.\nWars with Slavs.\nDuring the truce with the Magyars, Henry subdued the Polabian Slavs who lived on his eastern borders. In the winter of 928 he marched against the Slavic Hevelli tribes and seized their capital, Brandenburg. He then invaded the Glomacze lands on the middle Elbe river, conquering the capital Gana (Jahna) after a siege, and had a fortress (the later Albrechtsburg) built at Meissen. In 929, with the help of Arnulf of Bavaria, Henry entered the Duchy of Bohemia and forced Duke Wenceslaus I to resume the annual payment of tribute to the king.\nMeanwhile, the Slavic Redarii had driven away their chief, captured the town of Walsleben and massacred its inhabitants. Counts Bernard and Thietmar marched against the fortress of Lenzen beyond the Elbe, and, after fierce fighting, completely routed the enemy on 4 September 929. The Lusatians and the Ukrani on the lower Oder were subdued and made tributary in 932 and 934, respectively. In conquered lands Henry did not create march administration, which was implemented by his successor Otto I.\nWars with Danes.\nHenry also pacified territories to the north, where the Danes had been harrying the Frisians by sea. The monk and chronicler Widukind of Corvey in his \"Res gestae Saxonicae\" reports that the Danes were subjects of Henry the Fowler. Henry incorporated into his kingdom territories held by the Wends, who together with the Danes had attacked Germany, and also conquered Schleswig in 934.\nFamily and children.\nAs the first Saxon king of East Francia, Henry was the founder of the Ottonian dynasty. He and his descendants ruled East Francia, and later the Holy Roman Empire, from 919 until 1024.\nHenry had two wives and at least six children:\nLegacy.\nHenry returned to public attention as a character in Richard Wagner's opera, \"Lohengrin\" (1850), trying to gain the support of the Brabantian nobles against the Magyars. After the attempts to achieve German national unity failed with the Revolutions of 1848, Wagner strongly relied on the picture of Henry as the actual ruler of all German tribes as advocated by pan-Germanist activists like Friedrich Ludwig Jahn.\nThere are indications that Heinrich Himmler saw himself as the reincarnation of Henry, who was proclaimed to be the first king of Germany. Himmler traveled to Quedlinburg several times to hold a ceremony in the crypt on the anniversary of the king's death, 2 July. This started in 1936, 1,000 years after Henry died. Himmler considered him to be the \"first German king\" and declared his tomb a site of pilgrimage for Germans. In 1937, the king's remains were reinterred in a new sarcophagus.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13959", "revid": "28217840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13959", "title": "Hannibal", "text": "Carthaginian general and statesman (247\u2013183/181 BC)\nHannibal (; ; 247 \u2013 between 183 and 181 BC) was a Carthaginian general and statesman who commanded the forces of Carthage in their battle against the Roman Republic during the Second Punic War. Hannibal lived during a period of great tension in the Mediterranean Basin, triggered by the emergence of the Roman Republic as a great power with its defeat of Carthage in the First Punic War. Revanchism prevailed in Carthage, symbolized by the pledge that Hannibal made to his father to \"never be a friend of Rome\".\nIn 218 BC Hannibal attacked Saguntum (modern Sagunto, Spain), an ally of Rome in Hispania, sparking the Second Punic War. Hannibal invaded Italy by crossing the Alps with North African war elephants. In his first few years in Italy, as the leader of a Carthaginian and partially Celtic army, he won a succession of victories at the Battle of Ticinus, Trebia, Lake Trasimene, and Cannae, inflicting heavy losses on the Romans. Hannibal was distinguished for his ability to determine both his and his opponent's respective strengths and weaknesses, and to plan battles accordingly. His well-planned strategies allowed him to conquer and ally with several Italian cities that were previously allied to Rome. Hannibal occupied most of southern Italy for 15 years. The Romans, led by Fabius Maximus, avoided directly engaging him, instead waging a war of attrition (the Fabian strategy). Carthaginian defeats in Hispania prevented Hannibal from being reinforced, and he was unable to win a decisive victory. A counter-invasion of North Africa, led by the Roman general Scipio Africanus, forced him to return to Carthage. Hannibal was defeated at the Battle of Zama, ending the war in a Roman victory.\nAfter the war, Hannibal successfully ran for the office of sufet. He enacted political and financial reforms to enable the payment of the war indemnity imposed by Rome. Those reforms were unpopular with members of the Carthaginian aristocracy and in Rome, and he fled into voluntary exile. During this time, he lived at the Seleucid court, where he acted as military advisor to Antiochus III the Great in his war against Rome. Antiochus met defeat at the Battle of Magnesia and was forced to accept Rome's terms, and Hannibal fled again, making a stop in the Kingdom of Armenia. His flight ended in the court of Bithynia. He was betrayed to the Romans and committed suicide by poisoning himself.\nHannibal is considered one of the greatest military tacticians and generals of Western antiquity, alongside Alexander the Great, Julius Caesar, Scipio Africanus, and Pyrrhus. According to Plutarch, Scipio asked Hannibal \"who the greatest general was\", to which Hannibal replied \"either Alexander or Pyrrhus, then myself\".\nName.\nHannibal was a common Semitic Phoenician-Carthaginian personal name. It is recorded in Carthaginian sources as \u1e24NB\u02bfL (). It is a combination of the common Phoenician masculine given name Hanno with the Northwest Semitic Canaanite deity Baal (lit, \"lord\") a major god of the Carthaginian's ancestral homeland of Phoenicia in Western Asia. Its precise vocalization remains a matter of debate. Suggested readings include \"\u1e24annoba\u02bfal\", \"\u1e24anniba\u02bfl\", or \"\u1e24anniba\u02bfal\", meaning \"Ba\u02bfal/The lord is gracious\", \"Ba\u02bfal Has Been Gracious\", or \"The Grace of Ba\u02bfal\". It is equivalent to the fellow Semitic Hebrew name Haniel. Greek historians rendered the name as \"Ann\u00edbas\" ().\nThe Phoenicians and Carthaginians, like many West Asian Semitic peoples, did not use hereditary surnames but were typically distinguished from others bearing the same name using patronymics or epithets. Although he is by far the most famous Hannibal, when further clarification is necessary he is usually referred to as \"Hannibal, son of Hamilcar\", or \"Hannibal the Barcid\", to his father, Hamilcar Barca. \"Barca\" (, BRQ) is a Semitic cognomen meaning \"lightning\" or \"thunderbolt\", a surname acquired by Hamilcar on account of the swiftness and ferocity of his attacks. Barca is cognate with similar names for lightning found among the Israelites, Assyrians, Babylonians, Arameans, Arabs, Amorites, Moabites, Edomites and other fellow Asiatic Semitic peoples. Although they did not inherit the surname from their father, Hamilcar's progeny are collectively known as the Barcids. Modern historians occasionally refer to Hannibal's brothers as Hasdrubal Barca and Mago Barca to distinguish them from the multitudes of other Carthaginians named Hasdrubal and Mago, but this practice is ahistorical and is rarely applied to Hannibal. \nBackground and early career.\nHannibal was one of the sons of Carthaginian general and statesman Hamilcar Barca and an unknown mother. He was most likely born in Carthage, one of many Mediterranean regions colonised by the Canaanites from their homeland in Phoenicia. He had several sisters whose names are unknown and two brothers, Hasdrubal and Mago. His brothers-in-law were Hasdrubal the Fair and the Numidian king Naravas. He was still a child when his sisters married, and his brothers-in-law were close associates during his father's struggles in the Mercenary War and the Punic conquest of the Iberian Peninsula.\nAfter Carthage's defeat in the First Punic War, Hamilcar set out to improve his family's and Carthage's fortunes. With that in mind and supported by Gades, Hamilcar began the subjugation of the tribes of the Iberian Peninsula. Carthage was in such a poor state at the time that it lacked a navy able to transport his army; instead, Hamilcar had to march his forces across Numidia towards the Pillars of Hercules and then cross the Strait of Gibraltar.\nAccording to Polybius, Hannibal much later said that when he came upon his father and begged to go with him, Hamilcar agreed and demanded that Hannibal swear that he would never be a friend of Rome as long as he lived. There is even an account of him at a very young age (9 years old) begging his father to take him to an overseas war. In the story, Hamilcar brought him to a sacrificial chamber. Hamilcar held Hannibal over the fire roaring in the chamber and made him swear that he would never be a friend of Rome. Other sources report that Hannibal told his father, \"I swear so soon as age will permit...I will use fire and steel to arrest the destiny of Rome.\" According to the tradition, Hannibal's oath took place in Pe\u00f1\u00edscola.\nHamilcar went about with the conquest of Hispania. When Hamilcar drowned in battle, Hasdrubal succeeded to his command of the army with Hannibal (then 18 years old) serving as an officer under him. Hasdrubal pursued a policy of consolidation of Carthage's Iberian interests, even signing a treaty with Rome whereby Carthage would not expand north of the Ebro so long as Rome did not expand south of it. Hasdrubal also endeavoured to consolidate Carthaginian power through diplomatic relationships with the Iberians and the Berbers of the North African coasts.\nUpon the assassination of Hasdrubal in 221\u00a0BC, Hannibal at 26 years old was proclaimed commander-in-chief by the army and confirmed in his appointment by the Carthaginian government. Roman scholar Livy gives a depiction of the young Carthaginian: \"No sooner had he arrived...the old soldiers fancied they saw Hamilcar in his youth given back to them; the same bright look; the same fire in his eye, the same trick of countenance and features. Never was one and the same spirit more skilful to meet opposition, to obey, or to command[.]\"\nLivy records that Hannibal married a woman from Castulo, a powerful Spanish city closely allied with Carthage. Roman poet Silius Italicus names her as Imilce. Silius suggests a Greek origin for Imilce, but historian Gilbert Charles-Picard argues for a Punic heritage based on an etymology from the Semitic root m-l-k ('chief, the 'king'). Silius also suggests the existence of a son, who is otherwise not attested by Livy, Polybius, or Appian. The son may have been named Haspar or Aspar, although this is disputed.\nAfter he assumed command, Hannibal spent two years consolidating his holdings and completing the conquest of Hispania, south of the Ebro. In his first campaign, Hannibal stormed the Olcades' strongest centre, Alithia, which promptly led to their surrender, and brought Punic power close to the River Tagus. His following campaign in 220 BC was against the Vaccaei to the west, where he stormed the Vaccaen strongholds of Helmantice and Arbucala. On his return home, laden with many spoils, a coalition of Spanish tribes led by the Carpetani attacked, and Hannibal won his first major battlefield success and showed off his tactical skills at the battle of the River Tagus. \nFearing the growing strength of Hannibal in Iberia, Rome made an alliance with Saguntum, which lay a considerable distance south of the River Ebro, and claimed the city as its protectorate. Hannibal perceived this as a breach of the treaty signed with Hasdrubal, and since he was already planning an attack on Rome, this was his way to start the war. So he laid siege to the city, which fell after eight months.\nHannibal sent the booty from Saguntum to Carthage, a shrewd move which gained him much support from the government; Livy records that only Hanno II the Great spoke against him. In Rome, the Senate reacted to this apparent violation of the treaty by dispatching a delegation to Carthage to demand whether Hannibal had destroyed Saguntum in accordance with orders from Carthage. The Carthaginian Senate responded with legal arguments observing the lack of ratification by either government for the treaty alleged to have been violated. The delegation's leader, Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus, demanded Carthage choose between war and peace, to which his audience replied that Rome could choose. Fabius chose war.\nSecond Punic War in Italy (218\u2013204 BC).\nOverland journey to Italy.\nA campaign to Italy was originally planned by Hasdrubal, who was stationed in the Iberian Peninsula for eight years until 221\u00a0BC. Soon, the Romans became aware of an alliance between Carthage and the Celts of the Po Valley in northern Italy. When Hannibal arrived in the Po Valley, roughly 10,000 Celtic tribesmen joined his army. The Celts were amassing forces to invade farther south in Italy, presumably with Carthaginian backing. Therefore, the Romans pre-emptively invaded the Po region in 225\u00a0BC. By 220\u00a0BC the Romans had annexed the area as Cisalpine Gaul. Hasdrubal was assassinated around the same time (221\u00a0BC), bringing Hannibal to the fore. It seems that the Romans lulled themselves into a false sense of security, having dealt with the threat of a Gallo-Carthaginian invasion, and perhaps knowing that the original Carthaginian commander had been killed.\nHannibal departed Cartagena, Spain (New Carthage) in late spring of 218\u00a0BC. He fought his way through the northern tribes to the foothills of the Pyrenees, subduing the tribes through clever mountain tactics and stubborn fighting. He left a detachment of 20,000 troops to garrison the conquered region. At the Pyrenees, he released 11,000 Iberian troops who showed reluctance to leave their homeland. Hannibal reportedly entered Gaul with 40,000 foot soldiers and 12,000 horsemen.\nHannibal recognized that he still needed to cross the Pyrenees, the Alps, and many large rivers. Additionally, he would have to contend with opposition from the Gauls, whose territory he passed through. Starting in the spring of 218\u00a0BC, he crossed the Pyrenees, and by conciliating the Gaulish chiefs along his passage before the Romans could take any measures to bar his advance, he was able to reach the Rh\u00f4ne by September. Hannibal's army numbered 38,000 infantry, 8,000 cavalry, and 38 elephants, almost none of which would survive the harsh conditions of the Alps.\nHannibal outmanoeuvred the natives who had tried to prevent his crossing, then evaded a Roman force marching from the Mediterranean coast by turning inland up the valley of the Rh\u00f4ne. His exact route over the Alps has been the source of scholarly dispute ever since (Polybius, the surviving ancient account closest in time to Hannibal's campaign, reports that the route was already debated). The most influential modern theories favour either a march up the valley of the Dr\u00f4me and a crossing of the main range to the south of the modern highway over the Col de Montgen\u00e8vre or a march farther north up the valleys of the Is\u00e8re and Arc crossing the main range near the present Col de Mont Cenis or the Little St Bernard Pass. Recent numismatic evidence suggests that Hannibal's army passed within sight of the Matterhorn. Stanford geoarchaeologist Patrick Hunt argues that Hannibal took the Col de Clapier mountain pass, claiming the Clapier most accurately meets ancient depictions of the route: wide view of Italy, pockets of year-round snow, and a large campground. Other scholars have doubts, proposing that Hannibal took the easier route across Petit Mount Cenis. Hunt responds to this by proposing that Hannibal's Celtic guides purposefully misguided the Carthaginian general.\nMost recently, W. C. Mahaney has argued Col de la Traversette closest fits the records of ancient authors. Biostratigraphic archaeological data has reinforced the case for Col de la Traversette; analysis of peat bogs near watercourses on both sides of the pass's summit showed that the ground was heavily disturbed \"by thousands, perhaps tens of thousands, of animals and humans\" and that the soil bore traces of unique levels of \"Clostridia\" bacteria associated with the digestive tracts of horses and mules. Radiocarbon dating secured dates of 2168 BP or c. 218 BC, the year of Hannibal's march. Mahaney \"et al\". conclude that this and other evidence strongly supports the Col de la Traversette as being the \"Hannibalic Route\" as had been argued by Gavin de Beer in 1954. De Beer was one of only three interpreters\u2014the others being John Lazenby and Jakob Seibert\u2014to have visited all the Alpine high passes and presented a view on which was most plausible. Both De Beer and Seibert had selected the Col de la Traversette as the one most closely matching the ancient descriptions. Polybius writes that Hannibal had crossed the highest of the Alpine passes: Col de la Traversette, between the upper Guil valley and the upper Po river, is the highest pass. It is moreover the most southerly, as Roman general Varro in his \"De re rustica\" relates, agreeing that Hannibal's passage was the highest in the western Alps and the most southerly. Mahaney \"et al\". argue that factors used by De Beer to support Col de la Traversette including \"gauging ancient place names against modern, close scrutiny of times of flood in major rivers and distant viewing of the Po plains\" taken together with \"massive radiocarbon and microbiological and parasitical evidence\" from the alluvial sediments on either side of the pass furnish \"supporting evidence, proof if you will\" that Hannibal's invasion went that way. If Hannibal had ascended the Col de la Traversette, the Po Valley would indeed have been visible from the pass's summit, vindicating Polybius's account.\nBy Livy's account, the crossing was accomplished in the face of huge difficulties. These Hannibal surmounted with ingenuity, such as when he used vinegar and fire to break through a rockfall. According to Polybius, he arrived in Italy accompanied by 20,000 foot soldiers, 4,000 horsemen, and only a few elephants. The fired rockfall event is mentioned only by Livy; Polybius is mute on the subject and there is no evidence of carbonized rock at the only two-tier rockfall in the western Alps, located below the Col de la Traversette (Mahaney, 2008). If Polybius is correct in his figure for the number of troops that he commanded after the crossing of the Rh\u00f4ne, this would suggest that he had lost almost half of his force. Historians such as Serge Lancel have questioned the reliability of the figures for the number of troops that he had when he left Hispania. From the start, he seems to have calculated that he would have to operate without aid from Hispania. \nHannibal's vision of military affairs was derived partly from the teaching of his Greek tutors and partly from experience gained alongside his father, and it stretched over most of the Hellenistic world of his time. The breadth of his vision gave rise to his grand strategy of conquering Rome by opening a northern front and subduing allied city-states on the peninsula, rather than by attacking Rome directly. Historical events that led to the defeat of Carthage during the First Punic War when his father commanded the Carthaginian Army also led Hannibal to plan the invasion of Italy by land across the Alps. The task involved the mobilization of between 60,000 and 100,000 troops and the training of a war elephant corps, all of which had to be provisioned along the way. The alpine invasion of Italy was a military operation that would shake the Mediterranean world of 218\u00a0BC with repercussions for more than two decades.\nBattle of Trebia.\nHannibal's perilous march brought him into the Roman territory and frustrated the attempts of the enemy to fight out the main issue on foreign ground. His sudden appearance among the Gauls of the Po Valley enabled him to detach those tribes from their allegiance to the Romans before the Romans could take steps to check the rebellion. Consul Publius Cornelius Scipio, the father of Scipio Africanus, assumed responsibility for dealing with Hannibal.\nScipio had not expected Hannibal to make an attempt to cross the Alps and had already sent most of his forces abroad to fight the war in the Iberian Peninsula. With only a small detachment still positioned in Gaul, Scipio nevertheless attempted to confront Hannibal. He succeeded, through prompt decision and speedy movement, in transporting his army to Italy by sea in time to meet Hannibal. Hannibal's forces moved through the Po Valley and were engaged in the Battle of Ticinus in November 218 BC. Here, Hannibal forced the Romans to evacuate the plain of Lombardy, by virtue of his superior cavalry. The victory was minor, but it encouraged the Gauls and Ligurians to join the Carthaginian cause. Their troops bolstered his army back to around 40,000 men. Scipio was severely injured, his life only saved by the bravery of his son who rode back onto the field to rescue his fallen father. Scipio retreated across the Trebbia to camp at Placentia with his army mostly intact.\nEven before news of the defeat at Ticinus had reached Rome, the Senate had ordered Consul Tiberius Sempronius Longus to bring his army back from Sicily to meet Scipio and face Hannibal. Hannibal, by skillful maneuvers, was in position to head him off, for he lay on the direct road between Placentia and Arminum, by which Sempronius would have to march to reinforce Scipio. Hannibal captured Clastidium, from which he drew large amounts of supplies for his men. But this gain was not without loss, as Sempronius avoided Hannibal's watchfulness, slipped around his flank, and joined his colleague near the Trebbia near Placentia. There, Hannibal had an opportunity to show his masterful military skill at the Trebia in December, wearing down the superior Roman infantry before cutting it to pieces with a surprise attack and ambush from the flanks. However, most or all of his war elephants had died of injuries or the cold that winter, and none took part in the succeeding battles.\nBattle of Lake Trasimene.\nHannibal quartered his troops for the winter with the Gauls, whose support for him had abated. Fearing the possibility that the tribesmen would seek to assassinate him and win back the Romans' favor, Hannibal resorted to altering his appearance by wearing differently dyed wigs in the hopes they would not recognize him. In the spring of 217\u00a0BC Hannibal decided to find a more reliable base of operations farther south. Gnaeus Servilius and Gaius Flaminius (the new consuls of Rome) were expecting Hannibal to advance on Rome, and they took their armies to block the eastern and western routes that Hannibal could use.\nThe only alternative route to central Italy lay at the mouth of the Arno. This area was mostly marshland and happened to be overflowing more than usual that spring. Hannibal knew that this route was full of difficulties, but it remained the surest and quickest way to central Italy. Polybius claims that Hannibal's men marched for four days and three nights \"through a land that was under water\", suffering terribly from fatigue and enforced want of sleep. He crossed without opposition over both the Apennines (during which he lost his right eye because of conjunctivitis) and the seemingly impassable Arno, but he lost a large part of his force in the marshy lowlands of the Arno. He arrived in Etruria in the spring of 217\u00a0BC and decided to lure the main Roman army under Flaminius into a pitched battle by devastating the region that Flaminius had been sent to protect. As Polybius recounts, \"he [Hannibal] calculated that, if he passed the camp and made a descent into the district beyond, Flaminius (partly for fear of popular reproach and partly of personal irritation) would be unable to endure watching passively the devastation of the country but would spontaneously follow him... and give him opportunities for attack.\" \nAt the same time, Hannibal tried to break the allegiance of Rome's allies by proving that Flaminius was powerless to protect them. Despite this, Flaminius remained passively encamped at Arretium. Hannibal marched boldly around Flaminius' left flank, unable to draw him into battle by mere devastation, and effectively cut him off from Rome, executing the first recorded turning movement in military history. He then advanced through the uplands of Etruria, provoking Flaminius into a hasty pursuit and catching him in a defile on the shore of Lake Trasimenus. There Hannibal destroyed Flaminius' army in the waters or on the adjoining slopes, killing Flaminius as well. This was the most costly ambush that the Romans ever sustained until the Battle of Carrhae in 53 BC. Hannibal had disposed of the only field force that could check his advance upon Rome. He realized that without siege engines, he could not hope to take the capital. He opted to exploit his victory by entering into central and southern Italy and encouraging a general revolt against the sovereign power.\nThe Romans appointed Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus as their dictator. Departing from Roman military traditions, Fabius adopted the strategy named after him, avoiding open battle while placing several Roman armies in Hannibal's vicinity in order to watch and limit his movements. Hannibal ravaged Apulia but was unable to bring Fabius to battle, so he decided to march through Samnium to Campania, one of the richest and most fertile provinces of Italy, hoping that the devastation would draw Fabius into battle. Fabius closely followed Hannibal's path of destruction yet still refused to let himself be drawn out of the defensive. This strategy was unpopular with many Romans, who believed that it was a form of cowardice.\nHannibal decided that it would be unwise to winter in the devastated lowlands of Campania, but Fabius had trapped him there by ensuring that all the exit passes were blocked. This situation led to the night Battle of Ager Falernus. Hannibal had his men tie burning torches to the horns of a herd of cattle and drive them up the heights nearby. Some of the Romans, seeing a moving column of lights, were tricked into believing it was the Carthaginian army marching to escape along the heights. As they moved off in pursuit of this decoy, Hannibal managed to move his army in silence through the dark lowlands and up to an unguarded pass. Fabius was within striking distance, but in this case his caution worked against him, as rightly sensing a trick he stayed put. Thus, Hannibal managed to stealthily escape with his entire army intact. What Hannibal achieved in extricating his army was, as historian Adrian Goldsworthy puts it, \"a classic of ancient generalship, finding its way into nearly every historical narrative of the war and being used by later military manuals\". This was a severe blow to Fabius' prestige, and when his dictatorial term ended soon after, it was not renewed. For the winter, Hannibal found comfortable quarters in the Apulian plain.\nBattle of Cannae.\nIn the spring of 216\u00a0BC Hannibal took the initiative and seized the large supply depot at Cannae in the Apulian plain. By capturing Cannae, Hannibal had placed himself between the Romans and their crucial sources of supply. Once the Roman Senate resumed their consular elections in 216\u00a0BC, they appointed Gaius Terentius Varro and Lucius Aemilius Paullus as consuls. In the meantime, the Romans hoped to gain success through sheer strength and weight of numbers, and they raised an army of unprecedented size, estimated by some to be as large as 100,000 men but more likely around 50,000\u201380,000.\nThe Romans and allied legions resolved to confront Hannibal and marched southward to Apulia. They eventually found him on the left bank of the Aufidus River and encamped away. On this occasion, the two armies were combined into one, the consuls having to alternate their command on a daily basis. According to Livy, Varro was a man of reckless and hubristic nature, and it was his turn to command on the day of battle. This account is possibly biased against Varro as its main source, Polybius, was a client of Paullus's aristocratic family whereas Varro was less distinguished. Some historians have suggested that the sheer size of the army required both generals to command a wing each. This theory is supported by the fact that after Varro survived the battle he was pardoned by the Senate, which would be peculiar if he were the sole commander at fault.\nHannibal capitalized on the eagerness of the Romans and drew them into a trap by using an envelopment tactic. This eliminated the Roman numerical advantage by shrinking the combat area. Hannibal drew up his least reliable infantry in the centre in a semicircle curving towards the Romans. Placing them forward of the wings allowed them room to fall back, luring the Romans after them, while the cavalry on the flanks dealt with their Roman counterparts. Hannibal's wings were composed of the Gallic and Numidian cavalry. The Roman legions forced their way through Hannibal's weak centre, but the Libyan mercenaries on the wings\u2014swung around by the movement\u2014menaced their flanks.\nThe onslaught of Hannibal's cavalry was unstoppable. Hannibal's chief cavalry commander Maharbal led the mobile Numidian cavalry on the right which shattered the Roman cavalry opposing them. Hannibal's Iberian and Gallic heavy cavalry on the left, led by Hanno, defeated the Roman heavy cavalry after which both the Carthaginian heavy cavalry and the Numidians attacked the legions from behind. As a result, the Roman army was fully surrounded with no means of escape.\nWith these brilliant tactics Hannibal managed to surround and destroy all but a small remnant of his enemy, despite his inferior numbers. Depending upon the source, it is estimated that 50,000\u201370,000 Romans were killed or captured. Among the dead were Roman Consul Lucius Aemilius Paullus, two consuls for the preceding year, two quaestors, 29 of the 48 military tribunes, and an additional 80 senators. At a time when the Roman Senate was composed of no more than 300 men, this constituted 25\u201330% of the governing body. This makes the battle one of the most catastrophic defeats in the history of ancient Rome and one of the bloodiest battles in all of human history, in terms of the number of lives lost in a single day.\nAfter Cannae, the Romans were very hesitant to confront Hannibal in pitched battle, preferring instead to weaken him by attrition, relying on their advantages of interior lines, supply, and manpower. As a result, Hannibal fought no more major battles in Italy for the rest of the war. It is believed that his refusal to bring the war to Rome was a lack of commitment from Carthage of men, money, and material\u2014principally siege equipment. Whatever the reason, the choice prompted Maharbal to say, \"Hannibal, you know how to gain a victory, but not how to use one.\"\nAs a result of this victory, many parts of Italy joined Hannibal's cause. As Polybius notes, \"How much more serious was the defeat of Cannae, than those that preceded it can be seen by the behaviour of Rome's allies; before that fateful day, their loyalty remained unshaken, now it began to waver for the simple reason that they despaired of Roman Power.\" During 216 BC the Greek cities in Sicily were induced to revolt against Roman political control, while King Philip V of Macedon pledged his support to Hannibal, initiating the First Macedonian War against Rome. \nHannibal also secured an alliance with newly appointed tyrant Hieronymus of Syracuse. It is often argued that if Hannibal had received proper material reinforcements from Carthage, he might have succeeded with a direct attack upon Rome. Instead, he had to content himself with subduing the fortresses that still held out against him, and the only other notable event of 216\u00a0BC was the defection of certain Italian territories, including Capua, the second largest city of Italy, which Hannibal made his base. However, only a few of the Italian city-states that he had expected to gain as allies defected to him.\nStalemate.\nThe war in Italy settled into a strategic stalemate. The Romans used the attritional strategy that Fabius had taught them, which they finally realized was the only feasible means of defeating Hannibal. Fabius received the name \"Cunctator\" (\"the Delayer\") because of his policy of not meeting Hannibal in open battle. The Romans deprived Hannibal of a large-scale battle and instead assaulted his weakening army with multiple smaller armies in an attempt to both weary him and create unrest in his troops. For the next few years, Hannibal was forced to sustain a scorched earth policy and obtain local provisions for protracted and ineffectual operations throughout southern Italy. His immediate objectives were reduced to minor operations centred mainly around the cities of Campania.\nThe forces detached to his lieutenants were generally unable to hold their own, and neither his home government nor Philip V helped to make up his losses. His position in southern Italy therefore became increasingly difficult, and his chance of ultimately conquering Rome grew ever more remote. Hannibal still won a number of notable victories: completely destroying two Roman armies in 212\u00a0BC, and slaying two consuls including the famed Marcus Claudius Marcellus in a battle in 208\u00a0BC. However, Hannibal slowly began losing ground\u2014inadequately supported by his Italian allies, abandoned by his government (either because of jealousy or simply because Carthage was overstretched), and unable to match Rome's resources. He was not able to bring about another grand decisive victory that could produce a lasting strategic change.\nCarthaginian political will was embodied in the ruling oligarchy. There was a Carthaginian Senate, but the real power was with the inner \"Council of 30 Nobles\" and the board of judges from ruling families known as the \"Hundred and Four\". Two political factions operated in Carthage: the war party, also known as the \"Barcids\" (Hannibal's family name), and the peace party led by Hanno II the Great. Hanno had been instrumental in denying Hannibal's requested reinforcements following the Battle of Cannae. He and his allies relied on trade with Rome to sustain their wealth and resented how Hannibal's unauthorized attack of Saguntum had forced them to choose between losing prestige or committing Carthage to war. Thus, they repeatedly acted to thwart Hannibal's plans; requests for supplies and equipment that would have made besieging Rome and its fortified cities possible were either delayed or ignored, and Carthaginian soldiers in northern Africa were not sent to reinforce Hannibal, forcing him to increasingly rely on local mercenaries who refused to be disciplined and whose loyalty lasted only until there was no plunder for them to earn.\nRetreat.\nIn March 212\u00a0BC Hannibal captured Tarentum in a surprise attack, but he failed to obtain control of its harbor. The tide was slowly turning against him and in favor of Rome. The Roman consuls mounted a siege of Capua in 212 BC. Hannibal attacked them, forcing their withdrawal from Campania. He moved to Lucania and destroyed a 16,000-man Roman army at the Battle of the Silarus, with 15,000 Romans killed. Another opportunity presented itself soon after, a Roman army of 18,000 men being destroyed by Hannibal at the first battle of Herdonia with 16,000 Romans dead, freeing Apulia from the Romans for the year. \nThe Roman consuls mounted another siege of Capua in 211\u00a0BC, conquering the city. Hannibal's attempt to lift the siege with an assault on the Roman siege lines failed. He marched on Rome to force the recall of the Roman armies. He drew off 15,000 Roman soldiers, but the siege continued, and Capua fell. In 212 BC Marcellus conquered Syracuse, and the Romans destroyed the Carthaginian army in Sicily in 211\u2013210 BC. In 210 BC, the Romans entered into an alliance with the Aetolian League to counter Philip V. Philip, who attempted to exploit Rome's preoccupation in Italy to conquer Illyria, found himself under attack from several sides at once and was quickly subdued by Rome and her Greek allies.\nIn 210\u00a0BC Hannibal again proved his superiority in tactics by inflicting a severe defeat at the Battle of Herdonia in Apulia upon a proconsular army and, in 208\u00a0BC he destroyed a Roman force engaged in the siege of Locri at the Battle of Petelia. But with the loss of Tarentum in 209\u00a0BC and the gradual reconquest by the Romans of Samnium and Lucania, his hold on south Italy was almost lost. In 207\u00a0BC he succeeded in making his way again into Apulia, where he waited to concert measures for a combined march upon Rome with his brother Hasdrubal. On hearing of Hasdrubal's defeat and death at the Battle of the Metaurus he retired to Calabria, where he maintained himself for the ensuing years. Hasdrubal's head had been cut off, carried across Italy, and tossed over the palisade of Hannibal's camp as a cold message of the iron-clad will of the Roman Republic. The combination of these events marked the end to Hannibal's success in Italy. With the failure of his brother Mago in Liguria (205\u2013203\u00a0BC) and of his own negotiations with Phillip, the last hope of recovering his ascendancy in Italy was lost. \nConclusion of the Second Punic War (203\u2013201 BC).\nReturn to Carthage.\nIn 203\u00a0BC, after nearly 15 years of fighting in Italy and with the military fortunes of Carthage rapidly declining, Hannibal was recalled to Carthage to direct the defense of his native country against a Roman invasion under Scipio Africanus. After leaving a record of his expedition engraved in Punic and Greek upon bronze tablets in the Temple of Juno Lacinia at Crotona, he sailed back to Africa. His arrival immediately restored the predominance of the war party, which placed him in command of a combined force of African levies and his mercenaries from Italy. In 202\u00a0BC Hannibal met Scipio in a fruitless peace conference. \nDespite mutual admiration, negotiations floundered due to Roman allegations of \"Punic Faith,\" referring to the breach of protocols that ended the First Punic War by the Carthaginian attack on Saguntum and an attack on a stranded Roman fleet. Scipio and Carthage had worked out a peace plan, which was approved by Rome. The terms of the treaty were quite modest, but the war had been long for the Romans. Carthage could keep its African territory but would lose its overseas empire. Numidia was to be independent. Also, Carthage was to reduce its fleet and pay a war indemnity. Carthage then made a terrible blunder. Its long-suffering citizens had captured a stranded Roman fleet in the Gulf of Tunis and stripped it of supplies, an action that aggravated the faltering negotiations. Fortified by both Hannibal and the supplies, the Carthaginians rebuffed the treaty and Roman protests. \nBattle of Zama (202 BC).\nUnlike most battles of the Second Punic War, at Zama the Romans were superior in cavalry and the Carthaginians had the edge in infantry. This Roman cavalry superiority was due to the betrayal of King Masinissa of Numidia, who had earlier assisted Carthage in Iberia but changed sides in 206\u00a0BC with the promise of land, and due to his personal conflicts with Syphax, a Carthaginian ally. Although the ageing Hannibal was suffering from mental exhaustion and deteriorating health after years of campaigning in Italy, the Carthaginians still had the advantage in numbers and were boosted by 80 war elephants.\nThe Roman cavalry won an early victory by swiftly routing the Carthaginian cavalry. The Romans were also successful in limiting the effectiveness of the war elephants with tactics such as playing trumpets to frighten the elephants and cause them to run into the Carthaginian lines. Some historians say that the elephants routed the Carthaginian cavalry and not the Romans, whilst others suggest that it was actually a tactical retreat planned by Hannibal. Whatever the truth, the battle remained closely fought. At one point, it seemed that Hannibal was on the verge of victory, but Scipio was able to rally his men. Scipio's cavalry attacked Hannibal's rear. This two-pronged attack caused the Carthaginian formation to collapse.\nWith their foremost general defeated, the Carthaginians had no choice but to surrender. Carthage lost approximately 20,000 troops with an additional 15,000 wounded. The Romans suffered 2,500 casualties. The last major battle of the Second Punic War resulted in a loss of respect for Hannibal by his fellow Carthaginians. The conditions of defeat were such that Carthage could no longer battle for Mediterranean supremacy.\nLater career.\nPeacetime Carthage (200\u2013196 BC).\nHannibal was 46 at the conclusion of the Second Punic War in 201 BC and quickly showed that he could be a statesman as well as a soldier. Following the conclusion of a peace that left Carthage saddled with an indemnity of ten thousand talents, he was elected suffete (chief magistrate) of the Carthaginian state. After an audit confirmed Carthage had the resources to pay the indemnity without increasing taxation, Hannibal initiated a reorganization of state finances aimed at eliminating corruption and recovering embezzled funds.\nThe principal beneficiaries of these financial peculations had been the oligarchs of the Hundred and Four. In order to reduce their power, Hannibal passed a law stipulating the Hundred and Four be chosen by direct election rather than co-option. He also used citizen support to change the term of office in the Hundred and Four from life to one year, with none permitted to hold office for two consecutive years.\nExile (after 195 BC).\nSeven years after the victory of Zama, the Romans, alarmed by Carthage's renewed prosperity and suspicious that Hannibal had been in contact with Antiochus III of the Seleucid Empire, sent a delegation to Carthage alleging that Hannibal was helping an enemy of Rome. Aware that he had many enemies, not the least of which were because of his financial reforms eliminating corruption, Hannibal fled into voluntary exile before the Romans could demand that Carthage surrender him into their custody.\nHe journeyed first to Tyre, the mother city of Carthage, and then to Antioch, before he finally reached Ephesus where he was honourably received by Antiochus. Livy states that Antiochus consulted Hannibal on the strategic concerns of making war on Rome. According to Cicero, while at the court of Antiochus, Hannibal attended a lecture by Phormio, a philosopher, that ranged through many topics. When Phormio finished a discourse on the duties of a general, Hannibal was asked his opinion. He replied, \"I have seen during my life many old fools; but this one beats them all.\" Another story, according to Aulus Gellius, is that after Antiochus showed Hannibal the gigantic and elaborately equipped army he had created to invade Greece, he asked him if they would be enough for the Roman Republic, to which Hannibal replied, \"I think all this will be enough, yes, quite enough, for the Romans, even though they are most avaricious.\"\nIn the summer of 193 BC, tensions flared up between the Seleucids and Rome. Antiochus gave tacit support to Hannibal's plans of launching an anti-Roman coup d'\u00e9tat in Carthage, yet it was not carried out. Hannibal advised equipping a fleet and landing a body of troops in the south of Italy, offering to take command himself. In 190 BC, after having suffered a series of defeats in the Roman\u2013Seleucid war, Antiochus gave Hannibal his first significant military command after spending five years in the Seleucid court. Hannibal was tasked with building a fleet in Cilicia from scratch. Although Phoenician territories like Tyre and Sidon possessed the necessary combination of raw materials, technical expertise, and experienced personnel, it took much longer than expected for it to be completed, most likely due to wartime shortages.\nIn July 190 BC Hannibal ordered his fleet to set sail from Seleucia Pieria in order to reinforce the rest of the Seleucid navy at Ephesus. The following month Hannibal's fleet clashed with the Rhodian navy in the Battle of Side. The faster Rhodian ships managed to heavily damage half of Hannibal's warships through the manoeuvre, forcing him to retreat. Hannibal had preserved most of his fleet; however, he was in no position to unite with Polyxenidas' fleet at Ephesus since his ships required extensive repairs. \nThe ensuing Battle of Myonessus resulted in a Roman-Rhodian victory, which cemented Roman control over the Aegean Sea, enabling them to launch an invasion of Seleucid Asia Minor. The two armies faced off in the Battle of Magnesia, resulting in a decisive Roman-Pergamene victory. The truce was signed at Sardes in January 189 BC, whereupon Antiochus agreed to abandon his claims on all lands west of the Taurus Mountains, paid a heavy war indemnity, and promised to hand over Hannibal and other notable enemies of Rome from among his allies.\nAccording to Strabo and Plutarch, Hannibal received hospitality at the Armenian royal court of Artaxias I. The authors add an apocryphal story of how Hannibal planned and supervised the building of the new royal capital Artaxata. Suspicious that Antiochus was prepared to surrender him to the Romans, Hannibal fled to Crete, but he soon went back to Anatolia and sought refuge with Prusias I of Bithynia, who was engaged in warfare with Rome's ally, King Eumenes II of Pergamon. Hannibal went on to serve Prusias in this war. In 190 BC he gained a naval victory over Eumenes by throwing clay pots filled with venomous snakes onto Eumenes' ships. In 184 BC Hannibal defeated Eumenes two more times in battles on land.\nDeath (183\u2013181 BC).\nAt this stage, the Romans intervened and threatened Bithynia into giving up Hannibal. Prusias agreed, but Hannibal was determined not to fall into his enemy's hands. The precise year and cause of Hannibal's death are unknown. Pausanias writes that Hannibal's death occurred after his finger was wounded by his drawn sword while mounting his horse, resulting in a fever and then his death three days later. Cornelius Nepos and Livy tell a different story, namely that the ex-consul Titus Quinctius Flamininus, on discovering that Hannibal was in Bithynia, went there in an embassy to demand his surrender from Prusias. Hannibal, discovering that the castle where he was living was surrounded by Roman soldiers and he could not escape, took poison. Appian writes that it was Prusias who poisoned Hannibal.\nPliny the Elder and Plutarch, in his \"Life of Flamininus\", record that Hannibal's tomb was at Libyssa on the coast of the Sea of Marmara. According to some, Libyssa was sited at Gebze, between Bursa and \u00dcskudar. W. M. Leake, identifying Gebze with ancient Dakibyza, places it further west. Before dying, Hannibal is said to have left behind a letter declaring, \"Let us relieve the Romans from the anxiety they have so long experienced, since they think it tries their patience too much to wait for an old man's death\".\nAppian writes of a prophecy about Hannibal's death, which states that \"Libyssan earth shall cover Hannibal's remains.\" This, he writes, made Hannibal believe that he would die in Libya, but instead it was at the Bithynian Libyssa that he would die. In his \"Annales\", Titus Pomponius Atticus reports that Hannibal's death occurred in 183\u00a0BC, and Livy implies the same. Polybius, who wrote nearest the event, gives 182\u00a0BC. Sulpicius Blitho records the death under 181\u00a0BC.\nLegacy.\nAncient world.\nHannibal caused great distress to many in Roman society. He became such a figure of terror that whenever disaster threatened, Romans would exclaim \"\" (\"Hannibal is at the gates!\") to emphasize the gravity of the emergency, a phrase still used in modern languages.\nHis legacy was recorded by his Greek tutor, Sosylus of Lacedaemon. The works of Roman writers such as Livy (64 or 59 BC \u2013 AD 12 or 17), Frontinus (c. AD 40\u2013103), and Juvenal (1st\u20132nd century AD) show a grudging admiration for Hannibal. The Romans even built statues of him in the streets of Rome to advertise their defeat of such a worthy adversary. It is plausible to suggest that Hannibal engendered the greatest fear Rome had towards an enemy. Nevertheless, the Romans grimly refused to admit the possibility of defeat and rejected all overtures for peace; they even refused to accept the ransom of prisoners after the Battle of Cannae.\nDuring the war there are no reports of revolutions among the Roman citizens, no factions within the Senate desiring peace, no pro-Carthaginian Roman turncoats, and no coups. Indeed, throughout the war Roman aristocrats ferociously competed with each other for positions of command to fight against Rome's most dangerous enemy. Hannibal's military genius was not enough to really disturb the Roman political process and the collective political and military capacity of the Roman people. As Lazenby states,\nIt says volumes, too, for their political maturity and respect for constitutional forms that the complicated machinery of government continued to function even amidst disaster\u2014there are few states in the ancient world in which a general who had lost a battle like Cannae would have dared to remain, let alone would have continued to be treated respectfully as head of state.\nAccording to Livy, the Romans feared Hannibal's military genius, and during Hannibal's march against Rome in 211\u00a0BC:\na messenger who had travelled from Fregellae for a day and a night without stopping created great alarm in Rome, and the excitement was increased by people running about the City with wildly exaggerated accounts of the news he had brought. The wailing cry of the matrons was heard everywhere, not only in private houses but even in the temples. Here they knelt and swept the temple-floors with their dishevelled hair and lifted up their hands to heaven in piteous entreaty to the gods that they would deliver the City of Rome out of the hands of the enemy and preserve its mothers and children from injury and outrage. In the Senate the news was \"received with varying feelings as men's temperaments differed,\" so it was decided to keep Capua under siege but to send 15,000 infantry and 1,000 cavalry as reinforcements to Rome.\nAccording to Livy, the land occupied by Hannibal's army outside Rome in 211\u00a0BC was sold by a Roman while it was occupied. This may not be true, but as Lazenby states, \"could well be, exemplifying as it does not only the supreme confidence felt by the Romans in ultimate victory, but also the way in which something like normal life continued.\" After Cannae, the Romans showed considerable steadfastness. As an example of Rome's confidence, after the Cannae disaster she was left virtually defenseless; however, the Senate still chose not to withdraw a single garrison from an overseas province to strengthen the city. In fact, they were reinforced and the campaigns there maintained until victory was secured; beginning first in Sicily under the direction of Claudius Marcellus, and later in Hispania under Scipio Africanus. Although the long-term consequences of Hannibal's war are debatable, this war was undeniably Rome's \"finest hour\".\nMost of the sources available to historians about Hannibal are from Romans. They considered him the greatest enemy Rome had ever faced. Livy indicates that Hannibal was extremely cruel. Even Cicero, when he talked of Rome and its two great enemies, spoke of the \"honourable\" Pyrrhus and the \"cruel\" Hannibal. Yet a different picture sometimes emerges. When Hannibal's successes had brought about the death of two Roman consuls, he vainly searched for the body of Gaius Flaminius on the shores of Lake Trasimene, held ceremonial rituals in recognition of Lucius Aemilius Paullus, and sent Marcellus' ashes back to his family in Rome. Any bias attributed to Polybius, however, is more troublesome. Historian Ronald Mellor considers the Greek scholar a loyal partisan of Scipio Aemilianus, while H. Ormerod does not view him as an \"altogether unprejudiced witness\" when it came to his pet peeves, the Aetolians, the Carthaginians, and the Cretans. Nonetheless, Polybius did recognize that the reputation for cruelty the Romans attached to Hannibal might in reality have been by mistaking him for one of his officers, Hannibal Monomachus.\nIn the Severan period, Hannibal was portrayed as a successful military leader from history who could serve as an exemplary figure for a Roman audience. In the 13th century, Byzantine scholar John Tzetzes writes that Severus (likely Septimius Severus), being of Libyan birth, constructed a tomb of white marble for Hannibal in Libyssa. Scholars debate whether this act was intended to promote a unified North African identity, stimulate local economic interests, or link Severus with past military heroes to strengthen his legacy, reflecting a broader Severan policy of honoring local traditions and historical figures.\nMilitary history.\nHannibal is generally regarded as one of the best military strategists and tacticians of all time, the double envelopment at Cannae an enduring legacy of tactical brilliance. Military academies all over the world continue to study Hannibal's exploits, especially his victory at Cannae. According to Appian, several years after the Second Punic War, Hannibal served as a political advisor in the Seleucid Kingdom and Scipio arrived there on a diplomatic mission from Rome.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMaximilian Otto Bismarck Caspari in his article in the Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica Eleventh Edition (1910\u20131911), praises Hannibal in these words:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEven the Roman chroniclers acknowledged Hannibal's supreme military leadership, writing that \"he never required others to do what he could not and would not do himself\". According to Polybius 23, 13, p.\u00a0423:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is a remarkable and very cogent proof of Hannibal's having been by nature a real leader and far superior to anyone else in statesmanship, that though he spent seventeen years in the field, passed through so many barbarous countries, and employed to aid him in desperate and extraordinary enterprises numbers of men of different nations and languages, no one ever dreamt of conspiring against him, nor was he ever deserted by those who had once joined him or submitted to him.\nPrior to World War I, Count Alfred von Schlieffen developed his \"Schlieffen Plan\" from his military studies, including the envelopment technique that Hannibal employed in the Battle of Cannae. George S. Patton believed himself a reincarnation of Hannibal\u2014as well as of many other people, including a Roman legionary and a Napoleonic soldier. Norman Schwarzkopf Jr., the commander of the Coalition of the Gulf War of 1990\u20131991, claimed, \"The technology of war may change, the sophistication of weapons certainly changes. But those same principles of war that applied to the days of Hannibal apply today.\"\nAccording to the military historian Theodore Ayrault Dodge,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hannibal excelled as a tactician. No battle in history is a finer sample of tactics than Cannae. But he was yet greater in logistics and strategy. No captain ever marched to and fro among so many armies of troops superior to his own numbers and material as fearlessly and skilfully as he. No man ever held his own so long or so ably against such odds. Constantly overmatched by better soldiers, led by generals always respectable, often of great ability, he yet defied all their efforts to drive him from Italy, for half a generation. Excepting in the case of Alexander, and some few isolated instances, all wars up to the Second Punic War, had been decided largely, if not entirely, by battle-tactics. Strategic ability had been comprehended only on a minor scale. Armies had marched towards each other, had fought in parallel order, and the conqueror had imposed terms on his opponent. Any variation from this rule consisted in ambuscades or other stratagems. That war could be waged by avoiding in lieu of seeking battle; that the results of a victory could be earned by attacks upon the enemy's communications, by flank-manoeuvres, by seizing positions from which safely to threaten him in case he moved, and by other devices of strategy, was not understood... [However,] for the first time in the history of war, we see two contending generals avoiding each other, occupying impregnable camps on heights, marching about each other's flanks to seize cities or supplies in their rear, harassing each other with small-war, and rarely venturing on a battle which might prove a fatal disaster\u2014all with a well-conceived purpose of placing his opponent at a strategic disadvantage... That it did so was due to the teaching of Hannibal.\nIn modern Tunisia.\nDue to his origin and connection with the territory belonging to modern-day Tunisia, he is widely revered as a national hero in the country. Hannibal's profile appears on the Tunisian five-dinar bill issued on 8 November 1993, as well as on a bill put into circulation on 20 March 2013. His name appears in the name of a private television channel, Hannibal TV. A street in Carthage, located near the Punic ports, bears his name; as does as a station on the TGM railway line: \"Carthage Hannibal\". Plans envisage a mausoleum and a high colossus of Hannibal on the Byrsa, the highest point of Carthage overlooking Tunis.\nOther.\nThe teenaged Sigmund Freud regarded Hannibal as a \"hero\"; the founder of psychoanalysis portrays an idealized image of Hannibal in his analysis of his \"dreams of Rome\" in \"The Interpretation of Dreams\". Freud associates this phenomenon with the adage \"All roads lead to Rome\". He writes: \"Hannibal and Rome symbolized for the adolescent that I was the opposition between the tenacity of Judaism and the organizing spirit of the Catholic Church\".\nKocaeli in Turkey has a cenotaph built in Hannibal's memory. Even though the location of Hannibal's tomb could not be determined precisely in the studies carried out through President Atat\u00fcrk's great interest, a monumental cenotaph was built in 1981 in the south of present-day Gebze as an expression of Atat\u00fcrk's respect for Hannibal.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13961", "revid": "45215721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13961", "title": "Hansie Cronje", "text": "South African cricketer (1969\u20132002)\nWessel Johannes \"Hansie\" Cronje (25 September 1969 \u2013 1 June 2002) was a South African international cricketer and captain of the South Africa national cricket team in the 1990s. A right-handed all-rounder, as captain Cronje led his team to victory in 27 Test matches and 99 One Day Internationals. Cronje also led South Africa to win the 1998 ICC KnockOut Trophy, the first major ICC title the country has won in international cricket. In the 1998 ICC KnockOut Trophy Final, Cronje played a major role with the bat with his 61 not out, leading the team to victory by 4 wickets. He was voted the 11th-greatest South African in 2004 despite having been banned from cricket for life due to his role in a match-fixing scandal. He died in a plane crash in 2002.\nEarly life.\nCronje was born in Bloemfontein, South Africa to Ewie Cronje and San-Marie Cronje on 25 September 1969 in an Afrikaner family.\nHe graduated in 1987 from Grey College in Bloemfontein, where he was the head boy. An excellent all round sportsman, he represented the then Orange Free State Province in cricket and rugby at schools level. He was the captain of his school's cricket and rugby teams. Cronje earned a Bachelor of Commerce degree from the University of the Free State. He had an older brother, Frans Cronje, and a younger sister, Hester Parsons.\nHis father Ewie had played for Orange Free State in the 1960s, and Frans had also played first-class cricket.\nFirst-class career.\nCronje made his first-class debut for Orange Free State against Transvaal at Johannesburg in January 1988 at the age of 18. In the following season, he was a regular, appearing in all eight Currie Cup matches plus being part of the Benson and Hedges Series-winning team, scoring 73 as an opener in the final. In 1989\u201390, despite playing all the Currie Cup matches, he failed to make a century, and averaged only 19.76; however, in one-day games he averaged 60.12. During that season he scored his maiden century for South African Universities against Mike Gatting's rebels.\nDespite having just turned 21, Cronje was made captain of Orange Free State for the 1990\u201391 season. He scored his maiden century for them against Natal in December 1990, and finished the season with another century and a total of 715 runs at 39.72. That season he also scored 159* in a 40-over match against Griqualand West.\nIn 1992\u201393, he captained Orange Free State to the Castle Cup/Total Power Series double.\nIn 1995, Cronje appeared for Leicestershire where he scored 1301 runs at 52.04 finishing the season as the county's leading scorer.\nIn 1995\u201396, he finished the season top of the batting averages in the Currie Cup, his top score of 158 helped Free State chase down 389 to beat Northern Transvaal.\nIn 1997, Cronje played for Ireland as an overseas player in the Benson and Hedges Cup and helped them to a 46-run win over Middlesex by scoring 94 not out and taking three wickets. This was Ireland's first-ever win against English county opposition. Later in the same competition, he scored 85 and took one wicket against Glamorgan.\nInternational career.\nDebuts.\nCronje's form in 1991/92 was impressive especially in the one-day format where he averaged 61.40. He earned an international call up for the 1992 World Cup, making his One Day International debut against Australia at Sydney. During the tournament he played in eight of the team's nine games, averaging 34.00 with the bat, while his medium pace was used in bowling 20 overs.\nAfter the World Cup Cronje was part of the tour to the West Indies; he featured in the three ODIs, and in the Test match at Bridgetown that followed, he made his Test debut. This was South Africa's first Test since readmission and they came close to beating a strong West Indian side, going into the final day at 122/2 chasing 200 they collapsed to 148.\nIndia toured South Africa in 1992/93. In the first one-day international, he hit the famous six when his team needed 6 runs off only 4 balls, and was awarded Man of the match for his bowling. In the one-day series, Cronje managed just one fifty but with the ball he was economical and took his career best figures of 5/32, becoming the second South African to take five wickets in an ODI. In the Test series that followed he scored his maiden test century, 135 off 411 balls, after coming in at 0\u20131 in the second over he was last man out, after eight and three-quarter hours, in a total of 275. This contributed to South Africa's first Test win since readmission. At the end of the season in a triangular tournament with Pakistan and West Indies he scored 81 off 70 balls against Pakistan.\nIn South Africa's next Test series against Sri Lanka, Cronje scored his second Test century, 122 in the second Test in Colombo; the victory margin of an innings and 208 runs is a South African record. He finished the series with 237 runs at 59.25 after scoring 73* in the drawn third Test.\nStand-in captain.\nIn 1993\u201394, there was another Castle Cup/Total Power Series double for Orange Free State. In international cricket, he was named as vice-captain for the tour of Australia despite being the youngest member of the squad. In the first ODI of the triangular tournament with New Zealand and Australia, he guided South Africa to victory against Australia at the MCG with 91*, which won him the man of the match award. He scored 71 in a rain-affected first test at Melbourne before a tense second test that South Africa won by 5 runs. An injury to captain Kepler Wessels meant Cronje was captain for the final day of the match. Between the second and third tests, the one-day tournament continued, now with Cronje as captain, South Africa made the final series but lost it 2\u20131 to Australia. He became South Africa's second-youngest Test captain, after Murray Bisset in 1898\u201399, when he led the team for the third test at Adelaide but it was an unsuccessful start to his captaincy career as the series was squared.\nIn February 1994, there was the return series as Australia toured South Africa. Cronje started the ODI series with scores of 112, 97, 45 and 50* and when Australia played Orange Free State in their final match before the first Test, Cronje hit 251 off 306 balls, 200 of these came on the final day in which 294 runs were added. Despite this, Orange Free State lost the match. In the first test at Johannesburg, he added another century as South Africa won by 197 runs. This innings was the end of a 14-day period in which he'd scored 721 runs against the Aussies. However, he failed to reach fifty in the next two tests and four ODIs as both series were drawn.\nThere was another drawn series when South Africa toured England in 1994. Cronje scored only one century on the whole tour and scored only 90 runs in the three-test series. In October 1994, South Africa again came up against Australia in a triangular one day series also featuring Pakistan. Cronje scored 354 runs at an average of 88.50. Despite this, South Africa lost all their matches. This series was Bob Woolmer's first as coach and Kepler Wessels' last as captain. Cronje, who'd previously been vice-captain, was named as captain for the test series with New Zealand in 1994\u201395.\nPermanent captain.\nSouth Africa lost the first Test in Johannesburg but before the second test the two teams plus Pakistan and Sri Lanka competed for the Mandela Trophy, New Zealand failed to gain a win in the six-match round robin stage while South Africa beat Pakistan in the final. This changed the momentum as South Africa secured wins in Durban and Cape Town, where Cronje scored his fourth test century. He was the first captain since W. G. Grace to win a three-match series after being one down.\nIn early 1995, South Africa won one-off tests against both Pakistan and New Zealand. In Auckland Cronje scored the only century of the match before a final day declaration left his bowlers barely enough time to dismiss the Kiwis.\nIn October 1995, South Africa won a one-off Test with Zimbabwe. Cronje scored a second innings 54* to guide them to a seven wicket win. In two one-dayers that followed, he took five wickets as South Africa comfortably won both. South Africa won the five Test series against England 1\u20130 despite Cronje struggling, scoring 113 runs at 18.83. However, he top scored in the one-day series that they won 6\u20131.\nIn the 1996 World Cup, he scored 78 and 45* against New Zealand and Pakistan, respectively, as South Africa won their group but in the Quarter final with West Indies a Brian Lara century ended their ten-game winning streak.\nThe 1996\u201397 season featured back-to-back series with India. The first away was lost 2\u20131. The home series was won 2\u20130. In the six tests combined, Cronje managed one fifty. Cronje produced better form against Australia, averaging over 50 in both test and ODI series although both were lost.\nCronje started 1997\u201398 by leading South Africa to their first series victory in Pakistan, his batting continued to struggle with his biggest contribution being taking the wickets of Inzamam-ul-Haq and Moin Khan in the Third Test.\nBetter form.\nCronje once again came up against Australia and once again ended on the losing side. In the triangular one day series they won the group with Australia just scraping through, they also won the first 'final' but South Africa lost the last two finals. During the group matches Cronje had threatened to lead his team off after Pat Symcox had missiles thrown at him, Symcox had the last laugh ending the match with 4/24. Before the Test series started he scored consecutive centuries against Tasmania and Australia A these were his first in two years.\nIn the first Test, Cronje scored 70 as South Africa saved the match; in the second Test, he lasted 335 minutes for his 88. Despite this, they lost by an innings. In the third Test, they scored 517 and although Mark Taylor carried his bat for 169, Australia needed to bat 109 overs to save the match. Mark Waugh batted 404 minutes, and, despite controversy when Waugh hit one of his bails off (under Law 35 he was adjudged to have finished his stroke and therefore given not out), South Africa fell three wickets short. Cronje put a stump through the umpires' dressing room door after the match and was lucky to avoid a ban.\nCronje missed the first Test of the series with Pakistan because of a knee injury. The second Test at Durban was lost, but he top scored at Port Elizabeth with 85, to help square the three Test series 1\u20131. There was still time in the season for a two-Test series with Sri Lanka. The first was won with Cronje scoring 49 and 74; in the second Test, he took 3/14, his best bowling in Tests, and smashed 82 off 63 balls, his fifty being brought up with three consecutive sixes off Muttiah Muralitharan, and was reached off just 31 balls; at the time, it was the second fastest in Tests after Kapil Dev's. In the triangular series, which South Africa won, he scored only one fifty at East London where he also took 2/17 off 10 overs.\nDuring the 1998 Test series against England, Cronje scored five consecutive fifties, having failed to score one in the nine previous Tests against them. In his fiftieth Test, at Trent Bridge he scored 126, his sixth and last Test century and his first in 29 matches. During his second innings of 67, he passed 3,000 runs\u2014only the second South African to do so. However, England won the Test, and the one at Headingley, to win the series 2\u20131, Cronje finished the series as South Africa's top scorer with 401 runs at 66.83.\n1999 World Cup and life ban.\nIn the West Indies series of 1998\u201399, Cronje captained South Africa to their only whitewash in a five Test series. His best batting against West Indies came when playing for Free State; he scored 158* as they chased down 438 and made up a first innings deficit of 249. In the ODI series he was South Africa's top scorer and took 11 wickets at 14.72 as South Africa won 6\u20131.\nIn March 1999, they toured New Zealand, beating them 1\u20130 in the Test series and 3\u20132 in the one-dayers.\nAt the 1999 World Cup, Cronje finished with 98 runs at 12.25 as South Africa were eliminated after the famous tied semi-final against Australia at Edgbaston. In the first match of the tournament versus India, Cronje came onto the field with an earpiece wired to coach Bob Woolmer, but at the first drinks break match referee Talat Ali ordered him to remove it.\nIn October 1999, Cronje became South Africa's highest Test run scorer during the first Test against Zimbabwe. The two Test series was won 2\u20130 thanks to innings victories. South Africa won the series with England in the fourth Test at Cape Town, Cronje's fiftieth as captain.\nThe fifth test of the 1999\u20132000 South Africa versus England series at Centurion was ruined by rain, entering the final day only 45 overs had been possible with South Africa 155/6. On the final morning as they batted on, news filtered through that the captains had met and were going to \"make a game of it\". A target of 250 from 70 overs was agreed. When South Africa reached 248/8, Cronje declared; both teams then forfeited an innings leaving England a target of 249 to win the Test, which they did with two wickets left and only five balls remaining. It ended South Africa's 14-game unbeaten streak in Test cricket. It was later learnt Cronje accepted money and a gift from a bookmaker in return for making an early declaration in this Test (see below).\nCronje top scored with 56 after South Africa were left reeling at 21\u20135 in the Final of the triangular tournament which featured England and Zimbabwe.\nOn 31 March 2000, his cricket career finished with a 73-ball 79 against Pakistan in the final of Sharjah Cup 1999/2000. The following month, Delhi police would charge him with match fixing. After confessing to the South African board about accepting money for information, but not match fixing, he was sacked on 11 April 2000, before being banned for life in October after further information regarding his guilt came to light.\nStatistics.\nUnder Cronje's captaincy, South Africa won 27 Tests and lost 11, completing series victories against every team except Australia.\nHe captained the One Day International team to 99 wins out of 138 matches with one tied match and three no results. He holds the South African record for matches won as captain, and his record of captaining his side in 138 matches stands bettered only by Graeme Smith's 149 matches as ODI captain. His 99 wins as captain makes him the fourth-most-successful captain worldwide in terms of matches won, behind Ricky Ponting, Allan Border and Mahendra Singh Dhoni and in terms of percentage of wins (73.70), behind Ponting and Clive Lloyd.\nBetween September 1993 and March 2000, he played in 162 consecutive ODIs, a South African record.\nCronje has the record for playing the most consecutive ODI matches as captain (130) and is the only player to play in 100-plus consecutive ODI matches as captain.\nMatch fixing.\nOn 7 April 2000, it was revealed there was a conversation between Cronje and Sanjeev Chawla, a representative of an Indian betting syndicate, over match-fixing allegations. Three other players, Herschelle Gibbs, Nicky Boje and Pieter Strydom, were also implicated. After an enquiry by the King Commission, Cronje was banned from any involvement in cricket for life. He challenged his life ban in September 2001 but on 17 October 2001, his application was dismissed.\nAfter 13 years, on 22 July 2013, the Delhi Police registered a first information report for match-fixing in 2000; the charge sheet in the case involved several South African cricketers including Cronje.\nDeath.\nOn 1 June 2002, Cronje's scheduled flight home from Johannesburg to George was grounded. He then hitched a ride as the only passenger aboard a Hawker Siddeley HS 748 turboprop aircraft. Near George airport, the pilots lost visibility in clouds and were unable to land, partly due to unusable navigational equipment. While circling, the plane crashed into Cradock Peak, in the Outeniqua Mountains northeast of the airport. Cronje, aged 32, and the two pilots were killed instantly.\nIn August 2006, an inquest into the plane crash was opened by South Africa's High Court. The inquest concluded that \"the death of the deceased Wessel Johannes Cronje was brought about by an act or omission prima facie amounting to an offence on the part of pilots.\"\nConspiracy theories that Cronje was murdered on the orders of a cricket betting syndicate flourished after his death and were refloated by former Nottinghamshire and South African coach Clive Rice in the wake of the death of Pakistan coach Bob Woolmer in March 2007. It was alleged that he was murdered to hide the truths behind match-fixing.\nPersonal life.\nHansie Cronje married Bertha Hans on 8 April 1995. They had no children. Hansie's widow later married Jacques Du Plessis, a financial auditor, in 2003. It was reported that the private ceremony was attended by Hansie's parents and siblings, and close friends Jonty Rhodes and his wife Kate.\nIn 2008, a biographical film titled \"Hansie: A True Story\" was released, where Frank Rautenbach played the part of Cronje.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13963", "revid": "45523345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13963", "title": "Hultsfred Municipality", "text": "Hultsfred Municipality () is a municipality in Kalmar County, in south-eastern Sweden. The seat is in the town of Hultsfred.\nThe present municipality was created in 1971 through the amalgamation of the market town (\"k\u00f6ping\") of Hultsfred (instituted in 1927) with a number of surrounding municipalities. In 1863 there were eight entities in the area.\nHultsfred is known as the site of a major rock festival in Sweden, the Hultsfred Festival.\nHistory.\nIn the age known as the Nordic Bronze Age, the area had some shipping of furs to northern Germany and the Roman army, but not much is known from that time other than the area being inhabited; there have also been older finds from 3000 to 4000 BC. However, from the medieval age, around 1100 AD, a few churches remain.\nThe area continued to be inhabited mainly by farmers until the 20th century. In the 17th and 18th there was some production of iron in Kalmar County, totalling about 10 mines; of those 2 were located in the municipality of Hultsfred. Hultsfred was a center for some military exercising companies during the 19th century, and some remaining building can be visited in the vicinity of Silver\u00e5n. When the railroads through Sweden were built late in that century, Hultsfred received a population boost.\nThere are several folks museums around the area that keeps trace of its history.\nGeography.\nBasically every one of the localities of Hultsfred Municipality are situated on the railway. Besides Hultsfred, in the mid north of the municipality, there are the towns of Virserum in the south-west and other ever smaller settlements such as L\u00f6nneberga, Silverdalen and M\u00e5lilla. The population of the municipality has however been decreasing with some 2,000 people in the last 10 years, as many people move to larger cities, causing a decrease in nativity.\nMuch of the geography is taken up with forests, a notability for the entire province of Sm\u00e5land, with some few scattered areas suitable for agriculture.\nLocalities.\nThere are eight urban areas (also called a T\u00e4tort or locality) in Hultsfred Municipality.\nIn the table the localities are listed according to the size of the population as of December 31, 2005. The municipal seat is in bold characters.\nDemographics.\nThis is a demographic table based on Hultsfred Municipality's electoral districts in the 2022 Swedish general election sourced from SVT's election platform, in turn taken from SCB official statistics.\nIn total there were 14,027 residents, including 10,283 Swedish citizens of voting age. 47.4% voted for the left coalition and 50.9% for the right coalition. Indicators are in percentage points except population totals and income.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2014 Sister cities.\nHultsfred Municipality is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13964", "revid": "33225138", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13964", "title": "Parliament of the United Kingdom", "text": "United Kingdom legislature\nThe Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is the supreme legislative body of the United Kingdom, and may also legislate for the Crown Dependencies and the British Overseas Territories. Since 1999, varying degree of powers have been devolved to the devolved national parliaments of Northern Ireland, Scotland, and Wales. Each devolved parliament has different devolved powers, with Scotland being the most powerful amongst the three devolved parliaments. The central UK Parliament retains the power to legislate in reserved matters, including broadcasting, defence, and currency.\nIt meets at the Palace of Westminster in London. Parliament possesses legislative supremacy and thereby holds ultimate power over all other political bodies in the United Kingdom and the Overseas Territories. While Parliament is bicameral, it has three parts: the sovereign, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons. The three parts acting together to legislate may be described as the King-in-Parliament. The Crown normally acts on the advice of the prime minister, and the powers of the House of Lords are limited to only delaying legislation.\nThe House of Commons is the elected lower chamber of Parliament, with elections to 650 single-member constituencies held at least every five years under the first-past-the-post system. By constitutional convention, all government ministers, including the prime minister, are members of the House of Commons (MPs), or less commonly the House of Lords, and are thereby accountable to the respective branches of the legislature. Most Cabinet ministers are from the Commons, while junior ministers can be from either house.\nThe House of Lords is the upper chamber of Parliament, comprising two types of members. The most numerous are the Lords Temporal, consisting mainly of life peers appointed by the sovereign on the advice of the prime minister, plus up to 92 hereditary peers. The less numerous Lords Spiritual consist of up to 26 bishops of the Church of England. Before the establishment of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom in 2009, the House of Lords performed judicial functions through the law lords.\nThe Parliament of the United Kingdom is one of the oldest legislatures in the world, and is characterised by the stability of its governing institutions and its capacity to absorb change. The Westminster system shaped the political systems of the nations once ruled by the British Empire, and thus has been called the \"mother of parliaments\".\nHistory.\nThe Parliament of Great Britain was formed in 1707 following the ratification of the Treaty of Union by Acts of Union passed by the Parliament of England (established 1215) and the Parliament of Scotland (c.\u20091235), both Acts of Union stating, \"That the United Kingdom of Great Britain be represented by one and the same Parliament to be styled The Parliament of Great Britain.\" At the start of the 19th century, Parliament was further enlarged by Acts of Union ratified by the Parliament of Great Britain and the Parliament of Ireland, which abolished the latter and added 100 Irish MPs and 32 Lords to the former to create the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. The Royal and Parliamentary Titles Act 1927 formally amended the name to the \"Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland\", five years after the secession of the Irish Free State.\nParliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.\nThe United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland was created on 1 January 1801, by the merger of the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland under the Acts of Union 1800. The principle of ministerial responsibility to the lower house (Commons) did not develop until the 19th century\u2014the House of Lords was superior to the House of Commons both in theory and in practice. Members of the House of Commons (MPs) were elected in an antiquated electoral system, under which constituencies of vastly different sizes existed. Thus, the borough of Old Sarum, with seven voters, could elect two members, as could the borough of Dunwich, which had almost completely disappeared into the sea due to land erosion.\nMany small constituencies, known as pocket or rotten boroughs, were controlled by members of the House of Lords (peers), who could ensure the election of their relatives or supporters. During the reforms of the 19th century, beginning with the Reform Act 1832, the electoral system for the House of Commons was progressively regularised. No longer dependent on the Lords for their seats, MPs grew more assertive.\nThe supremacy of the British House of Commons was reaffirmed in the early 20th century. In 1909, the Commons passed the \"People's Budget\", which made numerous changes to the taxation system which were detrimental to wealthy landowners. The House of Lords, which consisted mostly of powerful landowners, rejected the Budget. On the basis of the Budget's popularity and the Lords' consequent unpopularity, the Liberal Party narrowly won two general elections in 1910.\nUsing the result as a mandate, the Liberal Prime Minister, H. H. Asquith, introduced the Parliament Bill, which sought to restrict the powers of the House of Lords. (He did not reintroduce the land tax provision of the People's Budget.) When the Lords refused to pass the bill, Asquith countered with a promise extracted from the King in secret before the second general election of 1910 and requested the creation of several hundred Liberal peers, so as to erase the Conservative majority in the House of Lords. In the face of such a threat, the House of Lords narrowly passed the bill.\nThe Parliament Act 1911, as it became, prevented the Lords from blocking a money bill (a bill dealing with taxation), and allowed them to delay any other bill for a maximum of three sessions (reduced to two sessions in 1949), after which it could become law over their objections. However, regardless of the Parliament Acts of 1911 and 1949, the House of Lords has always retained the unrestricted power to veto any bill outright which attempts to extend the life of a parliament.\nParliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nThe result of the 1918 general election in Ireland showed a landslide victory for the Irish republican party Sinn F\u00e9in, who vowed in their manifesto to establish an independent Irish Republic. Accordingly, Sinn F\u00e9in MPs, though ostensibly elected to sit in the House of Commons, refused to take their seats in Westminster, and instead assembled in 1919 to proclaim Irish independence and form a revolutionary unicameral parliament for the independent Irish Republic, called D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann.\nIn 1920, in parallel to the D\u00e1il, the Government of Ireland Act 1920 created home rule parliaments of Northern Ireland and Southern Ireland and reduced the representation of both parts at Westminster. The number of Northern Ireland seats was increased again after the introduction of direct rule in 1973.\nThe Irish republicans responded by declaring the elections to these home rule Parliaments, held on the same day in 1921, to be the basis of membership for a new D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann. While the elections in Northern Ireland were both contested and won by Unionist parties, in Southern Ireland, all 128 candidates for the Southern Irish seats were returned unopposed. Of these, 124 were won by Sinn F\u00e9in and four by independent Unionists representing Dublin University (Trinity College). Since only four MPs sat in the home rule Southern Irish parliament, with the remaining 124 being in the Republic's Second D\u00e1il, the home rule parliament was adjourned \"sine die\" without ever having operated.\nIn 1922, pursuant to the Anglo-Irish Treaty, the revolutionary Irish Republic was replaced by the Irish Free State, recognised by the United Kingdom as a separate state (and thus, no longer represented in the Westminster Parliament), while Northern Ireland would remain British, and in 1927, parliament was renamed the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nFurther reforms to the House of Lords were made in the 20th century. The Life Peerages Act 1958 authorised the regular creation of life peerage dignities. By the 1960s, the regular creation of hereditary peerage dignities had ceased; thereafter, almost all new peers were life peers only.\nThe House of Lords Act 1999 removed the automatic right of hereditary peers to sit in the House of Lords, although it made an exception for 92 of them to be elected to life-terms by the other hereditary peers, with by-elections upon their death. The House of Lords is now a chamber that is subordinate to the House of Commons. Additionally, the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 led to abolition of the judicial functions of the House of Lords with the creation of the new Supreme Court of the United Kingdom in October 2009.\nComposition and powers.\nUnder the UK's constitution, Parliament is the supreme legislative body of the state. Whilst the privy council can also issue legislation through orders-in-council, this power may be limited by Parliament, like all other exercises of the royal prerogative.\nThe legislative authority, the King-in-Parliament, has three separate elements: the Monarch, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons. As a result, a bill must be passed by both houses (or just the House of Commons under the \"Parliament Act 1911\") and receive royal assent for it to become law.\nExecutive powers (including those granted by legislation or forming part of the prerogative) are not formally exercised by Parliament. However, these powers are in practice exercised on the advice of government ministers, who must be drawn from and be accountable to the Parliament.\nMonarch.\nWhilst the monarch is a constitutive element of parliament, they do not debate bills or otherwise contribute to political debate. Their royal assent is required for a bill to become law; however, this has not been refused since 1708 and is largely a formality. Assent is granted by the monarch (or counsellors of state) signing letters patent (affixed with the Great Seal of the Realm) prepared by the clerk of the Crown listing all bills passed by the houses of Parliament up to a certain date. To be complete, Parliament must be notified that assent has been given. Assent may also be granted in person by the monarch in the House of Lords; however, this has not happened since 1854. Alternatively, assent may be granted by royal commission, as commonly occurred before 1967 but now only occurs when bills are assented to before prorogation.\nHouse of Lords.\nThe House of Lords is known formally as \"The Right Honourable The Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled\", the Lords Spiritual being bishops of the Church of England and the Lords Temporal being Peers of the Realm. The Lords Spiritual and Lords Temporal are considered separate \"estates\", but they sit, debate, and vote together.\nThe Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949 significantly reduced the legislative powers of the House of Lords relative to the House of Commons. Whilst the Lords debates and votes on all bills (except money bills), their refusal to pass a bill may only delay its passage for a maximum of two parliamentary sessions over a year. After this, the bill may receive royal assent and become law without the Lords' consent.\nLike in the House of Commons, the House of Lords may scrutinise governments through asking questions to government ministers that sit in the Lords and through the operation of a small number of select committees.\nThe Lords used to also exercise judicial power and acted as the UK's supreme legislative court. Appeals were not heard by the whole body, but a committee of senior judges that were appointed to the Lords to act for this purpose. This power was lost when it was transferred to the newly created Supreme Court of the United Kingdom in 2009.\nMany members of the general public have questioned the need for The House of Lords in today's society. They say it is stopping the political system from evolving within the UK and hampering modernisation.\nLords Spiritual.\nThe Lords Spiritual of the Lords' currently consists of the archbishops of Canterbury and York, the bishops of London, Durham and Winchester (who sit by right regardless of seniority) and 21 other diocesan bishops of the Church of England, ranked in order of consecration, subject to women being preferred if one is eligible from 2015 to 2025 under the \"Lords Spiritual (Women) Act 2015.\" Formerly, the Lords Spiritual included all of the senior clergymen of the Church of England\u2014archbishops, bishops, abbots and mitred priors.\nLords Temporal.\nThe Lords Temporal consists of 92 hereditary peers and all life peers appointed under the Life Peerages Act 1958 (currently numbering around 700).\nTwo hereditary peers sit ex officio by virtue of being the Earl Marshal or the Lord Great Chamberlain. Each of the other 90 are elected for life upon a seat becoming vacant. 15 members are elected by the whole House whilst the other 75 are elected by all the hereditary peers, including those not sitting in the Lords. Currently, a standing rule divides these seats between the parties with a replacement peer from one party subject to an election only by peers of that party. Formerly, all hereditary peers were members of the Lords, until the passage of the House of Lords Act 1999 limited their numbers to 92.\nLife peers are appointed by the monarch, on the advice of the prime minister. Typically, these are members of the party of the prime minister, however some peers from other parties are also generally appointed.\nHouse of Commons.\nAs of 2019, the House consists of 650 members; this total includes the Speaker, who by convention renounces partisan affiliation and does not take part in debates or votes, as well as three Deputy Speakers, who also do not participate in debates or votes but formally retain their party membership. Each Member of Parliament (MP) is chosen by a single constituency by the First-Past-the-Post electoral system. There are 650 constituencies in the United Kingdom, each made up of an average of 65,925 voters. The First-Past-the-Post system means that every constituency elects one MP each. Each voter assigns one vote for one candidate, and the candidate with the most votes in each constituency is elected as MP to represent their constituency. Members sit for a maximum of five years, although elections are generally called before that maximum limit is reached.\nA party needs to win 326 constituencies (known as \"seats\") to win a majority in the House of Commons. If no party achieves a majority, then a situation of no overall control occurs \u2013 commonly known as a \"Hung Parliament\". In case of a Hung Parliament, the party with the most seats has the opportunity to form a coalition with other parties, so their combined seat tally extends past the 326-seat majority.\nThe House of Commons is the most powerful of the components of Parliament, particularly due to its sole right to determine taxation and the supply of money to the government. Additionally, the prime minister and leader of the government sits in the House, having acquiring this position by virtue of having the confidence of the other members. This also means that the House is also the primary location in which the government faces scrutiny, as expressed through Question Time and the work of various select committees.\nState Opening of Parliament.\nThe State Opening of Parliament is an annual event that marks the commencement of a session of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It is held in the House of Lords Chamber. Before 2012, it took place in November or December, or, in a general election year, when the new Parliament first assembled. From 2012 onwards, the ceremony has taken place in May or June.\nUpon the signal of the Monarch, the Lord Great Chamberlain raises their wand of office to signal to Black Rod, who is charged with summoning the House of Commons and has been waiting in the Commons lobby. Black Rod turns and, under the escort of the Door-keeper of the House of Lords and an inspector of police, approaches the doors to the Chamber of the Commons. In 1642, King Charles I stormed into the House of Commons in an unsuccessful attempt to arrest the Five Members, who included the celebrated English patriot and leading Parliamentarian John Hampden. This action sparked the English Civil War. The wars established the constitutional rights of Parliament, a concept legally established in the Glorious Revolution in 1688 and the subsequent Bill of Rights 1689. Since then, no British monarch has entered the House of Commons when it is in session. On Black Rod's approach, the doors are slammed shut against them, symbolising the rights of parliament and its independence from the monarch. They then strike, with the end of their ceremonial staff (the Black Rod), three times on the closed doors of the Commons Chamber. They are then admitted, and announce the command of the monarch for the attendance of the Commons.\nThe monarch reads a speech, known as the Speech from the Throne, which is prepared by the Prime Minister and the Cabinet, outlining the Government's agenda for the coming year. The speech reflects the legislative agenda for which the Government intends to seek the agreement of both Houses of Parliament.\nAfter the monarch leaves, each Chamber proceeds to the consideration of an \"Address in Reply to His Majesty's Gracious Speech.\" But, first, each House considers a bill \"pro forma\" to symbolise their right to deliberate independently of the monarch. In the House of Lords, the bill is called the Select Vestries Bill, while the Commons equivalent is the Outlawries Bill. The Bills are considered for the sake of form only, and do not make any actual progress.\n \"See also the stages of a bill section in Acts of Parliament in the United Kingdom.\"\nLegislative procedure.\nBoth houses of the British Parliament are presided over by a speaker, the Speaker of the House for the Commons and the Lord Speaker in the House of Lords.\nFor the Commons, the approval of the Sovereign is required before the election of the Speaker becomes valid, but it is, by modern convention, always granted. The Speaker's place may be taken by the Chairman of Ways and Means, the First Deputy Chairman, or the Second Deputy Chairman. (The titles of those three officials refer to the Committee of Ways and Means, a body which no longer exists.)\nPrior to July 2006, the House of Lords was presided over by a Lord Chancellor (a Cabinet member), whose influence as Speaker was very limited (whilst the powers belonging to the Speaker of the House of Commons are vast). However, as part of the Constitutional Reform Act 2005, the position of Speaker of the House of Lords (as it is termed in the Act) was separated from the office of Lord Chancellor (the office which has control over the judiciary as a whole), though the Lords remain largely self-governing. Decisions on points of order and on the disciplining of unruly members are made by the whole body, but by the Speaker alone in the Lower House. Speeches in the House of Lords are addressed to the House as a whole (using the words \"My Lords\"), but those in the House of Commons are addressed to the Speaker alone (using \"Mr Speaker\" or \"Madam Speaker\"). Speeches may be made to both Houses simultaneously.\nBoth Houses may decide questions by voice vote; members shout out \"Aye!\" and \"No!\" in the Commons\u2014or \"Content!\" and \"Not-Content!\" in the Lords\u2014and the presiding officer declares the result. The pronouncement of either Speaker may be challenged, and a recorded vote (known as a division) demanded. (The Speaker of the House of Commons may choose to overrule a frivolous request for a division, but the Lord Speaker does not have that power.) In each House, a division requires members to file into one of the two lobbies alongside the Chamber; their names are recorded by clerks, and their votes are counted as they exit the lobbies to re-enter the Chamber. The Speaker of the House of Commons is expected to be non-partisan, and does not cast a vote except in the case of a tie; the Lord Speaker, however, votes along with the other Lords. Speaker Denison's rule is a convention which concerns how the Speaker should vote should he be required to break a tie.\nBoth Houses normally conduct their business in public, and there are galleries where visitors may sit.\nDuration.\nOriginally there was no fixed limit on the length of a Parliament, but the Triennial Act 1694 set the maximum duration at three years. As the frequent elections were deemed inconvenient, the Septennial Act 1715 extended the maximum to seven years, but the Parliament Act 1911 reduced it to five. During the Second World War, the term was temporarily extended to ten years by Acts of Parliament. Since the end of the war the maximum has remained five years. Modern Parliaments, however, rarely continued for the maximum duration; normally, they were dissolved earlier. For instance, the 52nd, which assembled in 1997, was dissolved after four years. The Septennial Act was repealed by the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011, which established a presumption that a Parliament will last for five years, unless two thirds of the House of Commons votes for an early general election, or the government loses the confidence of the House. This was repealed by the Dissolution and Calling of Parliament Act 2022, which restored the ability for the government to call an early election while keeping five year terms.\nSummary history of terms of the Parliament of the United Kingdom\nFollowing a general election, a new Parliamentary session begins. Parliament is formally summoned 40 days in advance by the Sovereign, who is the source of parliamentary authority. On the day indicated by the Sovereign's proclamation, the two Houses assemble in their respective chambers. The Commons are then summoned to the House of Lords, where Lords Commissioners (representatives of the Sovereign) instruct them to elect a Speaker. The Commons perform the election; on the next day, they return to the House of Lords, where the Lords Commissioners confirm the election and grant the new Speaker the royal approval in the Sovereign's name.\nThe business of Parliament for the next few days of its session involves the taking of the oaths of allegiance. Once a majority of the members have taken the oath in each House, the State Opening of Parliament may take place. The Lords take their seats in the House of Lords Chamber, the Commons appear at the Bar (at the entrance to the Chamber), and the Sovereign takes the seat on the throne. The Sovereign then reads the Speech from the Throne\u2014the content of which is determined by the Ministers of the Crown\u2014outlining the Government's legislative agenda for the upcoming year. Thereafter, each House proceeds to the transaction of legislative business.\nBy custom, before considering the Government's legislative agenda, a bill is introduced \"pro forma\" in each House\u2014the Select Vestries Bill in the House of Lords and the Outlawries Bill in the House of Commons. These bills do not become laws; they are ceremonial indications of the power of each House to debate independently of the Crown. After the \"pro forma\" bill is introduced, each House debates the content of the Speech from the Throne for several days. Once each House formally sends its reply to the Speech, legislative business may commence, appointing committees, electing officers, passing resolutions and considering legislation.\nA session of Parliament is brought to an end by a prorogation. There is a ceremony similar to the State Opening, but much less well known to the general public. Normally, the Sovereign does not personally attend the prorogation ceremony in the House of Lords and is represented by Lords Commissioners. The next session of Parliament begins under the procedures described above, but it is not necessary to conduct another election of a Speaker or take the oaths of allegiance afresh at the beginning of such subsequent sessions. Instead, the State Opening of Parliament proceeds directly. To avoid the delay of opening a new session in the event of an emergency during the long summer recess, Parliament is no longer prorogued beforehand, but only after the Houses have reconvened in the autumn; the State Opening follows a few days later.\nEach Parliament comes to an end, after a number of sessions, in anticipation of a general election. Parliament is dissolved by virtue of the Dissolution and Calling of Parliament Act 2022 and previously the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011. Prior to that, dissolution was effected by the Sovereign, always on the advice of the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister could seek dissolution at a time politically advantageous to their party. If the Prime Minister loses the support of the House of Commons, Parliament will dissolve and a new election will be held. Parliaments can also be dissolved if two-thirds of the House of Commons votes for an early election.\nFormerly, the demise of the Sovereign automatically brought a Parliament to an end, the Crown being seen as the \"\" (beginning, basis and end) of the body, but this is no longer the case. The first change was during the reign of William and Mary, when it was seen to be inconvenient to have no Parliament at a time when succession to the Crown could be disputed, and an Act was passed that provided that a Parliament was to continue for six months after the death of a Sovereign, unless dissolved earlier. Under the Representation of the People Act 1867 Parliament can now continue for as long as it would otherwise have done in the event of the death of the Sovereign.\nAfter each Parliament concludes, the Crown issues writs to hold a general election and elect new members of the House of Commons, though membership of the House of Lords does not change.\nLegislative functions.\nLaws can be made by Acts of the United Kingdom Parliament. While Acts can apply to the whole of the United Kingdom including Scotland, due to the continuing separation of Scots law many Acts do not apply to Scotland and may be matched either by equivalent Acts that apply to Scotland alone or, since 1999, by legislation set by the Scottish Parliament relating to devolved matters.\nThis has led to a paradox known as the West Lothian question. The existence of a devolved Scottish Parliament means that while Westminster MPs from Scotland may vote directly on matters that affect English constituencies, they may not have much power over their laws affecting their own constituency. Since there is no devolved \"English Parliament\", the converse is not true. Any Act of the Scottish Parliament may be overturned, amended or ignored by Westminster under section 35 of the Scotland Act 1998, and this happened for the first time in January 2023, when the Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill was prohibited from receiving royal assent. Legislative Consent Motions enables the UK Parliament to vote on issues normally devolved to Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland, as part of United Kingdom legislation.\nLaws, in draft form known as bills, may be introduced by any member of either House. A bill introduced by a Minister is known as a \"Government Bill\"; one introduced by another member is called a \"Private Member's Bill\". A different way of categorising bills involves the subject. Most bills, involving the general public, are called \"public bills\". A bill that seeks to grant special rights to an individual or small group of individuals, or a body such as a local authority, is called a \"Private Bill\". A Public Bill which affects private rights (in the way a Private Bill would) is called a \"Hybrid Bill\", although those that draft bills take pains to avoid this.\nPrivate Members' Bills make up the majority of bills, but are far less likely to be passed than government bills. There are three methods for an MP to introduce a Private Member's Bill. The Private Members' Ballot (once per Session) put names into a ballot, and those who win are given time to propose a bill. The Ten Minute Rule is another method, where MPs are granted ten minutes to outline the case for a new piece of legislation. Standing Order 57 is the third method, which allows a bill to be introduced without debate if a day's notice is given to the Table Office. Filibustering is a danger, as an opponent of a bill can waste much of the limited time allotted to it. Private Members' Bills have no chance of success if the current government opposes them, but they are used in moral issues: the bills to decriminalise homosexuality and abortion were Private Members' Bills, for example. Governments can sometimes attempt to use Private Members' Bills to pass things it would rather not be associated with. \"Handout bills\" are bills which a government hands to MPs who win Private Members' Ballots.\nEach Bill goes through several stages in each House. The first stage, called the first reading, is a formality. At the second reading, the general principles of the bill are debated, and the House may vote to reject the bill, by not passing the motion \"That the Bill be now read a second time.\" Defeats of Government Bills in the Commons are extremely rare, the last being in 2005, and may constitute a motion of no confidence. (Defeats of Bills in the Lords never affect confidence and are much more frequent.)\nFollowing the second reading, the bill is sent to a committee. In the House of Lords, the Committee of the Whole House or the Grand Committee are used. Each consists of all members of the House; the latter operates under special procedures, and is used only for uncontroversial bills. In the House of Commons, the bill is usually committed to a Public Bill Committee, consisting of between 16 and 50 members, but the Committee of the Whole House is used for important legislation. Several other types of committees, including Select Committees, may be used, but rarely. A committee considers the bill clause by clause, and reports the bill as amended to the House, where further detailed consideration (\"consideration stage\" or \"report stage\") occurs. However, a practice which used to be called the \"kangaroo\" (Standing Order 32) allows the Speaker to select which amendments are debated. This device is also used under Standing Order 89 by the committee chairman, to restrict debate in committee. The Speaker, who is impartial as between the parties, by convention selects amendments for debate which represent the main divisions of opinion within the House. Other amendments can technically be proposed, but in practice have no chance of success unless the parties in the House are closely divided. If pressed they would normally be casually defeated by acclamation.\nOnce the House has considered the bill, the third reading follows. In the House of Commons, no further amendments may be made, and the passage of the motion \"That the Bill be now read a third time\" is passage of the whole bill. In the House of Lords further amendments to the bill may be moved. After the passage of the third reading motion, the House of Lords must vote on the motion \"That the Bill do now pass.\" Following its passage in one House, the bill is sent to the other House. If passed in identical form by both Houses, it may be presented for the Sovereign's Assent. If one House passes amendments that the other will not agree to, and the two Houses cannot resolve their disagreements, the bill will normally fail.\nSince the passage of the Parliament Act 1911 the power of the House of Lords to reject bills passed by the House of Commons has been restricted, with further restrictions were placed by the Parliament Act 1949. If the House of Commons passes a public bill in two successive sessions, and the House of Lords rejects it both times, the Commons may direct that the bill be presented to the Sovereign for his or her Assent, disregarding the rejection of the Bill in the House of Lords. In each case, the bill must be passed by the House of Commons at least one calendar month before the end of the session. The provision does not apply to Private bills or to Public bills if they originated in the House of Lords or if they seek to extend the duration of a Parliament beyond five years. A special procedure applies in relation to bills classified by the Speaker of the House of Commons as \"Money Bills\". A Money Bill concerns \"solely\" national taxation or public funds; the Speaker's certificate is deemed conclusive under all circumstances. If the House of Lords fails to pass a Money Bill within one month of its passage in the House of Commons, the Lower House may direct that the Bill be submitted for the Sovereign's Assent immediately.\nEven before the passage of the Parliament Acts, the Commons possessed pre-eminence in cases of financial matters. By ancient custom, the House of Lords may not introduce a bill relating to taxation or Supply, nor amend a bill so as to insert a provision relating to taxation or Supply, nor amend a Supply Bill in any way. The House of Commons is free to waive this privilege, and sometimes does so to allow the House of Lords to pass amendments with financial implications. The House of Lords remains free to reject bills relating to Supply and taxation, but may be over-ruled easily if the bills are Money Bills. (A bill relating to revenue and Supply may not be a Money Bill if, for example, it includes subjects other than national taxation and public funds).\nThe last stage of a bill involves the granting of royal assent. Theoretically, the Sovereign may either grant or withhold royal assent (make the bill a law or veto the bill). In modern times the Sovereign always grants royal assent, using the Norman French words \"Le Roy le veult\" (the King wishes it; \"La Reyne\" in the case of a Queen). The last refusal to grant the Assent was in 1708, when Queen Anne withheld her Assent from a bill \"for the settling of Militia in Scotland\", in the words \"\" (the Queen will think it over).\nThus, every bill obtains the assent of all three components of Parliament before it becomes law (except where the House of Lords is over-ridden under the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949). The words \"BE IT ENACTED by the King's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:-,\" or, where the House of Lords' authority has been over-ridden by use of the Parliament Acts, the words \"BE IT ENACTED by King's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, in accordance with the provisions of the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949, and by the authority of the same, as follows:-\" appear near the beginning of each Act of Parliament. These words are known as the enacting formula.\nJudicial functions.\nPrior to the creation of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom in 2009, Parliament was the highest court in the realm for most purposes, but the Privy Council had jurisdiction in some cases (for instance, appeals from ecclesiastical courts). The jurisdiction of Parliament arose from the ancient custom of petitioning the Houses to redress grievances and to do justice. The House of Commons ceased considering petitions to reverse the judgements of lower courts in 1399, effectively leaving the House of Lords as the court of last resort. In modern times, the judicial functions of the House of Lords were performed not by the whole House, but by the Lords of Appeal in Ordinary (judges granted life peerage dignities under the Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876) and by Lords of Appeal (other peers with experience in the judiciary). However, under the Constitutional Reform Act 2005, these judicial functions were transferred to the newly created Supreme Court in 2009, and the Lords of Appeal in Ordinary became the first Justices of the Supreme Court. Peers who hold high judicial office are no longer allowed to vote or speak in the Lords until they retire as justices.\nIn the late nineteenth century, acts allowed for the appointment of \"Scottish Lords of Appeal in Ordinary\" and ended appeal in Scottish criminal matters to the House of Lords, so that the High Court of Justiciary became the highest criminal court in Scotland. There is an argument that the provisions of Article XIX of the Union with England Act 1707 prevent any Court outside Scotland from hearing any appeal in criminal cases: \"And that the said Courts or any other of the like nature after the Unions shall have no power to Cognosce Review or Alter the Acts or Sentences of the Judicatures within Scotland or stop the Execution of the same.\" The House of Lords judicial committee usually had a minimum of two Scottish Judges to ensure that some experience of Scots law was brought to bear on Scottish appeals in civil cases, from the Court of Session. The Supreme Court now usually has at least two Scottish judges, together with at least one from Northern Ireland. As Wales is developing its own judicature, it is likely that the same principle will be applied.\nCertain other judicial functions have historically been performed by the House of Lords. Until 1948, it was the body in which peers had to be tried for felonies or high treason; now, they are tried by normal juries. The last occasion of the trial of a peer in the House of Lords was in 1935. When the House of Commons impeaches an individual, the trial takes place in the House of Lords. Impeachments are now possibly defunct, as the last one occurred in 1806. In 2006, a number of MPs attempted to revive the custom, having signed a motion for the impeachment of Tony Blair, but this was unsuccessful.\nRelationship with the UK Government.\nThe British Government is answerable to the House of Commons. However, neither the Prime Minister nor members of the Government are elected by the House of Commons. Instead, the King requests the person most likely to command the support of a majority in the House, normally the leader of the largest party in the House of Commons, to form a government. So that they may be accountable to the Lower House, the Prime Minister and most members of the Cabinet are, by convention, members of the House of Commons. The last prime minister to be a member of the House of Lords was Alec Douglas-Home, 14th Earl of Home, who became prime minister in 1963. To adhere to the convention under which he was responsible to the Lower House, he disclaimed his peerage and procured election to the House of Commons within days of becoming prime minister.\nGovernments have a tendency to dominate the legislative functions of Parliament, by using their in-built majority in the House of Commons, and sometimes using their patronage power to appoint supportive peers in the Lords. In practice, governments can pass any legislation (within reason) in the Commons they wish, unless there is major dissent by MPs in the governing party.\nBut even in these situations, it is highly unlikely a bill will be defeated, though dissenting MPs may be able to extract concessions from the government. In 1976, Quintin Hogg, Lord Hailsham of St\u00a0Marylebone created a now widely used name for this behaviour, in an academic paper called \"elective dictatorship\".\nParliament controls the executive by passing or rejecting its Bills and by forcing Ministers of the Crown to answer for their actions, either at \"Question Time\" or during meetings of the parliamentary committees. In both cases, Ministers are asked questions by members of their Houses, and are obliged to answer.\nAlthough the House of Lords may scrutinise the executive through Question Time and through its committees, it cannot bring down the Government. A ministry must always retain the confidence and support of the House of Commons. The Lower House may indicate its lack of support by rejecting a Motion of Confidence or by passing a Motion of No Confidence. Confidence Motions are generally originated by the Government to reinforce its support in the House, whilst No Confidence Motions are introduced by the Opposition. The motions sometimes take the form \"That this House has [no] confidence in His Majesty's Government\" but several other varieties, many referring to specific policies supported or opposed by Parliament, are used. For instance, a Confidence Motion of 1992 used the form, \"That this House expresses the support for the economic policy of His Majesty's Government.\" Such a motion may theoretically be introduced in the House of Lords, but, as the Government need not enjoy the confidence of that House, would not be of the same effect as a similar motion in the House of Commons; the only modern instance of such an occurrence involves the 'No Confidence' motion that was introduced in 1993 and subsequently defeated.\nMany votes are considered votes of confidence, although not including the language mentioned above. Important bills that form part of the Government's agenda (as stated in the Speech from the Throne) are generally considered matters of confidence. The defeat of such a bill by the House of Commons indicates that a Government no longer has the confidence of that House. The same effect is achieved if the House of Commons \"withdraws Supply,\" that is, rejects the budget.\nWhere a Government has lost the confidence of the House of Commons, in other words has lost the ability to secure the basic requirement of the authority of the House of Commons to tax and to spend Government money, the Prime Minister is obliged either to resign, or seek the dissolution of Parliament and a new general election. Otherwise the machinery of government grinds to a halt within days. The third choice \u2013 to mount a coup d'\u00e9tat or an anti-democratic revolution \u2013 is hardly to be contemplated in the present age. Though all three situations have arisen in recent years even in developed economies, international relations have allowed a disaster to be avoided.\nWhere a prime minister has ceased to retain the necessary majority and requests a dissolution, the sovereign can in theory reject his or her request, forcing a resignation and allowing the Leader of the Opposition to be asked to form a new government. This power is used extremely rarely. The conditions that should be met to allow such a refusal are known as the Lascelles Principles. These conditions and principles are constitutional conventions arising from the Sovereign's reserve powers as well as longstanding tradition and practice, not laid down in law.\nIn practice, the House of Commons' scrutiny of the Government is very weak. Since the first-past-the-post electoral system is employed in elections, the governing party tends to enjoy a large majority in the Commons; there is often limited need to compromise with other parties. Modern British political parties are so tightly organised that they leave relatively little room for free action by their MPs. In many cases, MPs may be expelled from their parties for voting against the instructions of party leaders. During the 20th century, the Government has lost confidence issues only three times\u2014twice in 1924, and once in 1979.\nParliamentary questions.\nIn the United Kingdom, question time in the House of Commons lasts for an hour each day from Monday to Thursday (2:30 to 3:30\u00a0pm on Mondays, 11:30\u00a0am to 12:30\u00a0pm on Tuesdays and Wednesdays, and 9:30 to 10:30\u00a0am on Thursdays). Each Government department has its place in a rota which repeats every five weeks. The exception to this sequence are the Business Questions (Questions to the Leader of House of Commons), in which questions are answered each Thursday about the business of the House the following week. Also, Questions to the Prime Minister takes place each Wednesday from noon to 12:30\u00a0pm.\nIn addition to government departments, there are also questions to the Church commissioners. Additionally, each Member of Parliament is entitled to table questions for written answer. Written questions are addressed to the Ministerial head of a government department, usually a Secretary of State, but they are often answered by a Minister of State or Parliamentary Under Secretary of State. Written Questions are submitted to the Clerks of the Table Office, either on paper or electronically, and answers are recorded in \"The Official Report (Hansard)\" so as to be widely available and accessible.\nIn the House of Lords, a half-hour is set aside each afternoon at the start of the day's proceedings for Lords' oral questions. A peer submits a question in advance, which then appears on the Order Paper for the day's proceedings. The peer shall say: \"\"My Lords, I beg leave to ask the Question standing in my name on the Order Paper\".\" The Minister responsible then answers the question. The peer is then allowed to ask a supplementary question and other peers ask further questions on the theme of the original put down on the order paper. (For instance, if the question regards immigration, peers can ask the Minister any question related to immigration during the allowed period.)\nParliamentary sovereignty.\nSeveral different views have been taken of Parliament's sovereignty. According to the jurist Sir William Blackstone, \"It has sovereign and uncontrollable authority in making, confirming, enlarging, restraining, abrogating, repealing, reviving, and expounding of laws, concerning matters of all possible denominations, ecclesiastical, or temporal, civil, military, maritime, or criminal\u2026 it can, in short, do every thing that is not naturally impossible.\"\nA different view has been taken by the Scottish judge Thomas Cooper, 1st Lord Cooper of Culross. When he decided the 1953 case of \"MacCormick v. Lord Advocate\" as Lord President of the Court of Session, he stated, \"The principle of unlimited sovereignty of Parliament is a distinctively English principle and has no counterpart in Scottish constitutional law.\" He continued, \"Considering that the Union legislation extinguished the Parliaments of Scotland and England and replaced them by a new Parliament, I have difficulty in seeing why the new Parliament of Great Britain must inherit all the peculiar characteristics of the English Parliament but none of the Scottish.\" Nevertheless, he did not give a conclusive opinion on the subject.\nThus, the question of Parliamentary sovereignty appears to remain unresolved. Parliament has not passed any Act defining its own sovereignty. The European Union (Withdrawal Agreement) Act 2020 states \"It is recognised that the Parliament of the United Kingdom is sovereign\" without qualification or definition. A related possible limitation on Parliament relates to the Scottish legal system and Presbyterian faith, preservation of which were Scottish preconditions to the creation of the unified Parliament. Since the Parliament of the United Kingdom was set up in reliance on these promises, it may be that it has no power to make laws that break them.\nParliament's power has often been limited by its own Acts, whilst retaining the power to overturn those decisions should it decide to.\nActs passed in 1921 and 1925 granted the Church of Scotland complete independence in ecclesiastical matters. From 1973 to 2020, under membership of the European Community and European Union, parliament agreed to the position that European law would apply and be enforceable in Britain and that Britain would be subject to the rulings of the European Court of Justice. In the Factortame case, the European Court of Justice ruled that British courts could have powers to overturn British legislation that was not compatible with European law. This position ended with the passing of the European Union (Withdrawal Agreement) Act 2020 and Britain leaving the EU on 31 January 2020.\nParliament has also created national devolved parliaments and an assembly with differing degrees of legislative authority in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, but not in England, which continues to be governed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom. Parliament still has the power over areas for which responsibility lies with the devolved institutions, but would ordinarily gain the agreement of those institutions to act on their behalf. Similarly, it has granted the power to make regulations to Ministers of the Crown, and the power to enact religious legislation to the General Synod of the Church of England. (Measures of the General Synod and, in some cases proposed statutory instruments made by ministers, must be approved by both Houses before they become law.)\nIn every case aforementioned, authority has been conceded by Act of Parliament and may be taken back in the same manner. It is entirely within the authority of Parliament, for example, to abolish the devolved governments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, or \u2014 as happened in 2020 \u2014 to leave the EU. However, Parliament also revoked its legislative competence over Australia and Canada with the Australia and Canada Acts: although the Parliament of the United Kingdom could pass an Act reversing its action, it would not take effect in Australia or Canada as the competence of the Imperial Parliament is no longer recognised there in law.\nOne well-recognised consequence of Parliament's sovereignty is that it cannot bind future Parliaments; that is, no Act of Parliament may be made secure from amendment or repeal by a future Parliament. For example, although the Act of Union 1800 states that the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland are to be united \"forever,\" Parliament permitted southern Ireland to leave the United Kingdom in 1922.\nPrivileges.\nEach House of Parliament possesses and guards various ancient privileges. The House of Lords relies on inherent right. In the case of the House of Commons, the Speaker goes to the Lords' Chamber at the beginning of each new Parliament and requests representatives of the Sovereign to confirm the Lower House's \"undoubted\" privileges and rights. The ceremony observed by the House of Commons dates to the reign of King Henry VIII. Each House is the guardian of its privileges, and may punish breaches thereof. The extent of parliamentary privilege is based on law and custom. Sir William Blackstone states that these privileges are \"very large and indefinite,\" and cannot be defined except by the Houses of Parliament themselves.\nThe foremost privilege claimed by both Houses is that of freedom of speech in debate; nothing said in either House may be questioned in any court or other institution outside Parliament. Another privilege claimed is that of freedom from arrest; at one time this was held to apply for any arrest except for high treason, felony or breach of the peace but it now excludes any arrest on criminal charges; it applies during a session of Parliament, and 40 days before or after such a session. Members of both Houses are no longer privileged from service on juries.\nBoth Houses possess the power to punish breaches of their privilege. Contempt of Parliament\u2014for example, disobedience of a subpoena issued by a committee\u2014may also be punished. The House of Lords may imprison an individual for any fixed period of time, but an individual imprisoned by the House of Commons is set free upon prorogation. The punishments imposed by either House may not be challenged in any court, and the Human Rights Act does not apply.\nUntil at least 2015, members of the House of Commons also had the privilege of a separate seating area in the Palace of Westminster canteen, protected by a false partition labelled \"MPs only beyond this point,\" so that they did not have to sit with canteen staff who were taking a break. This provoked mockery from a newly elected 20-year-old MP who described it as \"ridiculous\" snobbery.\nEmblem.\nThe badge of Parliament is a crowned portcullis, and was officially granted by the Queen in 1996. The portcullis was originally the badge of various English noble families from the 14th century. It went on to be adopted by the kings of the Tudor dynasty in the 16th century, under whom the Palace of Westminster became the regular meeting place of Parliament. The crown was added to make the badge a specifically royal symbol.\nThe portcullis probably first came to be associated with the Palace of Westminster through its use as decoration in the rebuilding of the Palace after the fire of 1512. However, at the time it was only one of many symbols. The widespread use of the portcullis throughout the Palace dates from the 19th century, when Charles Barry and Augustus Pugin used it extensively as a decorative feature in their designs for the new Palace built following the disastrous 1834 fire.\nThe crowned portcullis came to be accepted during the early 20th century as the emblem of both houses of parliament. This was simply a result of custom and usage rather than a specific decision. The emblem now appears on all official stationery, publications and papers, and is stamped on various items in use in the Palace of Westminster, such as cutlery, silverware and china. Various shades of red (for the House of Lords) and green (for the House of Commons) are used for visual identification of the houses.\nBroadcast media.\nAll public events are broadcast live and on-demand via \"https://\", which maintains an archive dating back to 4 December 2007. There is also a related official YouTube channel. They are also broadcast live by the independent Euronews English channel. In the UK the BBC has its own dedicated parliament channel, BBC Parliament, which broadcasts 24 hours a day and is also available on BBC iPlayer. It shows live coverage from the House of Commons, House of Lords, the Scottish Parliament, the Northern Ireland Assembly and the Senedd.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLists of MPs elected.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13966", "revid": "4007668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13966", "title": "Hosea", "text": "Biblical character\nIn the Hebrew Bible, Hosea ( or ; ), also known as Osee (), son of Beeri, was an 8th-century BC prophet in Israel and the nominal primary author of the Book of Hosea. He is the first of the Twelve Minor Prophets, whose collective writings were aggregated and organized into a single book in the Jewish Tanakh by the Second Temple period (forming the last book of the Nevi'im) but which are distinguished as individual books in Christianity. Hosea is often seen as a \"prophet of doom\", but underneath his message of destruction is a promise of restoration. The Talmud claims that he was the greatest prophet of his generation. The period of Hosea's ministry extended to some sixty years, and he was the only prophet of Israel of his time who left any written prophecy.\nMost scholars since the nineteenth and twentieth centuries have agreed on the contemporaneous dating of Hosea and the Book of Hosea to the time of Jeroboam II, although some redaction-critical studies of Hosea since the 1980s have postulated that the theological and literary unity was created by editors, and scholars differ significantly in their interpretations of the redaction process, stages, and the extent of the eighth-century prophet\u2019s original contributions. Nevertheless, aspects of eighth century history are generally considered to be reflected in the text.\nName meaning.\nThe name \"Hosea\" seems to have been common, and is derived from a related verb meaning 'salvation'. Numbers 13:16 states that \"Hosea\" was the original name of Joshua, son of Nun until Moses gave him the longer, theophoric name \"Yehoshua\" () incorporating an abbreviated form of the Tetragrammaton. Rashi explains in Sotah 34b that Joshua is a compound name of (Yah) and (), \"God may save\".\nLocation.\nAlthough it is not expressly stated in the Book of Hosea, it is apparent from the level of detail and familiarity focused on north-east geography, that Hosea conducted his prophetic ministries in the northern Kingdom of Israel, of which he was a native. In Hosea 5:8 ff., there seems to be a reference to the Syro-Ephraimite War which led to the capture of the kingdom by the Assyrians (c. \u00a0BCE). Hosea's long ministry, from the reign of Jeroboam II (787\u2013747) to the reign of Hoshea (731\u2013722), seems to have ended before the fall of Samaria in 722/721.\nFamily.\nLittle is known about the life or social status of Hosea. According to the Book of Hosea, he married Gomer, the daughter of Diblaim, but she proved to be unfaithful. Hosea knew she would be unfaithful, as God says this to him immediately in the opening statements of the book. This marriage was arranged in order to serve to the prophet as a symbol of Israel's unfaithfulness to the Lord. His marriage will dramatize the breakdown in the relationship between God and his people Israel. Hosea's family life reflected the \"adulterous\" relationship which Israel had built with other gods.\nSimilarly, his children's names represent God's estrangement from Israel. They are prophetic of the fall of the ruling dynasty and the severed covenant with God \u2013 much like the prophet Isaiah a generation later. The name of Hosea's daughter, Lo-ruhamah, which translates as 'not pitied', is chosen as a sign of displeasure with the people of Israel for following false gods. The name of Hosea's son, Lo-ammi, which translates as 'not my people', is chosen as a sign of the Lord's displeasure with the people of Israel for following those false gods.\nRabbinic literature.\nThe reign of Uzziah, who for a while occupied the throne during his father Amaziah's lifetime, is notable particularly because it marks the beginning of the activity of three of the prophets Hosea, Amos, and Isaiah. The oldest of the three was Hosea, the son of the prophet and prince Beeri, the Beeri who was later carried away captive by Tiglath-pileser, the King of Assyria. Of Beeri's prophecies there are two verses preserved by Isaiah. The peculiar marriage contracted by Hosea at the command of God was not without a good reason. When God spoke to the prophet about the sins of Israel, expecting him to defend or excuse his people, Hosea said severely: \"O Lord of the world! Thine is the universe. In place of Israel choose another as Thy particular people from among the nations of the earth.\" To make the true relation between God and Israel known to the prophet, he was commanded to take to wife a woman with a dubious past. After she had several children born, God suddenly put the question to him: \"Why followest thou not the example of thy teacher Moses, who denied himself the joys of family life after his call to prophecy?\" Hosea replied: \"I can neither send my wife away nor divorce her, for she has borne me children.\" \"If, now,\" said God to him, \"thou who hast a wife of whose honesty thou art so uncertain that thou canst not even be sure that her children are thine, and yet thou canst not separate from her, how, then can I separate Myself from Israel, from My children, the children of My elect, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob!\" Hosea entreated God to pardon him. But God said: \"Better were it that thou shouldst pray for the welfare of Israel, for thou art the cause that I issued three fateful decrees against them.\" Hosea prayed as he was bidden, and his prayer averted the impending threefold doom. Hosea died at Babylon at a time in which a journey thence to Palestine was beset with many perils. Desirous of having his earthly remains rest in sacred ground, he requested before his death that his bier be loaded upon a camel, and the animal permitted to make its way as it would. Wherever it stopped, there his body was to be buried. As it commanded, so it was done. Without a single mishap the camel arrived at Safed. In the Jewish cemetery of the town it stood still, and there Hosea was buried in the presence of a large concourse.\"\nChristian thought.\nOne of the early writing prophets, Hosea used his own experience as a symbolic representation of God and Israel. The relationship between Hosea and Gomer parallels the relationship between God and Israel. Even though Gomer runs away from Hosea and sleeps with another man, he loves her anyway and forgives her. Likewise, even though the people of Israel worshipped false gods, God continued to love them and did not abandon his covenant with them.\nThe Book of Hosea was a severe warning to the northern kingdom against the growing idolatry being practiced there; the book was a dramatic call to repentance. Christians extend the analogy of Hosea to Christ and the church: Christ the husband, his church the bride. Christians see in this book a comparable call to the church not to forsake the Lord Jesus Christ. Christians also take the buying back of Gomer as the redemptive qualities of Jesus Christ's sacrifice on the cross.\nOther preachers, like Charles Spurgeon, saw Hosea as a striking presentation of the mercy of God in his sermon on Hosea 1:7: \"But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will save them by the Lord their God, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen.\" \u2013 Bible, Hosea 1:7\nIn Islam.\nIn Islam, \u1e24ushay\u0101 ibn B\u012br\u012b (Arabic: \u062d\u0634\u0627\u064a\u0627 \u0628\u0646 \u0628\u064a\u0631\u064a) is considered to be an Isra\u02bciliyyat prophet sent to guide Bani-Israel after they turned away from God. The Qur'an mentions only some prophets by name but makes it clear that many were sent who are not mentioned. Therefore, many Muslim scholars, such as Ibn Ishaq, speak of Hosea as one of the true Hebrew prophets of Israel. The Book of Hosea has also been used in Qur'anic exegesis by Abdullah Yusuf Ali, especially in reference to Qur'anic verses which speak of the backsliding of Israel.\nObservances.\nHe is commemorated with the other Minor prophets in the Calendar of saints of the Armenian Apostolic Church on July 31. He is commemorated on the Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar, with a feast day on October 17 (for those churches which follow the Julian Calendar, October 17 currently falls on October 30 of the modern Gregorian Calendar). He is also commemorated on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers (the Sunday before the Nativity of the Lord).\nSeveral haftarot are taken from Hosea, including those for \"Vayetze\", \"Bamidbar\", \"Shabbat Shuvah\", and (Sephardic only) Tisha B'Av.\nTomb.\nJewish tradition holds that the tomb of Hosea is a structure located in the Jewish cemetery of Safed; however, Emil G. Hirsch and Victor Ryssel, writing in \"The Jewish Encyclopedia\", say that this tradition is \"historically worthless\".\nIn popular culture.\nThe character Hosea Matthews in the video game \"Red Dead Redemption 2\" is named after the prophet.\nNorman Nicholson's play \"A Match for the Devil\", first performed in 1953, is based on the story of Hosea.\nThe story of Hosea is retold in a modern-day setting in the film \"HOSEA\" (2020), directed by Ryan Daniel Dobson.\nHosea is portrayed by Elijah Alexander in the film \"\" (2012).\nThe novel \"Redeeming Love\" (1991) is based on the book of Hosea.\nThe book of Hosea is mentioned and paralleled in the National Book Award for Fiction Finalist novel \"Pachinko\" by Min Jin Lee.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13967", "revid": "13732", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13967", "title": "Habakkuk", "text": "Prophet of the Hebrew Bible\nHabakkuk, or Habacuc, who was active around 612 BC, was a prophet whose oracles and prayer are recorded in the Book of Habakkuk, the eighth of the collected twelve minor prophets in the Hebrew Bible. He is revered by Jews, Christians, and Muslims.\nAlmost all information about Habakkuk is drawn from the book of the Bible bearing his name, with no biographical details provided other than his title, \"the prophet\". He is mentioned in the deuterocanonical Additions to Daniel, and outside the Bible, he is mentioned over the centuries in the forms of Christian and Rabbinic tradition.\nName.\nThe name Habakkuk, or Habacuc, appears in the Hebrew Bible only in Habakkuk 1:1 and 3:1. In the Masoretic Text, it is written in ( \"\u1e24avaqquq\" \"\u1e24\u0103\u1e07aqq\u00fbq\"). This name does not occur elsewhere. The Septuagint transcribes his name into Greek as (\"Ambakoum\"), and the Vulgate transcribes it into Latin as \"Abacuc\".\nThe etymology of the name is not clear, and its form has no parallel in Hebrew. The name is possibly related to the Akkadian \"khambbaququ\" (, \"\u1e2b\u00e2mbaququ\"), the name of a fragrant plant, or the Hebrew root , meaning \"embrace\".\nLife.\nAlmost nothing is known about Habakkuk, aside from what is stated within the book of the Bible bearing his name, or those inferences that may be drawn from that book. No biographical details are provided other than his title \"the prophet\".\nFor almost every other prophet, more information is given, such as the name of the prophet's hometown, his occupation, or information concerning his parentage or tribe. For Habakkuk, however, there is no reliable account of any of these. Although his home is not identified, scholars conclude that Habakkuk lived in Jerusalem at the time he wrote his prophecy. Further analysis has provided an approximate date for his prophecy and possibilities concerning his activities and background.\nBeyond the Bible, considerable conjecture has been put forward over the centuries in the form of Christian and Rabbinic tradition, but such accounts are dismissed by modern scholars as speculative and apocryphal.\nThe Septuagint translation of Daniel in the Codex Chisianus refers to him as \"the son of Jesus of the tribe of Levi\".\nBiblical account.\nBecause the book of Habakkuk consists of five oracles about the Chaldeans (Babylonians), and the Chaldean rise to power is dated circa 612 BC, it is assumed he was active about that time, making him an early contemporary of Jeremiah and Zephaniah. Jewish sources, however, do not group him with those two prophets, who are often placed together, so it is possible that he was slightly earlier than these prophets.\nBecause the final chapter of his book is a song, it is sometimes assumed that he was a member of the Tribe of Levi, who served as musicians in Solomon's Temple.\nTradition.\nA reference to \"the prophet Habakkuk\" appears in Bel and the Dragon, which is part of the deuterocanonical Additions to Daniel. Verses 33\u201339 place Habakkuk in Judea; after making some stew, he is instructed by an angel of the Lord to take the stew to Daniel, who is in the lion's den in Babylon. After Habakkuk proclaims that he is unaware of either the den or Babylon, the angel transports Habakkuk to the lion's den. Habakkuk gives Daniel the food to sustain him, and he is immediately taken back to \"his place\" or \"his own country\".\nHabakkuk is also mentioned in the \"Lives of the Prophets\", which also mentions his time in Babylon.\nAccording to the Zohar (Volume 1, page 8b), Habakkuk is the boy born to the Shunamite woman through Elisha's blessing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And he said, About this season, according to the time of life, thou shalt embrace (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d7\u05b9\u05d1\u05b6\u05e7\u05b6\u05ea\u200e\u00a0\u2013 \"\u1e25\u014d\u1e07eqe\u1e6f\") a son. And she said, Nay, my lord, [thou] man of God, do not lie unto thine handmaid.\u2014\u200a\nWorks.\nThe only work attributed to Habakkuk is the short biblical text which bears his name. The Book of Habakkuk consists of the taunting riddle, which are five woes about the Chaldeans (Babylonians) in chapter 2, and a song of praise to God in chapter 3.\nThe style of the book has been praised by many scholars, suggesting that its author was a man of great literary talent. The entire book follows the structure of a chiasmus in which parallelism of thought is used to bracket sections of the text.\nHabakkuk is unusual among the prophets in that he openly questions the working of God. In the first part of the first chapter, the prophet sees the injustice among his people and asks why God does not take action: \"O LORD, how long shall I cry for help, and you will not hear? Or cry to you \"Violence!\" and you will not save?\"\nTombs.\nThe final resting place of Habakkuk has been claimed at multiple locations. The fifth-century Christian historian Sozomen claimed that the relics of Habakkuk were found at Cela near Bayt Jibrin, when God revealed their location to Zebennus, bishop of Eleutheropolis, in a dream. Currently, one location in Israel and one in Iran lay claim to being the burial site of the prophet.\nTomb in Israel.\nThe burial place of Habakkuk is identified by Jewish tradition as a hillside in the Upper Galilee region of northern Israel, close to the villages Kadarim and Hukok, about six miles southwest of Safed and twelve miles north of Mount Tabor. A small stone building, erected during the 20th century, protects the tomb. Tradition dating as early as the 12th century AD holds that Habakkuk's tomb is at this location, but the tomb may also be of a local sheikh of Yaquq, a name related to the biblical place named \"Hukkok\", whose pronunciation and spelling in Hebrew are close to \"Habakkuk\". Archaeological findings in this location include several burial places dated to the Second Temple period.\nPersian shrine.\nA mausoleum southeast of the city of Tuyserkan in the west of Iran is also believed to be Habakkuk's burial place. It is protected by Iran's Cultural Heritage, Handcrafts and Tourism Organization. The Organization's guide to the Hamadan province states that Habakkuk was believed to be a guardian to Solomon's Temple, and that he was captured by the Babylonians and remained in their prison for some years. After being freed by Cyrus the Great, he went to Ecbatana and remained there until he died, and was buried somewhere nearby, in what is today Tuyserkan. Habakkuk is called both Habaghugh and Hayaghugh by the Muslim locals.\nThe surrounding shrine may date to the period of the Seljuq Empire (11\u201312th century); it consists of an octagonal wall and conical dome. Underneath the shrine is a hidden basement with three floors. In the center of the shrine's courtyard is the grave where Habakkuk is said to be buried. A stone upon the grave is inscribed in both Hebrew and Persian stating that the prophet's father was Shioua Lovit, and his mother was Lesho Namit. Both Muslims and Jews visit it to pay their respects.\nCommemoration.\nChristian.\nOn the Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar, his feast day is December 2. In the Roman Catholic Church, the twelve minor prophets are read in the Roman Breviary during the fourth and fifth weeks of November, which are the last two weeks of the liturgical year, and his feast day is January 15. In 2011, he was commemorated with the other Minor Prophets in the calendar of saints of the Armenian Apostolic Church on February 8.\nHabakkuk has also been commemorated in sculpture. In 1435, the Florentine artist Donatello created a sculpture of the prophet for the bell tower of Florence. This statue, nicknamed \"Zuccone\" (\"Big Head\") because of the shape of the head, now resides in the Museo dell'Opera del Duomo. The Basilica of Santa Maria del Popolo in Rome contains a Baroque sculpture of Habakkuk by the 17th-century artist Bernini. Between 1800 and 1805, the Brazilian sculptor Aleijadinho completed a soapstone sculpture of Habakkuk as part of his \"Twelve Prophets\". The figures are arranged around the forecourt and monumental stairway in front of the \"Santu\u00e1rio do Bom Jesus do Matosinhos\" at Congonhas.\nIslam.\nAli al-Ridha debate at al-Ma'mun's court.\nAlthough not mentioned by name in the Qu'ran, Habakkuk (), is recognized as an Islamic prophet because he is believed to herald the coming of last prophet and divine scripture Muhammad and the Qu'ran in the Book of Habakkuk.\nIn the court of Al-Ma'mun, Imam Ali al-Ridha, a descendant of Muhammad and chief Islamic scholar in the time of the Abbasid Caliphs, was asked by the Exilarch to prove that Muhammad was a prophet through the Torah. Imam Ridha asks \"Do you know the prophet Habakkuk?\" He said, \"Yes. I know of him.\" al-Ridha said, \"and this is narrated in your book, 'Allah brought down speech on Mount Faran, and the heavens were filled with the glorification of Muhammad and his community. His horse carries him over water as it carries him over land. He will bring a new book to us after the ruin of the holy house [the temple in Jerusalem].' What is meant by this book is the Qur'an. Do you know this and believe in it?\" The Exilarch said, \"Habakkuk the prophet has said this and we do not deny what he said.\"\nFurther evidence of prophethood.\nAlthough the Quran only mentions around twenty-five prophets by name, and alludes to a few others, it has been a cardinal doctrine of Islam that many more prophets were sent by God who are not mentioned in the scripture. Thus, Muslims have traditionally had no problem accepting those other Hebrew prophets not mentioned in the Quran or hadith as legitimate prophets of God, especially as the Quran itself states: \"Surely We sent down the Torah (to Moses), wherein is guidance and light; thereby the prophets (who followed him), who had surrendered themselves, gave judgment for those who were Jewish, as did the masters and the rabbis, following such portion of God's Book as they were given to keep and were witnesses to,\" with this passage having often been interpreted by Muslims to include within the phrase \"prophets\" an allusion to all the prophetic figures of the Jewish scriptural portion of the nevi'im, that is to say all the prophets of Israel after Moses and Aaron. Thus, Islamic authors have often alluded to Habakkuk as a prophet in their works, and followed the pronunciation of his name with the traditional salutations of peace bestowed by Muslims onto prophets after the utterance of their names.\nSome medieval Muslim scholars even provided commentaries on the biblical Book of Habakkuk, with the primary purpose of showing that the prophet had predicted the coming of Muhammad in Habakkuk 3:2\u20136, in a manner akin to the earlier Christian tradition of seeing in the book's prophecies allusions to the advent of Christ. For example, the medieval exegete Najm al-D\u012bn al-\u1e6c\u016bf\u012b (d. 716 AH/1316 CE) provided a commentary on select verses from the Book of Habakkuk, saying the prophet's words \"for his rays become light\" (Habakkuk 3:4) alluded to the spread of Islam; that his words \"his glory comes to town, his power appears in his courts\" (Habakkuk 3:4) referred to Muhammad's stay in the town of Yathrib and the help he received there from the ansar; and that his words \"death goes before him\" (Habakkuk 3:5). Likewise, Habakkuk 3:5\u20136 also received similar commentaries from medieval Islamic thinkers.\nThe famous and revered Persian Islamic scholar and polymath Ibn Qutaybah, who served as a judge during the Abbasid Caliphate, said of the prophet Habakkuk: \"Among the words of Habakkuk, who prophesied in the days of Daniel, Habakkuk says: 'God came from Teman, and the holy one from the mountains of Paran and the earth was filled with the sanctification of the praiseworthy one (\"a\u1e25mad\", which is a name of Muhammad in Islam), and with his right hand he exercised power over the earth and the necks of the nations,'\" which has been interpreted by scholars to be a clear allusion to Habakkuk 3:3-4. Elsewhere, the same scholar glossed Habakkuk 3:4, 15 as follows: \"The earth shines with his light, and his horses launched into the sea\", again interpreting the prophecy to be an allusion to the coming of Muhammad. One further prophecy of Habakkuk which Ibn Qutaybah cited, from extra-canonical Hebraic literature, was \"You shall be exceedingly filled in your bows ... O Praised One (Muhammad).\" This final prophecy attributed to Habakkuk was also referred to by later scholars like Ibn al-Jawzi and Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13968", "revid": "47981574", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13968", "title": "Haggai", "text": "Hebrew prophet\nHaggai or Aggeus (; \u2013 \"\u1e24aggay\"; lit.\u2009'One who celebrates'; Koine Greek: \u1f08\u03b3\u03b3\u03b1\u1fd6\u03bf\u03c2; ) was a Hebrew prophet active during the building of the Second Temple in Jerusalem, one of the twelve minor prophets in the Hebrew Bible, and the author or subject of the Book of Haggai. He is known for his prophecy in 520\u00a0BCE, commanding the Jews to rebuild the Temple. He was the first of three post-exilic prophets from the Neo-Babylonian Exile of the House of Judah (with Zechariah, his contemporary, and Malachi, who lived about one hundred years later), who belonged to the period of Jewish history which began after the return from captivity in Babylon. His name means \"my holidays\".\nLife.\nScarcely anything is known of his personal history, with the book of Haggai offering no biographical details about his ancestry or anything else in his life outside the prophecies of 520\u00a0BCE. Haggai is only mentioned in one other book of the Bible, the book of Ezra. He may have been one of the captives taken to Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar. Some commenters suggest he may have been an old man, and seen the previous temple before its destruction due to what he says about the former glory of the Temple in Haggai 2:3. He began God's prophecy about sixteen years after the return of the Jews to Judah (ca. c.\u2009520 BCE). The work of rebuilding the temple had been put to a stop through the intrigues of the Samaritans. After having been suspended for eighteen years, the work was resumed through the efforts of Haggai and Zechariah. They exhorted the people, which roused them from their lethargy, and induced them to take advantage of a change in the policy of the Persian government under Darius I.\nHaggai prophecies.\nHaggai prophesied in late 520\u00a0BCE Jerusalem, about the people needing to complete building the Temple. He has four messages, which begin on August 29 and culminate on December 18. The new Temple was bound to exceed the awesomeness of the previous Temple. He claimed if the Temple was not built there would be poverty, famine and drought affecting the Jewish nation.\nThere is a controversy regarding who edited Haggai's works. According to scholars, they credit it to his students. However, Jewish traditions state that the Men of the Great Assembly were responsible for the edits. The Men of the Great Assembly are traditionally known for continuing the work of Ezra and Nehemiah.\nHaggai and officials of his time.\nHaggai supported the officials of his time, specifically Zerubbabel, the governor of Judah, and Joshua the High Priest. In the Book of Haggai, God refers to Zerubbabel as \"my servant\" as King David was, and says he will make him as a \"signet ring\", as King Jehoiachin was. The signet ring symbolized a ring worn on the hand of Yahweh, showing that a king held divine favour. Thus, Haggai is implicitly, but not explicitly, saying that Zerubbabel would preside over a restored Davidic kingdom.\nJewish Persian diplomacy.\nThe Persian Empire was growing weak, and Haggai saw time as an opportunity to restore the Davidic Kingdom. He believed that the Kingdom of David was able to rise and take back their part in Jewish issues. Haggai's message was directed to the nobles and Zerubbabel, as he would be the first Davidic monarch restored. He saw this as important because the Kingdom would be an end to Jewish idol worship.\nHaggai in Jewish tradition.\nHaggai, in rabbinic writing, is often referred to as one of the men of the Great Assembly. The Babylonian Talmud (5th century CE) mentions a tradition concerning the prophet Haggai, saying that he gave instruction concerning three things: (a) that it is not lawful for a man whose brother married his daughter (as a co-wife in a polygamous relationship) to consummate a levirate marriage with one of his deceased brother's co-wives (a teaching accepted by the School of Hillel, but rejected by the School of Shammai); (b) that Jews living in the regions of Ammon and Moab separate from their produce the poor man's tithe during the Sabbatical year; (c) that they accept of proselytes from the peoples of Tadmor (Palmyra) and from the people of \u1e32ardu.\nLiturgical commemoration.\nOn the Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar, Haggai is commemorated as a saint and prophet. His feast day is 16 December (for those churches which follow the traditional Julian Calendar, 16 December currently falls on 29 December of the modern Gregorian Calendar). He is also commemorated, in common with the other righteous persons of the Old Testament, on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers (the second Sunday before the Nativity of the Lord).\nHaggai is commemorated with the other Minor prophets in the Calendar of saints of the Armenian Apostolic Church on 31 July.\nHaggai in Freemasonry.\nIn the Masonic degree of Holy Royal Arch Haggai is one of the Three Principals of the Chapter. Named after Haggai the prophet and accompanies Zerubbabel, Prince of the People, and Joshua, the son of Josedech, the High Priest.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13969", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13969", "title": "Herman Hollerith", "text": "American statistician and inventor\nHerman Hollerith (February 29, 1860 \u2013 November 17, 1929) was a German-American statistician, inventor, and businessman who developed an electromechanical tabulating machine for punched cards to assist in summarizing information and, later, in accounting. His invention of the punched card tabulating machine, patented in 1884, marks the beginning of the era of mechanized binary code and semiautomatic data processing systems, and his concept dominated that landscape for nearly a century.\nHollerith founded a company that was amalgamated in 1911 with several other companies to form the Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company. In 1924, the company was renamed \"International Business Machines\" (IBM) and became one of the largest and most successful companies of the 20th century. Hollerith is regarded as one of the seminal figures in the development of data processing.\nBiography.\nHerman Hollerith was born in Buffalo, New York, in 1860, where he also spent his early childhood. His parents were German immigrants; his father, Georg Hollerith, was a school teacher from Gro\u00dffischlingen, Rhineland-Palatinate. He entered the City College of New York in 1875, graduated from the Columbia School of Mines with an Engineer of Mines degree in 1879 at age 19, and, in 1890, earned a Doctor of Philosophy based on his development of the tabulating system. In 1882, Hollerith joined the Massachusetts Institute of Technology where he taught mechanical engineering and conducted his first experiments with punched cards. He eventually moved to Washington, D.C., living in Georgetown with a home on 29th Street and a business building at 31st Street and the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal, where today there is a commemorative plaque installed by IBM. He died of a heart attack in Washington, D.C., at age 69.\nElectromechanical tabulation of data.\nAt the suggestion of John Shaw Billings, Hollerith developed a mechanism using electrical connections to increment a counter, recording information. A key idea was that a datum could be recorded by the presence or absence of a hole at a specific location on a card. For example, if a specific hole location indicates \"marital status\", then a hole there can indicate \"married\" while not having a hole indicates \"single\". Hollerith determined that data in specified locations on a card, arranged in rows and columns, could be counted or sorted electromechanically. A description of this system, \"An Electric Tabulating System (1889)\", was submitted by Hollerith to Columbia University as his doctoral thesis, and is reprinted in Brian Randell's 1982 \"The Origins of Digital Computers, Selected Papers\". On January 8, 1889, Hollerith was issued U.S. Patent 395,782, claim 2 of which reads:\nThe herein-described method of compiling statistics, which consists in recording separate statistical items pertaining to the individual by holes or combinations of holes punched in sheets of electrically non-conducting material, and bearing a specific relation to each other and to a standard, and then counting or tallying such statistical items separately or in combination by means of mechanical counters operated by electro-magnets the circuits through which are controlled by the perforated sheets, substantially as and for the purpose set forth.\nInventions and businesses.\nHollerith had left teaching and began working for the United States Census Bureau in the year he filed his first patent application. Titled \"Art of Compiling Statistics\", it was filed on September 23, 1884; U.S. Patent 395,782 was granted on January 8, 1889.\nHollerith initially did business under his own name, as \"The Hollerith Electric Tabulating System\", specializing in punched card data processing equipment. He provided tabulators and other machines under contract for the Census Office, which used them for the 1890 census. The net effect of the many changes from the 1880 census: the larger population, the data items to be collected, the Census Bureau headcount, the scheduled publications, and the use of Hollerith's electromechanical tabulators, reduced the time required to process the census from eight years for the 1880 census to six years for the 1890 census.\nIn 1896, Hollerith founded the Tabulating Machine Company (in 1905 renamed The Tabulating Machine Company). Many major census bureaus around the world leased his equipment and purchased his cards, as did major insurance companies. Hollerith's machines were used for censuses in England &amp; Wales, Italy, Germany, Russia, Austria, Canada, France, Norway, Puerto Rico, Cuba, and the Philippines, and again in the 1900 U.S. census.\nHe invented the first automatic card-feed mechanism and the first keypunch. The 1890 Tabulator was hardwired to operate on 1890 Census cards. A control panel in his 1906 Type I Tabulator simplified rewiring for different jobs. The 1920s removable control panel supported prewiring and near instant job changing. These inventions were among the foundations of the data processing industry, and Hollerith's punched cards (later used for computer input/output) continued in use for almost a century.\nIn 1911, four corporations, including Hollerith's firm, were amalgamated to form a fifth company, the Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company (CTR). Under the presidency of Thomas J. Watson, CTR was renamed International Business Machines Corporation (IBM) in 1924. By 1933 The Tabulating Machine Company name had disappeared as subsidiary companies were subsumed by IBM.\nDeath and legacy.\nHerman Hollerith died November 17, 1929. Hollerith is buried at Oak Hill Cemetery in the Georgetown neighborhood of Washington, D.C.\nHollerith cards were named after Herman Hollerith,\nas were Hollerith strings and Hollerith constants.\nHis great-grandson, the Rt. Rev. Herman Hollerith IV, was the Episcopal bishop of the Diocese of Southern Virginia, and another great-grandson, Randolph Marshall Hollerith, is an Episcopal priest and the dean of Washington National Cathedral in Washington, D.C.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13971", "revid": "6815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13971", "title": "History of painting", "text": "The history of painting reaches back in time to artifacts and artwork created by pre-historic artists, and spans all cultures. It represents a continuous, though periodically disrupted, tradition from Antiquity. Across cultures, continents, and millennia, the history of painting consists of an ongoing river of creativity that continues into the 21st century. Until the early 20th century it relied primarily on representational, religious and classical motifs, after which time more purely abstract and conceptual approaches gained favor.\nDevelopments in Eastern painting historically parallel those in Western painting, in general, a few centuries earlier. African art, Jewish art, Islamic art, Indonesian art, Indian art, Chinese art, and Japanese art each had significant influence on Western art, and vice versa.\nInitially serving utilitarian purpose, followed by imperial, private, civic, and religious patronage, Eastern and Western painting later found audiences in the aristocracy and the middle class. From the Modern era, the Middle Ages through the Renaissance painters worked for the church and a wealthy aristocracy. Beginning with the Baroque era artists received private commissions from a more educated and prosperous middle class. Finally in the West the idea of \"art for art's sake\" began to find expression in the work of the Romantic painters like Francisco de Goya, John Constable, and J. M. W. Turner. The 19thcentury saw the rise of the commercial art gallery, which provided patronage in the 20th century.\nPre-history.\nThe oldest known are more than 40,000-60,000 years old (art of the Upper Paleolithic) and found in the caves in the district of Maros (Sulawesi, Indonesia). The oldest are often constructed from hand stencils and simple geometric shapes.\nIn November 2018, scientists reported the discovery of the then-oldest known figurative art painting, over 40,000 (perhaps as old as 52,000) years old, of an unknown animal, in the cave of Lubang Jeriji Sal\u00e9h in the Indonesian island of Borneo. In December 2019, cave paintings portraying pig hunting within the Maros-Pangkep karst region in Sulawesi were discovered to be even older, with an estimated age of at least 43,900 years. This finding was recognized as \"the oldest known depiction of storytelling and the earliest instance of figurative art in human history.\" In 2021, cave art of a pig found in Sulawesi, Indonesia, and dated to over 45,500 years ago, has been reported. On July 3, 2024, the journal \"Nature\" published research findings indicating that the cave paintings which depict anthropomorphic figures interacting with a pig and measure in Leang Karampuang are approximately 51,200 years old, establishing them as the oldest known paintings in the world.\nThere are examples of cave paintings all over the world\u2014in Indonesia, France, India, Spain, Southern Africa, China, Australia etc.\nVarious conjectures have been made as to the meaning these paintings had to the people that made them. Prehistoric artists may have painted animals to \"catch\" their soul or spirit in order to hunt them more easily or the paintings may represent an animistic vision and homage to surrounding nature. They may be the result of a basic need of expression that is innate to human beings, or they could have been for the transmission of practical information.\nIn Paleolithic times, the representation of humans in cave paintings was rare. Mostly, animals were painted, not only animals that were used as food but also animals that represented strength like the rhinoceros or large Felidae, as in the Chauvet Cave. Signs like dots were sometimes drawn. Rare human representations include handprints and stencils, and figures depicting human / animal hybrids. The Chauvet Cave in the Ard\u00e8che Departments of France contains the most important preserved cave paintings of the Paleolithic era, painted around 31,000 BC. The Altamira cave paintings in Spain were done 14,000 to 12,000 BC and show, among others, bisons. The hall of bulls in Lascaux, Dordogne, France, is one of the best known cave paintings and dates to about 15,000 to 10,000 BC.\nIf there is meaning to the paintings, it remains unknown. The caves were not in an inhabited area, so they may have been used for seasonal rituals. The animals are accompanied by signs which suggest a possible magic use. Arrow-like symbols in Lascaux are sometimes interpreted as being used as calendars or almanacs, but the evidence remains inconclusive. The most important work of the Mesolithic era were the \"marching warriors\", a rock painting at Cingle de la Mola, Castell\u00f3n, Spain dated to about 7000 to 4000 BC. The technique used was probably spitting or blowing the pigments onto the rock. The paintings are quite naturalistic, though stylized. The figures are not three-dimensional, even though they overlap.\nThe earliest known Indian paintings were the rock paintings of prehistoric times, the petroglyphs as found in places like the Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka, and some of them are older than 5500 BC. Such works continued and after several millennia, in the 7th century, carved pillars of Ajanta, Maharashtra state present a fine example of Indian paintings. The colors, mostly various shades of red and orange, were derived from minerals.\nEastern.\nThe history of Eastern painting includes a vast range of influences from various cultures and religions. Developments in Eastern painting historically parallel those in Western painting, in general a few centuries earlier. African art, Jewish art, Islamic art, Indonesian art, Indian art, Chinese art, Korean Art, and Japanese art each had significant influence on Western art, and, vice versa.\nChinese painting is one of the oldest continuous artistic traditions in the world. The earliest paintings were not representational but ornamental; they consisted of patterns or designs rather than pictures. Early pottery was painted with spirals, zigzags, dots, or animals. It was only during the Warring States period (403\u2013221 B.C.) that artists began to represent the world around them. Japanese painting is one of the oldest and most highly refined of the Japanese arts, encompassing a wide variety of genre and styles. The history of Japanese painting is a long history of synthesis and competition between native Japanese aesthetics and adaptation of imported ideas. Korean painting, as an independent form, began around 108 B.C., around the fall of Gojoseon, making it one of the oldest in the world. The artwork of that time period evolved into the various styles that characterized the Three Kingdoms of Korea period, most notably the paintings and frescoes that adorn the tombs of Goguryeo's royalty. During the Three Kingdoms period and through the Goryeo dynasty, Korean painting was characterized primarily by a combination of Korean-style landscapes, facial features, Buddhist-centered themes, and an emphasis on celestial observation that was facilitated by the rapid development of Korean astronomy.\nEast Asian.\nChina, Japan and Korea have a strong tradition in painting which is also highly attached to the art of calligraphy and printmaking (so much that it is commonly seen as painting). Far east traditional painting is characterized by water based techniques, less realism, \"elegant\" and stylized subjects, graphical approach to depiction, the importance of white space (or negative space) and a preference for landscape (instead of the human figure) as a subject. Beyond ink and color on silk or paper scrolls, gold on lacquer was also a common medium in painted East Asian artwork. Although silk was a somewhat expensive medium to paint upon in the past, the invention of paper during the 1st century AD by the Han court eunuch Cai Lun provided not only a cheap and widespread medium for writing, but also a cheap and widespread medium for painting (making it more accessible to the public).\nThe ideologies of Confucianism, Daoism, and Buddhism played important roles in East Asian art. Medieval Song dynasty painters such as Lin Tinggui and his \"Luohan Laundering\" (housed in the Smithsonian Freer Gallery of Art) of the 12th century are excellent examples of Buddhist ideas fused into classical Chinese artwork. In the latter painting on silk (image and description provided in the link), bald-headed Buddhist Luohan are depicted in a practical setting of washing clothes by a river. However, the painting itself is visually stunning, with the Luohan portrayed in rich detail and bright, opaque colors in contrast to a hazy, brown, and bland wooded environment. Also, the tree tops are shrouded in swirling fog, providing the common \"negative space\" mentioned above in East Asian Art.\nIn Japonisme, late 19th-century Post-Impressionists like Van Gogh and Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, and tonalists such as James McNeill Whistler, admired early 19th-century Japanese Ukiyo-e artists like Hokusai (1760\u20131849) and Hiroshige (1797\u20131858) and were influenced by them.\nChinese.\nThe earliest surviving examples of Chinese painted artwork date to the Warring States period (481\u2013221 BC), with paintings on silk or tomb murals on rock, brick, or stone. They were often in simplistic stylized format and in more-or-less rudimentary geometric patterns. They often depicted mythological creatures, domestic scenes, labor scenes, or palatial scenes filled with officials at court. Artwork during this period and the subsequent Qin dynasty (221\u2013207 BC) and Han dynasty (202 BC \u2013 220 AD) was made not as a means in and of itself or for higher personal expression; rather artwork was created to symbolize and honor funerary rites, representations of mythological deities or spirits of ancestors, etc. Paintings on silk of court officials and domestic scenes could be found during the Han dynasty, along with scenes of men hunting on horseback or partaking in military parade. There was also painting on three dimensional works of art like figurines and statues, such as the original-painted colors covering the soldier and horse statues of the Terracotta Army. During the social and cultural climate of the ancient Eastern Jin dynasty (316 \u2013 420 AD) based at Nanjing in the south, painting became one of the official pastimes of Confucian-taught bureaucratic officials and aristocrats (along with music played by the guqin zither, writing fanciful calligraphy, and writing and reciting of poetry). Painting became a common form of artistic self-expression, and during this period painters at court or amongst elite social circuits were judged and ranked by their peers.\nThe establishment of classical Chinese landscape painting is accredited largely to the Eastern Jin dynasty artist Gu Kaizhi (344 \u2013 406 AD), one of the most famous artists of Chinese history. Like the elongated scroll scenes of Kaizhi, Tang dynasty (618\u2013907 AD) Chinese artists like Wu Daozi painted vivid and highly detailed artwork on long horizontal handscrolls (which were very popular during the Tang), such as his \"Eighty Seven Celestial People\". Painted artwork during the Tang period pertained the effects of an idealized landscape environment, with sparse numbers of objects, persons, or amount of activity, as well as monochromatic in nature (example: the murals of Prince Yide's tomb in the Qianling Mausoleum). There were also figures such as early Tang-era painter Zhan Ziqian, who painted superb landscape paintings that were well ahead of his day in portrayal of realism. However, landscape art did not reach greater level of maturity and realism in general until the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period (907\u2013960 AD). During this time, there were exceptional landscape painters like Dong Yuan (refer to this article for an example of his artwork), and those who painted more vivid and realistic depictions of domestic scenes, like Gu Hongzhong and his \"Night Revels of Han Xizai\".\nDuring the Chinese Song dynasty (960\u20131279 AD), not only landscape art was improved upon, but portrait painting became more standardized and sophisticated than before (for example, refer to Emperor Huizong of Song), and reached its classical age maturity during the Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644 AD). During the late 13th century and first half of the 14th century, Chinese under the Mongol-controlled Yuan dynasty were not allowed to enter higher posts of government (reserved for Mongols or other ethnic groups from Central Asia), and the Imperial examination was ceased for the time being. Many Confucian-educated Chinese who now lacked profession turned to the arts of painting and theatre instead, as the Yuan period became one of the most vibrant and abundant eras for Chinese artwork. An example of such would be Qian Xuan (1235\u20131305 AD), who was an official of the Song dynasty, but out of patriotism, refused to serve the Yuan court and dedicated himself to painting. Examples of superb art from this period include the rich and detailed painted murals of the Yongle Palace, or \"Dachunyang Longevity Palace\", of 1262 AD, a UNESCO World Heritage site. Within the palace, paintings cover an area of more than 1000 square meters, and hold mostly Daoist themes. It was during the Song dynasty that painters would also gather in social clubs or meetings to discuss their art or others' artwork, the praising of which often led to persuasions to trade and sell precious works of art. However, there were also many harsh critics of others art as well, showing the difference in style and taste amongst different painters. In 1088 AD, the polymath scientist and statesman Shen Kuo once wrote of the artwork of one Li Cheng, who he criticized as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n...Then there was Li Cheng, who when he depicted pavilions and lodges amidst mountains, storeyed buildings, pagodas and the like, always used to paint the eaves as seen from below. His idea was that 'one should look upwards from underneath, just as a man standing on level ground and looking up at the eaves of a pagoda can see its rafters and its cantilever eave rafters'. This is all wrong. In general the proper way of painting a landscape is to see the small from the viewpoint of the large...just as one looks at artificial mountains in gardens (as one walks about). If one applies (Li's method) to the painting of real mountains, looking up at them from below, one can only see one profile at a time, and not the wealth of their multitudinous slopes and profiles, to say nothing of all that is going on in the valleys and canyons, and in the lanes and courtyards with their dwellings and houses. If we stand to the east of a mountain its western parts would be on the vanishing boundary of far-off distance, and vice versa. Surely this could not be called a successful painting? Mr. Li did not understand the principle of 'seeing the small from the viewpoint of the large'. He was certainly marvelous at diminishing accurately heights and distances, but should one attach such importance to the angles and corners of buildings?\nAlthough high level of stylization, mystical appeal, and surreal elegance were often preferred over realism (such as in shan shui style), beginning with the medieval Song dynasty there were many Chinese painters then and afterwards who depicted scenes of nature that were vividly real. Later Ming dynasty artists would take after this Song dynasty emphasis for intricate detail and realism on objects in nature, especially in depictions of animals (such as ducks, swans, sparrows, tigers, etc.) amongst patches of brightly colored flowers and thickets of brush and wood (a good example would be the anonymous Ming dynasty painting \"Birds and Plum Blossoms\", housed in the Freer Gallery of the Smithsonian Museum in Washington, D.C.). There were many renowned Ming dynasty artists; Qiu Ying is an excellent example of a paramount Ming era painter (famous even in his own day), utilizing in his artwork domestic scenes, bustling palatial scenes, and nature scenes of river valleys and steeped mountains shrouded in mist and swirling clouds. During the Ming dynasty there were also different and rivaling schools of art associated with painting, such as the Wu School and the Zhe School.\nClassical Chinese painting continued on into the early modern Qing dynasty, with highly realistic portrait paintings like seen in the late Ming dynasty of the early 17th century. The portraits of Kangxi Emperor, Yongzheng Emperor, and Qianlong Emperor are excellent examples of realistic Chinese portrait painting. During the Qianlong reign period and the continuing 19th century, European Baroque styles of painting had noticeable influence on Chinese portrait paintings, especially with painted visual effects of lighting and shading. Likewise, East Asian paintings and other works of art (such as porcelain and lacquerware) were highly prized in Europe since initial contact in the 16th century.\nChinese oil paintings.\nWestern techniques of oil paintings began entering China in the 19th century, becoming prevalent among Chinese artists and art students in the early 20th century, coinciding with China's growing engagement with the West. Artists such as Li Tiefu, Hong Yi, Xu Beihong, Yan Wenliang, Lin Fengmian, Fang Ganmin, Pang Yuliang went abroad, predominantly to Paris and Tokyo, to learn Western art. Through them, artistic movements such as Impressionism, Cubism, Fauvism, Post-impressionism grew and thrived in China, only halted by the Second World War and the birth of the People's Republic of China, when modernistic artistic styles were seen as being inconsistent with the prevailing political ideals and realism was the only acceptable artistic form. Nonetheless, the legacy of the close engagement with Western art in the early 20th century endured. Oil paintings survived as an important medium in Chinese artistic scenes; traditional Chinese ink paintings were also changed as a result. \nJapanese.\nJapanese painting (\u7d75\u753b) is one of the oldest and most highly refined of the Japanese arts, encompassing a wide variety of genres and styles. As with Japanese arts in general, Japanese painting developed through a long history of synthesis and competition between native Japanese aesthetics and adaptation of imported ideas. Ukiyo-e, or \"pictures of the floating world,\" is a genre of Japanese woodblock prints (or \"woodcuts\") and paintings produced between the 17th and 20th centuries, featuring motifs of landscapes, theater, and courtesan districts. It is the main artistic genre of Japanese woodblock printing. Japanese printmaking, especially from the Edo period, exerted enormous influence on French painting over the 19th century. While in the 19th century, Japanese painters developed a new painting technique called \"y\u014dga\" that borrowed heavily from western painting techniques and materials, such notable artists include Harada Naojir\u014d, Fujishima Takeji, and Kuroda Seiki.\nKorean.\nKorean painting, as an independent form, began around 108 B.C., around the fall of Gojoseon, making it one of the oldest in the world. The artwork of that time period evolved into the various styles that characterized the Three Kingdoms of Korea period, most notably the paintings and frescoes that adorn the tombs of Goguryeo's royalty. During the Three Kingdoms period and through the Goryeo dynasty, Korean painting was characterized primarily by a combination of Korean-style landscapes, facial features, Buddhist-centered themes, and an emphasis on celestial observation that was facilitated by the rapid development of Korean astronomy. It wasn't until the Joseon dynasty that Confucian themes began to take root in Korean paintings, used in harmony with indigenous aspects.\nThe history of Korean painting has been characterized by the use monochromatic works of black brushwork, often on mulberry paper or silk. This style is evident in \"Min-Hwa\", or colorful folk art, tomb paintings, and ritual and festival arts, both of which incorporated an extensive use of colour.\nSouth Asian.\nIndian.\nIndian paintings historically revolved around the religious deities and kings. Indian art is a collective term for several different schools of art that existed in the Indian subcontinent. The paintings varied from large frescoes of Ajanta to the intricate Mughal miniature paintings to the metal embellished works from the Tanjore school. The paintings from the Gandhar\u2013Taxila are influenced by the Persian works in the west. The eastern style of painting was mostly developed around the Nalanda school of art. The works are mostly inspired by various scenes from Indian mythology.\nHistory.\nThe earliest Indian paintings were the rock paintings of prehistoric times, the petroglyphs as found in places like the Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka, and some of them are older than 5500 BC. Such works continued and after several millennia, in the 7th century, carved pillars of Ajanta, Maharashtra state present a fine example of Indian paintings, and the colors, mostly various shades of red and orange, were derived from minerals.\nAjanta Caves in Maharashtra, India are rock-cut cave monuments dating back to the 2nd century BCE and containing paintings and sculpture considered to be masterpieces of both Buddhist religious art and universal pictorial art.\nMadhubani painting is a style of Indian painting, practiced in the Mithila region of Bihar state, India. The origins of Madhubani painting are shrouded in antiquity.\nMughal.\nMughal painting is a particular style of Indian painting, generally confined to illustrations on the book and done in miniatures, and which emerged, developed and took shape during the period of the Mughal Empire 16th \u221219th centuries.\nRajput.\nRajput painting evolved and flourished during the 18th century, in the royal courts of Rajputana, India. Each Rajput kingdom evolved a distinct style, but with certain common features. Rajput paintings depict a number of themes, events of epics like the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, Krishna's life, beautiful landscapes, and humans. Miniatures were the preferred medium of Rajput painting, but several manuscripts also contain Rajput paintings, and paintings were even done on the walls of palaces, inner chambers of the forts, havelies, particularly, the havelis of Shekhawait.\nThe colors extracted from certain minerals, plant sources, conch shells, and were even derived by processing precious stones, gold and silver were used. The preparation of desired colors was a lengthy process, sometimes taking weeks. Brushes used were very fine.\nTanjore.\nTanjore painting is an important form of classical South Indian painting native to the town of Tanjore in Tamil Nadu. The art form dates back to the early 9th century, a period dominated by the Chola rulers, who encouraged art and literature. These paintings are known for their elegance, rich colors, and attention to detail. The themes for most of these paintings are Hindu Gods and Goddesses and scenes from Hindu mythology. In modern times, these paintings have become a much sought after souvenir during festive occasions in South India.\nThe process of making a Tanjore painting involves many stages. The first stage involves the making of the preliminary sketch of the image on the base. The base consists of a cloth pasted over a wooden base. Then chalk powder or zinc oxide is mixed with water-soluble adhesive and applied on the base. To make the base smoother, a mild abrasive is sometimes used. After the drawing is made, decoration of the jewellery and the apparels in the image is done with semi-precious stones. Laces or threads are also used to decorate the jewellery. On top of this, the gold foils are pasted. Finally, dyes are used to add colors to the figures in the paintings.\nMadras School.\nDuring British rule in India, the crown found that Madras had some of the most talented and intellectual artistic minds in the world. As the British had also established a huge settlement in and around Madras, Georgetown was chosen to establish an institute that would cater to the artistic expectations of the royal family in London. This has come to be known as the Madras School of Art. At first traditional artists were employed to produce exquisite varieties of furniture, metal work, and curios and their work was sent to the royal palaces of the Queen.\nUnlike the Bengal School where 'copying' is the norm of teaching, the Madras School flourishes on 'creating' new styles, arguments and trends.\nBengal School.\nThe Bengal school of art was an influential style of art that flourished in India during the British Raj in the early 20th century. It was associated with Indian nationalism, but was also promoted and supported by many British arts administrators.\nThe Bengal School arose as an avant garde and nationalist movement reacting against the academic art styles previously promoted in India, both by Indian artists such as Raja Ravi Varma and in British art schools. Following the widespread influence of Indian spiritual ideas in the West, the British art teacher Ernest Binfield Havel attempted to reform the teaching methods at the Calcutta School of Art by encouraging students to imitate Mughal miniatures. This caused immense controversy, leading to a strike by students and complaints from the local press, including from nationalists who considered it to be a retrogressive move. Havel was supported by the artist Abanindranath Tagore, a nephew of the poet Rabindranath Tagore. Tagore painted a number of works influenced by Mughal art, a style that he and Havel believed to be expressive of India's distinct spiritual qualities, as opposed to the \"materialism\" of the West. Tagore's best-known painting, \"Bharat Mata\" (Mother India), depicted a young woman, portrayed with four arms in the manner of Hindu deities, holding objects symbolic of India's national aspirations. Tagore later attempted to develop links with Japanese artists as part of an aspiration to construct a pan-Asianist model of art.\nThe Bengal School's influence in India declined with the spread of modernist ideas in the 1920s. In the post-independence period, Indian artists showed more adaptability as they borrowed freely from European styles and amalgamated them freely with the Indian motifs to new forms of art. While artists like Francis Newton Souza and Tyeb Mehta were more western in their approach, there were others like Ganesh Pyne and Maqbool Fida Husain who developed thoroughly indigenous styles of work. Today after the process of liberalization of market in India, the artists are experiencing more exposure to the international art-scene which is helping them in emerging with newer forms of art which were hitherto not seen in India. Jitish Kallat had shot to fame in the late 1990s with his paintings which were both modern and beyond the scope of generic definition. However, while artists in India in the new century are trying out new styles, themes and metaphors, it would not have been possible to get such quick recognition without the aid of the business houses which are now entering the art field like they had never before.\nModern Indian.\nAmrita Sher-Gil was an Indian painter, sometimes known as India's Frida Kahlo, and today considered an important woman painter of 20th-century India, whose legacy stands at par with that of the Masters of Bengal Renaissance; she is also the 'most expensive' woman painter of India.\nToday, she is amongst \"Nine Masters\", whose work was declared as \"art treasures\" by The Archaeological Survey of India, in 1976 and 1979, and over 100 of her paintings are now displayed at National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi.\nDuring the colonial era, Western influences started to make an impact on Indian art. Some artists developed a style that used Western ideas of composition, perspective and realism to illustrate Indian themes. Others, like Jamini Roy, consciously drew inspiration from folk art.\nBy the time of Independence in 1947, several schools of art in India provided access to modern techniques and ideas. Galleries were established to showcase these artists. Modern Indian art typically shows the influence of Western styles, but is often inspired by Indian themes and images. Major artists are beginning to gain international recognition, initially among the Indian diaspora, but also among non-Indian audiences.\nThe Progressive Artists' Group, established shortly after India became independent in 1947, was intended to establish new ways of expressing India in the post-colonial era. The founders were six eminent artists \u2013 K. H. Ara, S. K. Bakre, H. A. Gade, M.F. Husain, S.H. Raza and F. N. Souza, though the group was dissolved in 1956, it was profoundly influential in changing the idiom of Indian art. Almost all India's major artists in the 1950s were associated with the group. Some of those who are well-known today are Bal Chabda, Manishi Dey, Mukul Dey, V. S. Gaitonde, Ram Kumar, Tyeb Mehta, and Akbar Padamsee. Other famous painters like Jahar Dasgupta, Prokash Karmakar, John Wilkins, Narayanan Ramachandran, and Bijon Choudhuri enriched the art culture of India. They have become the icons of modern Indian art. Art historians like Prof. Rai Anand Krishna have also referred to those works of modern artistes that reflect Indian ethos. Geeta Vadhera has had acclaim in translating complex, Indian spiritual themes onto canvas like Sufi thought, the Upanishads and the Bhagwad Geeta.\nIndian art got a boost with the economic liberalization of the country since the early 1990s. Artists from various fields now started bringing in varied styles of work. In post-liberalization India, many artists have established themselves in the international art market like the abstract painter Natvar Bhavsar, figurative artist Devajyoti Ray and sculptor Anish Kapoor whose mammoth postminimalist artworks have acquired attention for their sheer size. Many art houses and galleries have also opened in USA and Europe to showcase Indian artworks.\nSouth-East Asia.\nIndonesian.\nThe oldest known cave paintings are more than 44,000\u201350,000 years old, found in the caves in the district of Maros (Sulawesi, Indonesia). The oldest type of cave paintings are hand stencils and simple geometric shapes; the oldest undisputed examples of figurative cave paintings are somewhat younger, close to 35,000 years old.\nThe discovery of the then-oldest known figurative art painting, over 40,000 (perhaps as old as 52,000) years old, of an unknown animal, in the cave of Lubang Jeriji Sal\u00e9h on the Indonesian island of Borneo. In December 2019, however, figurative cave paintings depicting pig hunting in the Maros-Pangkep karst in Sulawesi were estimated to be even older, at at least 43,900 years old. The finding was noted to be \"the oldest pictorial record of storytelling and the earliest figurative artwork in the world\".\nOther examples of Indonesian paintings are the Kenyah decorative art, based on endemic natural motifs such as ferns and hornbills, found decorating the walls of Kenyah longhouses. Other notable traditional art is the geometric Toraja wood carvings. Balinese paintings are initially the narrative images to depict scenes of Balinese legends and religious scripts. The classical Balinese paintings are often decorating the lontar manuscripts and also the ceilings of temples pavilion. Notable modern Indonesian painters in the European tradition include Raden Saleh, Jan Toorop, Basuki Abdullah and Abdullah Suriosubroto, their themes explore landscape and portrait painting.\nFilipino.\nFilipino painting as a whole can be seen as an amalgamation of many cultural influences, though it tends to be more Western in its current form with Eastern roots.\nEarly Filipino painting can be found in red slip (clay mixed with water) designs embellished on the ritual pottery of the Philippines such as the Manunggul Jar. Evidence of Philippine pottery-making dated as early as 6000BC has been found in Sanga-sanga Cave, Sulu and Laurente Cave, Cagayan. By 5000BC the making of pottery was practiced throughout the country. Early Filipinos started making pottery before their Cambodian neighbors and at about the same time as the Thais as part of what appears to be a widespread Ice Age development of pottery technology. Further evidences of painting are manifested in the tattoo tradition of early Filipinos, in particular the Visayans, whom Spanish explorers referred to as \"Pintados\" or the 'Painted People'. They decorated their bodies in various colored pigmentations with designs referencing flora and fauna and heavenly bodies. Some of the most elaborate painting done by early Filipinos that survives to the present day is manifested among the arts and architecture of the Maranao who are well known for the N\u0101ga Dragons and the Sarimanok carved and painted in the beautiful Panolong of their Torogan or King's House.\nFilipinos began creating paintings in the European tradition during the 17th-century Spanish period. The earliest of these paintings were Church frescoes and religious imagery from Biblical sources as well as engravings, sculptures and lithographs featuring Christian icons and European nobility. Most of the paintings and sculptures between the 19th and 20th century were a mixture of religious, political, and landscape artwork, with qualities of sweetness, dark, and light. Early modernist painters such as Dami\u00e1n Domingo were associated with religious and secular paintings. The art of Juan Luna and F\u00e9lix Hidalgo showed a trend toward political statement. Artists such as Fernando Amorsolo used post-modernism to produce paintings that illustrated Philippine culture, nature, and harmony. Other artists such as Fernando Z\u00f3bel used reality and abstraction in their work.\nWestern.\nEgypt, Greece and Rome.\nAncient Egypt, a civilization with very strong traditions of architecture and sculpture (both originally painted in bright colours) also had many mural paintings in temples and buildings, and painted illustrations on papyrus manuscripts. Egyptian wall painting and decorative painting is often graphic, sometimes more symbolic than realistic. Egyptian painting depicts figures in bold outline and flat silhouette, in which symmetry is a constant characteristic. Egyptian painting has close connection with its written language \u2013 called Egyptian hieroglyphs. Painted symbols are found amongst the first forms of written language. The Egyptians also painted on linen, remnants of which survive today. Ancient Egyptian paintings survived due to the extremely dry climate. The ancient Egyptians created paintings to make the afterlife of the deceased a pleasant place. The themes included journey through the afterworld or their protective deities introducing the deceased to the gods of the underworld. Some examples of such paintings are paintings of the gods and goddesses Ra, Horus, Anubis, Nut, Osiris and Isis. Some tomb paintings show activities that the deceased were involved in when they were alive and wished to carry on doing for eternity. In the New Kingdom and later, the \"Book of the Dead\" was buried with the entombed person. It was considered important for an introduction to the afterlife.\nTo the north of Egypt was the Minoan civilization centered on the island of Crete. The wall paintings found in the palace of Knossos are similar to that of the Egyptians but much more free in style. Mycenaean Greece, beginning around 1600 BC, produced similar art to that of Minoan Crete. Ancient Greek art during the Greek Dark Age became far less complex, but the renewal of Greek civilization throughout the Mediterranean during Archaic Greece brought about new forms of Greek art with the Orientalizing style.\nAncient Greece had skilled painters, sculptors (though both endeavours were regarded as mere manual labour at the time), and architects. The Parthenon is an example of their architecture that has lasted to modern days. Greek marble sculpture is often described as the highest form of Classical art. Painting on pottery of Ancient Greece and ceramics gives a particularly informative glimpse into the way society in Ancient Greece functioned. Black-figure vase painting and Red-figure vase painting gives many surviving examples of what Greek painting was. Some famous Greek painters on wooden panels who are mentioned in texts are Apelles, Zeuxis, and Parrhasius, however few examples of Ancient Greek panel painting survive, mostly just written descriptions by their contemporaries or later Romans. Zeuxis lived in 5\u20136BC and was said to be the first to use sfumato. According to Pliny the Elder, the realism of his paintings was such that birds tried to eat the painted grapes. Apelles is described as the greatest painter of Antiquity for perfect technique in drawing, brilliant color and modeling.\nRoman art was influenced by Greece and can in part be taken as a descendant of ancient Greek painting. However, Roman painting does have important unique characteristics. Surviving Roman paintings include wall paintings and frescoes, many from villas in Campania, in Southern Italy at sites such as Pompeii and Herculaneum. Such painting can be grouped into four main \"styles\" or periods and may contain the first examples of \"trompe-l'\u0153il\", pseudo-perspective, and pure landscape. Almost the only painted portraits surviving from the Ancient world are a large number of coffin-portraits of bust form found in the Late Antique cemetery of Al-Fayum. Although these were neither of the best period nor the highest quality, they are impressive in themselves, and give an idea of the quality that the finest ancient work must have had. A very small number of miniatures from Late Antique illustrated books also survive, and a rather larger number of copies of them from the early medieval period.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe rise of Christianity imparted a different spirit and aim to painting styles. Byzantine art, once its style was established by the 6th century, placed great emphasis on retaining traditional iconography and style, and gradually evolved during the thousand years of the Byzantine Empire and the living traditions of Greek and Russian Orthodox icon-painting. Byzantine painting has a hieratic feeling and icons were and still are seen as a representation of divine revelation. There were many frescos, but fewer of these have survived than mosaics.\nByzantine art has been compared to contemporary abstraction, in its flatness and highly stylised depictions of figures and landscape. Some periods of Byzantine art, especially the so-called Macedonian art of around the 10th century, are more flexible in approach. Frescos of the Palaeologian Renaissance of the early 14th century survive in the Chora Church in Istanbul.\nIn post-Antique Catholic Europe the first distinctive artistic style to emerge that included painting was the Insular art of the British Isles, where the only surviving examples are miniatures in Illuminated manuscripts such as the Book of Kells. These are most famous for their abstract decoration, although figures, and sometimes scenes, were also depicted, especially in Evangelist portraits. Carolingian and Ottonian art also survives mostly in manuscripts, although some wall-painting remain, and more are documented. The art of this period combines Insular and \"barbarian\" influences with a strong Byzantine influence and an aspiration to recover classical monumentality and poise.\nWalls of Romanesque and Gothic churches were decorated with frescoes as well as sculpture and many of the few remaining murals have great intensity, and combine the decorative energy of Insular art with a new monumentality in the treatment of figures. Far more miniatures in Illuminated manuscripts survive from the period, showing the same characteristics, which continue into the Gothic period.\nPanel painting becomes more common during the Romanesque period, under the heavy influence of Byzantine icons. Towards the middle of the 13th century, Medieval art and Gothic painting became more realistic, with the beginnings of interest in the depiction of volume and perspective in Italy with Cimabue and then his pupil Giotto. From Giotto on, the treatment of composition by the best painters also became much more free and innovative. They are considered to be the two great medieval masters of painting in western culture. Cimabue, within the Byzantine tradition, used a more realistic and dramatic approach to his art. His pupil, Giotto, took these innovations to a higher level which in turn set the foundations for the western painting tradition. Both artists were pioneers in the move towards naturalism.\nChurches were built with more and more windows and the use of colorful stained glass become a staple in decoration. One of the most famous examples of this is found in the cathedral of Notre Dame de Paris. By the 14th century Western societies were both richer and more cultivated and painters found new patrons in the nobility and even the bourgeoisie. Illuminated manuscripts took on a new character and slim, fashionably dressed court women were shown in their landscapes. This style soon became known as International style and tempera panel paintings and altarpieces gained importance.\nRenaissance and Mannerism.\nThe Renaissance (French for 'rebirth'), a cultural movement roughly spanning the 14th through the mid-17th century, heralded the study of classical sources, as well as advances in science which profoundly influenced European intellectual and artistic life. In the Low Countries, especially in modern day Flanders, a new way of painting was established in the beginning of the 15th century. In the footsteps of the developments made in the illumination of manuscripts, especially by the Limbourg Brothers, artists became fascinated by the tangible in the visible world and began representing objects in an extremely naturalistic way. The adoption of oil painting whose invention was traditionally, but erroneously, credited to Jan van Eyck, made possible a new verisimilitude in depicting this naturalism. The medium of oil paint was already present in the work of Melchior Broederlam, but painters like Jan van Eyck and Robert Campin brought its use to new heights and employed it to represent the naturalism they were aiming for. With this new medium the painters of this period were capable of creating richer colors with a deep intense tonality. The illusion of glowing light with a porcelain-like finish characterized Early Netherlandish painting and was a major difference to the matte surface of tempera paint used in Italy. Unlike the Italians, whose work drew heavily from the art of Ancient Greece and Rome, the northerners retained a stylistic residue of the sculpture and illuminated manuscripts of the Middle Ages (especially its naturalism). The most important artist of this time was Jan van Eyck, whose work ranks among the finest made by artists who are now known as Early Netherlandish painters or Flemish Primitives (since most artists were active in cities in modern day Flanders). The first painter of this period was the Master of Fl\u00e9malle, nowadays identified as Robert Campin, whose work follows the art of the International Gothic. Another important painter of this period was Rogier van der Weyden, whose compositions stressed human emotion and drama, demonstrated for instance in his Descent from the Cross, which ranks among the most famous works of the 15th century and was the most influential Netherlandish painting of Christ's crucifixion. Other important artists from this period are Hugo van der Goes (whose work was highly influential in Italy), Dieric Bouts (who was among the first northern painters to demonstrate the use of a single vanishing point), Petrus Christus, Hans Memling and Gerard David.\nIn Italy, the art of Classical antiquity inspired a style of painting that emphasized the ideal. Artists such as Paolo Uccello, Masaccio, Fra Angelico, Piero della Francesca, Andrea Mantegna, Filippo Lippi, Sandro Botticelli, Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo Buonarroti, and Raphael took painting to a higher level through the use of perspective, the study of human anatomy and proportion, and through their development of an unprecedented refinement in drawing and painting techniques. A somewhat more naturalistic style emerged in Venice. Painters of the Venetian school, such as Giovanni Bellini, Giorgione, Titian, Tintoretto, and Veronese, were less concerned with precision in their drawing than with the richness of color and unity of effect that could be achieved by a more spontaneous approach to painting.\nFlemish, Dutch and German painters of the Renaissance such as Hans Holbein the Younger, Albrecht D\u00fcrer, Lucas Cranach, Matthias Gr\u00fcnewald, Hieronymus Bosch, and Pieter Bruegel represent a different approach from their Italian colleagues, one that is more realistic and less idealized. Genre painting became a popular idiom amongst the Northern painters like Pieter Bruegel.\nThe French tradition of International Gothic, will develop a new style by integrating the strong chromatic tones of Gothic with the Italian perspective and volumes of the \"Quattrocento\", as well as the naturalistic innovations of the Flemish primitives, called the \u00c9cole de Tours. Its main representatives are Jean Fouquet, Barth\u00e9lemy d'Eyck from the Netherlands, Jean and Fran\u00e7ois Clouet, Jean Perreal, Nicolas Froment and the \u00c9cole de Fontainebleau.\nRenaissance painting reflects the revolution of ideas and science (astronomy, geography) that occurred in this period, the Reformation, and the invention of the printing press. D\u00fcrer, considered one of the greatest of printmakers, states that painters are not mere artisans but thinkers as well. With the development of easel painting in the Renaissance, painting gained independence from architecture. Easel paintings\u2014movable pictures which could be hung easily on walls\u2014became a popular alternative to paintings fixed to furniture, walls or other structures. Following centuries dominated by religious imagery, secular subject matter slowly returned to Western painting. Artists included visions of the world around them, or the products of their own imaginations in their paintings. Those who could afford the expense could become patrons and commission portraits of themselves or their family.\nThe High Renaissance gave rise to a stylized art known as Mannerism. In place of the balanced compositions and rational approach to perspective that characterized art at the dawn of the 16th century, the Mannerists sought instability, artifice, and doubt. The unperturbed faces and gestures of Piero della Francesca and the calm Virgins of Raphael are replaced by the troubled expressions of Pontormo and the emotional intensity of El Greco. Restless and unstable compositions, often extreme or disjunctive effects of perspective, and stylized poses are characteristic of Italian Mannerists such as Tintoretto, Pontormo, and Bronzino, and appeared later in the work of Northern Mannerists such as Hendrick Goltzius, Bartholomeus Spranger, and Joachim Wtewael.\nBaroque and Rococo.\nBaroque painting is associated with the Baroque cultural movement, a movement often identified with Absolutism and the Counter Reformation or Catholic Revival; the existence of important Baroque painting in non-absolutist and Protestant states also, however, underscores its popularity, as the style spread throughout Western Europe.\nBaroque painting is characterized by great drama, rich, deep color, and intense light and dark shadows. Baroque art was meant to evoke emotion and passion instead of the calm rationality that had been prized during the Renaissance. During the period beginning around 1600 and continuing throughout the 17th century, painting is characterized as Baroque. Among the greatest painters of the Baroque are Caravaggio, Rembrandt, Frans Hals, Rubens, Vel\u00e1zquez, Poussin, and Johannes Vermeer. Caravaggio is an heir of the humanist painting of the High Renaissance. His realistic approach to the human figure, painted directly from life and dramatically spotlit against a dark background, shocked his contemporaries and opened a new chapter in the history of painting.\nBaroque painting often dramatizes scenes using light effects; this can be seen in works by Rembrandt, Vermeer, Le Nain, La Tour, and Jusepe de Ribera.\nIn Italy, the Baroque style is epitomized by religious and mythological paintings in the Grand Manner by artists such as the Carracci, Guido Reni, and Luca Giordano. Illusionistic church ceiling frescoes by Pietro da Cortona seemed to open to the sky. A much quieter type of Baroque emerged in the Dutch Republic, where easel paintings of everyday subjects were popular with middle-class collectors, and many painters became specialists in genre, others in landscape or seascape or still life. Vermeer, Gerard ter Borch, and Pieter de Hooch brought great technical refinement to the painting of domestic scenes, as did Willem Claesz. Heda to still life. In contrast, Rembrandt excelled in painting every type of subject, and developed an individual painterly style in which the chiaroscuro and dark backgrounds derived from Caravaggio and the Utrecht Caravaggists lose their theatrical quality.\nDuring the 18th century, Rococo followed as a lighter extension of Baroque, often frivolous and erotic. Rococo developed first in the decorative arts and interior design in France. Louis XV's succession brought a change in the court artists and general artistic fashion. The 1730s represented the height of Rococo development in France exemplified by the works of Antoine Watteau and Fran\u00e7ois Boucher. Rococo still maintained the Baroque taste for complex forms and intricate patterns, but by this point, it had begun to integrate a variety of diverse characteristics, including a taste for Oriental designs and asymmetric compositions.\nThe Rococo style spread with French artists and engraved publications. It was readily received in the Catholic parts of Germany, Bohemia, and Austria, where it was merged with the lively German Baroque traditions. German Rococo was applied with enthusiasm to churches and palaces, particularly in the south, while Frederician Rococo developed in the Kingdom of Prussia.\nThe French masters Watteau, Boucher and Fragonard represent the style, as do Giovanni Battista Tiepolo and Jean-Baptiste-Sim\u00e9on Chardin who was considered by some as the best French painter of the 18th century \u2013 the \"Anti-Rococo\". Portraiture was an important component of painting in all countries, but especially in England, where the leaders were William Hogarth, in a blunt realist style, and Francis Hayman, Angelica Kauffman (who was Swiss), Thomas Gainsborough and Joshua Reynolds in more flattering styles influenced by Anthony van Dyck. In France during the Rococo era Jean-Baptiste Greuze (the favorite painter of Denis Diderot), excelled in portraits and history paintings, and Maurice Quentin de La Tour and \u00c9lisabeth Vig\u00e9e-Lebrun were highly accomplished portrait painters. La Tour specialized in pastel painting, which became a popular medium during this period.\nWilliam Hogarth helped develop a theoretical foundation for Rococo beauty. Though not intentionally referencing the movement, he argued in his \"Analysis of Beauty\" (1753) that the undulating lines and S-curves prominent in Rococo were the basis for grace and beauty in art or nature (unlike the straight line or the circle in Classicism). The beginning of the end for Rococo came in the early 1760s as figures like Voltaire and Jacques-Fran\u00e7ois Blondel began to voice their criticism of the superficiality and degeneracy of the art. Blondel decried the \"ridiculous jumble of shells, dragons, reeds, palm-trees and plants\" in contemporary interiors.\nBy 1785, Rococo had passed out of fashion in France, replaced by the order and seriousness of Neoclassical artists like Jacques-Louis David.\n19th century: Neo-classicism, History painting, Romanticism, Impressionism, Post-Impressionism, Symbolism.\nAfter Rococo there arose in the late 18th century, in architecture, and then in painting severe neo-classicism, best represented by such artists as David and his heir Ingres. Ingres' work already contains much of the sensuality, but none of the spontaneity, that was to characterize Romanticism.\nThis movement turned its attention toward landscape and nature as well as the human figure and the supremacy of natural order above mankind's will. There is opposition to Enlightenment ideals, as humanity is seen being at the whim of nature's chaos. The idea that human beings are not above the forces of Nature is in contradiction to Ancient Greek and Renaissance ideals where mankind was above all things and owned his fate. This thinking led romantic artists to depict the sublime, ruined churches, shipwrecks, massacres and madness.\nBy the mid-19th-century painters became liberated from the demands of their patronage to only depict scenes from religion, mythology, portraiture or history. The idea \"art for art's sake\" began to find expression in the work of painters like Francisco de Goya, John Constable, and J.M.W. Turner. Romantic painters saw landscape painting as an important genre to express the vanity of mankind in opposition to the grandeur of nature. Until then, landscape painting wasn't considered the most important genre for painters (like portraiture or history painting). But painters like J.M.W. Turner and Caspar David Friedrich managed to elevate landscape painting to an eminence rivalling history painting.\nSome of the major painters of this period are Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix, Th\u00e9odore G\u00e9ricault, J. M. W. Turner, Caspar David Friedrich and John Constable. Francisco de Goya's late work demonstrates the Romantic interest in the irrational, while the work of Arnold B\u00f6cklin evokes mystery and the paintings of Aesthetic movement artist James McNeill Whistler evoke both sophistication and decadence. In the United States the Romantic tradition of landscape painting was known as the Hudson River School: exponents include Thomas Cole, Frederic Edwin Church, Albert Bierstadt, Thomas Moran, and John Frederick Kensett. Luminism was a movement in American landscape painting related to the Hudson River School.\nThe leading Barbizon School painter Camille Corot painted in both a romantic and a realistic vein; his work prefigures Impressionism, as does the paintings of Eug\u00e8ne Boudin who was one of the first French landscape painters to paint outdoors. Boudin was also an important influence on the young Claude Monet, whom in 1857 he introduced to Plein air painting. A major force in the turn towards Realism at mid-century was Gustave Courbet. In the latter third of the century Impressionists like \u00c9douard Manet, Claude Monet, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Camille Pissarro, Alfred Sisley, Berthe Morisot, Mary Cassatt, and Edgar Degas worked in a more direct approach than had previously been exhibited publicly. They eschewed allegory and narrative in favor of individualized responses to the modern world, sometimes painted with little or no preparatory study, relying on deftness of drawing and a highly chromatic pallette. Manet, Degas, Renoir, Morisot, and Cassatt concentrated primarily on the human subject. Both Manet and Degas reinterpreted classical figurative canons within contemporary situations; in Manet's case the re-imaginings met with hostile public reception. Renoir, Morisot, and Cassatt turned to domestic life for inspiration, with Renoir focusing on the female nude. Monet, Pissarro, and Sisley used the landscape as their primary motif, the transience of light and weather playing a major role in their work. While Sisley most closely adhered to the original principals of the Impressionist perception of the landscape, Monet sought challenges in increasingly chromatic and changeable conditions, culminating in his series of monumental works of Water Lilies painted in Giverny.\nPissarro adopted some of the experiments of Post-Impressionism. Slightly younger Post-Impressionists like Vincent van Gogh, Paul Gauguin, and Georges Seurat, along with Paul C\u00e9zanne led art to the edge of modernism; for Gauguin Impressionism gave way to a personal symbolism; Seurat transformed Impressionism's broken color into a scientific optical study, structured on frieze-like\ncompositions; Van Gogh's turbulent method of paint application, coupled with a sonorous use of color, predicted Expressionism and Fauvism, and C\u00e9zanne, desiring to unite classical composition with a revolutionary abstraction of natural forms, would come to be seen as a precursor of 20th-century art.\nThe spell of Impressionism was felt throughout the world, including in the United States, where it became integral to the painting of American Impressionists such as Childe Hassam, John Twachtman, and Theodore Robinson; and in Australia where painters of the Heidelberg School such as Arthur Streeton, Frederick McCubbin and Charles Conder painted \"en plein air\" and were particularly interested in the Australian landscape and light. It also exerted influence on painters who were not primarily Impressionistic in theory, like the portrait and landscape painter John Singer Sargent. At the same time in America at the turn of the 20th century there existed a native and nearly insular realism, as richly embodied in the figurative work of Thomas Eakins, the Ashcan School, and the landscapes and seascapes of Winslow Homer, all of whose paintings were deeply invested in the solidity of natural forms. The visionary landscape, a motive largely dependent on the ambiguity of the nocturne, found its advocates in Albert Pinkham Ryder and Ralph Albert Blakelock.\nIn the late 19th century there also were several, rather dissimilar, groups of Symbolist painters whose works resonated with younger artists of the 20th century, especially with the Fauvists and the Surrealists. Among them were Gustave Moreau, Odilon Redon, Pierre Puvis de Chavannes, Henri Fantin-Latour, Arnold B\u00f6cklin, Edvard Munch, F\u00e9licien Rops, and Jan Toorop, and Gustav Klimt amongst others including the Russian Symbolists like Mikhail Vrubel.\nSymbolist painters mined mythology and dream imagery for a visual language of the soul, seeking evocative paintings that brought to mind a static world of silence. The symbols used in Symbolism are not the familiar emblems of mainstream iconography but intensely personal, private, obscure and ambiguous references. More a philosophy than an actual style of art, the Symbolist painters influenced the contemporary Art Nouveau movement and Les Nabis. In their exploration of dreamlike subjects, symbolist painters are found across centuries and cultures, as they are still today; Bernard Delvaille has described Ren\u00e9 Magritte's surrealism as \"Symbolism plus Freud\".\n20th-century modern and contemporary.\nThe heritage of painters like Van Gogh, C\u00e9zanne, Gauguin, and Seurat was essential for the development of modern art. At the beginning of the 20th century Henri Matisse and several other young artists revolutionized the Paris art world with \"wild\", multi-colored, expressive, landscapes and figure paintings that the critics called Fauvism. Pablo Picasso made his first cubist paintings based on C\u00e9zanne's idea that all depiction of nature can be reduced to three solids: cube, sphere and cone.\nPioneers of the 20th century.\nThe heritage of painters like Van Gogh, C\u00e9zanne, Gauguin, and Seurat was essential for the development of modern art. At the beginning of the 20th century Henri Matisse and several other young artists including the pre-cubist Georges Braque, Andr\u00e9 Derain, Raoul Dufy and Maurice de Vlaminck revolutionized the Paris art world with \"wild\", multi-colored, expressive, landscapes and figure paintings that the critics called Fauvism. Henri Matisse's second version of \"The Dance\" signifies a key point in his career and in the development of modern painting. It reflects Matisse's incipient fascination with primitive art: the intense warm colors against the cool blue-green background and the rhythmical succession of dancing nudes convey the feelings of emotional liberation and hedonism. Pablo Picasso made his first cubist paintings based on C\u00e9zanne's idea that all depiction of nature can be reduced to three solids: cube, sphere and cone. With the painting Les Demoiselles d'Avignon 1907, Picasso dramatically created a new and radical picture depicting a raw and primitive brothel scene with five prostitutes, violently painted women, reminiscent of African tribal masks and his own new Cubist inventions. analytic Cubism was jointly developed by Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque, exemplified by \"Violin and Candlestick, Paris\", from about 1908 through 1912. Analytic cubism, the first clear manifestation of cubism, was followed by synthetic cubism, practised by Braque, Picasso, Fernand L\u00e9ger, Juan Gris, Albert Gleizes, Marcel Duchamp and countless other artists into the 1920s. Synthetic cubism is characterized by the introduction of different textures, surfaces, collage elements, papier coll\u00e9 and a large variety of merged subject matter.\nLes Fauves (French for \"The Wild Beasts\") were early-20th-century painters, experimenting with freedom of expression through color. The name was given, humorously and not as a compliment, to the group by art critic Louis Vauxcelles. Fauvism was a short-lived and loose grouping of early-20th-century artists whose works emphasized painterly qualities, and the imaginative use of deep color over the representational values. Fauvists made the subject of the painting easy to read, exaggerated perspectives and an interesting prescient prediction of the Fauves was expressed in 1888 by Paul Gauguin to Paul S\u00e9rusier,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;How do you see these trees? They are yellow. So, put in yellow; this shadow, rather blue, paint it with pure ultramarine; these red leaves? Put in vermilion.\nThe leaders of the movement were Henri Matisse and Andr\u00e9 Derain \u2013 friendly rivals of a sort, each with his own followers. Ultimately Matisse became the \"yang\" to Picasso's \"yin\" in the 20th century. Fauvist painters included Albert Marquet, Charles Camoin, Maurice de Vlaminck, Raoul Dufy, Othon Friesz, the Dutch painter Kees van Dongen, and Picasso's partner in Cubism, Georges Braque amongst others.\nFauvism, as a movement, had no concrete theories, and was short lived, beginning in 1905 and ending in 1907, they only had three exhibitions. Matisse was seen as the leader of the movement, due to his seniority in age and prior self-establishment in the academic art world. His 1905 portrait of Mme. Matisse \"The Green Line\", (above), caused a sensation in Paris when it was first exhibited. He said he wanted to create art to delight; art as a decoration was his purpose and it can be said that his use of bright colors tries to maintain serenity of composition. In 1906 at the suggestion of his dealer Ambroise Vollard, Andr\u00e9 Derain went to London and produced a series of paintings like \"Charing Cross Bridge, London\" (above) in the Fauvist style, paraphrasing the famous series by the Impressionist painter Claude Monet. Masters like Henri Matisse and Pierre Bonnard continued developing their narrative styles independent of any movement throughout the 20th century.\nBy 1907 Fauvism no longer was a shocking new movement, soon it was replaced by Cubism on the critics' radar screen as the latest new development in Contemporary Art of the time.\nIn 1907 Apollinaire, commenting about Matisse in an article published in La Falange, said, \"We are not here in the presence of an extravagant or an extremist undertaking: Matisse's art is eminently reasonable.\"\nAnalytic cubism was jointly developed by Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque from about 1908 through 1912. Analytic cubism, the first clear manifestation of cubism, was followed by Synthetic cubism, practised by Braque, Picasso, Fernand L\u00e9ger, Juan Gris, Albert Gleizes, Marcel Duchamp and countless other artists into the 1920s. Synthetic cubism is characterized by the introduction of different textures, surfaces, collage elements, papier coll\u00e9 and a large variety of merged subject matter.\nDuring the years between 1910 and the end of World War I and after the heyday of cubism, several movements emerged in Paris. Giorgio de Chirico moved to Paris in July 1911, where he joined his brother Andrea (the poet and painter known as Alberto Savinio). Through his brother he met Pierre Laprade a member of the jury at the Salon d'Automne, where he exhibited three of his dreamlike works: \"Enigma of the Oracle\", \"Enigma of an Afternoon\" and \"Self-Portrait\". During 1913 he exhibited his work at the Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants and Salon d'Automne, his work was noticed by Pablo Picasso and Guillaume Apollinaire and several others. His compelling and mysterious paintings are considered instrumental to the early beginnings of Surrealism. During the first half of the 20th century in Europe masters like Georges Braque, Andr\u00e9 Derain, and Giorgio de Chirico continued painting independent of any movement.\nPioneers of Modern art.\nIn the first two decades of the 20th century and after Cubism, several other important movements emerged; futurism (Balla), abstract art (Kandinsky), Der Blaue Reiter), Bauhaus, (Kandinsky) and (Klee), Orphism, (Robert Delaunay and Franti\u0161ek Kupka), Synchromism (Morgan Russell), De Stijl (Mondrian), Suprematism (Malevich), Constructivism (Tatlin), Dadaism (Duchamp, Picabia, Arp) and Surrealism (De Chirico, Andr\u00e9 Breton, Mir\u00f3, Magritte, Dal\u00ed, Ernst). Modern painting influenced all the visual arts, from Modernist architecture and design, to avant-garde film, theatre and modern dance and became an experimental laboratory for the expression of visual experience, from photography and concrete poetry to advertising art and fashion. Van Gogh's painting exerted great influence upon 20th-century Expressionism, as can be seen in the work of the Fauves, Die Br\u00fccke (a group led by German painter Ernst Kirchner), and the Expressionism of Edvard Munch, Egon Schiele, Marc Chagall, Amedeo Modigliani, Cha\u00efm Soutine and others..\nWassily Kandinsky a Russian painter, printmaker and art theorist, one of the most famous 20th-century artists is generally considered the first important painter of modern abstract art. As an early Modernist, in search of new modes of visual expression, and spiritual expression, he theorized as did contemporary occultists and theosophists, that pure visual abstraction had corollary vibrations with sound and music. They posited that pure abstraction could express pure spirituality. His earliest abstractions were generally titled as the example in the (above gallery) \"Composition VII\", making connection to the work of the composers of music. Kandinsky included many of his theories about abstract art in his book \"Concerning the Spiritual in Art.\" Robert Delaunay was a French artist who is associated with Orphism, (reminiscent of a link between pure abstraction and cubism). His later works were more abstract, reminiscent of Paul Klee. His key contributions to abstract painting refer to his bold use of color, and a clear love of experimentation of both depth and tone. At the invitation of Wassily Kandinsky, Delaunay and his wife the artist Sonia Delaunay, joined The Blue Rider (Der Blaue Reiter), a Munich-based group of abstract artists, in 1911, and his art took a turn to the abstract.\nOther major pioneers of early abstraction include Russian painter Kasimir Malevich, who after the Russian Revolution in 1917, and after pressure from the Stalinist regime in 1924 returned to painting imagery and \"Peasants and Workers in the field\", and Swiss painter Paul Klee whose masterful color experiments made him an important pioneer of abstract painting at the Bauhaus. Still other important pioneers of abstract painting include the Swedish artist Hilma af Klint, Czech painter Franti\u0161ek Kupka as well as American artists Stanton Macdonald-Wright and Morgan Russell who, in 1912, founded Synchromism, an art movement that closely resembles Orphism.\n\"Expressionism\" and \"Symbolism\" are broad rubrics that involve several important and related movements in 20th-century painting that dominated much of the avant-garde art being made in Western, Eastern and Northern Europe. Expressionist works were painted largely between World War I and World War II, mostly in France, Germany, Norway, Russia, Belgium, and Austria. Expressionist artists are related to both Surrealism and Symbolism and are each uniquely and somewhat eccentrically personal. Fauvism, Die Br\u00fccke, and Der Blaue Reiter are three of the best known groups of Expressionist and Symbolist painters.\nArtists as interesting and diverse as Marc Chagall, whose painting \"I and the Village\", (above) tells an autobiographical story that examines the relationship between the artist and his origins, with a lexicon of artistic Symbolism. Gustav Klimt, Egon Schiele, Edvard Munch, Emil Nolde, Cha\u00efm Soutine, James Ensor, Oskar Kokoschka, Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, Max Beckmann, Franz Marc, K\u00e4the Schmidt Kollwitz, Georges Rouault, Amedeo Modigliani and some of the Americans abroad like Marsden Hartley, and Stuart Davis, were considered influential expressionist painters. Although Alberto Giacometti is primarily thought of as an intense Surrealist sculptor, he made intense expressionist paintings as well.\nPioneers of abstraction.\nPiet Mondrian's art was also related to his spiritual and philosophical studies. In 1908 he became interested in the theosophical movement launched by Helena Petrovna Blavatsky in the late 19th century. Blavatsky believed that it was possible to attain a knowledge of nature more profound than that provided by empirical means, and much of Mondrian's work for the rest of his life was inspired by his search for that spiritual knowledge.\nDe Stijl also known as neoplasticism, was a Dutch artistic movement founded in 1917. The term \"De Stijl\" is used to refer to a body of work from 1917 to 1931 founded in the Netherlands.\n\"De Stijl\" is also the name of a journal that was published by the Dutch painter, designer, writer, and critic Theo van Doesburg propagating the group's theories. Next to van Doesburg, the group's principal members were the painters Piet Mondrian, Vilmos Husz\u00e1r, and Bart van der Leck, and the architects Gerrit Rietveld, Robert van 't Hoff, and J. J. P. Oud. The artistic philosophy that formed a basis for the group's work is known as \"neoplasticism\" \u2013 the new plastic art (or \"Nieuwe Beelding\" in Dutch).\nProponents of De Stijl sought to express a new utopian ideal of spiritual harmony and order. They advocated pure abstraction and universality by a reduction to the essentials of form and colour; they simplified visual compositions to the vertical and horizontal directions, and used only primary colors along with black and white. Indeed, according to the Tate Gallery's online article on neoplasticism, Mondrian himself sets forth these delimitations in his essay \"Neo-Plasticism in Pictorial Art\". He writes, \"...\u00a0this new plastic idea will ignore the particulars of appearance, that is to say, natural form and colour. On the contrary, it should find its expression in the abstraction of form and colour, that is to say, in the straight line and the clearly defined primary colour.\" The Tate article further summarizes that this art allows \"only primary colours and non-colours, only squares and rectangles, only straight and horizontal or vertical line.\" The Guggenheim Museum's online article on De Stijl summarizes these traits in similar terms: \"It [De Stijl] was posited on the fundamental principle of the geometry of the straight line, the square, and the rectangle, combined with a strong asymmetricality; the predominant use of pure primary colors with black and white; and the relationship between positive and negative elements in an arrangement of non-objective forms and lines.\"\nDe Stijl movement was influenced by Cubist painting as well as by the mysticism and the ideas about \"ideal\" geometric forms (such as the \"perfect straight line\") in the neoplatonic philosophy of mathematician M. H. J. Schoenmaekers. The works of De Stijl would influence the Bauhaus style and the international style of architecture as well as clothing and interior design. However, it did not follow the general guidelines of an \"ism\" (Cubism, Futurism, Surrealism), nor did it adhere to the principles of art schools like Bauhaus; it was a collective project, a joint enterprise.\nDada and Surrealism.\nMarcel Duchamp, came to international prominence in the wake of his notorious success at the New York City Armory Show in 1913, (soon after he denounced artmaking for chess). After Duchamp's Nude Descending a Staircase became the international cause celebre at the 1913 Armory show in New York he created \"The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even, Large Glass\". The \"Large Glass\" pushed the art of painting to radical new limits being part painting, part collage, part construction. Duchamp became closely associated with the Dada movement that began in neutral Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland, during World War I and peaked from 1916 to 1920. The movement primarily involved visual arts, literature (poetry, art manifestoes, art theory), theatre, and graphic design, and concentrated its anti war politic through a rejection of the prevailing standards in art through anti-art cultural works. Francis Picabia, Man Ray, Kurt Schwitters, Tristan Tzara, Hans Richter, Jean Arp, Sophie Taeuber-Arp, along with Duchamp and many others are associated with the Dadaist movement. Duchamp and several Dadaists are also associated with Surrealism, the movement that dominated European painting in the 1920s and 1930s.\nIn 1924 Andr\u00e9 Breton published the \"Surrealist Manifesto.\" The Surrealist movement in painting became synonymous with the avant-garde and which featured artists whose works varied from the abstract to the super-realist. With works on paper like \"Machine Turn Quickly\", (above) Francis Picabia continued his involvement in the Dada movement through 1919 in Z\u00fcrich and Paris, before breaking away from it after developing an interest in Surrealist art. Yves Tanguy, Ren\u00e9 Magritte and Salvador Dal\u00ed are particularly known for their realistic depictions of dream imagery and fantastic manifestations of the imagination. Joan Mir\u00f3's \"The Tilled Field\" of 1923\u20131924 verges on abstraction, this early painting of a complex of objects and figures, and arrangements of sexually active characters; was Mir\u00f3's first Surrealist masterpiece. Mir\u00f3's \"The Tilled Field\" also contains several parallels to Bosch's \"Garden of Earthly Delights\": similar flocks of birds; pools from which living creatures emerge; and oversize disembodied ears all echo the Dutch master's work that Mir\u00f3 saw as a young painter in The Prado. The more abstract Joan Mir\u00f3, Jean Arp, Andr\u00e9 Masson, and Max Ernst were very influential, especially in the United States during the 1940s.\nThroughout the 1930s, Surrealism continued to become more visible to the public at large. A Surrealist group developed in Britain and, according to Breton, their 1936 London International Surrealist Exhibition was a high water mark of the period and became the model for international exhibitions. Surrealist groups in Japan, and especially in Latin America, the Caribbean and in Mexico produced innovative and original works.\nDal\u00ed and Magritte created some of the most widely recognized images of the movement. The 1928/1929 painting \"This Is Not A Pipe\", by Magritte is the subject of a Michel Foucault 1973 book, \"This is not a Pipe\" (English edition, 1991), that discusses the painting and its paradox. Dal\u00ed joined the group in 1929, and participated in the rapid establishment of the visual style between 1930 and 1935.\nSurrealism as a visual movement had found a method: to expose psychological truth by stripping ordinary objects of their normal significance, in order to create a compelling image that was beyond ordinary formal organization, and perception, sometimes evoking empathy from the viewer, sometimes laughter and sometimes outrage and bewilderment.\n1931 marked a year when several Surrealist painters produced works which marked turning points in their stylistic evolution: in one example, liquid shapes become the trademark of Dal\u00ed, particularly in his \"The Persistence of Memory\", which features the image of watches that sag as if they are melting. Evocations of time and its compelling mystery and absurdity.\nThe characteristics of this style \u2013 a combination of the depictive, the abstract, and the psychological \u2013 came to stand for the alienation which many people felt in the modernist period, combined with the sense of reaching more deeply into the psyche, to be \"made whole with one's individuality.\"\nMax Ernst whose 1920 painting \"Murdering Airplane\", studied philosophy and psychology in Bonn and was interested in the alternative realities experienced by the insane. His paintings may have been inspired by the psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud's study of the delusions of a paranoiac, Daniel Paul Schreber. Freud identified Schreber's fantasy of becoming a woman as a \"castration complex.\" The central image of two pairs of legs refers to Schreber's hermaphroditic desires. Ernst's inscription on the back of the painting reads: \"The picture is curious because of its symmetry. The two sexes balance one another.\"\nDuring the 1920s Andr\u00e9 Masson's work was enormously influential in helping the newly arrived in Paris and young artist Joan Mir\u00f3 find his roots in the new Surrealist painting. Mir\u00f3 acknowledged in letters to his dealer Pierre Matisse the importance of Masson as an example to him in his early years in Paris.\nLong after personal, political and professional tensions have fragmented the Surrealist group into thin air and ether, Magritte, Mir\u00f3, Dal\u00ed and the other Surrealists continue to define a visual program in the arts. Other prominent surrealist artists include Giorgio de Chirico, M\u00e9ret Oppenheim, Toyen, Gr\u00e9goire Michonze, Roberto Matta, Kay Sage, Leonora Carrington, Dorothea Tanning, and Leonor Fini among others.\nBefore and after the war.\nDer Blaue Reiter was a German movement lasting from 1911 to 1914, fundamental to Expressionism, along with Die Br\u00fccke which was founded the previous decade in 1905 and was a group of German expressionist artists formed in Dresden in 1905. Founding members of Die Br\u00fccke were Fritz Bleyl, Erich Heckel, Ernst Ludwig Kirchner and Karl Schmidt-Rottluff. Later members included Max Pechstein, Otto Mueller and others. The group was one of the seminal ones, which in due course had a major impact on the evolution of modern art in the 20th century and created the style of Expressionism.\nWassily Kandinsky, Franz Marc, August Macke, Alexej von Jawlensky, whose psychically expressive painting of the Russian dancer \"Portrait of Alexander Sakharoff\", 1909 is in the gallery above, Marianne von Werefkin, Lyonel Feininger and others founded the Der Blaue Reiter group in response to the rejection of Kandinsky's painting \"Last Judgement\" from an exhibition. Der Blaue Reiter lacked a central artistic manifesto, but was centered around Kandinsky and Marc. Artists Gabriele M\u00fcnter and Paul Klee were also involved.\nThe name of the movement comes from a painting by Kandinsky created in 1903. It is also claimed that the name could have derived from Marc's enthusiasm for horses and Kandinsky's love of the colour blue. For Kandinsky, \"blue\" is the colour of spirituality: the darker the blue, the more it awakens human desire for the eternal.\nIn the USA during the period between World War I and World War II painters tended to go to Europe for recognition. Artists like Marsden Hartley, Patrick Henry Bruce, Gerald Murphy and Stuart Davis, created reputations abroad. In New York City, Albert Pinkham Ryder and Ralph Blakelock were influential and important figures in advanced American painting between 1900 and 1920. During the 1920s photographer Alfred Stieglitz exhibited Georgia O'Keeffe, Arthur Dove, Alfred Henry Maurer, Charles Demuth, John Marin and other artists including European Masters Henri Matisse, Auguste Rodin, Henri Rousseau, Paul C\u00e9zanne, and Pablo Picasso, at his gallery \"the 291.\"\nSocial consciousness.\nDuring the 1920s and the 1930s and the Great Depression, Surrealism, late Cubism, the Bauhaus, De Stijl, Dada, German Expressionism, Expressionism, and modernist and masterful color painters like Henri Matisse and Pierre Bonnard characterized the European art scene. In Germany Max Beckmann, Otto Dix, George Grosz and others politicized their paintings, foreshadowing the coming of World War II. While in America American Scene painting and the social realism and regionalism movements that contained both political and social commentary dominated the art world. Artists like Ben Shahn, Thomas Hart Benton, Grant Wood, George Tooker, John Steuart Curry, Reginald Marsh, and others became prominent. In Latin America besides the Uruguayan painter Joaqu\u00edn Torres Garc\u00eda and Rufino Tamayo from Mexico, the muralist movement with Diego Rivera, David Siqueiros, Jos\u00e9 Orozco, Pedro Nel G\u00f3mez and Santiago Martinez Delgado and the Symbolist paintings by Frida Kahlo began a renaissance of the arts for the region, with a use of color and historic, and political messages. Frida Kahlo's Symbolist works also relate strongly to Surrealism and to the Magic Realism movement in literature. The psychological drama in many of Kahlo's self portraits (above) underscore the vitality and relevance of her paintings to artists in the 21st century.\n\"American Gothic\" is a painting by Grant Wood from 1930. Portraying a pitchfork-holding farmer and a younger woman in front of a house of Carpenter Gothic style, it is one of the most familiar images in 20th-century American art. Art critics had favorable opinions about the painting, like Gertrude Stein and Christopher Morley, they assumed the painting was meant to be a satire of rural small-town life. It was thus seen as part of the trend towards increasingly critical depictions of rural America, along the lines of Sherwood Anderson's \"1919 Winesburg, Ohio\", Sinclair Lewis' 1920 \"Main Street\", and Carl Van Vechten's \"The Tattooed Countess\" in literature. However, with the onset of the Great Depression, the painting came to be seen as a depiction of steadfast American pioneer spirit.\nDiego Rivera is perhaps best known by the public world for his 1933 mural, \"Man at the Crossroads\", in the lobby of the RCA Building at Rockefeller Center. When his patron Nelson Rockefeller discovered that the mural included a portrait of Vladimir Lenin and other communist imagery, he fired Rivera, and the unfinished work was eventually destroyed by Rockefeller's staff. The film \"Cradle Will Rock\" includes a dramatization of the controversy. Frida Kahlo (Rivera's wife's) works are often characterized by their stark portrayals of pain. Of her 143 paintings 55 are self-portraits, which frequently incorporate symbolic portrayals of her physical and psychological wounds. Kahlo was deeply influenced by indigenous Mexican culture, which is apparent in her paintings' bright colors and dramatic symbolism. Christian and Jewish themes are often depicted in her work as well; she combined elements of the classic religious Mexican tradition\u2014which were often bloody and violent\u2014with surrealist renderings. While her paintings are not overtly Christian they certainly contain elements of the macabre Mexican Christian style of religious paintings.\nPolitical activism was an important piece of David Siqueiros' life, and frequently inspired him to set aside his artistic career. His art was deeply rooted in the Mexican Revolution, a violent and chaotic period in Mexican history in which various social and political factions fought for recognition and power. The period from the 1920s to the 1950s is known as the Mexican Renaissance, and Siqueiros was active in the attempt to create an art that was at once Mexican and universal. He briefly gave up painting to focus on organizing miners in Jalisco.\nWorld conflict.\nDuring the 1930s radical leftist politics characterized many of the artists connected to Surrealism, including Pablo Picasso. On 26 April 1937, during the Spanish Civil War, the Basque town of Gernika was the scene of the \"Bombing of Gernika\" by the Condor Legion of Nazi Germany's Luftwaffe. The Germans were attacking to support the efforts of Francisco Franco to overthrow the Basque Government and the Spanish Republican government. The town was devastated, though the Biscayan assembly and the Oak of Gernika survived. Pablo Picasso painted his mural sized \"Guernica\" to commemorate the horrors of the bombing.\nIn its final form, \"Guernica\" is an immense black and white, tall and wide mural painted in oil. The mural presents a scene of death, violence, brutality, suffering, and helplessness without portraying their immediate causes. The choice to paint in black and white contrasts with the intensity of the scene depicted and invokes the immediacy of a newspaper photograph.\nPicasso painted the mural sized painting called \"Guernica\" in protest of the bombing. The painting was first exhibited in Paris in 1937, then Scandinavia, then London in 1938 and finally in 1939 at Picasso's request the painting was sent to the United States in an extended loan (for safekeeping) at MoMA. The painting went on a tour of museums throughout the USA until its final return to the Museum of Modern Art in New York City where it was exhibited for nearly thirty years. Finally in accord with Pablo Picasso's wish to give the painting to the people of Spain as a gift, it was sent to Spain in 1981.\nDuring the Great Depression of the 1930s, through the years of World War II American art was characterized by Social Realism and American Scene Painting in the work of Grant Wood, Edward Hopper, Ben Shahn, Thomas Hart Benton, and several others. \"Nighthawks\" (1942) is a painting by Edward Hopper that portrays people sitting in a downtown diner late at night. It is not only Hopper's most famous painting, but one of the most recognizable in American art. It is currently in the collection of the Art Institute of Chicago. The scene was inspired by a diner (since demolished) in Greenwich Village, Hopper's home neighborhood in Manhattan. Hopper began painting it immediately after the attack on Pearl Harbor. After this event there was a large feeling of gloominess over the country, a feeling that is portrayed in the painting. The urban street is empty outside the diner, and inside none of the three patrons is apparently looking or talking to the others but instead is lost in their own thoughts. This portrayal of modern urban life as empty or lonely is a common theme throughout Hopper's work.\nThe Dynamic for artists in Europe during the 1930s deteriorated rapidly as the Nazi's power in Germany and across Eastern Europe increased. The climate became so hostile for artists and art associated with Modernism and abstraction that many left for the Americas. \"Degenerate art\" was a term adopted by the Nazi regime in Germany for virtually all modern art. Such art was banned on the grounds that it was un-German or Jewish Bolshevist in nature, and those identified as degenerate artists were subjected to sanctions. These included being dismissed from teaching positions, being forbidden to exhibit or to sell their art, and in some cases being forbidden to produce art entirely.\n\"Degenerate Art\" was also the title of an exhibition, mounted by the Nazis in Munich in 1937, consisting of modernist artworks chaotically hung and accompanied by text labels deriding the art. Designed to inflame public opinion against modernism, the exhibition subsequently traveled to several other cities in Germany and Austria. German artist Max Beckmann and scores of others fled Europe for New York. In New York City a new generation of young and exciting Modernist painters led by Arshile Gorky, Willem de Kooning, and others were just beginning to come of age.\nArshile Gorky's portrait of someone who might be Willem de Kooning (above) is an example of the evolution of abstract expressionism from the context of figure painting, cubism and surrealism. Along with his friends de Kooning and John D. Graham Gorky created bio-morphically shaped and abstracted figurative compositions that by the 1940s evolved into totally abstract paintings. Gorky's work seems to be a careful analysis of memory, emotion and shape, using line and color to express feeling and nature.\nTowards mid-century.\nThe 1940s in New York City heralded the triumph of American abstract expressionism, a modernist movement that combined lessons learned from Henri Matisse, Pablo Picasso, Surrealism, Joan Mir\u00f3, Cubism, Fauvism, and early Modernism via great teachers in America like Hans Hofmann and John D. Graham. American artists benefited from the presence of Piet Mondrian, Fernand L\u00e9ger, Max Ernst and the Andr\u00e9 Breton group, Pierre Matisse's gallery, and Peggy Guggenheim's gallery \"The Art of This Century\", as well as other factors. The figurative work of Francis Bacon, Frida Kahlo, Edward Hopper, Lucian Freud, Andrew Wyeth and others served as a kind of alternative to abstract expressionism.\nPost-Second World War American painting called Abstract expressionism included artists like Jackson Pollock, Willem de Kooning, Arshile Gorky, Mark Rothko, Hans Hofmann, Clyfford Still, Franz Kline, Adolph Gottlieb, Mark Tobey, Barnett Newman, James Brooks, Philip Guston, Robert Motherwell, Conrad Marca-Relli, Jack Tworkov, William Baziotes, Richard Pousette-Dart, Ad Reinhardt, Hedda Sterne, Jimmy Ernst, Esteban Vicente, Bradley Walker Tomlin, and Theodoros Stamos, among others. American Abstract expressionism got its name in 1946 from the art critic Robert Coates. It is seen as combining the emotional intensity and self-denial of the German Expressionists with the anti-figurative aesthetic of the European abstract schools such as futurism, the Bauhaus and synthetic cubism. Abstract expressionism, action painting, and Color Field painting are synonymous with the New York School.\nTechnically Surrealism was an important predecessor for abstract expressionism with its emphasis on spontaneous, automatic or subconscious creation. Jackson Pollock's dripping paint onto a canvas laid on the floor is a technique that has its roots in the work of Andr\u00e9 Masson. Another important early manifestation of what came to be abstract expressionism is the work of American Northwest artist Mark Tobey, especially his \"white writing\" canvases, which, though generally not large in scale, anticipate the \"all over\" look of Pollock's drip paintings.\nAbstract expressionism.\nAdditionally, Abstract expressionism has an image of being rebellious, anarchic, highly idiosyncratic and, some feel, rather nihilistic. In practice, the term is applied to any number of artists working (mostly) in New York who had quite different styles, and even applied to work which is not especially abstract nor expressionist. Pollock's energetic \"action paintings\", with their \"busy\" feel, are different both technically and aesthetically, to the violent and grotesque \"Women\" series of Willem de Kooning. As seen above in the gallery \"Woman V\" is one of a series of six paintings made by de Kooning between 1950 and 1953 that depict a three-quarter-length female figure. He began the first of these paintings, \"Woman I\" collection: The Museum of Modern Art, New York City, in June 1950, repeatedly changing and painting out the image until January or February 1952, when the painting was abandoned unfinished. The art historian Meyer Schapiro saw the painting in de Kooning's studio soon afterwards and encouraged the artist to persist. De Kooning's response was to begin three other paintings on the same theme; \"Woman II\" collection: The Museum of Modern Art, New York City, \"Woman III\", Tehran Museum of Contemporary Art, \"Woman IV\", Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art, Kansas City, Missouri. During the summer of 1952, spent at East Hampton, de Kooning further explored the theme through drawings and pastels. He may have finished work on \"Woman I\" by the end of June, or possibly as late as November 1952, and probably the other three women pictures were concluded at much the same time. The \"Woman series\" are decidedly figurative paintings. Another important artist is Franz Kline, as demonstrated by his painting \"High Street\", 1950 as with Jackson Pollock and other Abstract Expressionists, was labelled an \"action painter\" because of his seemingly spontaneous and intense style, focusing less, or not at all, on figures or imagery, but on the actual brush strokes and use of canvas.\nClyfford Still, Barnett Newman, Adolph Gottlieb, and the serenely shimmering blocks of color in Mark Rothko's work (which is not what would usually be called expressionist and which Rothko denied was abstract), are classified as abstract expressionists, albeit from what Clement Greenberg termed the Color Field direction of abstract expressionism. Both Hans Hofmann and Robert Motherwell (gallery) can be comfortably described as practitioners of action painting and Color Field painting.\nAbstract expressionism has many stylistic similarities to the Russian artists of the early 20th century such as Wassily Kandinsky. Although it is true that spontaneity or of the impression of spontaneity characterized many of the abstract expressionists works, most of these paintings involved careful planning, especially since their large size demanded it. An exception might be the drip paintings of Pollock.\nWhy this style gained mainstream acceptance in the 1950s is a matter of debate. American Social realism had been the mainstream in the 1930s. It had been influenced not only by the Great Depression but also by the Social Realists of Mexico such as David Alfaro Siqueiros and Diego Rivera. The political climate after World War II did not long tolerate the social protests of those painters. Abstract expressionism arose during World War II and began to be showcased during the early 1940s at galleries in New York like \"The Art of This Century Gallery\". The late 1940s through the mid-1950s ushered in the McCarthy era. It was after World War II and a time of political conservatism and extreme artistic censorship in the United States. Some people have conjectured that since the subject matter was often totally abstract, Abstract expressionism became a safe strategy for artists to pursue this style. Abstract art could be seen as apolitical. Or if the art was political, the message was largely for the insiders. However, those theorists are in the minority. As the first truly original school of painting in America, Abstract expressionism demonstrated the vitality and creativity of the country in the post-war years, as well as its ability (or need) to develop an aesthetic sense that was not constrained by the European standards of beauty.\nAlthough Abstract expressionism spread quickly throughout the United States, the major centers of this style were New York City and California, especially in the New York School, and the San Francisco Bay area. Abstract expressionist paintings share certain characteristics, including the use of large canvases, an \"all-over\" approach, in which the whole canvas is treated with equal importance (as opposed to the center being of more interest than the edges). The canvas as the \"arena\" became a credo of action painting, while the \"integrity of the picture plane\" became a credo of the Color Field painters. Many other artists began exhibiting their abstract expressionist related paintings during the 1950s including Alfred Leslie, Sam Francis, Joan Mitchell, Helen Frankenthaler, Cy Twombly, Milton Resnick, Michael Goldberg, Norman Bluhm, Ray Parker, Nicolas Carone, Grace Hartigan, Friedel Dzubas, and Robert Goodnough among others.\nDuring the 1950s Color Field painting initially referred to a particular type of abstract expressionism, especially the work of Mark Rothko, Clyfford Still, Barnett Newman, Robert Motherwell and Adolph Gottlieb. It essentially involved abstract paintings with large, flat expanses of color that expressed the sensual, and visual feelings and properties of large areas of nuanced surface. Art critic Clement Greenberg perceived Color Field painting as related to but different from Action painting. The overall expanse and gestalt of the work of the early color field painters speaks of an almost religious experience, awestruck in the face of an expanding universe of sensuality, color and surface. During the early-to-mid-1960s, \"Color Field painting\" came to refer to the styles of artists like Jules Olitski, Kenneth Noland, and Helen Frankenthaler, whose works were related to second-generation abstract expressionism, and to younger artists like Larry Zox, and Frank Stella, \u2013 all moving in a new direction. Artists like Clyfford Still, Mark Rothko, Hans Hofmann, Morris Louis, Jules Olitski, Kenneth Noland, Helen Frankenthaler, Larry Zox, and others often used greatly reduced references to nature, and they painted with a highly articulated and psychological use of color. In general these artists eliminated recognizable imagery. In \"Mountains and Sea\", from 1952, a seminal work of Color Field painting by Helen Frankenthaler the artist used the stain technique for the first time.\nIn Europe there was the continuation of Surrealism, Cubism, Dada and the works of Matisse. Also in Europe, Tachisme (the European equivalent to Abstract expressionism) took hold of the newest generation. Serge Poliakoff, Nicolas de Sta\u00ebl, Georges Mathieu, Vieira da Silva, Jean Dubuffet, Yves Klein and Pierre Soulages among others are considered important figures in post-war European painting.\nEventually abstract painting in America evolved into movements such as Neo-Dada, Color Field painting, Post painterly abstraction, Op art, hard-edge painting, Minimal art, shaped canvas painting, lyrical abstraction, Neo-expressionism and the continuation of Abstract expressionism. As a response to the tendency toward abstraction imagery emerged through various new movements, notably Pop art.\nPop art.\nEarlier in England in 1956 the term \"Pop Art\" was used by Lawrence Alloway for paintings that celebrated consumerism of the post World War II era. This movement rejected abstract expressionism and its focus on the hermeneutic and psychological interior, in favor of art which depicted, and often celebrated material consumer culture, advertising, and iconography of the mass production age. The early works of David Hockney and the works of Richard Hamilton Peter Blake and Eduardo Paolozzi were considered seminal examples in the movement.\nPop art in America was to a large degree initially inspired by the works of Jasper Johns, Larry Rivers, and Robert Rauschenberg. Although the paintings of Gerald Murphy, Stuart Davis and Charles Demuth during the 1920s and 1930s set the table for pop art in America. In New York City during the mid-1950s Robert Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns created works of art that at first seemed to be continuations of Abstract expressionist painting. Actually their works and the work of Larry Rivers, were radical departures from abstract expressionism especially in the use of banal and literal imagery and the inclusion and the combining of mundane materials into their work. The innovations of Johns' specific use of various images and objects like chairs, numbers, targets, beer cans and the American flag; Rivers paintings of subjects drawn from popular culture such as George Washington crossing the Delaware, and his inclusions of images from advertisements like the camel from Camel cigarettes, and Rauschenberg's surprising constructions using inclusions of objects and pictures taken from popular culture, hardware stores, junkyards, the city streets, and taxidermy gave rise to a radical new movement in American art. Eventually by 1963 the movement came to be known worldwide as pop art.\nAmerican pop art is exemplified by artists: Andy Warhol, Claes Oldenburg, Wayne Thiebaud, James Rosenquist, Jim Dine, Tom Wesselmann and Roy Lichtenstein among others. Lichtenstein's most important work is arguably \"Whaam!\" (1963, Tate Modern, London), one of the earliest known examples of pop art, adapted a comic-book panel from a 1962 issue of DC Comics' \"All-American Men of War\". The painting depicts a fighter aircraft firing a rocket into an enemy plane, with a red-and-yellow explosion. The cartoon style is heightened by the use of the onomatopoeic lettering \"Whaam!\" and the boxed caption \"I pressed the fire control... and ahead of me rockets blazed through the sky...\" Pop art merges popular and mass culture with fine art, while injecting humor, irony, and recognizable imagery and content into the mix. In October 1962 the Sidney Janis Gallery mounted \"The New Realists\" the first major pop art group exhibition in an uptown art gallery in New York City. Sidney Janis mounted the exhibition in a 57th Street storefront near his gallery at 15 E. 57th Street. The show sent shockwaves through the New York School and reverberated worldwide. Earlier in the fall of 1962 an historically important and ground-breaking \"New Painting of Common Objects\" exhibition of pop art, curated by Walter Hopps at the Pasadena Art Museum sent shock waves across the Western United States.\nWhile in the downtown scene in New York City's East Village 10th Street galleries artists were formulating an American version of Pop Art. Claes Oldenburg had his storefront and made painted objects, and the Green Gallery on 57th Street began to show Tom Wesselmann and James Rosenquist. Later Leo Castelli exhibited other American artists including the bulk of the careers of Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein and his use of Benday dots, a technique used in commercial reproduction. There is a connection between the radical works of Duchamp, and Man Ray, the rebellious Dadaists \u2013 with a sense of humor; and pop artists like Alex Katz (who became known for his parodies of portrait photography and suburban life), Claes Oldenburg, Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein and the others.\nWhile throughout the 20th century many painters continued to practice landscape and figurative painting with contemporary subjects and solid technique, like Milton Avery, John D. Graham, Fairfield Porter, Edward Hopper, Balthus, Francis Bacon, Nicolas de Sta\u00ebl, Andrew Wyeth, Lucian Freud, Frank Auerbach, Philip Pearlstein, David Park, Nathan Oliveira, David Hockney, Malcolm Morley, Richard Estes, Ralph Goings, Audrey Flack, Chuck Close, Susan Rothenberg, Eric Fischl, Vija Celmins and Richard Diebenkorn.\nFigurative, landscape, still-Life, seascape, and Realism.\nDuring the 1930s through the 1960s abstract painting in America and Europe evolved into movements such as abstract expressionism, Color Field painting, Post painterly abstraction, Op art, hard-edge painting, Minimal art, shaped canvas painting, and lyrical abstraction. Other artists reacted as a response to the tendency toward abstraction, allowing figurative imagery to continue through various new contexts like the Bay Area Figurative Movement in the 1950s and new forms of expressionism from the 1940s through the 1960s. In Italy during this time, Giorgio Morandi was the foremost still life painter, exploring a wide variety of approaches to depicting everyday bottles and kitchen implements. Throughout the 20th century many painters practiced Realism and used expressive imagery; practicing landscape and figurative painting with contemporary subjects and solid technique, and unique expressivity like still-life painter Giorgio Morandi, Milton Avery, John D. Graham, Fairfield Porter, Edward Hopper, Andrew Wyeth, Balthus, Francis Bacon, Leon Kossoff, Frank Auerbach, Lucian Freud, Philip Pearlstein, Willem de Kooning, Arshile Gorky, Grace Hartigan, Robert De Niro, Sr., Elaine de Kooning and others. Along with Henri Matisse, Pablo Picasso, Pierre Bonnard, Georges Braque, and other 20th-century masters. In particular Milton Avery through his use of color and his interest in seascape and landscape paintings connected with the Color field aspect of Abstract expressionism as manifested by Adolph Gottlieb and Mark Rothko as well as the lessons American painters took from the work of Henri Matisse.\n\"Head VI\", 1949 is a painting by the Irish born artist Francis Bacon and is an example of Post World War II European Expressionism. The work shows a distorted version of the Portrait of Innocent X painted by the Spanish artist Diego Vel\u00e1zquez in 1650. The work is one of a series of variants of the Vel\u00e1zquez painting which Bacon executed throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, over a total of forty-five works. When asked why he was compelled to revisit the subject so often, Bacon replied that he had nothing against the Popes, that he merely \"wanted an excuse to use these colours, and you can't give ordinary clothes that purple colour without getting into a sort of false fauve manner.\" The Pope in this version seethes with anger and aggression, and the dark colors give the image a grotesque and nightmarish appearance. The pleated curtains of the backdrop are rendered transparent, and seem to fall through the Pope's face.\nItalian painter Giorgio Morandi was an important 20th-century early pioneer of Minimalism. Born in Bologna, Italy, in 1890, throughout his career, Morandi concentrated almost exclusively on still lifes and landscapes, except for a few self-portraits. With great sensitivity to tone, color, and compositional balance, he would depict the same familiar bottles and vases again and again in paintings notable for their simplicity of execution. Morandi executed 133 etchings, a significant body of work in its own right, and his drawings and watercolors often approach abstraction in their economy of means. Through his simple and repetitive motifs and economical use of color, value and surface, Morandi became a prescient and important forerunner of Minimalism. He died in Bologna in 1964.\nAfter World War II the term School of Paris often referred to Tachisme, the European equivalent of American Abstract expressionism and those artists are also related to Cobra. Important proponents being Jean Dubuffet, Pierre Soulages, Nicolas de Sta\u00ebl, Hans Hartung, Serge Poliakoff, and Georges Mathieu, among several others. During the early 1950s Dubuffet (who was always a figurative artist), and de Sta\u00ebl, abandoned abstraction, and returned to imagery via figuration and landscape. De Sta\u00ebl 's work was quickly recognised within the post-war art world, and he became one of the most influential artists of the 1950s. His return to representation (seascapes, footballers, jazz musicians, seagulls) during the early 1950s can be seen as an influential precedent for the American Bay Area Figurative Movement, as many of those abstract painters like Richard Diebenkorn, David Park, Elmer Bischoff, Wayne Thiebaud, Nathan Oliveira, Joan Brown and others made a similar move; returning to imagery during the mid-1950s. Much of de Sta\u00ebl 's late work \u2013 in particular his thinned, and diluted oil on canvas abstract landscapes of the mid-1950s predicts Color Field painting and Lyrical Abstraction of the 1960s and 1970s. Nicolas de Sta\u00ebl's bold and intensely vivid color in his last paintings predict the direction of much of contemporary painting that came after him including Pop art of the 1960s.\nArt brut, New Realism, Bay Area Figurative Movement, neo-Dada, photorealism.\nDuring the 1950s and 1960s as abstract painting in America and Europe evolved into movements such as Color Field painting, post-painterly abstraction, op art, hard-edge painting, minimal art, shaped canvas painting, lyrical abstraction, and the continuation of Abstract expressionism. Other artists reacted as a response to the tendency toward abstraction with art brut, as seen in \"Court les rues,\" 1962, by Jean Dubuffet, fluxus, neo-Dada, New Realism, allowing imagery to re-emerge through various new contexts like pop art, the Bay Area Figurative Movement (a prime example is Diebenkorn's \"Cityscape I, (Landscape No. 1),\" 1963, Oil on canvas, 60 1/4 x 50 1/2 inches, collection: San Francisco Museum of Modern Art) and later in the 1970s Neo-expressionism. The Bay Area Figurative Movement of whom David Park, Elmer Bischoff, Nathan Oliveira and Richard Diebenkorn whose painting \"Cityscape 1\", 1963 is a typical example were influential members flourished during the 1950s and 1960s in California. Although throughout the 20th century painters continued to practice Realism and use imagery, practicing landscape and figurative painting with contemporary subjects and solid technique, and unique expressivity like Milton Avery, Edward Hopper, Jean Dubuffet, Francis Bacon, Frank Auerbach, Lucian Freud, Philip Pearlstein, and others. Younger painters practiced the use of imagery in new and radical ways. Yves Klein, Martial Raysse, Niki de Saint Phalle, Wolf Vostell, David Hockney, Alex Katz, Malcolm Morley, Ralph Goings, Audrey Flack, Richard Estes, Chuck Close, Susan Rothenberg, Eric Fischl, John Baeder and Vija Celmins were a few who became prominent between the 1960s and the 1980s. Fairfield Porter was largely self-taught, and produced representational work in the midst of the Abstract Expressionist movement. His subjects were primarily landscapes, domestic interiors and portraits of family, friends and fellow artists, many of them affiliated with the New York School of writers, including John Ashbery, Frank O'Hara, and James Schuyler. Many of his paintings were set in or around the family summer house on Great Spruce Head Island, Maine.\nAlso during the 1960s and 1970s, there was a reaction against painting. Critics like Douglas Crimp viewed the work of artists like Ad Reinhardt, and declared the \"death of painting\". Artists began to practice new ways of making art. New movements gained prominence some of which are: Fluxus, Happening, Video art, Installation art Mail art, the situationists, Conceptual art, Postminimalism, Earth art, arte povera, performance art and body art among others.\nNeo-Dada is also a movement that started in the 1950s and 1960s and was related to Abstract expressionism only with imagery. Featuring the emergence of combined manufactured items, with artist materials, moving away from previous conventions of painting. This trend in art is exemplified by the work of Jasper Johns and Robert Rauschenberg, whose \"combines\" in the 1950s were forerunners of Pop Art and Installation art, and made use of the assemblage of large physical objects, including stuffed animals, birds and commercial photography. Robert Rauschenberg, Jasper Johns, Larry Rivers, John Chamberlain, Claes Oldenburg, George Segal, Jim Dine, and Edward Kienholz among others were important pioneers of both abstraction and Pop Art; creating new conventions of art-making; they made acceptable in serious contemporary art circles the radical inclusion of unlikely materials as parts of their works of art.\nNew abstraction from the 1950s through the 1980s.\nColor Field painting clearly pointed toward a new direction in American painting, away from abstract expressionism. Color Field painting is related to post-painterly abstraction, suprematism, abstract expressionism, hard-edge painting and Lyrical Abstraction.\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s abstract painting continued to develop in America through varied styles. Geometric abstraction, Op art, hard-edge painting, Color Field painting and minimal painting, were some interrelated directions for advanced abstract painting as well as some other new movements. Morris Louis was an important pioneer in advanced Color Field painting, his work can serve as a bridge between abstract expressionism, Color Field painting, and minimal art. Two influential teachers Josef Albers and Hans Hofmann introduced a new generation of American artists to their advanced theories of color and space. Josef Albers is best remembered for his work as a Geometric abstractionist painter and theorist. Most famous of all are the hundreds of paintings and prints that make up the series \"Homage to the Square\". In this rigorous series, begun in 1949, Albers explored chromatic interactions with flat colored squares arranged concentrically on the canvas. Albers' theories on art and education were formative for the next generation of artists. His own paintings form the foundation of both hard-edge painting and Op art.\nJosef Albers, Hans Hofmann, Ilya Bolotowsky, Burgoyne Diller, Victor Vasarely, Bridget Riley, Richard Anuszkiewicz, Frank Stella, Morris Louis, Kenneth Noland, Ellsworth Kelly, Barnett Newman, Larry Poons, Ronald Davis, Larry Zox, Al Held and some others like Mino Argento, are artists closely associated with Geometric abstraction, Op art, Color Field painting, and in the case of Hofmann and Newman Abstract expressionism as well.\nIn 1965, an exhibition called \"The Responsive Eye\", curated by William C. Seitz, was held at the Museum of Modern Art, in New York City. The works shown were wide-ranging, encompassing the Minimalism of Frank Stella, the Op art of Larry Poons, the work of Alexander Liberman, alongside the masters of the Op Art movement: Victor Vasarely, Richard Anuszkiewicz, Bridget Riley and others. The exhibition focused on the perceptual aspects of art, which result both from the illusion of movement and the interaction of color relationships. Op art, also known as optical art, is a style present in some paintings and other works of art that use optical illusions. Op art is also closely akin to geometric abstraction and hard-edge painting. Although sometimes the term used for it is perceptual abstraction.\nOp art is a method of painting concerning the interaction between illusion and picture plane, between understanding and seeing. Op art works are abstract, with many of the better known pieces made in only black and white. When the viewer looks at them, the impression is given of movement, hidden images, flashing and vibration, patterns, or alternatively, of swelling or warping.\nColor Field painting sought to rid art of superfluous rhetoric. Artists like Clyfford Still, Mark Rothko, Hans Hofmann, Morris Louis, Jules Olitski, Kenneth Noland, Helen Frankenthaler, John Hoyland, Larry Zox, and others often used greatly reduced references to nature, and they painted with a highly articulated and psychological use of color. In general these artists eliminated recognizable imagery. Certain artists quoted references to past or present art, but in general color field painting presents abstraction as an end in itself. In pursuing this direction of modern art, artists wanted to present each painting as one unified, cohesive, monolithic image.\nWashington Color School, Shaped canvas, Abstract illusionism, Lyrical abstraction.\nFrank Stella, Kenneth Noland, Ellsworth Kelly, Barnett Newman, Ronald Davis, Neil Williams, Robert Mangold, Charles Hinman, Richard Tuttle, David Novros, and Alvin Loving are examples of artists associated with the use of the shaped canvas during the period beginning in the early 1960s. Many Geometric abstract artists, minimalists, and Hard-edge painters elected to use the edges of the image to define the shape of the painting rather than accepting the rectangular format. In fact, the use of the shaped canvas is primarily associated with paintings of the 1960s and 1970s that are coolly abstract, formalistic, geometrical, objective, rationalistic, clean-lined, brashly sharp-edged, or minimalist in character. The Andre Emmerich Gallery, the Leo Castelli Gallery, the Richard Feigen Gallery, and the Park Place Gallery were important showcases for Color Field painting, shaped canvas painting and Lyrical Abstraction in New York City during the 1960s. There is a connection with post-painterly abstraction, which reacted against abstract expressionisms' mysticism, hyper-subjectivity, and emphasis on making the act of painting itself dramatically visible \u2013 as well as the solemn acceptance of the flat rectangle as an almost ritual prerequisite for serious painting. During the 1960s Color Field painting and Minimal art were often closely associated with each other. In actuality by the early 1970s both movements became decidedly diverse.\nAnother related movement of the late 1960s, Lyrical Abstraction (the term being coined by Larry Aldrich, the founder of the Aldrich Contemporary Art Museum, Ridgefield Connecticut), encompassed what Aldrich said he saw in the studios of many artists at that time. It is also the name of an exhibition that originated in the Aldrich Museum and traveled to the Whitney Museum of American Art and other museums throughout the United States between 1969 and 1971.\nLyrical Abstraction in the late 1960s is characterized by the paintings of Dan Christensen, Ronnie Landfield, Peter Young and others, and along with the fluxus movement and postminimalism (a term first coined by Robert Pincus-Witten in the pages of \"Artforum\" in 1969) sought to expand the boundaries of abstract painting and minimalism by focusing on process, new materials and new ways of expression. Postminimalism often incorporating industrial materials, raw materials, fabrications, found objects, installation, serial repetition, and often with references to Dada and Surrealism is best exemplified in the sculptures of Eva Hesse. Lyrical Abstraction, conceptual art, postminimalism, Earth art, video, performance art, installation art, along with the continuation of fluxus, abstract expressionism, Color Field painting, hard-edge painting, minimal art, op art, pop art, photorealism and New Realism extended the boundaries of contemporary art in the mid-1960s through the 1970s. Lyrical Abstraction is a type of freewheeling abstract painting that emerged in the mid-1960s when abstract painters returned to various forms of painterly, pictorial, expressionism with a predominate focus on process, gestalt and repetitive compositional strategies in general.\nLyrical Abstraction shares similarities with color field painting and abstract expressionism, Lyrical Abstraction as exemplified by the 1968 Ronnie Landfield painting \"For William Blake\", (above) especially in the freewheeling usage of paint \u2013 texture and surface. Direct drawing, calligraphic use of line, the effects of brushed, splattered, stained, squeegeed, poured, and splashed paint superficially resemble the effects seen in abstract expressionism and color field painting. However, the styles are markedly different. Setting it apart from abstract expressionism and action painting of the 1940s and 1950s is the approach to composition and drama. As seen in action painting there is an emphasis on brushstrokes, high compositional drama, dynamic compositional tension. While in Lyrical Abstraction there is a sense of compositional randomness, all over composition, low key and relaxed compositional drama and an emphasis on process, repetition, and an all over sensibility.,\nHard-edge painting, minimalism, postminimalism, monochrome painting.\nAgnes Martin, Robert Mangold, Brice Marden, Jo Baer, Robert Ryman, Richard Tuttle, Neil Williams, David Novros, Paul Mogenson, Charles Hinman are examples of artists associated with Minimalism and (exceptions of Martin, Baer and Marden) the use of the shaped canvas also during the period beginning in the early 1960s. Many Geometric abstract artists, minimalists, and hard-edge painters elected to use the edges of the image to define the shape of the painting rather than accepting the rectangular format. In fact, the use of the shaped canvas is primarily associated with paintings of the 1960s and 1970s that are coolly abstract, formalistic, geometrical, objective, rationalistic, clean-lined, brashly sharp-edged, or minimalist in character. The Bykert Gallery, and the Park Place Gallery were important showcases for Minimalism and shaped canvas painting in New York City during the 1960s.\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s artists such as Robert Motherwell, Adolph Gottlieb, Phillip Guston, Lee Krasner, Cy Twombly, Robert Rauschenberg, Jasper Johns, Richard Diebenkorn, Josef Albers, Elmer Bischoff, Agnes Martin, Al Held, Sam Francis, Ellsworth Kelly, Morris Louis, Helen Frankenthaler, Gene Davis, Frank Stella, Kenneth Noland, Joan Mitchell, Friedel Dzubas, and younger artists like Brice Marden, Robert Mangold, Sam Gilliam, John Hoyland, Sean Scully, Pat Steir, Elizabeth Murray, Larry Poons, Walter Darby Bannard, Larry Zox, Ronnie Landfield, Ronald Davis, Dan Christensen, Joan Snyder, Ross Bleckner, Archie Rand, Susan Crile, and dozens of others produced a wide variety of paintings.\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s, there was a reaction against abstract painting. Some critics viewed the work of artists like Ad Reinhardt, and declared the 'death of painting'. Artists began to practice new ways of making art. New movements gained prominence some of which are: postminimalism, Earth art, video art, installation art, arte povera, performance art, body art, fluxus, happening, mail art, the situationists and conceptual art among others.\nHowever still other important innovations in abstract painting took place during the 1960s and the 1970s characterized by monochrome painting and hard-edge painting inspired by Ad Reinhardt, Barnett Newman, Milton Resnick, and Ellsworth Kelly. Artists as diverse as Agnes Martin, Al Held, Larry Zox, Frank Stella, Larry Poons, Brice Marden and others explored the power of simplification. The convergence of Color Field painting, minimal art, hard-edge painting, Lyrical Abstraction, and postminimalism blurred the distinction between movements that became more apparent in the 1980s and 1990s. The neo-expressionism movement is related to earlier developments in abstract expressionism, neo-Dada, Lyrical Abstraction and postminimal painting.\nNeo Expressionism.\nIn the late 1960s an abstract expressionist painter Philip Guston helped to lead a transition from abstract expressionism to Neo-expressionism in painting, abandoning the so-called \"pure abstraction\" of abstract expressionism in favor of more cartoonish renderings of various personal symbols and objects. These works were inspirational to a new generation of painters interested in a revival of expressive imagery. His painting \"Painting, Smoking, Eating\" 1973, seen above in the gallery is an example of Guston's final and conclusive return to representation.\nIn the late 1970s and early 1980s, there was also a return to painting that occurred almost simultaneously in Italy, Germany, France and Britain. These movements were called Transavantguardia, Neue Wilde, Figuration Libre, Neo-expressionism, the school of London, and in the late 1980s the Stuckists respectively. These paintings were characterized by large formats, free expressive mark making, figuration, myth and imagination. All work in this genre came to be labeled neo-expressionism. Critical reaction was divided. Some critics regarded it as driven by profit motivations by large commercial galleries. This type of art continues in popularity into the 21st century, even after the art crash of the late 1980s. Anselm Kiefer is a leading figure in European Neo-expressionism by the 1980s, Kiefer's themes widened from a focus on Germany's role in civilization to the fate of art and culture in general. His work became more sculptural and involves not only national identity and collective memory, but also occult symbolism, theology and mysticism. The theme of all the work is the trauma experienced by entire societies, and the continual rebirth and renewal in life.\nDuring the late 1970s in the United States painters who began working with invigorated surfaces and who returned to imagery like Susan Rothenberg gained in popularity, especially as seen above in paintings like \"Horse 2\", 1979. During the 1980s American artists like Eric Fischl, David Salle, Jean-Michel Basquiat (who began as a graffiti artist), Julian Schnabel, and Keith Haring, and Italian painters like Mimmo Paladino, Sandro Chia, and Enzo Cucchi, among others defined the idea of Neo-expressionism in America.\nNeo-expressionism was a style of modern painting that became popular in the late 1970s and dominated the art market until the mid-1980s. It developed in Europe as a reaction against the conceptual and minimalistic art of the 1960s and 1970s. Neo-expressionists returned to portraying recognizable objects, such as the human body (although sometimes in a virtually abstract manner), in a rough and violently emotional way using vivid colours and banal colour harmonies. The veteran painters Philip Guston, Frank Auerbach, Leon Kossoff, Gerhard Richter, A. R. Penck and Georg Baselitz, along with slightly younger artists like Anselm Kiefer, Eric Fischl, Susan Rothenberg, Francesco Clemente, Jean-Michel Basquiat, Julian Schnabel, Keith Haring, and many others became known for working in this intense expressionist vein of painting.\nPainting still holds a respected position in contemporary art. Art is an open field no longer divided by the objective versus non-objective dichotomy. Artists can achieve critical success whether their images are representational or abstract. What has currency is content, exploring the boundaries of the medium, and a refusal to recapitulate the works of the past as an end goal.\nContemporary painting into the 21st century.\nAt the beginning of the 21st century Contemporary painting and Contemporary art in general continues in several contiguous modes, characterized by the idea of pluralism. The \"crisis\" in painting and current art and current art criticism today is brought about by pluralism. There is no consensus, nor need there be, as to a representative style of the age. There is an \"anything goes\" attitude that prevails; an \"everything going on\", and consequently \"nothing going on\" syndrome; this creates an aesthetic traffic jam with no firm and clear direction and with every lane on the artistic superhighway filled to capacity. Consequently magnificent and important works of art continue to be made albeit in a wide variety of styles and aesthetic temperaments, the marketplace being left to judge merit.\nHard-edge painting, geometric abstraction, appropriation, hyperrealism, photorealism, expressionism, minimalism, Lyrical Abstraction, pop art, op art, abstract expressionism, Color Field painting, monochrome painting, neo-expressionism, collage, intermedia painting, assemblage painting, digital painting, postmodern painting, neo-Dada painting, shaped canvas painting, environmental mural painting, traditional figure painting, landscape painting, portrait painting, are a few continuing and current directions in painting at the beginning of the 21st century.\nAmericas.\nDuring the period before and after European exploration and settlement of the Americas, including North America, Central America, South America and the Islands of the Caribbean, the Antilles, the Lesser Antilles and other island groups, indigenous native cultures produced creative works including architecture, pottery, ceramics, weaving, , sculpture, painting and murals as well as other religious and utilitarian objects. Each continent of the Americas hosted societies that were unique and individually developed cultures; that produced totems, works of religious symbolism, and decorative and expressive painted works. African influence was especially strong in the art of the Caribbean and South America. The arts of the indigenous people of the Americas had an enormous impact and influence on European art and vice versa during and after the Age of Exploration. Spain, Portugal, France, The Netherlands, and England were all powerful and influential colonial powers in the Americas during and after the 15th century. By the 19th century cultural influence began to flow both ways across the Atlantic\nIslamic.\nThe depiction of humans, animals or any other figurative subjects is forbidden within Islam to prevent believers from idolatry so there is no religiously motivated painting (or sculpture) tradition within Muslim culture. Pictorial activity was reduced to Arabesque, mainly abstract, with geometrical configuration or floral and plant-like patterns. Strongly connected to architecture and calligraphy, it can be widely seen as used for the painting of tiles in mosques or in illuminations around the text of the Koran and other books. In fact, abstract art is not an invention of modern art but it is present in pre-classical, barbarian and non-western cultures many centuries before it and is essentially a decorative or applied art. Notable illustrator M. C. Escher was influenced by this geometrical and pattern-based art. Art Nouveau (Aubrey Beardsley and the architect Antonio Gaud\u00ed) re-introduced abstract floral patterns into western art.\nNote that despite the taboo of figurative visualization, some Muslim countries did cultivate a rich tradition in painting, though not in its own right, but as a companion to the written word. Iranian or Persian art, widely known as Persian miniature, concentrates on the illustration of epic or romantic works of literature. Persian illustrators deliberately avoided the use of shading and perspective, though familiar with it in their pre-Islamic history, in order to abide by the rule of not creating any lifelike illusion of the real world. Their aim was not to depict the world as it is, but to create images of an ideal world of timeless beauty and perfect order.\nIran.\nOriental historian Basil Gray believes \"Iran has offered a particularly unique [\"sic\"] art to the world which is excellent in its kind\". Caves in Iran's Lorestan province exhibit painted imagery of animals and hunting scenes. Some such as those in Fars Province and Sialk are at least 5,000 years old. Painting in Iran is thought to have reached a climax during the Tamerlane era, when outstanding masters such as Kamaleddin Behzad gave birth to a new style of painting.\nPaintings of the Qajar period are a combination of European influences and Safavid miniature schools of painting such as those introduced by Reza Abbasi and classical works by Mihr 'Ali. Masters such as Kamal-ol-molk further pushed forward the European influence in Iran. It was during the Qajar era when \"Coffee House painting\" emerged. Subjects of this style were often religious in nature depicting scenes from Shia epics and the like.\nAfrica.\nAfrican traditional culture and tribes do not seem to have great interest in two-dimensional representations in favour of sculpture and relief. However, decorative painting in African culture is often abstract and geometrical. Another pictorial manifestation is body painting, and face painting present for example in Maasai and K\u0129k\u0169y\u0169 culture in their ceremony rituals. Ceremonial cave painting in certain villages can be found to be still in use. Note that Pablo Picasso and other modern artists were influenced by African sculpture and masks in their varied styles.\nContemporary African artists follow western art movements and their paintings have little difference from occidental art works.\nSudanese.\nThe Kingdom of Kush in ancient Nubia (i.e. modern Sudan), bordering Ancient Egypt, produced a wide variety of arts, including wall paintings and painted objects. At the Sudanese site of Kerma, center of the Kerma culture that predated the Kingdom of Kush, a circa 1700 BC fragmentary painting from a royal tomb depicts a sailing ship and houses with ladders that are similar to scenes in reliefs from the reign of Egyptian queen Hatshepsut (c. 1479\u20131458 BC). The ancient tradition of wall paintings, first described by Abu Salih during the 12th century AD, continued into the period of medieval Nubia.\nEthiopian.\nThe Christian tradition of painting in Ethiopia dates back to the 4th century AD, during the ancient Kingdom of Aksum. During their exile to Axum, the 7th-century followers of Muhammad described paintings decorating the Church of Our Lady Mary of Zion. However, the earliest surviving examples of church paintings in Ethiopia come from the church of Debre Selam Mikael in the Tigray Region, dated to the 11th century AD. Ethiopian paintings in illuminated manuscripts predate the earliest surviving church paintings. For instance, the Ethiopian Garima Gospels of the 4th-6th centuries AD contain illuminated scenes imitating the contemporary Byzantine illuminated style.\nInfluence on Western art.\nAt the start of the 20th century, artists like Picasso, Matisse, Paul Gauguin and Modigliani became aware of, and were inspired by, African art. In a situation where the established avant garde was straining against the constraints imposed by serving the world of appearances, African Art demonstrated the power of supremely well organised forms; produced not only by responding to the faculty of sight, but also and often primarily, the faculty of imagination, emotion and mystical and religious experience. These artists saw in African art a formal perfection and sophistication unified with phenomenal expressive power.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13972", "revid": "50898088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13972", "title": "Hungarian language", "text": "Ugric language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nHungarian, or Magyar (, ), is a Ugric language of the Uralic language family spoken in Hungary and parts of several neighboring countries. It is the official language of Hungary and one of the 24 official languages of the European Union. Outside Hungary, it is also spoken by Hungarian communities in southern Slovakia, western Ukraine (Transcarpathia), central and western Romania (Transylvania), northern Serbia (Vojvodina), northern Croatia, northeastern Slovenia (Prekmurje), and eastern Austria (Burgenland).\nIt is also spoken by Hungarian diaspora communities worldwide, especially in North America (particularly the United States and Canada) and Israel. With 14\u00a0million speakers, it is the Uralic family's most widely spoken language.\nClassification.\nHungarian is a member of the Uralic language family. Linguistic connections between Hungarian and other Uralic languages were noticed in the 1670s, and the family's existence was established in 1717. Hungarian is assigned to the Ugric branch along with the Mansi and Khanty languages of western Siberia (Khanty\u2013Mansia region of North Asia). However, there is debate on whether that is a valid grouping. The classification of the Hungarian language as Uralic has historically been the subject of intense scholarly debate, with a number of prominent linguists arguing that Hungarian is a Turkic language. Historically, the language was written using the Old Hungarian Script, an alphabetic writing system born from the Old Turkic Script.\nWhen the Samoyedic languages were determined to be part of the family, some linguists initially assumed that Finnic and Ugric were closer to each other than to the Samoyedic branch of the family. That is now frequently rejected.\nThe name of Hungary could be a result of regular sound changes of \"Ungrian/Ugrian\", and the fact that the Eastern Slavs referred to Hungarians as (sg. ) seemed to confirm that. Current literature favors the hypothesis that it comes from the name of the Turkic tribe Ono\u011fur (which means 'ten arrows' or 'ten tribes').\nThere are numerous regular sound correspondences between Hungarian and the Ugric languages. For example, Hungarian corresponds to Khanty in certain positions, and Hungarian corresponds to Khanty , while Hungarian final corresponds to Khanty final . For example, Hungarian 'house' vs. Khanty 'house', and Hungarian 'hundred' vs. Khanty 'hundred'. The distance between the Ugric and Finnic languages is greater, but the correspondences are also regular.\nSome alternative theories suggest that the ancestors of the Hungarian people may have migrated from eastern Siberia or Inner Asia, and may even be distantly related to the Huns. While mainstream linguistics classifies Hungarian as a Ugric language within the Uralic family, certain typological similarities\u2014such as agglutinative grammar\u2014have been noted between Hungarian and other Eurasian languages, including Turkic, Mongolic, Tungusic, Japonic, and Koreanic languages.\nGenetic studies have identified Y\u2011DNA haplogroups in ethnic Hungarians, such as N3a\u2011L708 (most common in Siberia), R1a\u2011Z93 (most common in Kazakhstan), and C2\u2011M217 (most common in Mongolia). These findings and others have been interpreted by some researchers as supporting a westward migration of ancestors from regions around present-day eastern Siberia and present-day Mongolia approximately 4,500 years ago to the Carpathian Basin.\nSome scholars also propose a broader hypothetical Altaic or Eurasiatic macrofamily that would include Hungarian alongside Turkic, Mongolic, Tungusic, Japonic, and Koreanic, though these proposals are controversial and not accepted by most contemporary linguists.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nScholarly consensus.\nThe traditional view holds that the Hungarian language diverged from its Ugric relatives in the first half of the 1st millennium BC, in western Siberia east of the southern Urals. In Hungarian, Iranian loanwords date back to the time immediately following the breakup of Ugric and probably span well over a millennium. These include 'cow' (cf. Avestan ); 'ten' (cf. Avestan ); 'milk' (cf. Persian 'wet nurse'); and 'reed' (from late Middle Iranian; cf. Middle Persian and Modern Persian ).\nArchaeological evidence from present-day southern Bashkortostan confirms the existence of Hungarian settlements between the Volga River and the Ural Mountains. The Ono\u011furs (and Bulgars) later had a great influence on the language, especially between the 5th and 9th centuries. This layer of Turkic loans is large and varied (e.g. 'word', from Turkic; and 'crane', from the related Permic languages), and includes words borrowed from Oghur Turkic; e.g. 'calf' (cf. Chuvash , vs. Turkish ); 'noon; south' (cf. Chuvash vs. Turkish dial. ). Many words related to agriculture, state administration and even family relationships show evidence of such backgrounds. Hungarian syntax and grammar were not influenced in a similarly dramatic way over these three centuries.\nAfter the arrival of the Hungarians in the Carpathian Basin, the language came into contact with a variety of speech communities, among them Slavic, Turkic, and German. Turkic loans from this period come mainly from the Pechenegs and Cumanians, who settled in Hungary during the 12th and 13th centuries: e.g. \"cobza\" (cf. Turkish 'lute'); \"mop dog\" (&lt; *\"kumandur\" &lt; \"Cuman\"). 20% of loanwords in Hungarian borrowed from neighbouring Slavic languages: e.g. 'brick'; 'poppy seed'; 'Wednesday'; 'Thursday'...; 'Christmas'. These languages in turn borrowed words from Hungarian: e.g. Serbo-Croatian from Hungarian 'spade'. About 1.6 percent of the Romanian lexicon is of Hungarian origin.\nIn the 21st century, studies support an origin of the Uralic languages, including early Hungarian, in eastern or central Siberia, somewhere between the Ob and Yenisei rivers or near the Sayan mountains in the Russian\u2013Mongolian border region. A 2019 study based on genetics, archaeology and linguistics, found that early Uralic speakers arrived in Europe from the east, specifically from eastern Siberia.\nAlternative views.\nHungarian historian and archaeologist Gyula L\u00e1szl\u00f3 claims that geological data from pollen analysis seems to contradict the placing of the ancient Hungarian homeland near the Urals.\nHistorical controversy over origins.\nToday, the consensus among linguists is that Hungarian is a member of the Uralic family of languages.\nThe classification of Hungarian as a Uralic/Finno-Ugric rather than a Turkic language continued to be a matter of impassioned political controversy throughout the 18th and into the 19th centuries. During the latter half of the 19th century, a competing hypothesis proposed a Turkic affinity of Hungarian, or, alternatively, that both the Uralic and the Turkic families formed part of a superfamily of Ural\u2013Altaic languages. Following an academic debate known as (\"the Ugric-Turkic war\"), the Finno-Ugric hypothesis was concluded the sounder of the two, mainly based on work by the German linguist Josef Budenz.\nHungarians did, in fact, absorb some Turkic influences during several centuries of cohabitation. The influence on Hungarians was mainly from the Turkic Oghur speakers such as Sabirs, Bulgars of Atil, Kabars and Khazars. The Oghur tribes are often connected with the Hungarians whose exoethnonym is usually derived from Onogurs (&gt; (H)ungars), a Turkic tribal confederation. The similarity between customs of Hungarians and the Chuvash people, the only surviving member of the Oghur tribes, is visible. For example, the Hungarians appear to have learned animal husbandry techniques from the Oghur speaking Chuvash people (or historically Suvar people), as a high proportion of words specific to agriculture and livestock are of Chuvash origin. A strong Chuvash influence was also apparent in Hungarian burial customs.\nOld Hungarian.\nThe first written accounts of Hungarian date to the 10th century, such as mostly Hungarian personal names and place names in , written in Greek by Eastern Roman Emperor Constantine VII. No significant texts written in Old Hungarian script have survived, because the medium of writing used at the time, wood, is perishable.\nThe Kingdom of Hungary was founded in 1000 by Stephen I. The country became a Western-styled Christian (Roman Catholic) state, with Latin script replacing Hungarian runes. The earliest remaining fragments of the language are found in the establishing charter of the abbey of Tihany from 1055, intermingled with Latin text. The first extant text fully written in Hungarian is the Funeral Sermon and Prayer, which dates to the 1190s. Although the orthography of these early texts differed considerably from that used today, contemporary Hungarians can still understand a great deal of the reconstructed spoken language, despite changes in grammar and vocabulary.\nA more extensive body of Hungarian literature arose after 1300. The earliest known example of Hungarian religious poetry is the 14th-century \"Lamentations of Mary\". The first Bible translation was the Hussite Bible in the 1430s.\nThe standard language lost its diphthongs, and several postpositions transformed into suffixes, including \"onto\" (the phrase \"onto the way\" found in the 1055 text would later become ). There were also changes in the system of vowel harmony. At one time, Hungarian used six verb tenses, while today only two or three are used.\nModern Hungarian.\nIn 1533, Krak\u00f3w printer Benedek Komj\u00e1ti published Letters of St. Paul in Hungarian (modern orthography: ), the first Hungarian-language book set in movable type.\nBy the 17th century, the language already closely resembled its present-day form, although two of the past tenses remained in use. German, Italian and French loans also began to appear. Further Turkish words were borrowed during the period of Ottoman rule (1541 to 1699).\nIn the 19th century, a group of writers, most notably Ferenc Kazinczy, spearheaded a process of (language revitalization). Some words were shortened ( &gt; , 'victory' or 'triumph'); a number of dialectal words spread nationally (\"e.g.\", 'dawdle'); extinct words were reintroduced (, 'd\u00e9cor'); a wide range of expressions were coined using the various derivative suffixes; and some other, less frequently used methods of expanding the language were utilized. This movement produced more than ten thousand words, most of which are used actively today.\nThe 19th and 20th centuries saw further standardization of the language, and differences between mutually comprehensible dialects gradually diminished.\nIn 1920, Hungary signed the Treaty of Trianon, losing 71 percent of its territory and one-third of the ethnic Hungarian population along with it.\nToday, the language holds official status nationally in Hungary and regionally in Romania, Slovakia, Serbia, Austria and Slovenia.\nIn 2014 The proportion of Transylvanian students studying Hungarian exceeded the proportion of Hungarian students, which shows that the effects of Romanianization are slowly getting reversed and regaining popularity. The Dictate of Trianon resulted in a high proportion of Hungarians in the surrounding 7 countries, so it is widely spoken or understood. Although host countries are not always considerate of Hungarian language users, communities are strong. The Szeklers, for example, form their own region and have their own national museum, educational institutions, and hospitals.\n\"Source: National censuses, Ethnologue\"\nGeographic distribution.\nHungarian has about 13 million native speakers, of whom more than 9.8 million live in Hungary. According to the 2011 Hungarian census, 9,896,333 people (99.6% of the total population) speak Hungarian, of whom 9,827,875 people (98.9%) speak it as a first language, while 68,458 people (0.7%) speak it as a second language. About 2.2 million speakers live in other areas that were part of the Kingdom of Hungary before the Treaty of Trianon (1920). Of these, the largest group lives in Transylvania, the western half of present-day Romania, where there are approximately 1.25 million Hungarians. There are large Hungarian communities also in Slovakia, Serbia and Ukraine, and Hungarians can also be found in Austria, Croatia, and Slovenia, as well as about a million additional people scattered in other parts of the world. For example, there are more than one hundred thousand Hungarian speakers in the Hungarian American community and 1.5 million with Hungarian ancestry in the United States.\nOfficial status.\nHungarian is the official language of Hungary, and thus an official language of the European Union. Hungarian is also one of the official languages of Serbian province of Vojvodina and an official language of three municipalities in Slovenia: Hodo\u0161, Dobrovnik and Lendava, along with Slovene. Hungarian is officially recognized as a minority or regional language in Austria, Croatia, Romania, Zakarpattia in Ukraine, and Slovakia. In Romania it is a recognized minority language used at local level in communes, towns and municipalities with an ethnic Hungarian population of over 20%.\nDialects.\nThe dialects of Hungarian identified by Ethnologue are: Alf\u00f6ld, West Danube, Danube-Tisza, King's Pass Hungarian, Northeast Hungarian, Northwest Hungarian, Sz\u00e9kely and West Hungarian. These dialects are, for the most part, mutually intelligible. The Hungarian Cs\u00e1ng\u00f3 dialect, which is mentioned but not listed separately by Ethnologue, is spoken primarily in Bac\u0103u County in eastern Romania. The Cs\u00e1ng\u00f3 Hungarian group has been largely isolated from other Hungarian people, and therefore preserved features that closely resemble earlier forms of Hungarian.\nPhonology.\nHungarian has 14 vowel phonemes and 30 consonant phonemes (or 31, it depends on the dialect). The vowel phonemes can be grouped as pairs of short and long vowels such as and . Most of the pairs have an almost similar pronunciation and vary significantly only in their duration. However, pairs / and / differ both in closedness and in length.\nConsonant length is also distinctive in Hungarian. Most consonant phonemes can occur as geminates.\nThe sound voiced palatal plosive , written \u27e8gy\u27e9, sounds similar to 'd' in British English 'duty'. It occurs in the name of the country, \"\" (Hungary), pronounced . It is one of four palatal consonants, the others being \u27e8ty\u27e9, \u27e8ny\u27e9, and \u27e8j\u27e9. Historically, and mostly in some northern dialects (for example, the modern Pal\u00f3c dialect), a fifth palatalized consonant existed, written \u27e8ly\u27e9. Elsewhere, this phoneme has merged with /j/.\n and are only found at the end of words in the second-person singular subjunctive/imperative after a voiceless/voiced consonant, both written \"j\", as in \" (get!) or \" (sew!), as an allophone of .\n is also rare, and it is mostly an allophone of \"h\". It is spelled as \"ch\", and is from German loanwords, like the name . A similar consonant is . This is also spelled as \"h\", and is also found in German loanwords, like (agate).\n is an uncommon consonant, written \"ng\". It mostly appears in loanwords from English such as \" or \", and in native words like \"\" (to swing). \"ng\" is a digraph; however unlike other digraphs, it is not a letter of the Hungarian alphabet.\nA single 'r' is pronounced as an alveolar tap ( 'of that size'), but a double 'r' is pronounced as an alveolar trill ( 'by that time'), like in Spanish and Italian.\nProsody.\nPrimary stress is always on the first syllable of the word, as in Finnish and the neighbouring Slovak and Czech. There is a secondary stress on other syllables in compounds: (\"goodbye\") is pronounced .\nGrammar.\nHungarian is an agglutinative language. It uses various affixes, mainly suffixes but also some prefixes and a circumfix, to change a word's meaning and its grammatical function.\nVowel harmony.\nHungarian uses vowel harmony to attach suffixes to words. That means that most suffixes have two or three different forms, and the choice between them depends on the vowels of the head word. There are some minor and unpredictable exceptions to the rule.\nNouns.\nNouns have 18 cases, which are formed regularly with suffixes. The nominative case is unmarked ( 'the apple') and, for example, the accusative is marked with the suffix \"\u2013t\" ( '[I eat] the apple'). Half of the cases express a combination of the source-location-target and surface-inside-proximity ternary distinctions (three times three cases); there is a separate case ending \u2013\"b\u00f3l\" / \"\u2013b\u0151l\" meaning a combination of source and insideness: 'from inside of'.\nPossession is expressed by a possessive suffix on the possessed object, rather than the possessor as in English (Peter's apple becomes , literally 'Peter apple-his'). Noun plurals are formed with \"\u2013k\" ( 'the apples'), but after a numeral, the singular is used ( 'two apples', literally 'two apple'; not *).\nUnlike English, Hungarian uses case suffixes and nearly always postpositions instead of prepositions.\nThere are two types of articles in Hungarian, definite and indefinite, which roughly correspond to the equivalents in English.\nHungarian nouns (and pronouns) are not gendered: there is only one class of nouns (and pronouns).\nAdjectives.\nAdjectives precede nouns ( 'the red apple') and have three degrees: positive ( 'red'), comparative ( 'redder') and superlative ( 'the reddest').\nIf the noun takes the plural or a case, an attributive adjective is invariable: 'the red apples'. However, a predicative adjective agrees with the noun: 'the apples are red'. Adjectives by themselves can behave as nouns (and so can take case suffixes): 'Which apple would you like?\u00a0\u2013 The red one'.\nWord order.\nHungarian subject\u2013object\u2013verb word order is free, although the meaning slightly changes. Almost all permutations of the following sample are valid, but with stress on different parts of the meaning. However, Hungarian is a topic-prominent language, and so has a word order that depends not only on syntax but also on the topic\u2013comment structure of the sentence (for example, what aspect is assumed to be known and what is emphasized).\nA Hungarian sentence generally has the following order: topic, comment (or focus), verb and the rest.\nThe topic shows that the proposition is only for that particular thing or aspect, and it implies that the proposition is not true for some others. For example, in \" ('It is John who sees the apple'. Literally 'The apple John sees.'), the apple is in the topic, implying that other objects may be seen by not him but other people (the pear may be seen by Peter). The topic part may be empty.\nThe focus shows the new information for the listeners that may not have been known or that their knowledge must be corrected. For example, \"\u00c9n vagyok az ap\u00e1d\". ('I am your father'. Literally, 'It is I who am your father'.), from the movie \"The Empire Strikes Back\", the pronoun I () is in the focus and implies that it is new information, and the listener thought that someone else is his father.\nAlthough Hungarian is sometimes described as having free word order, different word orders are generally not interchangeable, and the neutral order is not always correct to use. The intonation is also different with different topic-comment structures. The topic usually has a rising intonation, the focus having a falling intonation. In the following examples, the topic is marked with italics, and the focus (comment) is marked with boldface.\nPoliteness.\nHungarian has a four-tiered system for expressing levels of politeness. From highest to lowest:\nThe four-tiered system has somewhat been eroded due to the recent expansion of \"{{lang|hu|tegez\u0151d\u00e9s}}\" and \"{{lang|hu|\u00f6n\u00f6z\u00e9s}}\".\nSome anomalies emerged with the arrival of multinational companies who have addressed their customers in the {{lang|hu|te}} (least polite) form right from the beginning of their presence in Hungary. A typical example is the Swedish furniture shop IKEA, whose web site and other publications address the customers in {{lang|hu|te}} form. When a news site asked IKEA\u2014using the {{lang|hu|te}} form\u2014why they address their customers this way, IKEA's PR Manager explained in his answer\u2014using the {{lang|hu|\u00f6n}} form\u2014that their way of communication reflects IKEA's open-mindedness and the Swedish culture. However IKEA in France uses the polite ({{lang|fr|vous}}) form. Another example is the communication of Yettel Hungary (earlier Telenor, a mobile network operator) towards its customers. Yettel chose to communicate towards business customers in the polite {{lang|hu|\u00f6n}} form while all other customers are addressed in the less polite {{lang|hu|te}} form.\nVocabulary.\nDuring the first early phase of Hungarian language reforms (late 18th and early 19th centuries) more than ten thousand words were coined, several thousand of which are still actively used today (see also Ferenc Kazinczy, the leading figure of the Hungarian language reforms.) Kazinczy's chief goal was to replace existing words of German and Latin origins with newly created Hungarian words. As a result, Kazinczy and his later followers (the reformers) significantly reduced the formerly high ratio of words of Latin and German origins in the Hungarian language, which were related to social sciences, natural sciences, politics and economics, institutional names, fashion etc.\nGiving an accurate estimate for the total word count is difficult, since it is hard to define a \"word\" in agglutinating languages, due to the existence of affixed words and compound words. To obtain a meaningful definition of compound words, it is necessary to exclude compounds whose meaning is the mere sum of its elements. The largest dictionaries giving translations from Hungarian to another language contain 120,000 words and phrases (but this may include redundant phrases as well, because of translation issues){{clarify|date=March 2019}}. The new desk lexicon of the Hungarian language contains 75,000 words, and the Comprehensive Dictionary of Hungarian Language (to be published in 18 volumes in the next{{clarify|date=June 2022}} twenty years) is planned to contain 110,000 words. The default Hungarian lexicon is usually estimated to comprise 60,000 to 100,000 words. (Independently of specific languages, speakers actively use at most 10,000 to 20,000 words, with an average intellectual using 25,000 to 30,000 words.) However, all the Hungarian lexemes collected from technical texts, dialects etc. would total up to 1,000,000 words.\nParts of the lexicon can be organized using word-bushes{{clarify|date=September 2019}} (see an example on the right). The words in these bushes share a common root, are related through inflection, derivation and compounding, and are usually broadly related in meaning.\nThe basic vocabulary shares several hundred word roots with other Uralic languages like Finnish, Estonian, Mansi and Khanty. Examples are the verb {{Lang|hu|\u00e9l}} \"live\" (Finnish {{lang|fi|el\u00e4\u00e4}}), the numbers {{Lang|hu|kett\u0151}} (2), {{Lang|hu|h\u00e1rom}} (3), {{Lang|hu|n\u00e9gy}} (4) (cf. Mansi {{lang|mns|\u043a\u0438\u0442\u044b\u0433|italic=no}} {{lang|mns-latn|kitig}}, {{lang|mns|\u0445\u0443\u0440\u0443\u043c|italic=no}} {{lang|mns-latn|khurum}}, {{lang|mns|\u043d\u0438\u043b\u0430|italic=no}} {{lang|mns-latn|nila}}, Finnish {{lang|fi|kaksi, kolme, nelj\u00e4}}, Estonian {{lang|et|kaks, kolm, neli}}), as well as {{Lang|hu|v\u00edz}} 'water', {{Lang|hu|k\u00e9z}} 'hand', {{Lang|hu|v\u00e9r}} 'blood', {{Lang|hu|fej}} 'head' (cf. Finnish and Estonian {{lang|fi|vesi, k\u00e4si, veri}}, Finnish {{lang|fi|p\u00e4\u00e4}}, Estonian {{lang|et|pea}} or {{lang|et|p\u00e4\u00e4}}).\nWords for elementary kinship and nature are more Ugric, less r-Turkic and less Slavic. Words related to agriculture are about 50% r-Turkic and 50% Slavic; pastoral terms are more r-Turkic, less Ugric and less Slavic. Finally, Christian and state terminology is more Slavic and less r-Turkic. The Slavic is most probably proto-Slovakian or proto-Slovenian. This is easily understood in the Uralic paradigm, proto-Magyars were first similar to Ob-Ugors, who were mainly hunters, fishers and gatherers, but with some horses too. Then they accultured to Bulgarian r-Turks, so the older layer of agriculture words (wine, beer, wheat, barley etc.) are purely r-Turkic, and many terms of statesmanship and religion were, too.\nExcept for a few Latin and Greek loanwords, these differences are unnoticed even by native speakers; the words have been entirely adopted into the Hungarian lexicon. There are an increasing number of English loanwords, especially in technical fields and slang as well.\nCalculating the percentile fractions of the origins of various words within a language is an essentially meaningless and impossible exercise. There is no definite set number of words within a language that can be tallied up, and other factors like the frequency of use and dialectal differences also affect the end result. An approximate estimate of the number of foreign loanwords in Hungarian can be established, as well as the general frequency of their usage.\nAccording to estimates, the most numerous loanwords come from Slavic languages (1252 words of proven Slavic origin, around 484 universally used in all dialects of Hungarian, 694 in specific dialects only, and 74 obsolete words). An additional 382 words are classified as \"possibly Slavic\", 147 of them present in all dialects, 209 present in certain dialects, and 26 no longer in common use, bringing the final number of potentially Slavic loanwords in all dialects to 631, and the total number of potentially Slavic loanwords across all dialects to about 1634.\nThe second largest group of loanwords are made up of Turkic loanwords, which can be divided into pre-Conquest, and Ottoman layers, with the pre-Conquest words making up the absolute majority of them. Due to centuries of cohabitation with Turkic peoples such as the Volga Bulgars and Khazars, the exact origin of certain words can be hard to pin down. The number of Turkic loanwords can be difficult to enumerate from the pre-Conquest period due to a lack of written sources from R-Turkic languages from the period, and even later, but generally the number of Turkic loanwords are estimated to be between 300\u2013500.\nThe third largest group is made up of German loanwords, which number around 400. These started appearing in the language as early as the 11th century, but became especially prominent during the Habsburg-era, starting in the 16th century.\nA much smaller but also much older layer of loanwords are Iranian loanwords, which only number in the dozens but serve as an important layer of the vocabulary. These words include {{lang|hu|teh\u00e9n}} 'cow', {{lang|hu|tej}} 'milk', {{lang|hu|asszony}} 'married woman, wife', {{lang|hu|v\u00e1m}} 'tax', {{lang|hu|v\u00e1r}} 'fortress', {{lang|hu|v\u00e1s\u00e1r}} 'market', {{lang|hu|\u00fcveg}} 'glass' etc.\nOther, mostly more technical, religious, or scholarly loanwords also numbering in the dozens are from Latin and Greek, while newer layers may include virtually any European language that Hungarian has been in contact with over the centuries.\nWord formation.\nWords can be compounds or derived. Most derivation is with suffixes, but there is a small set of derivational prefixes as well.\nCompounds.\nCompounds have been present in the language since the Proto-Uralic era. Numerous ancient compounds transformed to base words during the centuries. Today, compounds play an important role in vocabulary.\nA good example is the word {{lang|hu|arc}}:\n {{lang|hu|orr}} (nose) + {{lang|hu|sz\u00e1j}} (mouth) \u2192 {{lang|hu|orca}} (face) (colloquial until the end of the 19th century and still in use in some dialects) &gt; {{lang|hu|arc}} (face)\nCompounds are made up of two base words: the first is the prefix, the latter is the suffix. A compound can be \"subordinative\": the prefix is in logical connection with the suffix. If the prefix is the subject of the suffix, the compound is generally classified as a subjective one. There are objective, determinative, and adjunctive compounds as well. Some examples are given below:\n Subjective:\n {{lang|hu|menny}} (heaven) + {{lang|hu|d\u00f6rg\u00e9s}} (rumbling) \u2192 {{lang|hu|mennyd\u00f6rg\u00e9s}} (thundering)\n {{lang|hu|Nap}} (Sun) + {{lang|hu|s\u00fct\u00f6tte}} (lit by) \u2192 {{lang|hu|naps\u00fct\u00f6tte}} (sunlit)\n Objective:\n {{lang|hu|fa}} (tree, wood) + {{lang|hu|v\u00e1g\u00f3}} (cutter) \u2192 {{lang|hu|fav\u00e1g\u00f3}} (lumberjack, literally \"woodcutter\")\n Determinative:\n {{lang|hu|\u00faj}} (new) + {{lang|hu|j\u00e1}} (modification of \"-v\u00e1\", \"-v\u00e9\" a suffix meaning \"making it to something\") + {{lang|hu|\u00e9p\u00edt\u00e9s}} (construction) \u2192 {{lang|hu|\u00fajj\u00e1\u00e9p\u00edt\u00e9s}} (reconstruction, literally \"making something to be new by construction\")\n Adjunctive:\n {{lang|hu|s\u00e1rga}} (yellow) + {{lang|hu|r\u00e9z}} (copper) \u2192 {{lang|hu|s\u00e1rgar\u00e9z}} (brass)\nAccording to current orthographic rules, a subordinative compound word has to be written as a single word, without spaces; however, if a compound of three or more words (not counting one-syllable verbal prefixes) is seven or more syllables long (not counting case suffixes), a hyphen must be inserted at the appropriate boundary to ease the determination of word boundaries for the reader.\n'really occasionally'), twin words (where a base word and a distorted form of it makes up a compound: {{lang|hu|gizgaz}}, where the suffix 'gaz' means 'weed' and the prefix {{lang|hu|giz}} is the distorted form; the compound itself means 'inconsiderable weed'), and such compounds which have meanings, but neither their prefixes, nor their suffixes make sense (for example, {{lang|hu|hercehurca}} 'complex, obsolete procedures').\nA compound also can be made up by multiple (i.e., more than two) base words: in this case, at least one word element, or even both the prefix and the suffix, is a compound. Some examples:\n {{lang|hu|elme}} [mind; standalone base] + ({{lang|hu|gy\u00f3gy}} [medical] + {{lang|hu|int\u00e9zet}} [institute]) \u2192 {{lang|hu|elmegy\u00f3gyint\u00e9zet}} (asylum)\n ({{lang|hu|hadi}} [militarian] + {{lang|hu|fogoly}} [prisoner]) + ({{lang|hu|munka}} [work] + {{lang|hu|t\u00e1bor}} [camp]) \u2192 {{lang|hu|hadifogoly-munkat\u00e1bor}} (work camp of prisoners of war)\nNoteworthy lexical items.\nPoints of the compass.\nHungarian words for the points of the compass are directly derived from the position of the Sun during the day in the Northern Hemisphere.\nTwo words for \"red\".\nThere are two basic words for \"red\" in Hungarian: \"{{lang|hu|piros}}\" and \"{{lang|hu|v\u00f6r\u00f6s}}\" (variant: \"{{lang|hu|veres}}\"; compare with Estonian \"verev\" or Finnish \"punainen\"). The word \"{{lang|hu|v\u00f6r\u00f6s}}\" is related to \"{{lang|hu|v\u00e9r}}\", meaning \"blood\" (Finnish and Estonian \"veri\"). When they refer to an actual difference in colour (as on a colour chart), \"{{lang|hu|v\u00f6r\u00f6s}}\" usually refers to the deeper (darker or more red and less orange) hue of red. While many languages have multiple names for this colour, often Hungarian scholars assume that this is unique in recognizing two shades of red as separate and distinct \"folk colours\".\nHowever, the two words are also used independently of the above in collocations. \"{{lang|hu|Piros}}\" is learned by children first, as it is generally used to describe inanimate, artificial things, or things seen as cheerful or neutral, while \"{{lang|hu|v\u00f6r\u00f6s}}\" typically refers to animate or natural things (biological, geological, physical and astronomical objects), as well as serious or emotionally charged subjects.\nWhen the rules outlined above are in contradiction, typical collocations usually prevail. In some cases where a typical collocation does not exist, the use of either of the two words may be equally adequate.\nExamples:\nKinship terms.\nThe Hungarian words for brothers and sisters are differentiated based upon relative age. There is also a general word for \"sibling\": {{Lang|hu|testv\u00e9r}}, from {{Lang|hu|test}} \"body\" and {{Lang|hu|v\u00e9r}} \"blood\"; i.e., originating from the same body and blood.\nIn addition, there are separate prefixes for several ancestors and descendants:\nThe words for \"boy\" and \"girl\" are applied with possessive suffixes. Nevertheless, the terms are differentiated with different declension or lexemes:\nThe word {{Lang|hu|fi\u00fa}} (boy) is also often noted as an extreme example of the ability of the language to add suffixes to a word, by forming {{Lang|hu|fiai\u00e9i}}, adding vowel-form suffixes only, where the result is quite a frequently used word:\n Partition to root and suffixes with explanations:\n Translation: \"for your [plural] repeated pretending to be indesecratable\"\nExtremely long words.\nThe above word is often considered to be the longest word in Hungarian, although there are longer words like:\n {{lang|hu|leges-leg-meg-szent-s\u00e9g-telen-\u00edt-tet-het-etlen-ebb-je-i-tek-k\u00e9nt|italic=unset}}\n \"like those of you that are the very least possible to get desecrated\"\nWords of such length are not used in practice and are difficult to understand even for natives. They were invented to show, in a somewhat facetious way, the ability of the language to form long words (see agglutinative language). They are not compound words but are formed by adding a series of one- and two-syllable suffixes (and a few prefixes) to a simple root (\"{{lang|hu|szent}}\", saint or holy).\nThere is virtually no limit for the length of words, but when too many suffixes are added, the meaning of the word becomes less clear, and the word becomes hard to understand and will work like a riddle even for native speakers.\nHungarian words in English.\nThe English word best known as being of Hungarian origin is probably \"paprika\", from Serbo-Croatian \"papar\" \"pepper\" and the Hungarian diminutive \"-ka\". The most common, however, is \"coach\", from {{lang|hu|kocsi}}, originally {{lang|hu|kocsi szek\u00e9r}} \"car from/in the style of Kocs\". Others are:\nWriting system.\nThe Hungarian language was originally written in right-to-left Old Hungarian runes, superficially similar in appearance to the better-known futhark runes but unrelated. After Stephen I of Hungary established the Kingdom of Hungary in the year 1000, the old system was gradually discarded in favour of the Latin alphabet and left-to-right order. Although now not used at all in everyday life, the old script is still known and practised by some enthusiasts.\nModern Hungarian is written using an expanded Latin alphabet and has a phonemic orthography, i.e. pronunciation can generally be predicted from the written language. In addition to the standard letters of the Latin alphabet, Hungarian uses several modified Latin characters to represent the additional vowel sounds of the language. These include letters with acute accents \"(\u00e1, \u00e9, \u00ed, \u00f3, \u00fa)\" to represent long vowels, and umlauts (\"\u00f6\" and \"\u00fc\") and their long counterparts \"\u0151\" and \"\u0171\" to represent front vowels. Sometimes (usually as a result of a technical glitch on a computer) {{angle bracket|\u00f4}} or {{angle bracket|\u00f5}} is used for {{angle bracket|\u0151}}, and {{angle bracket|\u00fb}} for {{angle bracket|\u0171}}. This is often due to the limitations of the Latin-1 / ISO-8859-1 code page. These letters are not part of the Hungarian language and are considered misprints. Hungarian can be properly represented with the Latin-2 / ISO-8859-2 code page, but this code page is not always available. (Hungarian is the only language using both {{angle bracket|\u0151}} and {{angle bracket|\u0171}}.) Unicode includes them, and so they can be used on the Internet.\nAdditionally, the digraphs (letter pairs) {{angle bracket|ny}}, {{angle bracket|ty}}, and {{angle bracket|gy}} are used to represent the palatal consonants {{IPA|/\u0272/}}, {{IPA|/c/}}, and {{IPA|/\u025f/}} (roughly analogous to the \"d+y\" sounds in British \"\"du\"ke\" or American \"woul\"d y\"ou\")\u2014produced using a similar mechanism as the letter \"d\" when pronounced with the tongue pointing to the palate.\nHungarian uses {{angle bracket|s}} for {{IPA|/\u0283/}} and {{angle bracket|sz}} for {{IPA|/s/}}, which is the reverse of Polish usage. The letter {{angle bracket|zs}} is {{IPA|/\u0292/}} and {{angle bracket|cs}} is {{IPA|/t\u0361\u0283/}}. These digraphs are considered single letters in the alphabet. The letter {{angle bracket|ly}} is also a \"single letter digraph\", but is pronounced like {{IPA|/j/}} (English {{angle bracket|y}}) and appears mostly in old words. The letters {{angle bracket|dz}} and {{angle bracket|dzs}} {{IPA|/d\u0361\u0292/}} are exotic remnants and are hard to find even in longer texts. Some examples still in common use are {{lang|hu|madzag}} (\"string\"), {{lang|hu|edzeni}} (\"to train (athletically)\") and {{lang|hu|dzsungel}} (\"jungle\").\nSometimes additional information is required for partitioning words with digraphs: {{lang|hu|h\u00e1zsz\u00e1m|italic=no}} (\"street number\") = {{lang|hu|h\u00e1z}} (\"house\") + {{lang|hu|sz\u00e1m}} (\"number\"), not an unintelligible {{lang|hu|h\u00e1zs}} + {{lang|hu|z\u00e1m}}.\nHungarian distinguishes between long and short vowels, with long vowels written with acutes. It also distinguishes between long and short consonants, with long consonants being doubled. For example, {{lang|hu|lenni}} (\"to be\"), {{lang|hu|hozz\u00e1sz\u00f3l\u00e1s}} (\"comment\"). The digraphs, when pronounced as long consonants, are written as trigraphs: {{angle bracket|sz}} + {{angle bracket|sz}} = {{angle bracket|ssz}}, e.g. {{lang|hu|m\u0171v\u00e9sszel}} (\"with an artist\"). But when a word is hyphenated at such a doubled digraph, the digraph is written out in full both before and after the hyphen. For example, (\"with a bus\"):\n ... \"busz-\"\n \"szal\"...\nWhen the first lexeme of a compound ends in a digraph and the second lexeme starts with the same digraph, both digraphs are written out: {{lang|hu|jegy}} + {{lang|hu|gy\u0171r\u0171}} = {{lang|hu|jegygy\u0171r\u0171}} (\"engagement/wedding ring\", {{lang|hu|jegy}} means \"sign\", \"mark\". The term {{lang|hu|jegyben lenni/j\u00e1rni}} means \"to be engaged\"; {{lang|hu|gy\u0171r\u0171}} means \"ring\").\nAlmost all trigraphs found in Hungarian text are the result of doubled digraphs, but there are a few exceptions: {{lang|hu|tizennyolc}} (\"eighteen\") is a concatenation of {{Lang|hu|tizen}} + {{Lang|hu|nyolc}}. Hungarian has minimal pairs of single vs. double consonants, for example {{Lang|hu|tol}} (\"push\") vs. {{Lang|hu|toll}} (\"feather\" or \"pen\").\nWhile to English speakers they may seem unusual at first, once the new orthography and pronunciation are learned, written Hungarian is almost completely phonemic (except for etymological spellings and \"ly, j\" representing {{IPA|/j/}}).\nWord order.\nThe word order is basically from general to specific. This is a typical analytical approach and is used generally in Hungarian.\nName order.\nHungarian names in foreign languages.\nFor clarity, in foreign languages Hungarian names are usually represented in the western name order. Sometimes, however, especially in countries neighbouring Hungary\u00a0\u2013 where there is a significant Hungarian population\u00a0\u2013 the Hungarian name order is retained, as it causes less confusion there.\nFor an example of foreign use, the birth name of the Hungarian-born physicist called the \"father of the hydrogen bomb\" was Teller Ede, but he immigrated to the United States in the 1930s and thus became known as Edward Teller. Prior to the mid-20th century, given names were usually translated along with the name order; this is no longer as common. For example, the pianist uses \"Andr\u00e1s Schiff\" when abroad, not \"Andrew Schiff\" (in Hungarian {{lang|hu|Schiff Andr\u00e1s}}). If a second given name is present, it becomes a middle name and is usually written out in full, rather than truncated to an initial.\nForeign names in Hungarian.\nIn modern usage, foreign names retain their order when used in Hungarian. Therefore:\nThe Hungarian name {{lang|hu|Kiss J\u00e1nos}} is in the Hungarian name order ({{lang|hu|J\u00e1nos}} is equivalent to \"John\"), but the foreign name \"John Travolta\" remains in the western name order.\nBefore the 20th century, not only was it common to reverse the order of foreign personalities, they were also \"Hungarianised\": {{lang|hu|Goethe J\u00e1nos Farkas}} (originally Johann Wolfgang Goethe). This usage sounds odd today, when only a few well-known personalities are referred to using their Hungarianised names, including {{lang|hu|Verne Gyula}} (Jules Verne), {{lang|hu|Marx K\u00e1roly}} (Karl Marx), {{lang|hu|Kolumbusz Krist\u00f3f}} (Christopher Columbus; the last of these is also translated in English from the original Italian or possibly Ligurian).\nSome native speakers disapprove of this usage; the names of certain historical religious personalities (including popes), however, are always Hungarianised by practically all speakers, such as {{lang|hu|Luther M\u00e1rton}} (Martin Luther), {{lang|hu|Husz J\u00e1nos}} (Jan Hus), {{lang|hu|K\u00e1lvin J\u00e1nos}} (John Calvin); just like the names of monarchs, for example the king of Spain, Juan Carlos I is referred to as {{lang|hu|I. J\u00e1nos K\u00e1roly}} or the late queen of the UK, Elizabeth II would be referred to as {{lang|hu|II. Erzs\u00e9bet}}.\nJapanese names, which are usually written in western order in the rest of Europe, retain their original order in Hungarian, e. g. {{lang|hu|Kuroszava Akira}} instead of Akira Kurosawa.\nDate and time.\nAs in Japanese, Chinese, and Korean, the Hungarian convention for date and time is to go from the general to the specific, starting with the year first, then month, then day.\nAddresses.\nAlthough address formatting is increasingly being influenced by standard European conventions, the traditional Hungarian style is:\n1052 Budapest, De\u00e1k Ferenc t\u00e9r 1.\nSo the order is: 1) postcode 2) settlement (most general), 3) street/square/etc. (more specific), 4) house number (most specific). The house number may be followed by the storey and door numbers.\nAddresses on envelopes and postal parcels should be formatted and placed on the right side as follows:\nName of the recipient\nSettlement\nStreet address (up to door number if necessary)\n(HU-)postcode\nThe HU- part before the postcode is only for incoming postal traffic from foreign countries.\nVocabulary examples.\n\"Note: The stress is always placed on the first syllable of each word. The remaining syllables all receive an equal, lesser stress. All syllables are pronounced clearly and evenly, even at the end of a sentence, unlike in English.\"\nExample text.\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in Hungarian:\n{{lang|hu|Minden emberi l\u00e9ny szabadon sz\u00fcletik \u00e9s egyenl\u0151 m\u00e9lt\u00f3s\u00e1ga \u00e9s joga van. Az emberek, \u00e9sszel \u00e9s lelkiismerettel b\u00edrv\u00e1n, egym\u00e1ssal szemben testv\u00e9ri szellemben kell hogy viseltessenek.|italic=unset}}\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in English:\n\"All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\"\n This book gives an introduction to the Hungarian language in 15 chapters. The dialogues are available on CDs.\n This is a complete course in spoken and written Hungarian. The course consists of 21 chapters with dialogues, culture notes, grammar and exercises. The dialogues are available on cassette.\n These course books were developed by the University of Debrecen Summer School program for teaching Hungarian to foreigners. The books are written completely in Hungarian and therefore unsuitable for self study. There is an accompanying 'dictionary' with translations of the Hungarian vocabulary into English, German, and French for the words used in the first two books."}
{"id": "13974", "revid": "9337959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13974", "title": "Hymenoptera", "text": "Order of insects\n Hymenoptera is a large order of insects, comprising the sawflies, wasps, bees, and ants. Over 150,000 living species of Hymenoptera have been described, in addition to over 2,000 extinct ones. Many of the species are parasitic. Females typically have a special ovipositor for inserting eggs into hosts or places that are otherwise inaccessible. This ovipositor is often modified into a stinger. The young develop through holometabolism (complete metamorphosis)\u2014that is, they have a wormlike larval stage and an inactive pupal stage before they reach adulthood.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Hymenoptera\" comes from Ancient Greek \u1f51\u03bc\u03ae\u03bd (\"hum\u1e17n\") 'membrane' and \u03c0\u03c4\u03b5\u03c1\u03cc\u03bd (\"pter\u00f3n\") 'wing'.\nEvolution.\nMolecular analysis finds that Hymenoptera is the earliest branching group of Holometabola.\nHymenoptera originated in the Triassic, with the oldest fossils belonging to the family Xyelidae. Social hymenopterans appeared during the Cretaceous. The evolution of this group has been intensively studied by Alex Rasnitsyn, Michael S. Engel, and others.\nPhylogenetic relationships within the Hymenoptera, based on both morphology and molecular data, have been intensively studied since 2000. In 2023, a molecular study based on the analysis of ultra-conserved elements confirmed many previous findings and produced a relatively robust phylogeny of the whole Order. Basal superfamilies are shown in the cladogram below.\nAnatomy.\nHymenopterans range in size from very small to large insects. Their mouthparts are adapted for chewing, with well-developed mandibles (ectognathous mouthparts). Many species have further developed the mouthparts into a lengthy proboscis, with which they can drink liquids, such as nectar. Hymenopterans usually have two pairs of wings, but some solitary wasps and worker ants don't. They typically have large compound eyes with three simple eyes, ocelli.\nThe forward margin of the hind wing bears a number of hooked bristles, or \"hamuli\", which lock onto the fore wing, keeping them held together (hamuli wing coupling). The smaller species may have only two or three hamuli on each side, but the largest wasps may have a considerable number, keeping the wings gripped together especially tightly. Hymenopteran wings have relatively few veins compared with many other insects, especially in the smaller species.\nIn the more ancestral hymenopterans, the ovipositor is blade-like, and has evolved for slicing plant tissues. In the majority, however, it is modified for piercing, and, in some cases, is several times the length of the body. In some species, the ovipositor has become modified as a stinger, and the eggs are laid from the base of the structure, rather than from the tip, which is used only to inject venom. The sting is typically used to immobilize prey, but in some wasps and bees may be used in defense.\nHymenopteran larvae typically have a distinct head region, three thoracic segments, and usually nine or 10 abdominal segments. In the suborder Symphyta, the eruciform larvae resemble caterpillars in appearance, and like them, typically feed on leaves. They have large chewing mandibles, three pairs of thoracic limbs, and, in most cases, six or eight abdominal prolegs. Unlike caterpillars, however, the prolegs have no grasping spines, and the antennae are reduced to mere stubs. Symphytan larvae that are wood borers or stem borers have no abdominal legs and the thoracic legs are smaller than those of non-borers.\nWith rare exceptions, larvae of the suborder Apocrita have no legs and are maggotlike in form, and are adapted to life in a protected environment. This may be the body of a host organism, or a cell in a nest, where the adults will care for the larva. In parasitic forms, the head is often greatly reduced and partially withdrawn into the prothorax (anterior part of the thorax). Sense organs appear to be poorly developed, with no ocelli, very small or absent antennae, and toothlike, sicklelike, or spinelike mandibles. They are also unable to defecate until they reach adulthood due to having an incomplete digestive tract (a blind sac), presumably to avoid contaminating their environment. The larvae of stinging forms (Aculeata) generally have 10 pairs of spiracles, or breathing pores, whereas parasitic forms usually have nine pairs present.\nReproduction.\nSex determination.\nAmong most or all hymenopterans, sex is determined by the number of chromosomes an individual possesses. Fertilized eggs get two sets of chromosomes (one from each parent's respective gametes) and develop into diploid females, while unfertilized eggs only contain one set (from the mother) and develop into haploid males. The act of fertilization is under the voluntary control of the egg-laying female, giving her control of the sex of her offspring. This phenomenon is called haplodiploidy.\nHowever, the actual genetic mechanisms of haplodiploid sex determination may be more complex than simple chromosome number. In many Hymenoptera, sex is determined by a single gene locus with many alleles. In these species, haploids are male and diploids heterozygous at the sex locus are female, but occasionally a diploid will be homozygous at the sex locus and develop as a male, instead. This is especially likely to occur in an individual whose parents were siblings or other close relatives. Diploid males are known to be produced by inbreeding in many ant, bee, and wasp species. Diploid biparental males are usually sterile but a few species that have fertile diploid males are known.\nOne consequence of haplodiploidy is that females on average have more genes in common with their sisters than they do with their daughters. Because of this, cooperation among kindred females may be unusually advantageous and has been hypothesized to contribute to the multiple origins of eusociality within this order. In many colonies of bees, ants, and wasps, worker females will remove eggs laid by other workers due to increased relatedness to direct siblings, a phenomenon known as worker policing.\nAnother consequence is that hymenopterans may be more resistant to the deleterious effects of inbreeding. As males are haploid, any recessive genes will automatically be expressed, exposing them to natural selection. Thus, the genetic load of deleterious genes is purged relatively quickly.\nThelytoky.\nSome hymenopterans take advantage of parthenogenesis, the creation of embryos without fertilization. Thelytoky is a particular form of parthenogenesis in which female embryos are created (without fertilisation). The form of thelytoky in hymenopterans is a kind of automixis in which two haploid products (proto-eggs) from the same meiosis fuse to form a diploid zygote. This process tends to maintain heterozygosity in the passage of the genome from mother to daughter. It is found in several ant species including the desert ant \"Cataglyphis cursor\", the clonal raider ant \"Cerapachys biroi\", the predaceous ant \"Platythyrea punctata\", and the electric ant (little fire ant) \"Wasmannia auropunctata\". It also occurs in the Cape honey bee \"Apis mellifera capensis\".\nOocytes that undergo automixis with central fusion often have a reduced rate of crossover recombination, which helps to maintain heterozygosity and avoid inbreeding depression. Species that display central fusion with reduced recombination include the ants \"Platythyrea punctata\" and \" Wasmannia auropunctata\" and the Cape honey bee \"Apis mellifera capensis\". In \"A. m. capensis\", the recombination rate during meiosis is reduced more than tenfold. In \"W. auropunctata\" the reduction is 45\u00a0fold.\nSingle queen colonies of the narrow headed ant \"Formica exsecta\" illustrate the possible deleterious effects of increased homozygosity. Colonies of this species which have more homozygous queens will age more rapidly, resulting in reduced colony survival.\nDiet.\nDifferent species of Hymenoptera show a wide range of feeding habits. The most primitive forms are typically phytophagous, feeding on flowers, pollen, foliage, or stems. Stinging wasps are predators, and will provision their larvae with immobilized prey, while bees feed on nectar and pollen.\nA huge number of species are parasitoids as larvae. The adults inject the eggs into a host, which they begin to consume after hatching. For example, the eggs of the endangered \"Papilio homerus\" are parasitized at a rate of 77%, mainly by Hymenoptera species. Some species are even hyperparasitoid, with the host itself being another parasitoid insect. Habits intermediate between those of the herbivorous and parasitoid forms are shown in some hymenopterans, which inhabit the galls or nests of other insects, stealing their food, and eventually killing and eating the occupant.\nClassification.\nThe Hymenoptera are divided into two groups; the Symphyta which have no waist, and the Apocrita which have a narrow waist.\nSymphyta.\nThe suborder Symphyta includes the sawflies, horntails, and parasitic wood wasps. The group may be paraphyletic, as it has been suggested that the family Orussidae may be the group from which the Apocrita arose. They have an unconstricted junction between the thorax and abdomen. The larvae are herbivorous, free-living, and eruciform, usually with three pairs of true legs, prolegs (on every segment, unlike Lepidoptera) and ocelli. The prolegs do not have crochet hooks at the ends unlike the larvae of the Lepidoptera. The legs and prolegs tend to be reduced or absent in larvae that mine or bore plant tissue, as well as in larvae of Pamphiliidae.\nApocrita.\nThe wasps, bees, and ants together make up the suborder (and clade) Apocrita, characterized by a constriction between the first and second abdominal segments called a wasp-waist (petiole), also involving the fusion of the first abdominal segment to the thorax. Also, the larvae of all Apocrita lack legs, prolegs, or ocelli. The hindgut of the larvae also remains closed during development, with feces being stored inside the body, with the exception of some bee larvae where the larval anus has reappeared through developmental reversion. In general, the anus only opens at the completion of larval growth.\nThreats.\nHymenoptera as a group are highly susceptible to habitat loss, which can lead to substantial decreases in species richness and have major ecological implications due to their pivotal role as plant pollinators.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13976", "revid": "8719036", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13976", "title": "Hannibal Hamlin", "text": "Vice President of the United States from 1861 to 1865\nHannibal Hamlin (August 27, 1809 \u2013 July 4, 1891) was an American politician and diplomat who was the 15th vice president of the United States, serving from 1861 to 1865, during President Abraham Lincoln's first term. He was the first Republican vice president.\nAs an attorney from Maine, Hamlin began his political career as a Democrat in the Maine House of Representatives before being elected twice to the United States House of Representatives, and then to the United States Senate. With his strong abolitionist views, he left the Democratic Party for the newly formed Republican Party in 1856. In the 1860 general election, Hamlin balanced the successful Republican ticket as a New Englander partnered with the Northwesterner Lincoln. Although not a close friend of the president, he lent loyal support to his key projects such as the Emancipation Proclamation during the American Civil War.\nIn the 1864 election, Hamlin was replaced as vice-presidential nominee by Andrew Johnson, a Southern Democrat from Tennessee who remained loyal to the union, and chosen for his appeal to Southern Unionists. After being appointed Collector of the Port of Boston, Hamlin was elected to two more terms in the Senate, and finally served as U.S. Minister to Spain before retiring in 1882.\nEarly life.\nHamlin was born to Cyrus Hamlin and his wife Anna (n\u00e9e Livermore) in Paris (now in Maine, then a part of Massachusetts). He was a descendant of the sixth generation of English colonist James Hamlin, who had settled in Barnstable, part of the Plymouth Colony in 1639. He was a grandnephew of U.S. Senator Samuel Livermore II of New Hampshire.\nAccording to folklore, Hamlin's life was saved when he was an infant by a Native American medicine woman named Molly Ockett. Hamlin was gravely ill, and Ockett prescribed that he be given warm cow's milk, after which he recovered.\nHamlin attended the district schools and Hebron Academy and later managed his father's farm. From 1827 to 1830 he published the \"Oxford Jeffersonian\" newspaper in partnership with Horatio King.\nHe studied law with the firm headed by Samuel Fessenden, was admitted to the bar in 1833, and began practicing in Hampden, Maine, where he lived until 1848.\nPersonal life.\nHamlin married Sarah Jane Emery of Paris Hill in 1833. Her father was Stephen Emery, who was appointed as Maine's Attorney General from 1839 to 1840. Hamlin and Sarah had four children: George, Charles, Cyrus, and Sarah.\nHis wife died in 1855. The next year, Hamlin married Sarah's half-sister, Ellen Vesta Emery. They had two children together: Hannibal E. and Frank. Ellen Hamlin died in 1925.\nPolitical beginnings.\nHamlin's political career began in 1835 when he was elected to the Maine House of Representatives. Appointed a Major on the staff of Governor John Fairfield, he served with the militia in the bloodless Aroostook War of 1839. He facilitated negotiations between Fairfield and Lieutenant Governor John Harvey of New Brunswick, which helped reduce tensions and make possible the Webster\u2013Ashburton Treaty, which ended the war.\nHamlin unsuccessfully ran for the United States House of Representatives in 1840 and left the State House in 1841. He was later elected to two terms in the United States House of Representatives, serving from 1843 to 1847. He was elected by the state legislature to fill a U.S. Senate vacancy in 1848 and to a full term in 1851. A Democrat at the beginning of his career, Hamlin supported the presidential candidacy of Franklin Pierce in 1852.\nFrom the very beginning of his service in Congress, Hamlin was a prominent opponent of the extension of slavery. He was a conspicuous supporter of the Wilmot Proviso and spoke against the Compromise of 1850. In 1854, Hamlin strongly opposed the passage of the Kansas\u2013Nebraska Act, which repealed the Missouri Compromise. After the Democratic Party endorsed that repeal at the 1856 Democratic National Convention, on June 12, 1856, he withdrew from the Democratic Party and joined the newly organized Republican Party, causing a national sensation.\nThe Republicans nominated Hamlin for governor of Maine the same year. He won the election by a large margin and was inaugurated on January 8, 1857. In the latter part of February 1857, however, he resigned the governorship. He returned to the United States Senate, serving from 1857 to January 1861.\nVice presidency (1861\u20131865).\nHamlin was nominated by the Republican Party for Vice President of the United States in the 1860 presidential election on a ticket with former Representative Abraham Lincoln, the presidential nominee. Given that Lincoln was from Illinois, a vice presidential nominee from Maine provided regional balance. As a former Democrat, Hamlin could persuade other anti-slavery Democrats that joining the Republican Party was the only way to ensure slavery's demise.\nHamlin and Lincoln were not close personally, but had a good working relationship. At the time, the vice president was part of the legislative branch in his role as president of the Senate and did not attend cabinet meetings; Hamlin did not regularly visit the White House. Mary Todd Lincoln and Hamlin disliked each other. For his part, Hamlin complained, \"I am only a fifth wheel of a coach and can do little for my friends.\"\nHe had little influence in the Lincoln administration, although he urged both the Emancipation Proclamation and the arming of Black Americans. He strongly supported Joseph Hooker's appointment as commander of the Army of the Potomac, which failed at the Battle of Chancellorsville.\nBeginning in 1860, Hamlin was a member of Company A of the Maine State Guard, a militia unit. When the company was called up in the summer of 1864, militia leaders informed Hamlin that because of his position as vice president, he did not have to take part in the muster. He opted to serve, arguing that he could set an example by doing the duty expected of any citizen, and the only concession made because of his office was that he was quartered with the officers. He reported to Fort McClary, in Kittery, in July, initially taking part in routine assignments including guard duty, and later taking over as company cook. He was promoted to corporal during his service and mustered out with the rest of his unit in mid-September.\nIn 1862, Hamlin presided over the impeachment trial in the Senate of Judge West Hughes Humphreys.\nIn June 1864, the Republicans and War Democrats joined to form the National Union Party. Although Lincoln was renominated, War Democrat Andrew Johnson of Tennessee was named to replace Hamlin as Lincoln's running mate. Lincoln was seeking to broaden his base of support and was also looking ahead to Southern Reconstruction, at which Johnson had proven himself adept as military governor of occupied Tennessee. Hamlin, by contrast, was an ally of the Northern \"Radical Republicans\" (who later impeached Johnson). Lincoln and Johnson were elected in November 1864, and Hamlin's term expired on March 4, 1865. Hamlin swore Johnson in as vice president. Johnson, who was drunk, subsequently gave an incoherent speech.\nAlthough Hamlin narrowly missed becoming president, his vice presidency ushered in a half-century of sustained national influence for the Maine Republican Party. In the period 1861\u20131911, Maine Republicans occupied the offices of vice president, Secretary of the Treasury (twice), Secretary of State, President pro tempore of the United States Senate, and Speaker of the United States House of Representatives (twice), and fielded a presidential nominee in James G. Blaine, a level of influence in national politics unmatched by subsequent Maine political delegations.\nPost-vice presidency (1865\u20131891).\nAfter leaving the vice presidency, Hamlin served briefly as Collector of the Port of Boston. Appointed to the post by Johnson, he resigned in protest over Johnson's Reconstruction policy and accompanying efforts to build a political following loyal to him after he had been repudiated by the Republicans. Republicans had supported Johnson as part of the National Union ticket during the war, but opposed him after he became president and his position on Reconstruction deviated from theirs.\nNot content with private life, Hamlin returned to the U.S. Senate in 1869 to serve two more terms before declining to run for reelection in 1880 because of an ailing heart. His last duty as a public servant came in 1881 when Secretary of State James G. Blaine convinced President James A. Garfield to name Hamlin as United States Ambassador to Spain. Hamlin received the appointment on June 30, 1881, and held the post until October 17, 1882.\nUpon returning from Spain, Hamlin retired from public life to his home in Bangor, Maine, which he had purchased in 1851. The Hannibal Hamlin House\u2014as it is known today\u2014is in central Bangor at 15 5th Street. Incorporating Victorian, Italianate, and Mansard-style architecture, the mansion was posted to the National Register of Historic Places in 1979.\nHamlin was elected as a Third Class Companion of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States. Third Class was the MOLLUS division created to recognize civilians who had contributed outstanding service to the Union during the war.\nDeath.\nOn July 4, 1891, Hamlin collapsed and fell unconscious while playing cards at the Tarratine Club he founded in downtown Bangor, and died there a few hours later, at the age of 81. He was buried in the Hamlin family plot at Mount Hope Cemetery in Bangor. He outlived six of his successors in the vice presidency (Andrew Johnson, Schuyler Colfax, Henry Wilson, William A. Wheeler, Chester A. Arthur, and Thomas A. Hendricks), more than any other U.S. vice president. He was also the third American Vice President to die on Independence Day.\nHe is buried in the Mount Hope Cemetery in Bangor, Maine.\nFamily.\nHamlin had four sons and one daughter who grew to adulthood: Charles, Cyrus, Hannibal Emery, Frank, and Sarah. Charles and Cyrus served in the Union forces during the Civil War, both becoming generals, Charles by brevet. Cyrus was among the first Union officers to argue for the enlistment of black troops and commanded a brigade of freedmen in the Siege of Port Hudson. Charles and Sarah were present at Ford's Theater the night of Lincoln's assassination. Hannibal Emery Hamlin was Maine Attorney General from 1905 to 1908. Hannibal Hamlin's great-granddaughter Sally Hamlin was a child actor who made many spoken word recordings for the Victor Talking Machine Company in the early 20th century.\nHannibal's older brother, Elijah Livermore Hamlin, was president of the Mutual Fire Insurance Co. of Bangor and the Bangor Institution for Savings. He was twice an unsuccessful candidate for governor of Maine in the late 1840s and served as mayor of Bangor in 1851\u20131852. The brothers were members of different political parties (Hannibal a Democrat, and Elijah a Whig) before both became Republicans in the late 1850s.\nHannibal's nephew (Elijah's son) Augustus Choate Hamlin was a physician, artist, mineralogist, author, and historian. He was also mayor of Bangor in 1877\u20131878, and a founding member of the Bangor Historical Society.\nAugustus served as a surgeon in the 2nd Maine Volunteer Infantry Regiment during the Civil War, eventually becoming a U.S. Army Medical Inspector, and later the Surgeon General of Maine. He wrote books about Andersonville Prison and the Battle of Chancellorsville. Hannibal's grand-nephew (Elijah's grandson) Isaiah K. Stetson was Speaker of the Maine House of Representatives in 1899\u20131900, and owned a large company in Bangor that manufactured and shipped lumber and ice and ran a shipyard and marine railway.\nHannibal's first cousin Cyrus Hamlin, who was a graduate of the Bangor Theological Seminary, became a missionary in Turkey, where he founded Robert College. He later became president of Middlebury College in Vermont. His son, A. D. F. Hamlin, Hannibal's first cousin once removed, became a professor of architecture at Columbia University and a noted architectural historian. There are biographies of Hamlin by his grandson Charles E. Hamlin (1899, reprinted 1971) and by H. Draper Hunt (1969).\nHonors and legacy.\nHamlin County, South Dakota is named in his honor, as are Hamlin, Kansas; Hamlin, New York; Hamlin, West Virginia; Hamlin Township; Hamlin Lake in Mason County, Michigan; Hamlin Peak, a mountain in Piscataquis County, Maine; and Hamlin, a small Maine village that is a U.S.\u2013Canada border crossing with Grand Falls, New Brunswick. There are statues in Hamlin's likeness in the United States Capitol and a public park (Norumbega Mall) in Bangor, Maine.\nThere is also a building on the University of Maine Campus, in Orono, named Hannibal Hamlin Hall. A fire broke out there on February 13, 1944, in which two students died and one was severely injured. The building was later rebuilt. Hannibal Hamlin Memorial Library is next to his birthplace in Paris, Maine.\nThe Hampden Maine Historical Society exhibits a restoration of his first law office at its Kinsley House Museum grounds.\nHamlin's house in Bangor subsequently housed the presidents of the adjacent Bangor Theological Seminary. It is listed on the National Register of Historic Places, as is Hamlin's birthplace in Paris, Maine (as part of the Paris Hill Historic District).\nHamlin Park in Chicago is named in his honor.\nIn popular culture.\nHamlin appears briefly in three alternate history writings by Harry Turtledove: \"The Guns of the South\", \"Must and Shall\", and \"How Few Remain\".\nIn \"Fallout 3\", a quest called Head of State involves returning the Lincoln Memorial statue's head to its pedestal. The leader of the group trying to return the head to Abraham Lincoln's statue is named Hannibal Hamlin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13978", "revid": "21203279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13978", "title": "Hopwood Award", "text": "University of Michigan scholarship program\nThe Hopwood Awards are a major scholarship program at the University of Michigan, founded by Avery Hopwood.\nUnder the terms of the will of Avery Hopwood, a prominent American dramatist and member of the class of 1905 of the University of Michigan, one-fifth of Mr. Hopwood's estate was given to the regents for the encouragement of creative work in writing. The first awards were made in 1931, and today, the Hopwood Program offers around $120,000 in prizes every year to aspiring writers at the University of Michigan. According to Nicholas Delbanco, UM English professor and former director of the Hopwood Awards Program, \"This is the oldest and best-known series of writing prizes in the country, and it is a very good indicator of future success.\"\nContests and prizes.\nThe Graduate and Undergraduate Hopwood Contests.\nAwards are offered in these genres: drama/screenplay, essay, the novel, short fiction, nonfiction, and poetry. These awards are classified under two categories, graduate or undergraduate, except the novel and drama/screenplay, which are combined categories. Award amounts for this contest vary, but usually fall in the range of $1000 to $6000.\nSummer Hopwood Contest.\nThe Summer Hopwood Contest was discontinued in 2017, but archives of winning Summer Hopwood manuscripts continue to be held in the Hopwood Room. When it ran, the contest was open only to students who took writing courses during spring and summer terms. Awards were given in the categories of drama or screenplay, nonfiction, short fiction, and poetry. Novels were not eligible for the Summer Hopwood Contest.\nHopwood Underclassmen Contest.\nThis contest is open only to freshmen and sophomores who are enrolled in writing courses. Awards are given in the categories of nonfiction, fiction, and poetry.\nHopwood Program.\nThe Hopwood Program administers the Hopwood Award, and several other awards in writing. It is located in the Hopwood Room at the University of Michigan and serves the needs and interests of Hopwood contestants. The room was established by Professor Roy W. Cowden, director of the Hopwood Awards from 1933 to 1952, who generously contributed a part of his library, which has grown through the addition of many volumes of contemporary literature. In addition to housing the winning manuscripts from the past years of the contests, the Hopwood Room has a lending library of 20th-century literature, a generous supply of noncirculating current periodicals, some reference books on how to get published, information on graduate and summer writing \nprograms, and a collection of screen plays donated by former Hopwood winner Lawrence Kasdan.\nPrizes administered by the Hopwood Program.\nThe Hopwood Program also administers these writing contests: \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13979", "revid": "20834545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13979", "title": "Hopwood Program", "text": ""}
{"id": "13980", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13980", "title": "Homeostasis", "text": "State of steady internal conditions maintained by living things\nIn biology, homeostasis (British also homoeostasis; ) is the state of steady internal physical and chemical conditions maintained by living systems. This is the condition of optimal functioning for the organism and includes many variables, such as body temperature and fluid balance, being kept within certain pre-set limits (homeostatic range). Other variables include the pH of extracellular fluid, the concentrations of sodium, potassium, and calcium ions, as well as the blood sugar level, and these need to be regulated despite changes in the environment, diet, or level of activity. Each of these variables is controlled by one or more regulators or homeostatic mechanisms, which together maintain life.\nHomeostasis is brought about by a natural resistance to change when already in optimal conditions, and equilibrium is maintained by many regulatory mechanisms; it is thought to be the central motivation for all organic action. All homeostatic control mechanisms have at least three interdependent components for the variable being regulated: a receptor, a control center, and an effector. The receptor is the sensing component that monitors and responds to changes in the environment, either external or internal. Receptors include thermoreceptors and mechanoreceptors. Control centers include the respiratory center and the renin-angiotensin system. An effector is the target acted on, to bring about the change back to the normal state. At the cellular level, effectors include nuclear receptors that bring about changes in gene expression through up-regulation or down-regulation and act in negative feedback mechanisms. An example of this is in the control of bile acids in the liver.\nSome centers, such as the renin\u2013angiotensin system, control more than one variable. When the receptor senses a stimulus, it reacts by sending action potentials to a control center. The control center sets the maintenance range\u2014the acceptable upper and lower limits\u2014for the particular variable, such as temperature. The control center responds to the signal by determining an appropriate response and sending signals to an effector, which can be one or more muscles, an organ, or a gland. When the signal is received and acted on, negative feedback is provided to the receptor that stops the need for further signaling.\nThe cannabinoid receptor type 1, located at the presynaptic neuron, is a receptor that can stop stressful neurotransmitter release to the postsynaptic neuron; it is activated by endocannabinoids such as anandamide (\"N\"-arachidonoylethanolamide) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol via a retrograde signaling process in which these compounds are synthesized by and released from postsynaptic neurons, and travel back to the presynaptic terminal to bind to the CB1 receptor for modulation of neurotransmitter release to obtain homeostasis.\nThe polyunsaturated fatty acids are lipid derivatives of omega-3 (docosahexaenoic acid, and eicosapentaenoic acid) or of omega-6 (arachidonic acid). They are synthesized from membrane phospholipids and used as precursors for endocannabinoids to mediate significant effects in the fine-tuning adjustment of body homeostasis.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"homeostasis\" ( ) uses combining forms of \"homeo-\" and \"-stasis\", Neo-Latin from Greek: \u1f45\u03bc\u03bf\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 \"homoios\", \"similar\" and \u03c3\u03c4\u03ac\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2 \"stasis\", \"standing still\", yielding the idea of \"staying the same\".\nHistory.\nThe concept of the regulation of the internal environment was described by French physiologist Claude Bernard in 1849, and the word \"homeostasis\" was coined by Walter Bradford Cannon in 1926. In 1932, Joseph Barcroft, a British physiologist, was the first to say that higher brain function required the most stable internal environment. Thus, to Barcroft homeostasis was not only organized by the brain\u2014homeostasis served the brain. Homeostasis is an almost exclusively biological term, referring to the concepts described by Bernard and Cannon, concerning the constancy of the internal environment in which the cells of the body live and survive. The term cybernetics is applied to technological control systems such as thermostats, which function as homeostatic mechanisms but are often defined much more broadly than the biological term of homeostasis.\nOverview.\nThe metabolic processes of all organisms can only take place in very specific physical and chemical environments. The conditions vary with each organism, and also with whether the chemical processes take place inside the cell or in the interstitial fluid bathing the cells. The best-known homeostatic mechanisms in humans and other mammals are regulators that keep the composition of the extracellular fluid (or the \"internal environment\") constant, especially with regard to the temperature, pH, osmolality, and the concentrations of sodium, potassium, glucose, carbon dioxide, and oxygen. However, a great many other homeostatic mechanisms, encompassing many aspects of human physiology, control other entities in the body. Where the levels of variables are higher or lower than those needed, they are often prefixed with \"hyper-\" and \"hypo-\", respectively such as hyperthermia and hypothermia or hypertension and hypotension.\nIf an entity is homeostatically controlled it does not imply that its value is necessarily absolutely steady in health. Core body temperature is, for instance, regulated by a homeostatic mechanism with temperature sensors in, amongst others, the hypothalamus of the brain. However, the set point of the regulator is regularly reset. For instance, core body temperature in humans varies during the course of the day (i.e. has a circadian rhythm), with the lowest temperatures occurring at night, and the highest in the afternoons. Other normal temperature variations include those related to the menstrual cycle. The temperature regulator's set point is reset during infections to produce a fever. Organisms are capable of adjusting somewhat to varied conditions such as temperature changes or oxygen levels at altitude, by a process of acclimatisation.\nHomeostasis does not govern every activity in the body. For instance, the signal (be it via neurons or hormones) from the sensor to the effector is, of necessity, highly variable in order to convey information about the direction and magnitude of the error detected by the sensor. Similarly, the effector's response needs to be highly adjustable to reverse the error \u2013 in fact it should be very nearly in proportion (but in the opposite direction) to the error that is threatening the internal environment. For instance, arterial blood pressure in mammals is homeostatically controlled and measured by stretch receptors in the walls of the aortic arch and carotid sinuses at the beginnings of the internal carotid arteries. The sensors send messages via sensory nerves to the medulla oblongata of the brain indicating whether the blood pressure has fallen or risen, and by how much. The medulla oblongata then distributes messages along motor or efferent nerves belonging to the autonomic nervous system to a wide variety of effector organs, whose activity is consequently changed to reverse the error in the blood pressure. One of the effector organs is the heart whose rate is stimulated to rise (tachycardia) when the arterial blood pressure falls, or to slow down (bradycardia) when the pressure rises above the set point. Thus the heart rate (for which there is no sensor in the body) is not homeostatically controlled but is one of the effector responses to errors in arterial blood pressure. Another example is the rate of sweating. This is one of the effectors in the homeostatic control of body temperature, and therefore highly variable in rough proportion to the heat load that threatens to destabilize the body's core temperature, for which there is a sensor in the hypothalamus of the brain.\nControls of variables.\nCore temperature.\nMammals regulate their core temperature using input from thermoreceptors in the hypothalamus, brain, spinal cord, internal organs, and great veins. Apart from the internal regulation of temperature, a process called allostasis can come into play that adjusts behaviour to adapt to the challenge of very hot or cold extremes (and to other challenges). These adjustments may include seeking shade and reducing activity, seeking warmer conditions and increasing activity, or huddling.\nBehavioral thermoregulation takes precedence over physiological thermoregulation since necessary changes can be affected more quickly and physiological thermoregulation is limited in its capacity to respond to extreme temperatures.\nWhen the core temperature falls, the blood supply to the skin is reduced by intense vasoconstriction. The blood flow to the limbs (which have a large surface area) is similarly reduced and returned to the trunk via the deep veins which lie alongside the arteries (forming venae comitantes). This acts as a counter-current exchange system that short-circuits the warmth from the arterial blood directly into the venous blood returning into the trunk, causing minimal heat loss from the extremities in cold weather. The subcutaneous limb veins are tightly constricted, not only reducing heat loss from this source but also forcing the venous blood into the counter-current system in the depths of the limbs.\nThe metabolic rate is increased, initially by non-shivering thermogenesis, followed by shivering thermogenesis if the earlier reactions are insufficient to correct the hypothermia.\nWhen core temperature rises are detected by thermoreceptors, the sweat glands in the skin are stimulated via cholinergic sympathetic nerves to secrete sweat onto the skin, which, when it evaporates, cools the skin and the blood flowing through it. Panting is an alternative effector in many vertebrates, which cools the body also by the evaporation of water, but this time from the mucous membranes of the throat and mouth.\nBlood glucose.\nBlood sugar levels are regulated within fairly narrow limits. In mammals, the primary sensors for this are the beta cells of the pancreatic islets. The beta cells respond to a rise in the blood sugar level by secreting insulin into the blood and simultaneously inhibiting their neighboring alpha cells from secreting glucagon into the blood. This combination (high blood insulin levels and low glucagon levels) act on effector tissues, the chief of which is the liver, fat cells, and muscle cells. The liver is inhibited from producing glucose, taking it up instead, and converting it to glycogen and triglycerides. The glycogen is stored in the liver, but the triglycerides are secreted into the blood as very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) particles which are taken up by adipose tissue, there to be stored as fats. The fat cells take up glucose through special glucose transporters (GLUT4), whose numbers in the cell wall are increased as a direct effect of insulin acting on these cells. The glucose that enters the fat cells in this manner is converted into triglycerides (via the same metabolic pathways as are used by the liver) and then stored in those fat cells together with the VLDL-derived triglycerides that were made in the liver. Muscle cells also take glucose up through insulin-sensitive GLUT4 glucose channels, and convert it into muscle glycogen.\nA fall in blood glucose, causes insulin secretion to be stopped, and glucagon to be secreted from the alpha cells into the blood. This inhibits the uptake of glucose from the blood by the liver, fats cells, and muscle. Instead the liver is strongly stimulated to manufacture glucose from glycogen (through glycogenolysis) and from non-carbohydrate sources (such as lactate and de-aminated amino acids) using a process known as gluconeogenesis. The glucose thus produced is discharged into the blood correcting the detected error (hypoglycemia). The glycogen stored in muscles remains in the muscles, and is only broken down, during exercise, to glucose-6-phosphate and thence to pyruvate to be fed into the citric acid cycle or turned into lactate. It is only the lactate and the waste products of the citric acid cycle that are returned to the blood. The liver can take up only the lactate, and, by the process of energy-consuming gluconeogenesis, convert it back to glucose.\nIron levels.\nIron homeostasis is a crucial physiological process that regulates iron levels in the body, ensuring that this essential nutrient is available for vital functions while preventing potential toxicity from excess iron. The primary site for iron absorption is the duodenum, where dietary iron exists in two forms: heme iron, sourced from animal products, and non-heme iron, found in plant foods. Heme iron is more efficiently absorbed than non-heme iron, which requires factors like vitamin C for optimal uptake. Once absorbed, iron enters the bloodstream bound to transferrin, a transport protein that delivers it to various tissues and organs. Cells uptake iron through transferrin receptors, making it available for critical processes such as oxygen transport and DNA synthesis. Excess iron is stored in the liver, spleen, and bone marrow as ferritin and hemosiderin. The regulation of iron levels is primarily controlled by the hormone hepcidin, produced by the liver, which adjusts intestinal absorption and the release of stored iron based on the body's needs. Disruptions in iron homeostasis can lead to conditions such as iron deficiency anemia or iron overload disorders like hemochromatosis, highlighting the importance of maintaining the delicate balance of this vital nutrient for overall health.\nCopper regulation.\nCopper is absorbed, transported, distributed, stored, and excreted in the body according to complex homeostatic processes which ensure a constant and sufficient supply of the micronutrient while simultaneously avoiding excess levels. If an insufficient amount of copper is ingested for a short period of time, copper stores in the liver will be depleted. Should this depletion continue, a copper health deficiency condition may develop. If too much copper is ingested, an excess condition can result. Both of these conditions, deficiency and excess, can lead to tissue injury and disease. However, due to homeostatic regulation, the human body is capable of balancing a wide range of copper intakes for the needs of healthy individuals.\nMany aspects of copper homeostasis are known at the molecular level. Copper's essentiality is due to its ability to act as an electron donor or acceptor as its oxidation state fluxes between Cu1+ (cuprous) and Cu2+ (cupric). As a component of about a dozen cuproenzymes, copper is involved in key redox (i.e., oxidation-reduction) reactions in essential metabolic processes such as mitochondrial respiration, synthesis of melanin, and cross-linking of collagen. Copper is an integral part of the antioxidant enzyme copper-zinc superoxide dismutase, and has a role in iron homeostasis as a cofactor in ceruloplasmin.\nLevels of blood gases.\nChanges in the levels of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and plasma pH are sent to the respiratory center, in the brainstem where they are regulated.\nThe partial pressure of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the arterial blood is monitored by the peripheral chemoreceptors (PNS) in the carotid artery and aortic arch. A change in the partial pressure of carbon dioxide is detected as altered pH in the cerebrospinal fluid by central chemoreceptors (CNS) in the medulla oblongata of the brainstem. Information from these sets of sensors is sent to the respiratory center which activates the effector organs \u2013 the diaphragm and other muscles of respiration. An increased level of carbon dioxide in the blood, or a decreased level of oxygen, will result in a deeper breathing pattern and increased respiratory rate to bring the blood gases back to equilibrium.\nToo little carbon dioxide, and, to a lesser extent, too much oxygen in the blood can temporarily halt breathing, a condition known as apnea, which freedivers use to prolong the time they can stay underwater.\nThe partial pressure of carbon dioxide is more of a deciding factor in the monitoring of pH. However, at high altitude (above 2500\u00a0m) the monitoring of the partial pressure of oxygen takes priority, and hyperventilation keeps the oxygen level constant. With the lower level of carbon dioxide, to keep the pH at 7.4 the kidneys secrete hydrogen ions into the blood and excrete bicarbonate into the urine. This is important in acclimatization to high altitude.\nBlood oxygen content.\nThe kidneys measure the oxygen content rather than the partial pressure of oxygen in the arterial blood. When the oxygen content of the blood is chronically low, oxygen-sensitive cells secrete erythropoietin (EPO) into the blood. The effector tissue is the red bone marrow which produces red blood cells (RBCs, also called ). The increase in RBCs leads to an increased hematocrit in the blood, and a subsequent increase in hemoglobin that increases the oxygen carrying capacity. This is the mechanism whereby high altitude dwellers have higher hematocrits than sea-level residents, and also why persons with pulmonary insufficiency or right-to-left shunts in the heart (through which venous blood by-passes the lungs and goes directly into the systemic circulation) have similarly high hematocrits.\nRegardless of the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood, the amount of oxygen that can be carried, depends on the hemoglobin content. The partial pressure of oxygen may be sufficient for example in anemia, but the hemoglobin content will be insufficient and subsequently as will be the oxygen content. Given enough supply of iron, vitamin B12 and folic acid, EPO can stimulate RBC production, and hemoglobin and oxygen content restored to normal.\nArterial blood pressure.\nThe brain can regulate blood flow over a range of blood pressure values by vasoconstriction and vasodilation of the arteries.\nHigh pressure receptors called baroreceptors in the walls of the aortic arch and carotid sinus (at the beginning of the internal carotid artery) monitor the arterial blood pressure. Rising pressure is detected when the walls of the arteries stretch due to an increase in blood volume. This causes heart muscle cells to secrete the hormone atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) into the blood. This acts on the kidneys to inhibit the secretion of renin and aldosterone causing the release of sodium, and accompanying water into the urine, thereby reducing the blood volume.\nThis information is then conveyed, via afferent nerve fibers, to the solitary nucleus in the medulla oblongata. From here motor nerves belonging to the autonomic nervous system are stimulated to influence the activity of chiefly the heart and the smallest diameter arteries, called arterioles. The arterioles are the main resistance vessels in the arterial tree, and small changes in diameter cause large changes in the resistance to flow through them. When the arterial blood pressure rises the arterioles are stimulated to dilate making it easier for blood to leave the arteries, thus deflating them, and bringing the blood pressure down, back to normal. At the same time, the heart is stimulated via cholinergic parasympathetic nerves to beat more slowly (called bradycardia), ensuring that the inflow of blood into the arteries is reduced, thus adding to the reduction in pressure, and correcting the original error.\nLow pressure in the arteries, causes the opposite reflex of constriction of the arterioles, and a speeding up of the heart rate (called tachycardia). If the drop in blood pressure is very rapid or excessive, the medulla oblongata stimulates the adrenal medulla, via \"preganglionic\" sympathetic nerves, to secrete epinephrine (adrenaline) into the blood. This hormone enhances the tachycardia and causes severe vasoconstriction of the arterioles to all but the essential organs in the body (especially the heart, lungs, and brain). These reactions usually correct the low arterial blood pressure (hypotension) very effectively.\nCalcium levels.\nThe plasma ionized calcium (Ca2+) concentration is very tightly controlled by a pair of homeostatic mechanisms. The sensor for the first one is situated in the parathyroid glands, where the chief cells sense the Ca2+ level by means of specialized calcium receptors in their membranes. The sensors for the second are the parafollicular cells in the thyroid gland. The parathyroid chief cells secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH) in response to a fall in the plasma ionized calcium level; the parafollicular cells of the thyroid gland secrete calcitonin in response to a rise in the plasma ionized calcium level.\nThe effector organs of the first homeostatic mechanism are the bones, the kidney, and, via a hormone released into the blood by the kidney in response to high PTH levels in the blood, the duodenum and jejunum. Parathyroid hormone (in high concentrations in the blood) causes bone resorption, releasing calcium into the plasma. This is a very rapid action which can correct a threatening hypocalcemia within minutes. High PTH concentrations cause the excretion of phosphate ions via the urine. Since phosphates combine with calcium ions to form insoluble salts (see also bone mineral), a decrease in the level of phosphates in the blood, releases free calcium ions into the plasma ionized calcium pool. PTH has a second action on the kidneys. It stimulates the manufacture and release, by the kidneys, of calcitriol into the blood. This steroid hormone acts on the epithelial cells of the upper small intestine, increasing their capacity to absorb calcium from the gut contents into the blood.\nThe second homeostatic mechanism, with its sensors in the thyroid gland, releases calcitonin into the blood when the blood ionized calcium rises. This hormone acts primarily on bone, causing the rapid removal of calcium from the blood and depositing it, in insoluble form, in the bones.\nThe two homeostatic mechanisms working through PTH on the one hand, and calcitonin on the other can very rapidly correct any impending error in the plasma ionized calcium level by either removing calcium from the blood and depositing it in the skeleton, or by removing calcium from it. The skeleton acts as an extremely large calcium store (about 1\u00a0kg) compared with the plasma calcium store (about 180\u00a0mg). Longer term regulation occurs through calcium absorption or loss from the gut.\nAnother example are the most well-characterised endocannabinoids like anandamide (\"N\"-arachidonoylethanolamide; AEA) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), whose synthesis occurs through the action of a series of intracellular enzymes activated in response to a rise in intracellular calcium levels to introduce homeostasis and prevention of tumor development through putative protective mechanisms that prevent cell growth and migration by activation of CB1 and/or CB2 and adjoining receptors.\nSodium concentration.\nThe homeostatic mechanism which controls the plasma sodium concentration is rather more complex than most of the other homeostatic mechanisms described on this page.\nThe sensor is situated in the juxtaglomerular apparatus of kidneys, which senses the plasma sodium concentration in a surprisingly indirect manner. Instead of measuring it directly in the blood flowing past the juxtaglomerular cells, these cells respond to the sodium concentration in the renal tubular fluid after it has already undergone a certain amount of modification in the proximal convoluted tubule and loop of Henle. These cells also respond to rate of blood flow through the juxtaglomerular apparatus, which, under normal circumstances, is directly proportional to the arterial blood pressure, making this tissue an ancillary arterial blood pressure sensor.\nIn response to a lowering of the plasma sodium concentration, or to a fall in the arterial blood pressure, the juxtaglomerular cells release renin into the blood. Renin is an enzyme which cleaves a decapeptide (a short protein chain, 10 amino acids long) from a plasma \u03b1-2-globulin called angiotensinogen. This decapeptide is known as angiotensin I. It has no known biological activity. However, when the blood circulates through the lungs a pulmonary capillary endothelial enzyme called angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) cleaves a further two amino acids from angiotensin I to form an octapeptide known as angiotensin II. Angiotensin II is a hormone which acts on the adrenal cortex, causing the release into the blood of the steroid hormone, aldosterone. Angiotensin II also acts on the smooth muscle in the walls of the arterioles causing these small diameter vessels to constrict, thereby restricting the outflow of blood from the arterial tree, causing the arterial blood pressure to rise. This, therefore, reinforces the measures described above (under the heading of \"Arterial blood pressure\"), which defend the arterial blood pressure against changes, especially hypotension.\nThe angiotensin II-stimulated aldosterone released from the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal glands has an effect on particularly the epithelial cells of the distal convoluted tubules and collecting ducts of the kidneys. Here it causes the reabsorption of sodium ions from the renal tubular fluid, in exchange for potassium ions which are secreted from the blood plasma into the tubular fluid to exit the body via the urine. The reabsorption of sodium ions from the renal tubular fluid halts further sodium ion losses from the body, and therefore preventing the worsening of hyponatremia. The hyponatremia can only be \"corrected\" by the consumption of salt in the diet. However, it is not certain whether a \"salt hunger\" can be initiated by hyponatremia, or by what mechanism this might come about.\nWhen the plasma sodium ion concentration is higher than normal (hypernatremia), the release of renin from the juxtaglomerular apparatus is halted, ceasing the production of angiotensin II, and its consequent aldosterone-release into the blood. The kidneys respond by excreting sodium ions into the urine, thereby normalizing the plasma sodium ion concentration. The low angiotensin II levels in the blood lower the arterial blood pressure as an inevitable concomitant response.\nThe reabsorption of sodium ions from the tubular fluid as a result of high aldosterone levels in the blood does not, of itself, cause renal tubular water to be returned to the blood from the distal convoluted tubules or collecting ducts. This is because sodium is reabsorbed in exchange for potassium and therefore causes only a modest change in the osmotic gradient between the blood and the tubular fluid. Furthermore, the epithelium of the distal convoluted tubules and collecting ducts is impermeable to water in the absence of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) in the blood. ADH is part of the control of fluid balance. Its levels in the blood vary with the osmolality of the plasma, which is measured in the hypothalamus of the brain. Aldosterone's action on the kidney tubules prevents sodium loss to the extracellular fluid (ECF). So there is no change in the osmolality of the ECF, and therefore no change in the ADH concentration of the plasma. However, low aldosterone levels cause a loss of sodium ions from the ECF, which could potentially cause a change in extracellular osmolality and therefore of ADH levels in the blood.\nPotassium concentration.\nHigh potassium concentrations in the plasma cause depolarization of the zona glomerulosa cells' membranes in the outer layer of the adrenal cortex. This causes the release of aldosterone into the blood.\nAldosterone acts primarily on the distal convoluted tubules and collecting ducts of the kidneys, stimulating the excretion of potassium ions into the urine. It does so, however, by activating the basolateral Na+/K+ pumps of the tubular epithelial cells. These sodium/potassium exchangers pump three sodium ions out of the cell, into the interstitial fluid and two potassium ions into the cell from the interstitial fluid. This creates an ionic concentration gradient which results in the reabsorption of sodium (Na+) ions from the tubular fluid into the blood, and secreting potassium (K+) ions from the blood into the urine (lumen of collecting duct).\nFluid balance.\nThe total amount of water in the body needs to be kept in balance. Fluid balance involves keeping the fluid volume stabilized, and also keeping the levels of electrolytes in the extracellular fluid stable. Fluid balance is maintained by the process of osmoregulation and by behavior. Osmotic pressure is detected by osmoreceptors in the median preoptic nucleus in the hypothalamus. Measurement of the plasma osmolality to give an indication of the water content of the body, relies on the fact that water losses from the body, (through unavoidable water loss through the skin which is not entirely waterproof and therefore always slightly moist, water vapor in the exhaled air, sweating, vomiting, normal feces and especially diarrhea) are all hypotonic, meaning that they are less salty than the body fluids (compare, for instance, the taste of saliva with that of tears. The latter has almost the same salt content as the extracellular fluid, whereas the former is hypotonic with respect to the plasma. Saliva does not taste salty, whereas tears are decidedly salty). Nearly all normal and abnormal losses of body water therefore cause the extracellular fluid to become hypertonic. Conversely, excessive fluid intake dilutes the extracellular fluid causing the hypothalamus to register hypotonic hyponatremia conditions.\nWhen the hypothalamus detects a hypertonic extracellular environment, it causes the secretion of an antidiuretic hormone (ADH) called vasopressin which acts on the effector organ, which in this case is the kidney. The effect of vasopressin on the kidney tubules is to reabsorb water from the distal convoluted tubules and collecting ducts, thus preventing aggravation of the water loss via the urine. The hypothalamus simultaneously stimulates the nearby thirst center causing an almost irresistible (if the hypertonicity is severe enough) urge to drink water. The cessation of urine flow prevents the hypovolemia and hypertonicity from getting worse; the drinking of water corrects the defect.\nHypo-osmolality results in very low plasma ADH levels. This results in the inhibition of water reabsorption from the kidney tubules, causing high volumes of very dilute urine to be excreted, thus getting rid of the excess water in the body.\nUrinary water loss, when the body water homeostat is intact, is a \"compensatory\" water loss, \"correcting\" any water excess in the body. However, since the kidneys cannot generate water, the thirst reflex is the all-important second effector mechanism of the body water homeostat, \"correcting\" any water deficit in the body.\nBlood pH.\nThe plasma pH can be altered by respiratory changes in the partial pressure of carbon dioxide; or altered by metabolic changes in the carbonic acid to bicarbonate ion ratio. The bicarbonate buffer system regulates the ratio of carbonic acid to bicarbonate to be equal to 1:20, at which ratio the blood pH is 7.4 (as explained in the Henderson\u2013Hasselbalch equation). A change in the plasma pH gives an acid\u2013base imbalance.\nIn acid\u2013base homeostasis there are two mechanisms that can help regulate the pH. Respiratory compensation a mechanism of the respiratory center, adjusts the partial pressure of carbon dioxide by changing the rate and depth of breathing, to bring the pH back to normal. The partial pressure of carbon dioxide also determines the concentration of carbonic acid, and the bicarbonate buffer system can also come into play. Renal compensation can help the bicarbonate buffer system.\nThe sensor for the plasma bicarbonate concentration is not known for certain. It is very probable that the renal tubular cells of the distal convoluted tubules are themselves sensitive to the pH of the plasma. The metabolism of these cells produces carbon dioxide, which is rapidly converted to hydrogen and bicarbonate through the action of carbonic anhydrase. When the ECF pH falls (becoming more acidic) the renal tubular cells excrete hydrogen ions into the tubular fluid to leave the body via urine. Bicarbonate ions are simultaneously secreted into the blood that decreases the carbonic acid, and consequently raises the plasma pH. The converse happens when the plasma pH rises above normal: bicarbonate ions are excreted into the urine, and hydrogen ions released into the plasma.\nWhen hydrogen ions are excreted into the urine, and bicarbonate into the blood, the latter combines with the excess hydrogen ions in the plasma that stimulated the kidneys to perform this operation. The resulting reaction in the plasma is the formation of carbonic acid which is in equilibrium with the plasma partial pressure of carbon dioxide. This is tightly regulated to ensure that there is no excessive build-up of carbonic acid or bicarbonate. The overall effect is therefore that hydrogen ions are lost in the urine when the pH of the plasma falls. The concomitant rise in the plasma bicarbonate mops up the increased hydrogen ions (caused by the fall in plasma pH) and the resulting excess carbonic acid is disposed of in the lungs as carbon dioxide. This restores the normal ratio between bicarbonate and the partial pressure of carbon dioxide and therefore the plasma pH.\nThe converse happens when a high plasma pH stimulates the kidneys to secrete hydrogen ions into the blood and to excrete bicarbonate into the urine. The hydrogen ions combine with the excess bicarbonate ions in the plasma, once again forming an excess of carbonic acid which can be exhaled, as carbon dioxide, in the lungs, keeping the plasma bicarbonate ion concentration, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide and, therefore, the plasma pH, constant.\nCerebrospinal fluid.\nCerebrospinal fluid (CSF) allows for regulation of the distribution of substances between cells of the brain, and neuroendocrine factors, to which slight changes can cause problems or damage to the nervous system. For example, high glycine concentration disrupts temperature and blood pressure control, and high CSF pH causes dizziness and syncope.\nNeurotransmission.\nInhibitory neurons in the central nervous system play a homeostatic role in the balance of neuronal activity between excitation and inhibition. Inhibitory neurons using GABA, make compensating changes in the neuronal networks preventing runaway levels of excitation. An imbalance between excitation and inhibition is seen to be implicated in a number of neuropsychiatric disorders.\nNeuroendocrine system.\nThe neuroendocrine system is the mechanism by which the hypothalamus maintains homeostasis, regulating metabolism, reproduction, eating and drinking behaviour, energy utilization, osmolarity and blood pressure.\nThe regulation of metabolism, is carried out by hypothalamic interconnections to other glands.\nThree endocrine glands of the hypothalamic\u2013pituitary\u2013gonadal axis (HPG axis) often work together and have important regulatory functions. Two other regulatory endocrine axes are the hypothalamic\u2013pituitary\u2013adrenal axis (HPA axis) and the hypothalamic\u2013pituitary\u2013thyroid axis (HPT axis).\nThe liver also has many regulatory functions of the metabolism. An important function is the production and control of bile acids. Too much bile acid can be toxic to cells and its synthesis can be inhibited by activation of FXR a nuclear receptor.\nGene regulation.\nAt the cellular level, homeostasis is carried out by several mechanisms including transcriptional regulation that can alter the activity of genes in response to changes.\nEnergy balance.\nThe amount of energy consumed through dietary intake must align closely with the amount of energy expended by the body in order to maintain overall energy balance, a state known as energy homeostasis. This critical process is managed through the regulation of appetite, which is influenced by two key hormones: ghrelin and leptin. Ghrelin is known as the hunger hormone, as it plays a significant role in stimulating feelings of hunger, thereby prompting individuals to seek out and consume food. On the other hand, leptin serves a different function; it signals satiety, or the feeling of fullness, telling the body that it has consumed enough food.\nIn a comprehensive review conducted in 2019 that examined various weight-change interventions\u2014including dieting, exercise, and instances of overeating\u2014it was determined that the body's mechanisms for regulating weight homeostasis are not capable of precisely correcting for energetic errors. These energetic errors refer to the notable loss or gain of calories that can occur in the short term. This research highlights the complexity of energy balance, showing that the body may struggle to adjust rapidly to fluctuations in calorie intake or expenditure, thereby complicating the process of maintaining a stable body weight in response to immediate changes in energy consumption and usage.\nClinical significance.\nMany diseases are the result of a homeostatic failure. Almost any homeostatic component can malfunction either as a result of an inherited defect, an inborn error of metabolism, or an acquired disease. Some homeostatic mechanisms have inbuilt redundancies, which ensures that life is not immediately threatened if a component malfunctions; but sometimes a homeostatic malfunction can result in serious disease, which can be fatal if not treated. A well-known example of a homeostatic failure is shown in type 1 diabetes mellitus. Here blood sugar regulation is unable to function because the beta cells of the pancreatic islets are destroyed and cannot produce the necessary insulin. The blood sugar rises in a condition known as hyperglycemia.\nThe plasma ionized calcium homeostat can be disrupted by the constant, unchanging, over-production of parathyroid hormone by a parathyroid adenoma resulting in the typically features of hyperparathyroidism, namely high plasma ionized Ca2+ levels and the resorption of bone, which can lead to spontaneous fractures. The abnormally high plasma ionized calcium concentrations cause conformational changes in many cell-surface proteins (especially ion channels and hormone or neurotransmitter receptors) giving rise to lethargy, muscle weakness, anorexia, constipation and labile emotions.\nThe body water homeostat can be compromised by the inability to secrete ADH in response to even the normal daily water losses via the exhaled air, the feces, and insensible sweating. On receiving a zero blood ADH signal, the kidneys produce huge unchanging volumes of very dilute urine, causing dehydration and death if not treated.\nAs organisms age, the efficiency of their control systems becomes reduced. The inefficiencies gradually result in an unstable internal environment that increases the risk of illness, and leads to the physical changes associated with aging.\nVarious chronic diseases are kept under control by homeostatic compensation, which masks a problem by compensating for it (making up for it) in another way. However, the compensating mechanisms eventually wear out or are disrupted by a new complicating factor (such as the advent of a concurrent acute viral infection), which sends the body reeling through a new cascade of events. Such decompensation unmasks the underlying disease, worsening its symptoms. Common examples include decompensated heart failure, kidney failure, and liver failure according to Fan et al. (2011).\nBiosphere.\nIn the Gaia hypothesis, James Lovelock stated that the entire mass of living matter on Earth (or any planet with life) functions as a vast homeostatic superorganism that actively modifies its planetary environment to produce the environmental conditions necessary for its own survival. In this view, the entire planet maintains several homeostasis (the primary one being temperature homeostasis). Whether this sort of system is present on Earth is open to debate. However, some relatively simple homeostatic mechanisms are generally accepted. For example, it is sometimes claimed that when atmospheric carbon dioxide levels rise, certain plants may be able to grow better and thus act to remove more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. However, warming has exacerbated droughts, making water the actual limiting factor on land. When sunlight is plentiful and the atmospheric temperature climbs, it has been claimed that the phytoplankton of the ocean surface waters, acting as global sunshine, and therefore heat sensors, may thrive and produce more dimethyl sulfide (DMS). The DMS molecules act as cloud condensation nuclei, which produce more clouds, and thus increase the atmospheric albedo, and this feeds back to lower the temperature of the atmosphere. However, rising sea temperature has stratified the oceans, separating warm, sunlit waters from cool, nutrient-rich waters. Thus, nutrients have become the limiting factor, and plankton levels have actually fallen over the past 50 years, not risen. As scientists discover more about Earth, vast numbers of positive and negative feedback loops are being discovered, that, together, maintain a metastable condition, sometimes within a very broad range of environmental conditions.\nPredictive.\nPredictive homeostasis is an anticipatory response to an expected challenge in the future, such as the stimulation of insulin secretion by gut hormones which enter the blood in response to a meal. This insulin secretion occurs before the blood sugar level rises, lowering the blood sugar level in anticipation of a large influx into the blood of glucose resulting from the digestion of carbohydrates in the gut. Such anticipatory reactions are open loop systems which are based, essentially, on \"guess work\", and are not self-correcting. Anticipatory responses always require a closed loop negative feedback system to correct the 'over-shoots' and 'under-shoots' to which the anticipatory systems are prone.\nOther fields.\nThe term has come to be used in other fields, for example:\nRisk.\nAn actuary may refer to \"risk homeostasis\", where (for example) people who have anti-lock brakes have no better safety record than those without anti-lock brakes, because the former unconsciously compensate for the safer vehicle via less-safe driving habits. Previous to the innovation of anti-lock brakes, certain maneuvers involved minor skids, evoking fear and avoidance: Now the anti-lock system moves the boundary for such feedback, and behavior patterns expand into the no-longer punitive area. It has also been suggested that ecological crises are an instance of risk homeostasis in which a particular behavior continues until proven dangerous or dramatic consequences actually occur.\nStress.\nSociologists and psychologists may refer to \"stress homeostasis\", the tendency of a population or an individual to stay at a certain level of stress, often generating artificial stresses if the \"natural\" level of stress is not enough.\nJean-Fran\u00e7ois Lyotard, a postmodern theorist, has applied this term to societal 'power centers' that he describes in \"The Postmodern Condition\", as being 'governed by a principle of homeostasis,' for example, the scientific hierarchy, which will sometimes ignore a radical new discovery for years because it destabilizes previously accepted norms.\nTechnology.\nFamiliar technological homeostatic mechanisms include:\nSociety and culture.\nThe use of sovereign power, codes of conduct, religious and cultural practices and other dynamic processes in a society can be described as a part of an evolved homeostatic system of regularizing life and maintaining an overall equilibrium that protects the security of the whole from internal and external imbalances or dangers. Healthy civic cultures can be said to have achieved an optimal homeostatic balance between multiple contradictory concerns such as in the tension between respect for individual rights and concern for the public good, or that between governmental effectiveness and responsiveness to the interests of citizens.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13981", "revid": "48535834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13981", "title": "Hockey", "text": "Sports played with hockey sticks\nHockey is a family of stick sports where two opposing teams use hockey sticks to propel a ball or disk into a goal. There are many types of hockey, and the individual sports vary in rules, numbers of players, apparel, and playing surface. Hockey includes both summer and winter variations that may be played on an outdoor field, sheet of ice, or an indoor gymnasium. Some forms of hockey require skates, either inline, roller or ice, while others do not. The various games are usually distinguished by proceeding the word \"hockey\" with a qualifier, as in \"field hockey\", \"ice hockey\", \"roller hockey\", \"rink hockey\", or \"floor hockey\".\nIn each of these sports, two teams play against each other by trying to manoeuvre the object of play, either a type of ball or a disk (such as a puck), into the opponent's goal using a hockey stick. Two notable exceptions use a straight stick and an open disk (still referred to as a \"puck\") with a hole in the center instead. The first case is a style of floor hockey whose rules were codified in 1936 during the Great Depression by Canada's Sam Jacks. The second case involves a variant which was later modified in roughly the 1970s to make a related game that would be considered suitable for inclusion as a team sport in the newly emerging Special Olympics. The floor game of gym ringette, though related to floor hockey, is not a true variant because it was designed in the 1990s and modelled on the Canadian ice skating team sport of ringette, which was invented in Canada in 1963. Ringette was also invented by Sam Jacks, the same Canadian who codified the rules for the open disk style of floor hockey in 1936.\nCertain sports which share general characteristics with the forms of hockey, but are not generally referred to as hockey include lacrosse, hurling, camogie, and shinty.\nEtymology.\nThe first recorded use of the word \"hockey\" is in the 1773 book \"Juvenile Sports and Pastimes, to Which Are Prefixed, Memoirs of the Author: Including a New Mode of Infant Education\" by Richard Johnson (Pseud. Master Michel Angelo), whose chapter XI was titled \"New Improvements on the Game of Hockey\". The belief that hockey was mentioned in a 1363 proclamation by King Edward III of England is based on modern translations of the proclamation, which was originally in Latin and explicitly forbade the games \"Pilam Manualem, Pedivam, &amp; Bacularem: &amp; ad Canibucam &amp; Gallorum Pugnam\". The English historian and biographer John Strype did not use the word \"hockey\" when he translated the proclamation in 1720, instead translating \"Canibucam\" as \"Cambuck\"; this may have referred to either an early form of hockey or a game more similar to golf or croquet.\nThe word \"hockey\" itself is of unknown origin. One supposition is that it is a derivative of \"hoquet\", a Middle French word for a shepherd's stave. The curved, or \"hooked\" ends of the sticks used for hockey would indeed have resembled these staves, and similar folk etymologies exist for the bat-and-ball sports of Croquet and Cricket. Another supposition derives from the known use of cork bungs (stoppers), in place of wooden balls to play the game. The stoppers came from barrels containing \"hock\" ale, also called \"hocky\".\nModern usage.\nIn most of the world, the term \"hockey\" when used without clarification refers to field hockey, while in Canada, the United States, Russia and most of Eastern and Northern Europe, the term usually refers to ice hockey.\nIn more recent history, the word \"hockey\" is used in reference to either the summer Olympic sport of field hockey, which is a stick and ball game, and the winter ice team skating sports of bandy and ice hockey. This is because field hockey and other stick and ball sports and their related variants preceded games which would eventually be played on ice with ice skates, namely bandy and ice hockey, as well as sports involving dry floors such as roller hockey and floor hockey. However, the \"hockey\" referred to in common parlance often depends on locale, geography, and the size and popularity of the sport involved. For example, in Europe, \"hockey\" more typically refers to field hockey, whereas in Canada, it typically refers to ice hockey. In the case of bandy, the game was initially called \"hockey on the ice\" and preceded the organization and development of ice hockey, but was officially changed to \"bandy\" in the early 20th century in order to avoid confusion with ice hockey, a separate sport. Bandy, while related to other hockey games, derives some of its inspiration from Association football.\nHistory.\nGames played with curved sticks and a ball can be found in the histories of many cultures. In Egypt, 4000-year-old carvings feature teams with sticks and a projectile, hurling dates to before 1272 BC in Ireland, and there is a depiction from approximately 600 BC in Ancient Greece, where the game may have been called (\u03ba\u03b5\u03c1\u03b7\u03c4\u03af\u03b6\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd) because it was played with a horn or horn-like stick (\"\", \u03ba\u03ad\u03c1\u03b1\u03c2). In Inner Mongolia, the Daur people have been playing \"beikou\", a game similar to modern field hockey, for about 1,000 years. The Tio of the Republic of Congo played a hockey-like game with a ball called \"kuli\".164 Most evidence of hockey-like games during the Middle Ages is found in legislation concerning sports and games. The Galway Statute enacted in Ireland in 1527 banned certain types of ball games, including games using \"hooked\" (written \"hockie\", similar to \"hooky\") sticks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...at no tyme to use ne occupye the horlinge of the litill balle with hockie stickes or staves, nor use no hande ball to play withoute walles, but only greate foote balle\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Bandy, \u00bb. a game, like that of Golf, in which the ad- verse parties endeavour to beat a ball (generally a knob or gnarl from the trunk of a tree,) opposite ways...the stick with which the game is played is crook'd at the end.\nBy the 19th century, the various forms and divisions of historic games began to differentiate and coalesce into the individual sports defined today. Organizations dedicated to the codification of rules and regulations began to form, and national and international bodies sprang up to manage domestic and international competition.\nSubtypes.\nField hockey.\nField hockey is played on gravel, natural grass, or sand-based or water-based artificial turf, with a small, hard ball approximately 73\u00a0mm (2.9\u00a0in) in diameter. The game is popular among both men and women in many parts of the world, particularly in Europe, Asia, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, and Argentina. In most countries, the game is played between single-sex sides, although they can be mixed-sex.\nThe governing body is the 126-member International Hockey Federation (FIH). Men's field hockey has been played at every Summer Olympic Games since 1908 except for 1912 and 1924, while women's field hockey has been played at the Summer Olympic Games since 1980.\nModern field hockey sticks are constructed of a composite of wood, glass fibre or carbon fibre (sometimes both) and are J-shaped, with a curved hook at the playing end, a flat surface on the playing side and a curved surface on the rear side. All sticks are right-handed \u2013 left-handed sticks are not permitted.\nWhile field hockey in its current form appeared in mid-18th century England, primarily in schools, it was not until the first half of the 19th century that it became firmly established. The first club was created in 1849 at Blackheath in south-east London. Field hockey is the national sport of Pakistan. It was the national sport of India until the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports declared in August 2012 that India has no national sport.\nIndoor hockey.\nIndoor hockey is an indoor variant of field hockey. It is similar to the outdoor game in that two teams compete to move a hard ball into the goal of the opposing side using hockey sticks. Indoor hockey is played on a smaller area and between smaller teams than field hockey and the sidelines are replaced by solid barriers from which the ball rebounds and remains in play.\nOn ice.\nBandy.\nBandy is played with a ball on a football pitch-sized ice arena (bandy rink), typically outdoors, and with many rules similar to association football. It is played professionally in Russia and Sweden. The sport is recognized by the IOC, including the variety rink bandy. Its international governing body is the Federation of International Bandy.\nBandy has its roots in England in the 19th century, was originally called \"hockey on the ice\", and spread from England to other European countries around 1900 (the first international match took place in early 1891, when Bury Fen Bandy Club visited Haarlem). A similar Russian sport can also be seen as a predecessor and in Russia, bandy is sometimes called \"Russian hockey\". Bandy World Championships have been played since 1957 and Women's Bandy World Championships since 2004. There are national club championships in many countries and the top clubs in the world play in the Bandy World Cup every year.\nIce hockey.\nIce hockey is played between two teams of skaters on a large flat area of ice, using a three-inch-diameter (76.2\u00a0mm) vulcanized rubber disc called a puck. This puck is often frozen before high-level games to decrease the amount of bouncing and friction on the ice. The game is played all over North America, Europe and to varying extents in many other countries around the world. It is the most popular sport in Canada, Finland, Latvia, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia. Ice hockey is the national sport of Latvia and the national winter sport of Canada. Ice hockey is played at a number of levels, by all ages.\nThe governing body of international play is the 77-member International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF). Men's ice hockey has been played at the Winter Olympics since 1924, and was in the 1920 Summer Olympics. Women's ice hockey was added to the Winter Olympics in 1998. North America's National Hockey League (NHL) is the strongest professional ice hockey league, drawing top ice hockey players from around the globe. The NHL rules are slightly different from those used in Olympic ice hockey over many categories. International ice hockey rules were adopted from Canadian rules in the early 1900s.\nThe contemporary sport developed in Canada from European and native influences. These included various stick and ball games similar to field hockey, bandy and other games where two teams push a ball or object back and forth with sticks. These were played outdoors on ice under the name \"hockey\" in England throughout the 19th century, and even earlier under various other names. In Canada, there are 24 reports of hockey-like games in the 19th century before 1875 (five of them using the name \"hockey\"). The first organized and recorded game of ice hockey was played indoors in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, on March 3, 1875, and featured several McGill University students.\nIce hockey sticks are long L-shaped sticks made of wood, graphite, or composites with a blade at the bottom that can lie flat on the playing surface when the stick is held upright and can legally curve either way, for left- or right-handed players.\nPara ice hockey.\nSledge hockey, a variant of ice hockey designed for players with physical disabilities, was created in the 1960s and has since been renamed, \"Para-ice hockey\".\nIce sledge hockey, or \"para ice hockey\", is a form of ice hockey designed for players with physical disabilities affecting their lower bodies. Players sit on double-bladed sledges and use two sticks; each stick has a blade at one end and small picks at the other. Players use the sticks to pass, stickhandle and shoot the puck, and to propel their sledges. The rules are very similar to IIHF ice hockey rules.\nCanada is a recognized international leader in the development of sledge hockey, and much of the equipment for the sport was first developed there, such as sledge hockey sticks laminated with fiberglass, as well as aluminum shafts with hand-carved insert blades and special aluminum sledges with regulation skate blades.\nRoller hockey.\nInline hockey.\nThough inline hockey is considered a variant of roller hockey \"rink hockey\", it was derived from ice hockey instead and uses a type of hockey puck or a ball. Both roller games use a type of wheeled skate but inline hockey uses inline skates rather than roller skates or \"quads\".\nThere are puck-based and ball-based variants. Inline hockey puck variant is played by two teams, consisting of four skaters and one goalie, on a dry rink divided into two halves by a center line, with one net at each end of the rink. The game is played in two 20-minute periods. The sport is recognized as being governed by World Skate which organizes FIRS Inline Hockey World Championships. The International Ice Hockey Federation organized IIHF Inline Hockey World Championships but it has discontinued. On the other hand, ball-based variant is governed by International Inline Skater Hockey Federation.\nInline sledge hockey.\nBased on ice sledge hockey, inline sledge hockey is played to the same rules as inline puck hockey (essentially ice hockey played off-ice using inline skates). There is no classification point system dictating who can play inline sledge hockey, unlike the situation with other team sports such as wheelchair basketball and wheelchair rugby. Inline sledge hockey is being developed to allow everyone, regardless of whether they have a disability or not, to complete up to world championship level based solely on talent and ability.\nThe first game of organized inline sledge hockey was played at Bisley, Surrey, England, on December 19, 2009, between the Hull Stingrays and the Grimsby Redwings. Matt Lloyd is credited with inventing inline sledge hockey, and Great Britain is seen as the international leader in the game's development.\nRoller hockey (quad).\nRoller hockey, also known as \"rink hockey\", \"quad hockey\", \"international-style ball hockey\", and \"Hoquei em Patins\", is an overarching name for a roller sport that uses quad skates. It has existed long before the invention of inline skates. The sport is played in over sixty countries and has a worldwide following. Roller hockey was a demonstration sport at the 1992 Barcelona Summer Olympics.\nStreet hockey.\nAlso known as road hockey, this is a dry-land variant of ice and roller hockey played year-round on a hard surface (usually asphalt). A ball is usually used instead of a puck, and protective equipment is not usually worn.\nOther forms of hockey.\nOther games derived from hockey or its predecessors include the following:\nMain variants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sticky table start/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13982", "revid": "76027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13982", "title": "Holocaust revisionism", "text": ""}
{"id": "13983", "revid": "203434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13983", "title": "Hawick", "text": "Town in the Scottish Borders\nHawick ( ; ; ) is a town in the Scottish Borders council area and historic county of Roxburghshire in the east Southern Uplands of Scotland. It is south-west of Jedburgh and south-south-east of Selkirk. It is one of the furthest towns from the sea in Scotland, in the heart of Teviotdale, and is the biggest town in Roxburghshire. The town is at the confluence of the Slitrig Water with the River Teviot.\nThe town was formally established in the 16th century, but was previously the site of historic settlement going back hundreds of years. By the late 17th century, the town began to grow significantly, especially during the Industrial Revolution and Victorian era as a centre for the production of textiles, with a focus on knitting and weaving, involving materials such as tweed and cashmere. By the late 20th century, textile production had declined but the town remains an important regional centre for shopping, tourism and services. Hawick's architecture is distinctive in that it has many sandstone buildings with slate roofs. The town has several museums, parks and heritage sites. The town hosts the annual Alchemy Film and Moving Image Festival.\nHistory.\nThe name Hawick is Old English in origin, first recorded in 1167 and translates as \"enclosed farm\" or \"enclosed hamlet\". The origin of the name of Hawick was first researched in the 1860s by James Murray, a local teacher and later the primary editor of the \"Oxford English Dictionary.\" The town has a long history of habitation being settled at the confluence of Slitrig Water and the River Teviot. The west end of the town contains \"the Motte\", the remains of a likely 12th century Scoto-Norman motte-and-bailey castle.\nOn 20 June 1342, as Alexander Ramsay of Dalhousie according to the duty of his office as Sheriff of Teviotsdale was holding court in the church of Hawick, William Douglas, Lord of Liddesdale came with an armed retinue and entered the church. He was courteously welcomed. Douglas and his men attacked Ramsay and dragged him bleeding and in chains to Hermitage Castle; It is generally assumed because Douglas believed he should be Sheriff of Teviotdale. There Ramsay was imprisoned in a dungeon where he died of starvation.\nThe origin of Hawick being formally declared a town are said to originate with the Battle of Hornshole which was fought in 1514 between an English raiding party and young locals from Hawick. In 2014, on the 500th anniversary of the battle, some 1,800 children dressed in period costumes re-enacted the battle. The oldest official document of the town is a deed dated 11 October 1537 in which the town was re-declared a free burgh since time immemorial.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSt Mary's and Old Parish Church is the oldest church in the town, being constructed in 1764 on the site of an earlier 13th century church. The church was extensively damaged by fire in the late 19th century but was reconstructed in a similar style. The cemetery contains 17th and 18th century gravestones, as well as an elaborate ironwork memorial gate given by the town council.\nHawick developed in the late 18th and 19th centuries as an important town in the manufacture of textiles and knitwear. The first knitting machines were brought to Hawick in 1771 by John Hardie, building on an existing carpet manufacturing trade and with a view to expanding into the production of stockings. As a result of a decline in the stocking trade by 1815, some weaving manufacturers had set up in the town using resources from the stocking trade. These industries continued to grow in size, when in the early 1830s, the term \"Tweed\" originated from the town as a result of a miscommunication of twill for the River Tweed. The town subsequently focused on the manufacturer of different textiles, hosiery and knitwear, including cashmere, adapting to different patterns and materials as fashions changed. In the 1930s, over 1200 persons were employed in producing knitwear in the town. However, by the late 20th century, changing production methods, costs and tastes resulted in the decline of the textile industries to all but a few small businesses.\nJuly 2020 saw the start of work on a \u00a392m flood-defence scheme. But in October 2021, with engineering work still in progress, the town was severely affected by heavy rainfall and subsequent flooding.\nGovernance.\nLocal government services for Hawick are provided by Scottish Borders Council. There is also a community council covering the town.\nHawick was designated a burgh of regality in 1669 and became a police burgh in 1868. Hawick Town Hall on the High Street was built in 1886, designed by James Campbell Walker in the Scottish baronial style.\nWhen elected county councils were created in 1890 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889, the burgh of Hawick was deemed capable of running its own affairs and so was excluded from the jurisdiction of Roxburghshire County Council. Further local government reform in 1930 brought the burgh of Hawick within the area controlled by the county council, with the town being reclassified as a small burgh, ceding most of its functions to the county council.\nIn 1975 local government across Scotland was reformed under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973. The burghs and counties were abolished as administrative areas, replaced with a two-tier system of upper-tier regions and lower-tier districts. Hawick therefore became part of the Roxburgh district within the Borders region. Roxburgh District Council used Hawick Town Hall as its headquarters. Further local government reform in 1996 abolished the regions and districts, since when Hawick has been administered by Scottish Borders Council.\nEconomy.\nThe companies William Lockie, Hawico, Hawick Knitwear, Johnstons of Elgin, Lyle &amp; Scott, Peter Scott, Pringle of Scotland, and Scott and Charters, have had and in many cases still have manufacturing plants in Hawick, producing luxury cashmere and merino wool knitwear. Engineering firm Turnbull and Scott had their headquarters in an Elizabethan-style listed building on Commercial Road before moving to Burnfoot.\nIn recent times, unemployment has been an issue in Hawick. The rate of unemployment exceeded the average for the Scottish Borders between 2014 and 2017. The closure of once-significant employers, including mills like Peter Scott's and Pringle's have reduced the number of jobs in the town. The population has declined partly because of this; at 13,730 in 2016, it was at its lowest since the 1800s. Despite efforts to improve the economic situation, unemployment and poverty remain relatively high, with the number of children living in poverty in the town one-tenth higher than the average for the Borders region in 2017. Developments such as a new business centre, which opened in 2024, an Aldi supermarket, and distillery, which opened in 2018\u201319, have benefitted Hawick. Despite this, continued business closures, for example that of Homebase and the Original Factory Store in 2018, suggest continued economic decline for the town.\nTransport.\nHawick lies in the centre of the valley of the Teviot. The A7 Edinburgh\u2013Carlisle road passes through the town, with main roads also leading to Berwick-upon-Tweed (the A698) and Newcastle upon Tyne (the A6088, which joins the A68 at the Carter Bar, south-east of Hawick).\nThe town lost its rail service in 1969, when, as part of the Beeching Axe, the Waverley Route from Carlisle to Edinburgh via Hawick railway station was closed. It was then said to be the farthest large town from a railway station in the United Kingdom, but this changed as a result of the opening of the Borders Railway, which, in 2015, reopened part of the former Waverley Route to Tweedbank, near Galashiels. Regular buses serve the railway station at Carlisle, away. Reconnecting Hawick to the Borders Railway would require reinstatement of a further approximately of the former Waverley Route from Hawick to Tweedbank station via Hassendean, St Boswells and Melrose, with refurbishment of the four-arch Ale Water viaduct near New Belses. Hawick station was on the north bank of the river Teviot, below Wilton Hill Terrace, with a now demolished viaduct (near the Mart Street bridge) carrying the route south towards Carlisle. Waverley Walk in Hawick is a footpath along the former railway route, north-eastward from the former station site near Teviotdale Leisure Centre. A feasibility study is now underway to evaluate the possible reopening of the southern section of the former Waverley railway to link the Borders Railway terminus at Tweedbank through Hawick to Carlisle.\nThe nearest major airports are at Edinburgh, away, and Newcastle, away.\nCulture and traditions.\nCulture.\nThe town hosts the annual Common Riding, which combines the annual riding of the boundaries of the town's common land with the commemoration of a victory of local youths over an English raiding party in 1514. In March 2007, this was described by the \"Rough Guide\" publication \"World Party\" as one of the best parties in the world.\nPeople from Hawick call themselves \"Teries\", after a traditional song which includes the line \"Teribus ye teri odin\".\nHawick and surrounding border residents are known to possess a dialect and accent slightly different from broader Scots, being classed as Southern Scots or Borders Scots. For example, the term a \"Hawick Gill\" is a large measure of spirits, equivalent to 0.28\u00a0litre (half a pint).\nMonuments.\nHawick High Street has an equestrian statue at the east end, known as \"the Horse\", erected in 1914. Drumlanrig's Tower, now a museum, dates largely from the mid-16th century.\nIn 2009 another monument the \"Turning of the Bull\" (artist, Angela Hunter, Innerleithen) was unveiled in Hawick. This monument depicts William Rule turning the wild bull as it was charging King Robert the Bruce, thus saving the king's life and beginning the Scottish Clan of Turnbull. A poem written by John Leyden commemorates this historical event. \"His arms robust the hardy hunter flung around his bending horns, and upward wrung, with writhing force his neck retorted round, and rolled the panting monster to the ground, crushed, with enormous strength, his bony skull; and courtiers hailed the man who turned the bull.\"\nMedia and film.\nLocal news and television programmes are provided by BBC Scotland and ITV Border. Television signals are received from the Selkirk TV transmitter and the local relay transmitter. Local radio stations are BBC Radio Scotland on 93.5\u00a0FM, Greatest Hits Radio Scottish Borders and North Northumberland on 96.8\u00a0FM and TD9 Radio, an online community based station which broadcast from the town. The town is served by its own local newspaper, \"The Hawick Paper\". Other newspapers that cover the town are \"The Border Telegraph\" and \"Southern Reporter\".\nHawick is home to Alchemy Film &amp; Arts, and its internationally renowned flagship annual event Alchemy Film and Moving Image Festival. Investing in film \"as a means of generating discussion, strengthening community, and stimulating creative thought\", Alchemy works with artists and communities within Hawick and the Scottish Borders on a year-round basis. In summer 2019, Alchemy launched its award-winning \"Film Town\" project, which \"aims to work to the benefit of Hawick and its unique communities by widening accessibility and inclusion for audiences, participants and partners, and by challenging social, physical and communication barriers... while contributing to Hawick's economic regeneration through an investment in its cultural identity\".\nIn response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Alchemy delivered the tenth and eleventh editions of its annual film festival as livestream events delivered from Hawick, and assisted in helping the town's communities to digitise their own services, including the production of virtual lectures for the town's 164-year-old Hawick Archaeological Society.\nSports.\nThe town is the home of Hawick Rugby Football Club which was founded in 1873. The town has a senior football team, Hawick Royal Albert, who currently play in the East of Scotland Football League.\nThe Hawick baw game was once played here by the \"uppies\" and the \"doonies\" on the first Monday after the new moon in the month of February. The river of the town formed an important part of the pitch. Although no longer played at Hawick, it is still played at nearby Jedburgh.\nConfectionery.\n\"Hawick balls\" or \"baws\", also known as Hills Balls or taffy rock bools, are a peppermint-flavoured boiled sweet that originated in the town. They are particularly associated with rugby commentator Bill McLaren who was known to offer them from a bag that he always carried. They are now produced in Greenock.\nEducation and services.\nHawick Library is a Carnegie funded library that opened in 1904.\nTeviotdale Leisure Centre is the local public fitness centre, with a gym, children's soft-play area and swimming pool. The previous public baths, now disused were built in 1913 on Commercial Road and closed in the 1980s.\nThe Borders Textile Towerhouse is a local museum focusing on the history of textiles in Hawick and the Borders area. Examples of temporary exhibitions held include an exhibit on fashion designer Bernat Klein and a history of shops in the town. The museum occupies a restored heritage building, formerly a hotel and inn which incorporates Drumlanrig Tower, a 16th-century fortified tower.\nWilton Lodge Park is a large public park in the south-west of the town. The park is home to Hawick Museum, a public museum focusing on art and local history. The museum includes local artwork, some of which was produced by members of Hawick Art Club.\nThe Borders Abbeys Way passes through Hawick. A statue of the popular rugby commentator Bill McLaren (1923\u20132010) is in Wilton Lodge Park, to the west of the town centre. In October 2021, the local council began construction of a new \u00a32m footbridge to link local communities, as part of a broader improvements in the town to create an improved travel network in Hawick, alongside a new flood protection scheme.\nHawick Community Hospital is the local hospital for the area, itself replacing Hawick Cottage Hospital in 2005.\nHawick High School is a non-denominational secondary school in the town. In September 2021, it was announced that a new circa \u00a349 million will be built to replace the current school on its existing site by 2027. Hawick High School is part of the Hawick cluster of schools including Burnfoot Community School, Denholm Primary School (in the Village of Denholm), Drumlanrig St Cuthberts Primary School, Newcastleton Primary School (in the village of Newcastleton), Stirches Primary School, Trinity Primary School and Wilton Primary School.\nTown twinning.\nHawick is twinned with Bailleul, Nord, France.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13985", "revid": "1313908684", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13985", "title": "Hatfield, Hertfordshire", "text": "Town in Hertfordshire, England\nHatfield is a town and civil parish in Hertfordshire, England, in the borough of Welwyn Hatfield. It had a population of 29,616 in 2001, 39,201 at the 2011 census, and 41,265 at the 2021 census. The settlement is of Saxon origin. Hatfield House, home of the Marquess of Salisbury, forms the nucleus of the old town. From the 1930s when de Havilland opened a factory, until the 1990s when British Aerospace closed it, aircraft design and manufacture employed more people there than any other industry. Hatfield was one of the post-war New Towns built around London and has much modernist architecture from the period. The University of Hertfordshire is based there.\nHatfield lies north of London beside the A1(M) motorway and has direct trains to London King's Cross railway station, London St Pancras railway station, Finsbury Park and Moorgate. There has been a strong increase in commuters who work in London moving into the area.\nIn 2022, TV property expert Phil Spencer named Hatfield as the second best place to live for regular commuters to London, based on train times, house prices and the attractions the town has. In 2024, World Bucket List named Hatfield as the fifth most boring place in the world.\nHistory.\nThe name Hatfield derives from the Old English \"h\u01e3\u00f0feld\" meaning 'heath field'.\nIn the early tenth century Hatfield belonged to a \"vir potens\" (powerful man) called Ordm\u00e6r and his wife Ealde, who may have been the grandfather of King Edward the Martyr. Sometime between 932 and 956 he exchanged the town for land in Devon with \u00c6thelstan Half-King, who then gave it to his sons. King Edgar seized the land when he became king on 959, claiming that Ordm\u00e6r and Ealde had bequeathed it to him, but \u00c6thelstan's sons recovered it after Edgar died. Hatfield is recorded in Domesday Book of 1086 as the property of the Abbey of Ely, and unusually the original census data that compilers of Domesday used survives, giving us slightly more information than in the final Domesday record. No other records remain until 1226, when Henry III granted the Bishops of Ely rights to an annual four-day fair and a weekly market. The town was then called Bishop's Hatfield.\nHatfield House is the seat of the Cecil family, the Marquesses of Salisbury. Elizabeth Tudor was confined there for three years in what is now known as The Old Palace in Hatfield Park. Legend has it that she learnt here of her accession as queen in 1558 while sitting under an oak tree in the Park. She held her first Council in the Great Hall (The Old Palace) of Hatfield. In 1851 the route of the Great North Road (now the A1000) was altered to avoid cutting through the grounds of Hatfield House.\nThe town grew up around the gates of Hatfield House. Old Hatfield retains many historic buildings, notably the Old Palace, St Etheldreda's Church and Hatfield House. The Old Palace was built by the Bishop of Ely, Cardinal Morton, in 1497, during the reign of Henry VII, and the only surviving wing is still used today for Elizabethan-style banquets.\nSt Etheldreda's Church was founded by the monks from Ely, and the first wooden church, built in 1285, was probably sited where the existing building stands overlooking the old town.\nThe church of St Etheldreda, well situated towards the top of the hill, contains an Early English round arch with dog-tooth moulding, but for the rest is Decorated and Perpendicular and largely restored. The chapel north of the chancel is known as the Salisbury chapel and was erected by Robert Cecil, 1st Earl of Salisbury, who was buried here. It is in a combination of classic and Gothic styles. In a private portion of the churchyard is buried, among others of the family, Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury.\nAerospace industry.\nIn 1930 the de Havilland airfield and aircraft factory was opened at Hatfield and by 1949 it had become the largest employer in the town, with almost 4,000 staff. It was taken over by Hawker Siddeley in 1960 and merged into British Aerospace in 1978. In the 1930s it produced a range of small biplanes. During the Second World War it produced the Mosquito fighter bomber and developed the Vampire, the second British production jet aircraft after the Gloster Meteor. After the war, facilities were expanded and it developed the Comet airliner (the world's first production jet liner), the Trident airliner, and an early bizjet, the DH125.\nBritish Aerospace closed the Hatfield site in 1993 having moved the BAe 146 production line to Woodford Aerodrome. The land was used as a film set for Steven Spielberg's movie \"Saving Private Ryan\" and most of the BBC/HBO television drama \"Band of Brothers\". It was later developed for housing, higher education, commerce and retail.\nToday, Hatfield's aviation history is remembered by the names of certain local streets and pubs (e. g. Comet Way, The Airfield, Dragon Road) as well as \"The Comet Hotel\" (now owned by Ramada) built in the 1930s. \"The Harrier Pub\" (formerly \"The Hilltop\") is actually named after the Harrier bird, not the aircraft, hence the original pub sign showing the bird. The de Havilland Aircraft Heritage Centre, at Salisbury Hall in nearby London Colney, preserves and displays many historic de Havilland aeroplanes and related archives.\nNew Town.\nThe Abercrombie Plan for London in 1944 proposed a New Town in Hatfield. It was designated in the New Towns Act 1946 (9 &amp; 10 Geo. 6. c. 68), forming part of the initial Hertfordshire group with nearby Stevenage, Welwyn Garden City and Hemel Hempstead. The Government allocated for Hatfield New Town, with a population target of 25,000. (By 2001 the population had reached 27,833.) The Hatfield Development Corporation, tasked with creating the New Town, chose to build a new town centre, rejecting Old Hatfield because it was on the wrong side of the railway, without space for expansion and \"with its intimate village character, out of scale with the town it would have to serve.\" They chose instead St Albans Road on the town's east\u2013west bus route. A road pattern was planned that offered no temptation to through traffic to take short cuts through the town and which enabled local traffic to move rapidly.\nHatfield retains New Town characteristics, including much modernist architecture of the 1950s and the trees and open spaces that were outlined in the original design. As of 2017, a redevelopment of the town centre was planned.\nGovernance.\nThere are three tiers of local government covering Hatfield, at parish, district and county level: Hatfield Town Council, Welwyn Hatfield Borough Council and Hertfordshire County Council. Hatfield Town Council has its offices and meeting place at the Birchwood Leisure Centre on Longmead. Hatfield town council is currently under a Labour administration.\nFrom 1894 until 1974 the lower two tiers of local government were Hatfield Parish Council and Hatfield Rural District Council. The rural district council built itself a headquarters at 16 St Albans Road East in 1930. The rural district council was abolished in 1974 and its powers transferred to Welwyn Hatfield.\nHatfield is twinned with the Dutch port town of Zierikzee. Hatfield is part of the Welwyn Hatfield constituency, which also includes Welwyn Garden City. The member of parliament (MP) for Welwyn Hatfield is Andrew Lewin, of the Labour Party.\nSport.\nHatfield Town F.C. plays Non-League football at Gosling Sports Park. The Welwyn Garden City Hockey Club are a field hockey club based in Hatfield.\nHatfield Athletic Football Club competes in the Herts Senior County League and plays its games at Lemsford.\nThe town has a public swimming pool and four sports/leisure centres (two with indoor swimming pools).\nClimate.\nHatfield experiences an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfb\") like most of the United Kingdom.\nCulture and recreation.\nHatfield has a nine-screen Odeon cinema, a stately home (Hatfield House), a museum (Mill Green Museum), a contemporary art gallery (Art and Design Gallery), a theatre (The Weston Auditorium) and a music venue (The Forum Hertfordshire). There are shopping centres in the new town: the Galleria (indoor shopping centre), The Stable Yard (Hatfield House), and three supermarkets (ASDA, ALDI and Tesco). In 2022, Hatfield held its first vegan market, an event held in a number of English towns, at Hatfield House and now holds the market each June and November. During Veganuary in 2023, students at the University of Hertfordshire organized their own vegan market.\nEducation.\nHatfield contains numerous primary and secondary schools, including St Philip Howard Catholic Primary School, Howe Dell Primary School, Countess Anne School, Onslow St Audrey's School, Bishop's Hatfield Girls' School and the independent day and private boarding girls' school Queenswood School (only to name a few).\nIn addition to the important areas in the town, the University of Hertfordshire is also included by many. A large section of the airfield site was purchased by the university and the \u00a3120-million de Havilland Campus, incorporating a \u00a315-million Sports Village, was opened in September 2003. The university has closed its sites at Watford and Hertford; faculties situated there have been moved to the de Havilland Campus.\nThe equine branch of the Royal Veterinary College is based in Hatfield.\nTransport.\nHatfield is to the north of London. It is from London Luton Airport. The A1(M) runs through a tunnel beneath the town, which is also close to the M25.\nIn the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries it was the northern terminus of the Hatfield and Reading Turnpike that allowed travelers from the north to continue their journey to the west without going through the congestion of London.\nThe East Coast railway line from London to York runs through the town, separating the old and new parts. A commuter service connects Hatfield railway station to London King's Cross. A new railway station and car park opened in late 2015. The frequent train service runs direct from Hatfield Station to London King's Cross (21 minutes) via Finsbury Park (16 minutes, Victoria Underground Line) on fast trains running two or three times an hour. An additional train service calls at all stations to Moorgate in the City of London.\nHatfield is well served by buses with regular services to all nearby towns and villages and as far as north London. Bus services are run by Uno, Arriva and Centrebus who are all part of the local Intalink Partnership.\nThe Hatfield rail crash occurred in October 2000, which brought track-maintenance deficiencies to public attention. A garden beside the East Coast Main Line was built as a memorial to the crash victims.\nLocal media.\nThe local TV stations are BBC London &amp; ITV London, received from the Crystal Palace TV transmitter and the Hemel Hempstead relay transmitter. BBC East and ITV Anglia are also received from the Sandy Heath TV transmitter.\nLocal radio stations are BBC Three Counties Radio on 90.4 FM, Heart Hertfordshire on 106.9 and Radio Verulam on 92.6 FM.\nThe Welwyn Hatfield Times is the town's local weekly newspaper.\nNearby towns and villages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13986", "revid": "39276444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13986", "title": "Hertfordshire", "text": "County of England\nHertfordshire (, ; often abbreviated Herts) is a ceremonial county in the East of England. It borders Bedfordshire to the north-west, Cambridgeshire to the north-east, Essex to the east, Greater London to the south and Buckinghamshire to the west. The largest settlement is Watford.\nThe county has an area of and had an estimated population of 1,236,191 in 2024. Watford is located in the south-west, and the county's other settlements include Stevenage in the north, the city of St Albans in the centre, and Hemel Hempstead in the west. For local government purposes Hertfordshire is a non-metropolitan county with ten districts. Potters Bar in the south-east of the county was historically part of Middlesex.\nHertfordshire centres on the headwaters and upper valleys of the rivers Lea and the Colne; both flow south and each is accompanied by a canal. Elevations are higher in the north and west, reaching more than in the Chilterns near Tring. Hertfordshire's undeveloped land is mainly agricultural and much of the county is covered by the Metropolitan green belt.\nSince 1903, Letchworth, in the far north, has served as the prototype garden city while Stevenage became the first town to expand under post-war Britain's New Towns Act 1946. Services have become the largest sector of the county's economy.\nHistory.\nThe county's landmarks span many centuries, ranging from the Six Hills in Stevenage built by local inhabitants during the Roman period, to Leavesden Film Studios. The volume of intact medieval and Tudor buildings surpasses London, in places in well-preserved conservation areas, especially in St Albans, which includes remains of the Roman town of Verulamium.\nIn 913, Hertfordshire was the area assigned to a fortress constructed at Hertford under the rule of Edward the Elder. Hertford is derived from the Anglo-Saxon \"heort ford,\" meaning deer crossing (of a watercourse). The name Hertfordshire is first recorded in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" in 1011. Deer feature in many county emblems. Many of the names of the current settlements date back to the Anglo-Saxon period, with many featuring standard placename suffixes attributed to the Anglo-Saxons: \"ford\", \"ton\", \"den\", \"bourn\", \"ley\", \"stead\", \"ing\", \"lett\", \"wood\", and \"worth\", are represented in this county by Hertford, Royston, Harpenden, Redbourn, Cuffley, Wheathampstead, Tring, Radlett, Borehamwood and Rickmansworth.\nThere is evidence of human life in Hertfordshire from the Mesolithic period. It was first farmed during the Neolithic period and permanent habitation appeared at the beginning of the Bronze Age. This was followed by tribes settling in the area during the Iron Age.\nFollowing the Roman conquest of Britain in AD 43, the Catuvellauni tribe accepted peace and adapted to the Roman life; resulting in the development of several new towns, including Verulamium (St Albans) where in c.\u2009293 the first recorded British martyrdom is traditionally believed to have taken place. Saint Alban, a Romano-British soldier, took the place of a Christian priest and was beheaded on Holywell Hill. His martyr's cross of a yellow saltire on a blue field is reflected in the flag and coat of arms of Hertfordshire as the yellow field to the stag or Hart representing the county. He is the Patron Saint of Hertfordshire.\nWith the departure of the Roman Legions in the early 5th century, the now-unprotected territory was invaded and colonised by the Anglo-Saxons. By the 6th century, the majority of the modern county was part of the East Saxon kingdom. This relatively short-lived kingdom collapsed in the 9th century, ceding the territory of Hertfordshire to the control of the West Anglians of Mercia. The region finally became an English shire in the 10th century, on the merger of the West Saxon and Mercian kingdoms.\nIn the midst of the Norse invasions, Hertfordshire was on the front lines of much of the fighting. King Edward the Elder, in his reconquest of Norse-held lands in what was to become England, established a \"burh\" or fort in Hertford, which was to curb Norse activities in the area. His father, King Alfred the Great, established the River Lea as a boundary between his kingdom and that of the Norse lord Guthrum, with the north and eastern parts of the county being within the Danelaw. There is little evidence however of Norse placenames within this region, and many of the Anglo-Saxon features remained intact to this day. The county however suffered from renewed Norse raids in the late 10th to early 11th centuries, as armies led by Danish kings Swein Forkbeard and Cnut the Great harried the country as part of their attempts to undermine and overthrow English king \u00c6thelred the Unready.\nNorman invasion onwards.\nA century later, William of Normandy received the surrender of some senior English Lords and Clergy at Berkhamsted, before entering London unopposed and being crowned at Westminster. Hertfordshire was used for some of the new Norman castles at Bishop's Stortford, and at King's Langley, a staging post between London and the royal residence of Berkhamsted.\nThe Domesday Book recorded the county as having nine hundreds. Tring and Danais became one\u2014Dacorum\u2014from Danis Corum or Danish rule harking back to a Viking not Saxon past. The other seven were Braughing, Stevenage, Cashio, Buntingford, Hertford, Hitchin and Odsey.\nIn the later Plantagenet period, St. Albans Abbey was an initial drafting place of what was to become Magna Carta. And in the later Wars of the Roses, St. Albans was the scene of two major battles between the Lancastrians and the Yorkists.\nIn Tudor times, Hatfield House was often frequented by Queen Elizabeth I. Stuart King James I used the locale for hunting and facilitated the construction of a waterway, the New River, supplying drinking water to London.\nAs London grew, Hertfordshire became conveniently close to the English capital; much of the area was owned by the nobility and aristocracy, this patronage helped to boost the local economy. However, the greatest boost to Hertfordshire came during the Industrial Revolution, after which the population rose dramatically. In 1903, Letchworth became the world's first garden city and Stevenage became the first town to redevelop under the New Towns Act 1946 (9 &amp; 10 Geo. 6. c. 68).\nThe first shooting-down of a zeppelin over Great Britain during WW1 happened in Cuffley.\nFrom the 1920s until the late 1980s, the town of Borehamwood was home to one of the major British film studio complexes, including the MGM-British Studios. Many well-known films were made here including the first three \"Star Wars\" movies (IV, V, &amp; VI). The studios generally used the name of Elstree. American director Stanley Kubrick not only used to shoot in those studios but also lived in the area until his death. \"Big Brother UK\" and \"Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?\" have been filmed there. \"EastEnders\" is filmed at Elstree. Hertfordshire has seen development at Warner Bros. Studios, Leavesden; the \"Harry Potter\" series was filmed here and the 1995 James Bond film \"GoldenEye\".\nOn 17 October 2000, the Hatfield rail crash killed four people with over 70 injured. The crash exposed the shortcomings of Railtrack, and resulted in speed restrictions and major track replacement. On 10 May 2002, seven people died in the fourth of the Potters Bar rail accidents; the train was travelling at high speed when it derailed and flipped into the air when one of the carriages slid along the platform where it came to rest.\nIn early December 2005, there were explosions at the Hertfordshire Oil Storage Terminal at Buncefield on the edge of Hemel Hempstead.\nGeography.\nHertfordshire is located in the south-eastern part of England and is the county immediately north of London. It is officially part of the East of England region, a mainly statistical unit. To the east is Essex, to the west is Buckinghamshire and to the north are Bedfordshire and Cambridgeshire. A significant minority of the population across all districts commute to Central London.\nThe county's boundaries were roughly fixed by the Counties (Detached Parts) Act 1844 which eliminated exclaves; amended when, in 1965 under the London Government Act 1963, East Barnet Urban District and Barnet Urban District were abolished, their area was transferred to form part of the present-day London Borough of Barnet and the Potters Bar Urban District of Middlesex was transferred to Hertfordshire.\nThe highest point in the county is at (AOD) on the Ridgeway long distance national path, on the border of Hastoe near Tring with Drayton Beauchamp, Buckinghamshire.\nAt the 2011 census, among the county's ten districts, East Hertfordshire had the lowest population density (290 people per km2) and Watford the highest (4210 per km2). Compared with neighbouring Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire lacks large towns or cities on the scale of Luton or Milton Keynes, whose populations exceed 200,000, but its overall population (1.2 million in 2021) is greater than those of the two aforementioned counties.\nThe River Lea near Harpenden runs through Wheathampstead, Welwyn Garden City, Hertford, Ware, and Broxbourne before reaching Cheshunt and ultimately the River Thames. The far west of the county is the most hilly, with the Chiltern Hills surrounding Tring, Berkhamsted and the Ashridge estate. This Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty runs from near Hitchin in the north to Berkshire and Oxfordshire.\nMany of the county's major settlements are in the central, northern and southern areas, such as Watford, Hemel Hempstead, Kings Langley, Rickmansworth, St. Albans, Harpenden, Redbourn, Radlett, Borehamwood, Potters Bar, Stevenage, Hatfield, Welwyn and Welwyn Garden City, Hitchin, Letchworth and Baldock. These are all small to medium-sized locations, featuring a mix of post-WWII new towns and older/more historical locales. The City of St. Albans is an example of a historical settlement, as its cathedral and abbey date to the Norman period, and there are ruins from the Roman settlement of Verulamium nearby the current city centre. Stevenage is a mix of post-WWII new town planning amidst its prior incarnation as a smaller town. The Old Town in Stevenage represents this historic core and has many shops and buildings reflecting its pre-WWII heritage. Hitchin also has a historic centre, with many Tudor and Stuart era buildings interspersed amongst more contemporary structures.\nHertfordshire's eastern regions are predominantly rural and arable, intermixed with villages and small to medium-sized towns. Royston, Buntingford and Bishop's Stortford, along with Ware and the county town of Hertford are major settlements in this regard. The physical geography of eastern Hertfordshire is less elevated than the far west, but with lower rising hills and prominent rivers such as the Stort. This river rises in Essex and terminates via a confluence with the Lea near to Ware. \nApart from the Lea and Stort, the River Colne is the major watercourse in the county's west. This runs near Watford and Radlett, and has a complex system/drainage area running south into both Greater London and Buckinghamshire.\nAn unofficial status, the purple star-shaped flower with yellow stamens, the Pasqueflower is among endemic county flowers.\nGeology.\nThe rocks of Hertfordshire belong to the great shallow syncline known as the London Basin. The beds dip in a south-easterly direction towards the syncline's lowest point roughly under the River Thames. The most important formations are the Cretaceous Chalk, exposed as the high ground in the north and west of the county, forming the Chiltern Hills and the younger Palaeocene, Reading Beds and Eocene, London Clay which occupy the remaining southern part. The eastern half of the county was covered by glaciers during the Ice Age and has a superficial layer of glacial boulder clays.\nNatural resources and environment.\nMuch of the west \u2013 and much more in the east \u2013 have richly diverse countryside. These range from beech woods of the Chilterns, clayland buffer zone countryside of Braughing and the Hadhams across to ancient hornbeam coppices west of the upper Lea valley. The county has sweeping panoramas of chalklands near Royston, Baldock, Hexton and Tring.\nLarge parts of the county are used for agriculture.\nSome quarrying of sand and gravel occurs around St Albans. In the past, clay has supplied local brick-making and still does in Bovingdon, just south-west of Hemel Hempstead. The chalk that is the bedrock of much of the county provides an aquifer that feeds streams and is also exploited to provide water supplies for much of the county and beyond. Chalk has also been used as a building material and, once fired, the resultant lime was spread on agricultural land to improve fertility. The mining of chalk since the early 18th century has left unrecorded underground galleries that occasionally collapse unexpectedly and endanger buildings.\nFresh water is supplied to London from Ware, using the New River built by Hugh Myddleton and opened in 1613. Local rivers, although small, supported developing industries such as paper production at Nash Mills.\nHertfordshire affords habitat for a variety of flora and fauna. A bird once common in the shire is the hooded crow, the old name of which is the eponymous name of the regional newspaper, the \"Royston Crow\" published in Royston. A product, now largely defunct, was watercress, based in Hemel Hempstead and Berkhamsted supported by reliable, clean chalk rivers.\nEconomy.\nThis is a table of trends of regional gross value added of Hertfordshire at current basic prices with figures in millions of British Pounds Sterling.\nHertfordshire has the main operational and/or headquarters UK site of some very large employers. Clockwise from north:\nIn Stevenage (a subsidiary of: BAE Systems, Airbus and Finmeccanica) MBDA, develops missiles. In the same town, Airbus (Defence &amp; Space Division) produces satellites.\nHatfield was where de Havilland developed the first commercial jet liner, the Comet. Now the site is a business park and new campus for the University of Hertfordshire. This major employment site notably hosts EE, Computacenter and Ocado groceries and other goods e-commerce.\nWelwyn Garden City hosts Tesco's UK base, hosts the UK Cereal Partners factory and in pharmaceuticals it hosts Roche UK's headquarters (subsidiary of the Swiss Hoffman-La Roche). GlaxoSmithKline has plants in Ware and Stevenage.\nHemel Hempstead has large premises of Dixons Carphone.\nThe National Pharmacy Association (NPA), the trade association for UK pharmacies, is based in St Albans.\nKings Langley has the plant-office of Pure, making DAB digital radios.\nWatford hosts national companies such as J D Wetherspoon, Camelot Group, Bathstore, and Caversham Finance (BrightHouse). It is also the UK base of multi-nationals Hilton Worldwide, TotalEnergies, TK Maxx, Costco, JJ Kavanagh and Sons, Vinci and Beko. The 2006 World Golf Championship and the 2013 Bilderberg Conference, took place at The Grove hotel. Warner Bros. owns and runs its main UK base since the 2000s, Warner Bros. Studios, in Leavesden, Watford.\nRickmansworth hosts Skanska.\nMedia.\nTelevision.\nMost of the county is served by BBC London &amp; ITV London, however Stevenage and North Hertfordshire is served by BBC East &amp; ITV Anglia. Some northwestern parts of the county around Tring can also receive BBC South and ITV Meridian.\nRadio.\nLocal radio for the county is provided by BBC Three Counties Radio, BBC Radio Cambridgeshire (covering Royston), Heart Hertfordshire, Greatest Hits Radio Bucks, Beds and Herts (formerly Mix 96), Mix 92.6 (formerly Radio Verulam St. Albans) and Community Radio Dacorum (Hemel Hempstead).\nNewspapers.\nLocal newspapers in the county are:\nSport.\nWatersports.\nWaltham Cross, Broxbourne, is the location of the Lee Valley White Water Centre, a purpose-built venue opened in 2010 for the 2012 Summer Olympics. The site consists of two white water courses; one 300m Grade IV \"Olympic\" run; and one 160m Grade III \"legacy\" run.\nDuring the games the center was the venue for the canoe and kayak slalom events.\nLee Valley has since hosted the ICF Canoe Slalom World Championships twice. First in 2015, and most recently in 2023, where Britain topped the medal table with 5 golds.\nFootball.\nAs of the 2024\u201325 season, there are four professional football teams in Hertfordshire: Watford, Stevenage, Arsenal WFC and Boreham Wood\nWatford have played their home games at Vicarage Road since 1922. The club joined the Football League in 1920 as a founding member of the Third Division and first played in the First Division of English football in 1982, finishing as runners-up to champions Liverpool. Watford was promoted to the Premier League at the end of the 2020\u20132021 season. After spending one season in the Premier League, they were relegated to the Championship again for the 2022\u20132023 season.\nStevenage F.C. was formed in 1976 as Stevenage Borough and have played at Broadhall Way since 1980. Stevenage was the first club to win a competitive match at the new Wembley Stadium, beating Kidderminster Harriers 3\u20132 in the 2007 FA Trophy Final. The club currently play in the EFL League One and have been managed by former player Alex Revell since February 2020.\nArsenal, whilst based at the Emirates Stadium in the London Borough of Islington, has long held a training ground in the county. Until 1999, it held the London Colney University of London facility, until it built a new purpose-built compound adjacent to it. Watford FC currently utilises the old Arsenal training area as its training facility.\nArsenal W.F.C. play at Meadow Park in Borehamwood. The club was formed in 1987 and have played in the FA Women's Super League since its inaugural season in 2011.\nHertfordshire has many semi-professional and amateur clubs. The highest placed are Boreham Wood, Hemel Hempstead Town and St Albans City, who all play in the National League South, the sixth tier of English football.\nRugby.\nRugby league.\nHemel Stags are a rugby league team based in Hemel Hempstead. Hemel Stags have played at Pennine Way Stadium since the club's founding in 1981. Until 2018, the club played in league 1, the of the British rugby league system, and now compete in the Conference League South.\nRugby union.\nThe Hertfordshire Rugby Football Union is the governing body for rugby union in Hertfordshire and is responsible for any interested parties involved in rugby.\nTring Rugby play matches at Cow Lane, Tring. The first XV currently play in the Regional 1 South East, League. A league.\nGAA.\nGaelic Football is played within Hertfordshire, with clubs from Oxfordshire all the way to Cambridge playing in the Hertfordshire League and Championship. Eire \u00d3g, Oxford are the 2022 County Champions. Hurling is played by an amalgamated team, St Declan's CLG, with players contributed from all football teams across Hertfordshire. St Declan's currently play in the Warwickshire League and Championship, having previously played in the London GAA championship. A number of St Declan's players have also played for the Warwickshire Senior Hurling team, playing in the Lory Meagher and Nicky Rackard competitions, including Patrick Lancaster, Eamon Doherty, Alan Hayes, and Alex Hanley.\nNetball.\nLondon Mavericks, previously Hertfordshire Mavericks and Saracens Mavericks, have competed in the Netball Super League since 2005. The franchise represents the East region and plays a number of home fixtures at the University of Hertfordshire sports village. Mavericks have appeared in the Netball Super League Grand Final seven times, winning the title in both 2008 and 2011.\nTurnford Netball Club and Hatfield Netball Club are both netball teams from Hertfordshire which play in the England Netball Premier League, the highest level of club/amateur netball in the country.\nLandmarks.\nBelow is a list of notable visitor attractions in Hertfordshire:\nTransport.\nHertfordshire is a home county with many towns forming part of the London commuter belt and has some of the principal roads in England including the A1, A1(M), A41, A414, M1, M11, and the M25.\nFour principal national railway lines pass through the county:\nA number of other local rail routes also cross Hertfordshire:\nThree commuter lines operated by Transport for London enter the county:\nThe distance travelled by buses in Hertfordshire has reduced by 56.5% since 2017.\nStansted Airport and Luton Airport are both within of the county's borders in Essex and Bedfordshire, respectively. The commercial airfield at Elstree is for light aircraft.\nThe Grand Union Canal passes through Rickmansworth, Watford, Hemel Hempstead, Berkhamsted and Tring.\nEducation.\nHertfordshire has 26 independent schools and 73 state secondary schools.\nThe state secondary schools are entirely comprehensive, although 7 schools in the south and southwest of the county are partially selective (see Education in Watford).\nAll state schools have sixth forms, and there are no sixth form colleges.\nThe tertiary colleges, each with multiple campuses, are Hertford Regional College, North Hertfordshire College, Oaklands College and West Herts College.\nThe University of Hertfordshire is a modern university based largely in Hatfield. It has more than 23,000 students.\nLiterature.\nHertfordshire is the location of Jack Worthing's country house in Oscar Wilde's play \"The Importance of Being Earnest\".\nJane Austen's novel \"Pride and Prejudice\" is primarily set in Hertfordshire.\nThe location of Mr Jarndyce's Bleak House in Charles Dickens's \"Bleak House\" is near St Albans.\nThe eponymous residence in E. M. Forster's novel \"Howards End\" was based on Rooks Nest House just outside Stevenage.\nGeorge Orwell based \"Animal Farm\" on Wallington, Hertfordshire, where he lived between 1936 and 1940. Manor Farm and The Great Barn both feature in the novel.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13987", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13987", "title": "Helene Kr\u00f6ller-M\u00fcller", "text": "German art collector (1869\u20131939)\nHelene Emma Laura Juliane Kr\u00f6ller-M\u00fcller (; n\u00e9e\u00a0M\u00fcller; 11 February 1869 \u2013 14 December 1939) was a German art collector. She was one of the first European women to put together a major art collection. She is credited with being one of the first collectors to recognise the genius of Vincent van Gogh. Her entire collection was eventually sold to the Dutch government, along with her and her husband, Anton Kr\u00f6ller's, large forested country estate. Today it is the Kr\u00f6ller-M\u00fcller Museum and sculpture garden and Hoge Veluwe National Park, one of the largest national parks in the Netherlands.\nLife and career.\nHelene Emma Laura Juliane M\u00fcller was born in Essen-Horst, Essen, into a wealthy industrialist family. Her father, Wilhelm M\u00fcller, owned Wm. H. M\u00fcller &amp; Co., a prosperous supplier of raw materials to the mining and steel industries. \nShe studied under painter Henk Bremmer in 1906\u20131907. As she was one of the wealthiest women in the Netherlands at the time, Bremmer recommended that she form an art collection. In 1907, she began her collection with the painting \"Train in a Landscape\" by Paul Gabri\u00ebl. Subsequently, Helene Kr\u00f6ller-M\u00fcller became an avid art collector, and one of the first people to recognise the genius of Vincent van Gogh. She eventually amassed more than 90 van Gogh paintings and 185 drawings, the world's largest collection of the artist's work at the time, and today the second largest after the subsequently created Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam. She also bought more than 400 works by Dutch artist Bart van der Leck, but his popularity did not take off like van Gogh's.\nKr\u00f6ller-M\u00fcller also collected works by modern artists, such as Picasso, Georges Braque, Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Fernand L\u00e9ger, Diego Rivera, Juan Gris, Piet Mondrian, Gino Severini, Joseph Csaky, Auguste Herbin, Georges Valmier, Mar\u00eda Blanchard, L\u00e9opold Survage and Tobeen. However, Bremmer advised her not to buy \"A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte\" by Georges Seurat, which turned out to be an important icon of 20th-century art. She did purchase however \"Le Chahut\" by Seurat, another icon in the history of modern art. Also, she steered away from artists of her native Germany, whose work she found \"insufficiently authoritative.\"\nOn a trip to Florence in June 1910, she conceived the idea of creating a museum-house. From 1913 onwards parts of her collection were open to the public; until the mid-1930s her exhibition hall in The Hague was one of the very rare places where one could see more than a few works of modern art. In 1928, Anton and Helene created the Kr\u00f6ller-M\u00fcller Foundation to protect the collection and the estates. In 1935, they donated to the Dutch people their entire collection totaling approximately 12,000 objects, on condition that a large museum be built in the gardens of her park. Held in the care of the Dutch government, the Kr\u00f6ller-M\u00fcller Museum was opened in 1938.\nThe Kr\u00f6ller-M\u00fcller Museum is nestled in their 75-acre (300,000 m2) forested country estate, today the largest national park in the Netherlands, the Hoge Veluwe National Park near the town of Otterlo and the city of Arnhem. A lavish art gallery was planned near their iconic lakeside Jachthuis Sint Hubertus hunting lodge and landscape statue of their close personal friend, the South African Boer General Christian de Wet on the estate. Due to threat of war the plans were never implemented in their lifetime but once the war was over a large forest sculpture garden and understated open exhibition extension was opened, housing statues by Rodin and the second largest collection of van Gogh paintings in the world, including the famous Sunflowers.\nFrom 13 September 2025, to 8 February 2026, the National Gallery, London exhibited \"Radical Harmony: Helene Kr\u00f6ller-M\u00fcller's Neo-Impressionists\".\u00a0 The exhibition focused on some of the works she collected, as well as other neo-impressionist works from various public and private collections. It was organized by the Kr\u00f6ller-M\u00fcller Museum and the National Gallery.\u00a0 The exhibition catalog was written by Julien Domercq, Christopher Riopelle, and Chiara Di Stefano.\u00a0 \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13988", "revid": "51002863", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13988", "title": "Hans-Georg Gadamer", "text": "German philosopher (1900\u20132002)\nHans-Georg Gadamer (; ; 11 February 1900\u00a0\u2013 13 March 2002) was a German philosopher of the continental tradition, best known for his 1960 on hermeneutics, \"Truth and Method\" (\"Wahrheit und Methode\").\nLife.\nFamily and early life.\nGadamer was born in Marburg, Germany, the son of Johannes Gadamer (1867\u20131928), a pharmaceutical chemistry professor who later also served as the rector of the University of Marburg. He was raised a Protestant Christian. Gadamer resisted his father's urging to take up the natural sciences and became more and more interested in the humanities. His mother, Emma Karoline Johanna Gewiese (1869\u20131904) died of diabetes while Hans-Georg was four years old, and he later noted that this may have had an effect on his decision not to pursue scientific studies. Jean Grondin describes Gadamer as finding in his mother \"a poetic and almost religious counterpart to the iron fist of his father\". Gadamer did not serve during World War I for reasons of ill health and similarly was exempted from serving during World War II due to polio.\nEducation.\nHe later studied classics and philosophy in the University of Breslau under Richard H\u00f6nigswald, but soon moved back to the University of Marburg to study with the neo-Kantian philosophers Paul Natorp (his doctoral thesis advisor) and Nicolai Hartmann. He defended his dissertation \"The Essence of Pleasure in Plato's Dialogues\" () in 1922.\nShortly thereafter, Gadamer moved to Freiburg University and began studying with Martin Heidegger, who was then a promising young scholar who had not yet received a professorship. He became close to Heidegger, and when Heidegger received a position at Marburg, Gadamer followed him there, where he became one of a group of students such as Leo Strauss, Karl L\u00f6with, and Hannah Arendt. It was Heidegger's influence that gave Gadamer's thought its distinctive cast and led him away from the earlier neo-Kantian influences of Natorp and Hartmann. Gadamer studied Aristotle both under Edmund Husserl and under Heidegger.\nEarly career.\nGadamer habilitated in 1929 and spent most of the early 1930s lecturing in Marburg. Unlike Heidegger, who joined the Nazi Party in May 1933 and continued as a member until the party was dissolved following World War II, Gadamer was silent on Nazism, and he was not politically active during Nazi rule. Gadamer did not join the Nazis, and he did not serve in the army because of the polio he had contracted in 1922. He joined the National Socialist Teachers League in August 1933.\nIn 1933 Gadamer signed the \"Vow of allegiance of the Professors of the German Universities and High-Schools to Adolf Hitler and the National Socialistic State\".\nIn April 1937 he became a temporary professor at Marburg, then in 1938 he received a professorship at Leipzig University. From an \"SS\"-point of view Gadamer was classified as neither supportive nor disapproving in the \"SD-Dossiers \u00fcber Philosophie-Professoren\" (i.e. SD-files concerning philosophy professors) that were set up by the \"SS\"-Security-Service (SD). In 1946, he was found by the American occupation forces to be untainted by Nazism and named rector of the university.\nThe level of Gadamer's involvement with the Nazis has been disputed in the works of Richard Wolin and Teresa Orozco. Orozco alleges, with reference to Gadamer's published works, that Gadamer had supported the Nazis more than scholars had supposed. Gadamer scholars have rejected these assertions: Jean Grondin has said that Orozco is engaged in a \"witch-hunt\" while Donatella Di Cesare said that \"the archival material on which Orozco bases her argument is actually quite negligible\". Di Cesare and Grondin have argued that there is no trace of antisemitism in Gadamer's work, and that Gadamer maintained friendships with Jews and provided shelter for nearly two years for the philosopher Jacob Klein in 1933 and 1934. Gadamer also reduced his contact with Heidegger during the Nazi era.\nAt Heidelberg.\nAfter the war Gadamer left for West Germany, accepting first a position in Goethe University Frankfurt and then the succession of Karl Jaspers as the philosophy chair in the University of Heidelberg in 1949, retiring in 1968. He remained in this position, as emeritus, until his death in 2002 at the age of 102. He was also an Editorial Advisor of the journal \"Dionysius\". It was during this time that he completed his \"magnum opus\", \"Truth and Method\" (1960), and engaged in his famous debate with J\u00fcrgen Habermas over the possibility of transcending history and culture in order to find a truly objective position from which to critique society. The debate was inconclusive, but marked the beginning of warm relations between the two men. It was Gadamer who secured Habermas's first professorship in the University of Heidelberg.\nIn 1968, Gadamer invited Tomonobu Imamichi for lectures at Heidelberg, but their relationship became very cool after Imamichi alleged that Heidegger had taken his concept of \"Dasein\" out of Okakura Kakuzo's concept of \"das in-der-Welt-sein\" (to be in the being in the world) expressed in \"The Book of Tea\", which Imamichi's teacher had offered to Heidegger in 1919, after having followed lessons with him the year before. Imamichi and Gadamer renewed contact four years later during an international congress.\nIn 1981, Gadamer attempted to engage with Jacques Derrida at a conference in Paris but it proved less enlightening because the two thinkers had little in common. A last meeting between Gadamer and Derrida was held at the Stift of Heidelberg in July 2001, coordinated by Derrida's students Joseph Cohen and Raphael Zagury-Orly. This meeting marked, in many ways, a turn in their philosophical encounter. After Gadamer's death, Derrida called their failure to find common ground one of the worst debacles of his life and expressed, in the main obituary for Gadamer, his great personal and philosophical respect. Richard J. Bernstein said that \"[a] genuine dialogue between Gadamer and Derrida has never taken place. This is a shame because there are crucial and consequential issues that arise between hermeneutics and deconstruction\".\nHonorary doctorates.\nGadamer received honorary doctorates from the University of Bamberg, the University of Wroc\u0142aw, Boston College, Charles University in Prague, Hamilton College, the University of Leipzig, the University of Marburg (1999) the University of Ottawa, Saint Petersburg State University (2001), the University of T\u00fcbingen and University of Washington.\nDeath.\nOn 11 February 2000, the University of Heidelberg celebrated Gadamer's 100th birthday with a ceremony and conference. Gadamer's last academic engagement was in the summer of 2001, at the age of 101, at an annual symposium on hermeneutics organized by two of his American students. On 13 March 2002, Gadamer died at Heidelberg's University Clinic at the age of 102. He is buried in the K\u00f6pfel cemetery in Ziegelhausen.\nWork.\nPhilosophical hermeneutics and \"Truth and Method\".\nGadamer's philosophical project, as explained in \"Truth and Method\", was to elaborate on the concept of \"philosophical hermeneutics\", which Heidegger initiated but never dealt with at length. Gadamer's goal was to uncover the nature of human understanding. In \"Truth and Method\", Gadamer argued that \"truth\" and \"method\" were at odds with one another. For Gadamer, \"the experience of art is exemplary in its provision of truths that are inaccessible by scientific methods, and this experience is projected to the whole domain of human sciences.\" He was critical of two approaches to the human sciences (\"Geisteswissenschaften\"). On the one hand, he was critical of modern approaches to humanities that modeled themselves on the natural sciences, which simply sought to \"objectively\" observe and analyze texts and art. On the other hand, he took issue with the traditional German approaches to the humanities, represented for instance by Friedrich Schleiermacher and Wilhelm Dilthey, who believed that meaning, as an object, could be found within a text through a particular process that allowed for a connection with the author's thoughts that led to the creation of a text (Schleiermacher), or the situation that led to an expression of human inner life (Dilthey).\nHowever, Gadamer argued meaning and understanding are not objects to be found through certain methods, but are inevitable phenomena. Hermeneutics is not a process in which an interpreter finds a particular meaning, but \"a philosophical effort to account for understanding as an ontological\u2014the ontological\u2014process of man.\" Thus, Gadamer is not giving a prescriptive method on how to understand, but rather he is working to examine how understanding, whether of texts, artwork, or experience, is possible at all. Gadamer intended \"Truth and Method\" to be a description of what we always do when we interpret things (even if we do not know it): \"My real concern was and is philosophic: not what we do or what we ought to do, but what happens to us over and above our wanting and doing\".\nAs a result of Martin Heidegger's temporal analysis of human existence, Gadamer argued that people have a so-called historically affected consciousness (\"wirkungsgeschichtliches Bewu\u00dftsein\"), and that they are embedded in the particular history and culture that shaped them. However the historical consciousness is not an object over and against our existence, but \"a stream in which we move and participate, in every act of understanding.\" Therefore, people do not come to any given thing without some form of preunderstanding established by this historical stream. The tradition in which an interpreter stands establishes \"prejudices\" that affect how he or she will make interpretations. For Gadamer, these prejudices are not something that hinders our ability to make interpretations, but are both integral to the reality of being, and \"are the basis of our being able to understand history at all.\" Gadamer criticized Enlightenment thinkers for harboring a \"prejudice against prejudices\".\nFor Gadamer, interpreting a text involves a fusion of horizons (\"Horizontverschmelzung\"). Both the text and the interpreter find themselves within a particular historical tradition, or \"horizon\". Each horizon is expressed through the medium of language, and both text and interpreter belong to and participate in history and language. This \"belongingness\" to language is the common ground between interpreter and text that makes understanding possible. As an interpreter seeks to understand a text, a common horizon emerges. This fusion of horizons does not mean the interpreter now fully understands some kind of objective meaning, but is \"an event in which a world opens itself to him.\" The result is a deeper understanding of the subject matter.\nGadamer further explains the hermeneutical experience as a dialogue. To justify this, he uses Plato's dialogues as a model for how we are to engage with written texts. To be in conversation, one must take seriously \"the truth claim of the person with whom one is conversing.\" Further, each participant in the conversation relates to one another insofar as they belong to the common goal of understanding one another. Ultimately, for Gadamer, the most important dynamic of conversation as a model for the interpretation of a text is \"the give-and-take of question and answer.\" In other words, the interpretation of a given text will change depending on the questions the interpreter asks of the\ntext. The \"meaning\" emerges not as an object that lies in the text or in the interpreter, but rather an event that results from the interaction of the two.\n\"Truth and Method\" was published twice in English, and the revised edition is now considered authoritative. The German-language edition of Gadamer's Collected Works includes a volume in which Gadamer elaborates his argument and discusses the critical response to the book. Finally, Gadamer's essay on Celan (entitled \"Who Am I and Who Are You?\") has been considered by many\u2014including Heidegger and Gadamer himself\u2014as a \"second volume\" or continuation of the argument in \"Truth and Method\".\nContributions to communication ethics.\nGadamer's \"Truth and Method\" has become an authoritative work in the communication ethics field, spawning several prominent ethics theories and guidelines. The most profound of these is the formulation of the dialogic coordinates, a standard set of prerequisite communication elements necessary for inciting dialogue. Adhering to Gadamer's theories regarding bias, communicators can better initiate dialogic transaction, allowing biases to merge and promote mutual understanding and learning.\nOther works.\nGadamer also added philosophical substance to the notion of human health. In \"The Enigma of Health\", Gadamer explored what it means to heal, as a patient and a provider. In this work the practice and art of medicine are thoroughly examined, as is the inevitability of any cure.\nIn addition to his work in hermeneutics, Gadamer is also well known for a long list of publications on Greek philosophy. Indeed, while \"Truth and Method\" became central to his later career, much of Gadamer's early life centered on studying Greek thinkers, Plato and Aristotle specifically. In the Italian introduction to \"Truth and Method\", Gadamer said that his work on Greek philosophy was \"the best and most original part\" of his career. His book \"Plato's Dialectical Ethics\" looks at the \"Philebus\" dialogue through the lens of phenomenology and the philosophy of Martin Heidegger.\n1971: Pour le M\u00e9rite and the Reuchlin Prize\n1972: Great Cross of Merit with Star of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany\n1979: Sigmund Freud Prize for scientific prose and Hegel Prize\n1986: Karl Jaspers Prize\n1990: Great Cross of Merit with Star and Sash of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany\n1993: Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany\n12 January 1996: appointed an honorary member of the Saxon Academy of Sciences in Leipzig\n1995: University of Wroc\u0142aw\n1996: University of Leipzig\n1999: Philipps-University Marburg\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13989", "revid": "51063478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13989", "title": "HomePage.", "text": "https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g154966-d8749915-Reviews-The_Kilt_Castle_Pub-Yellowknife_Northwest_Territories.html"}
{"id": "13990", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13990", "title": "Historical martial arts reconstruction", "text": ""}
{"id": "13991", "revid": "1314569218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13991", "title": "Honeymoon", "text": "Vacation after the wedding to celebrate recent marriage\nA honeymoon is a vacation taken by newlyweds after their wedding to celebrate their marriage. Today, honeymoons are often celebrated in destinations considered exotic or romantic. In a similar context, it may also refer to the phase in a couple's relationship\u2014whether they are in matrimony or not\u2014that exists before getting used to everyday life together.\nHistory.\nThe custom in Western culture and some westernized countries' cultures of a newlywed couple going on a holiday together originated in early-19th-century Britain. Upper-class couples would take a \"bridal tour\", sometimes accompanied by friends or family, to visit relatives who had not been able to attend the wedding. The practice soon spread to the European continent and was known in France as a ('English-style voyage'), from the 1820s onwards.\nHoneymoons in the modern sense\u2014a pure holiday voyage undertaken by the couple\u2014became widespread during the \"Belle \u00c9poque\", in the late 1800s as one of the first instances of modern mass tourism.\nAccording to some sources, the honeymoon is a relic of marriage by capture, based on the practice of the husband going into hiding with his wife to avoid reprisals from her relatives, with the intention that the woman would be pregnant by the end of the month.\nEtymology.\nThe honeymoon was originally the period following marriage, \"characterized by love and happiness,\" as attested since 1546. The word may allude to \"the idea that the first month of marriage is the sweetest\".\nAccording to a different version, of the Oxford English Dictionary:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The first month after marriage, when there is nothing but tenderness and pleasure (Samuel Johnson); originally having no reference to the period of a month, but comparing the mutual affection of newly married persons to the changing moon which is no sooner full than it begins to wane; now, usually, the holiday spent together by a newly married couple, before settling down at home.\nToday, \"honeymoon\" has a positive meaning, but originally it may have referred to the inevitable waning of love, like a phase of the moon. In 1552, Richard Huloet wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hony mone, a term proverbially applied to such as be newly married, which will not fall out at the first, but th'one loveth the other at the beginning exceedingly, the likelihood of their exceadinge love appearing to aswage, ye which time the vulgar people call the hony mone.\nIn many modern languages, the word for a honeymoon is a calque (e.g., ) or near-calque. Persian has a similar word, , which translates to 'month of honey' or 'moon of honey'.\nA 19th-century theory claimed that the word alludes to \"the custom of the higher order of the Teutones to drink Mead, or Metheglin, a beverage made with \"honey\", for thirty days after every wedding\", but the theory has been challenged.\nThe first recorded use of the word \"honeymoon\" to refer to the vacation after the wedding appeared in 1791, in a translation of German folk stories. The first recorded native-English use of the word appeared in 1804.\nModern practice.\nThe modern purpose of honeymooning varies by culture. For those in an arranged marriage, a honeymoon is a time to get to know one another. For some cultures, it is a time for the couple to become sexually intimate. For other cultures, the purpose of the honeymoon mainly involves spending time to relax, creating a shared memorable experience for the couple, and adjusting to married life.\nAccording to the 2023 Global Wedding Report done by \"The Knot\", among the 15 countries surveyed, an average of 75% of couples took a honeymoon. Honeymoons are most popular in European countries. Conversely, fewer than half of couples in India take a honeymoon. Beach resorts are the preferred location for many couples. \nUnited States.\nHoneymoons are a $12 billion a year industry. In the United States, an average couple spends $4,500 for their honeymoon. Niagara Falls was a popular honeymoon destination for Americans in the 1980s, but it has since become less favored due to the increasing costs of air travel.\nSolomoon or unimoon.\nAn emerging 21st-century travel trend is the \"solomoon\" or \"unimoon\", a separate, solo holiday the newlyweds take without their spouse. \"The New Zealand Herald\" cites a report by \"The New York Times\" that such alternatives to honeymoons are \"particularly suited for couples who just cannot agree on where to go\".\nEffects.\nOne 2015 scholarly study concluded that going on a honeymoon was associated with a somewhat lower risk of divorce, regardless of how much or little is spent on the honeymoon itself. However, high spending and incurring significant debt on other wedding-related expenses, such as engagement rings and wedding ceremonies, is associated with a high risk of divorce.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13992", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13992", "title": "Harold Kushner", "text": "American rabbi (1935\u20132023)\nHarold Samuel Kushner (April 3, 1935 \u2013 April 28, 2023) was an American rabbi, author, and lecturer. He was a member of the Rabbinical Assembly of Conservative Judaism and served as the congregational rabbi of Temple Israel of Natick, in Natick, Massachusetts, for 24 years. \nKushner gained widespread recognition for his many popular books that simplify complex theological ideas for both Jewish and non-Jewish readers. He received numerous awards, including the Christopher Award in 1987 and the Jewish Book Council's Lifetime Achievement Award in 2007. His most prominent works include \"When Bad Things Happen to Good People\", delving into human suffering, divine kindness, and theodicy following his son's death from progeria, and \"When All You've Ever Wanted Isn't Enough\", exploring existential themes of life's purpose and the pursuit of fulfillment.\nConsidered to have been one of America's most prominent rabbis, Kushner was known for his Reconstructionist views and for his ideological progressiveness within the Conservative movement. He argued against the notion of an omnipotent, interventionist God, and instead focused on God's role in offering comfort and solace to those who suffer.\nEarly life and education.\nHarold Samuel Kushner was born to Conservative Jewish parents Julius and Sarah (n\u00e9e\u00a0Hartman) Kushner in Brooklyn, New York City. When he began elementary school, his family relocated to the Crown Heights neighborhood. Kushner was an avid fan of the Brooklyn Dodgers in his early years. While his mother was a homemaker, his father owned Playmore Publishing, a shop at Fifth Avenue and 23rd Street that specialized in selling children's books and toys, primarily Bible stories. Julius had hoped that his son would take over the business someday, but Harold did not believe he possessed the same level of business acumen as his father. \nAfter graduating from Erasmus Hall High School, he attended Columbia University, where he initially intended to major in psychology but later switched to literature after being taught by Mark Van Doren, a Pulitzer Prize-winning poet. At Columbia, Kushner's extracurricular positions included working for \"Jester of Columbia\" and WKCR, where he eventually became the director of sports broadcasting, and serving as the president of the student Zionist organization.\nDespite having a strong religious upbringing, Kushner had no plans to become a rabbi until he joined an evening program at the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York City. He became certain about his calling to be a rabbi during his junior year at Columbia. He completed his bachelor's degree in religious education in 1955, and after completing his master's degree in the social and philosophical foundations of education in 1960, he enrolled full-time at the seminary, where he was ordained that same year. Kushner received his doctorate in Hebrew literature in 1972. He also completed a year of graduate work at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and held teaching positions at Clark University and the Rabbinical School of the JTS.\nRabbinical career.\nFollowing his rabbinic ordination, Kushner went to court to request the waiver of his military exemption. He served for two years as a first lieutenant in the Army's Chaplain Corps at Fort Sill in Oklahoma. After his discharge from the military, Kushner returned to New York and served as an assistant rabbi at Temple Israel in Great Neck from 1962 to 1966. \nIn 1966, Kushner assumed the position of rabbi at the 450-family congregation Temple Israel in Natick, Massachusetts. He fulfilled the role of congregational rabbi there for 24 years while also being a member of the Rabbinical Assembly, the \"clerical arm\" of the Conservative movement. From 1972 to 1974, he served as the president of the New England Region of the Rabbinical Assembly. Initially serving as Temple Israel's full-time rabbi, he shifted to part-time in 1983 to allocate more time for writing and in 1990, he transitioned to full-time writing and lecturing. The synagogue deemed Kushner, who was 55 years old at the time, too young to be appointed as rabbi emeritus, so he was bestowed the title of rabbi laureate in 1983. The title, held by only a few American rabbis, underlined his commitment to maintaining an enduring connection with both his congregants and the rabbinate. He attended the synagogue until his death.\nKushner's presence in the Conservative movement was described as \"inescapable\". In 2001, he co-authored \"Etz Hayim: A Torah Commentary\", the new official Torah commentary of the Conservative movement, in collaboration with Chaim Potok. The comprehensive work comprises four layers of commentary, encompassing insights on Conservative observance of Jewish law and traditional and contemporary interpretations of scripture (\"midrash\"), curated by Kushner.\nKushner spoke at the interfaith prayer service for the second inauguration of Bill Clinton. He was also a eulogist at the state funeral of Ronald Reagan in the Washington National Cathedral in 2004, where offered a reading from the Book of Isaiah.\nWriting.\nWith the backing of Rabbi Ira Eisenstein, the founder of the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College, Kushner released his inaugural book in 1971 under the title \"When Children Ask About God: A Guide for Parents Who Don't Always Have All the Answers.\" Rather than reinforcing the notion of God as an all-knowing and all-powerful creator, he aimed to foster a healthy skepticism and encourage questioning as a means of developing a meaningful religious faith. The book primarily targeted parents and aimed to address the concerns of people who were seeking a new Jewish belief system more in line with their broader worldview.\nKushner is best known for his international best-selling book on the problem of evil, \"When Bad Things Happen to Good People,\" published in 1981\".\" Written following the death of his son, Aaron, from the premature aging disease progeria, it deals with questions about human suffering, God, omnipotence, and theodicy. Kushner aimed to assist individuals in maintaining their belief in God's benevolence despite experiencing personal tragedies. His book offers a fresh interpretation of the Book of Job, suggesting that while God may not have the power to prevent suffering, God provides solace to those who are afflicted. His contemporary interpretation of theodicy in the book laid the groundwork for the modernist theological literature within the Conservative Jewish community, alongside works by Elliott N. Dorff, Neil Gillman, Harold M. Schulweis, and David Wolpe. The book resonated with readers across religions and was translated into at least 12 languages. Its success propelled it to the top of \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list, and established Kushner as a well-known author and commentator. In 1991, it tied for the ninth position with four other books in the Book of the Month Club's list of the top ten books that had the most significant impact on American lives, based on a nationwide survey. The book was described as \"arguably one of the most widely read books written by a rabbi in centuries\" and as \"one of the most widely read Jewish books of our generation\" by Neil Gillman. Its popularity was partly attributed to Protestant clergy members promoting it in their sermons and distributing copies to their congregations. Four million copies had been sold by the book's 20th anniversary. \nIn 1986, Kushner published \"When All You've Ever Wanted Isn't Enough: The Search for a Life That Matters\", delving into existential themes of life's meaning and individual pursuit of happiness within the context of Ecclesiastes. Its title was deemed an \"apt summary of Ecclesiastes\". Kushner's goal was to dissect the unfulfillment experienced even by achievers, asserting that \"What we miss in our lives, no matter how much we have, is that sense of meaning.\" He rejected the notion of a singular answer to life's complexities and contended that such answers are found in daily experiences, relationships, and the quest for integrity. Central to his argument was Ecclesiastes, which he called \"the most dangerous book in the Bible\" for its call to contemplation over blind worship, as Kushner contended that life's richness emerges from thoughtful engagement, emphasizing that an unfulfilled life is more daunting than death itself. The book earned praise as a \"useful spiritual survival manual\" from \"The Washington Post\" and received the 1987 Christopher Award for its \"contribution to the exaltation of the human spirit.\"\n\"Who Needs God,\" published in 1989\",\" argued for the ongoing relevance of God in a world characterized by unprecedented human achievements. As with Kushner's previous works, Reconstructionist views were apparent in his attempt to make room for religious life and the notion of God without the belief in an all-powerful creator. He aimed to bridge the gap between religious fundamentalism and atheism, highlighting that organized religion's greatest offering is not theology but rather the comfort and support of a spiritual community. Kushner also asserted that the existence of God endows individuals with the ability to perceive holiness in the world and attain a greater sense of purpose.\nKushner authored several other well-received theological books, such as \"How Good Do We Have to Be?\" and \"To Life!\". Works such as \"When All You've Ever Wanted Isn't Enough\", \"Who Needs God?\" and \"How Good Do We Have to Be?\" reached a wide readership of millions. In 2007, Kushner received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Jewish Book Council. \nCarolyn Hessel, director of the Jewish Book Council, attributed Kushner's success to his ability to appeal to everyone regardless of their background. Burton Cooper, a professor of theology at the Louisville Presbyterian Theological Seminary, argues that Kushner's popularity and significance arise from his skill in reaching individuals with a \"modern consciousness\", a perspective informed by science, and resonating with their longing for religious faith. \nIn the fall of 2001, Kushner achieved his sixth best-seller with \"Living a Life That Matters\", focused on Jacob from the Old Testament, the sole figure with a complete biography in the Bible. He examines Jacob's complex moral choices, such as deceiving his father to secure his blessing. He interprets Jacob's encounter with an angel as an internal struggle, symbolizing the conflict within his soul and his progression towards integrity. While Kushner's stance suggests Jacob's victory through loss, the Torah presents an alternate perspective, depicting Jacob as the undisputed winner.\nKushner's response to Simon Wiesenthal's question of forgiveness was included in a revised 1997 edition of the book \",\" alongside those of 45 other leading intellectuals and commentators. Wiesenthal's inquiry emerged from a real-life scenario during the Holocaust, when he confronted a dying Nazi soldier who sought absolution for his heinous deeds, prompting the question: Can such profound wrongdoing be forgiven? Kushner conveyed the essence of forgiveness as follows:\nForgiving is not something we do for another person, as the Nazi asked Wiesenthal to do for him. Forgiving happens inside us. It represents a letting go of the sense of grievance, and perhaps most importantly a letting go of the role of victim. For a Jew to forgive the Nazis would not mean, God forbid, saying to them \"What you did was understandable, I can understand what led you to it and I don't hate you for it.\" It would mean saying \"What you did was thoroughly despicable and puts you outside the category of decent human beings. But I refuse to give you the power to define me as a victim. I refuse to let your blind hatred define the shape and content of my Jewishness. I don't hate you; I reject you.\" And then the Nazi would remained chained to his past and to his conscience, but the Jew would be free.\nKushner was an editor of the journal \"Conservative Judaism\" from 1980 to 1984\".\" \nKushner frequently used examples from TV shows and movies in his teachings and writings to connect with his audience, as he believed many people are more familiar with these cultural references than with the Bible, although he expressed concern over the semi-literacy of the Bible and found it surprising when people were not familiar with biblical stories.\nViews.\nKushner, affiliated with Conservative Judaism, championed progressive concepts within the movement while deeply influenced by Mordecai Kaplan, his teacher and the founder of Reconstructionist Judaism, whom he regarded as the most influential thinker in American Jewish history. During a speech to the Rabbinical Assembly in 1980, he commented that the Conservative movement had faced an ongoing crisis regarding the authority of \"halakhah\" (Jewish law) since its inception. He emphasized that the goal of Conservative rabbis was to demonstrate that leading a religious life in the modern era could be fulfilling, without imposing strict observance on less practicing Jews. Paraphrasing Jewish theologian Martin Buber, Kushner also once stated that \"people want less theology and more religion.\" He rejected the definition of religion \"as an individual experience\", emphasizing its communal aspect.\nInformed by the teachings of Kaplan, Kushner was a proponent of Jewish religious naturalism. Discarding the notion of an omnipotent God, he proposed that God lacks complete dominion over the universe and is not culpable for evil. Within this Reconstructionist framework, he identified two core life forces: the randomness of nature and purposeful divine actions. He rejected the notion of God causing suffering as punishment, advocating instead for a God who shares in human pain, as evidenced by God's name \"I am with you\" in the Book of Exodus. Viewing God as a source of empathy and love, Kushner once recalled being concerned that during Yom Kippur, his synagogue's congregants focused too much on guilt and did not give themselves the chance to experience God's forgiveness. His aphorism \"forgiveness benefits us more than the person we forgive\" was one of many adopted by religious leaders of various faiths. Drawing from the Reconstructionist tradition, Kushner asserted that God shouldn't be perceived as a distant entity in space, emphasizing that the question of God's existence doesn't necessarily revolve around the concept of a heavenly population. \nKushner's writing and ideas were popular among Christians, but traditional Jews held mixed opinions. He once expressed, \"I always thought Judaism was at its best when it not only looked at text, but when it looked at people.\" Kushner's approach, rooted in a focus on human needs, occasionally led him to reinterpret Jewish theology for emotional solace. This resulted in some Orthodox Jews feeling defensive of traditional Jewish teachings and accusing him of promoting un-Jewish ideas. In \"When Bad Things Happen to Good People\", Kushner reconciled Jewish beliefs in God's omnipotence and benevolence constraining God's influence over random hazards in life. He likened God to a benevolent watchmaker who created the world and its natural laws. This perspective portrays God as taking pride in his creation while permitting it to operate within these established laws, including the occurrence of random challenges. This implies that God intentionally refrains from complete control over every aspect of life, enabling individuals to navigate and respond to various situations while supporting them only with his presence. This view contradicts traditional Jewish teaching and led to criticism from Orthodox Jews, although Kushner himself acknowledged that he may have been wrong about God. Literary critic and journalist Ron Rosenbaum was not convinced by Kushner's argument in the book, describing Kushner's position as \"diminishing God to something less than an Omnipotent Being \u2013 to something more like an eager cheerleader for good, but one decidedly on the sidelines in the struggle against evil.\"\nIn line with Kaplan's influence and Reconstructionist theology, Kushner perceived the Torah as a fully human creation that, while acknowledging its human origins, serves to commemorate significant religious experiences in life. He sometimes expressed doubt about the reliability of individuals who claim to have heard divine messages, and cited the Binding of Isaac as a problematic narrative that contradicts fundamental religious tenets. The story tells of Abraham going to sacrifice his son, Isaac, as an offering to God in obedience to a divine directive. Although Kushner believed that Abraham heard the message, he was skeptical that God actually said it.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1960, Kushner married Suzette Estrada and moved to Massachusetts. Estrada died in 2022. The couple had a son named Aaron, who died of progeria at the age of 14, a daughter named Ariel, and two grandchildren. Kushner's brother Paul was a rabbi in Bellmore and Merrick on Long Island, and died in 2019.\nIn 1995, Christian inspirational group the Christophers included Kushner in their list of \"50 individuals who have made a positive impact on the world over the past 50 years.\" He was the recipient of six honorary doctorates.\nKushner moved into a senior residence in Canton, Massachusetts in 2017. He died on April 28, 2023, at age 88.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13994", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13994", "title": "Hotspot", "text": "Hotspot, Hot Spot or Hot spot may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "13995", "revid": "50179043", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13995", "title": "Heapsort", "text": "Sorting algorithm using the heap data structure\nIn computer science, heapsort is an efficient, comparison-based sorting algorithm that reorganizes an input array into a heap (a data structure where each node is greater than its children) and then repeatedly removes the largest node from that heap, placing it at the end of the array in a similar manner to Selection sort. \nAlthough somewhat slower in practice on most machines than a well-implemented quicksort, it has the advantages of very simple implementation and a more favorable worst-case \"O\"(\"n\" log \"n\") runtime. Most real-world quicksort variants include an implementation of heapsort as a fallback should they detect that quicksort is becoming degenerate. Heapsort is an in-place algorithm, but it is not a stable sort.\nHeapsort was invented by J. W. J. Williams in 1964. The paper also introduced the binary heap as a useful data structure in its own right. In the same year, Robert W. Floyd published an improved version that could sort an array in-place, continuing his earlier research into the treesort algorithm.\nOverview.\nThe heapsort algorithm can be divided into two phases: heap construction, and heap extraction.\nThe heap is an implicit data structure which takes no space beyond the array of objects to be sorted; the array is interpreted as a complete binary tree where each array element is a node and each node's parent and child links are defined by simple arithmetic on the array indexes. For a zero-based array, the root node is stored at index 0, and the nodes linked to node are where the floor function rounds down to the preceding integer. For a more detailed explanation, see .\nThis binary tree is a max-heap when each node is greater than or equal to both of its children. Equivalently, each node is less than or equal to its parent. This rule, applied throughout the tree, results in the maximum node being located at the root of the tree.\nIn the first phase, a heap is built out of the data (see ).\nIn the second phase, the heap is converted to a sorted array by repeatedly removing the largest element from the heap (the root of the heap), and placing it at the start of the array. The heap is updated after each removal to maintain the heap property. Once all objects have been removed from the heap, the result is a sorted array.\nHeapsort is normally performed in place. During the first phase, the array is divided into an unsorted prefix and a heap-ordered suffix (initially empty). Each step shrinks the prefix and expands the suffix. When the prefix is empty, this phase is complete. During the second phase, the array is divided into a heap-ordered prefix and a sorted suffix (initially empty). Each step shrinks the prefix and expands the suffix. When the prefix is empty, the array is sorted.\nAlgorithm.\nThe heapsort algorithm begins by rearranging the array into a binary max-heap. The algorithm then repeatedly swaps the root of the heap (the greatest element remaining in the heap) with its last element, which is then declared to be part of the sorted suffix. Then the heap, which was damaged by replacing the root, is repaired so that the greatest element is again at the root. This repeats until only one value remains in the heap.\nThe steps are:\nThe operation is run once, and is \"O\"(\"n\") in performance. The function is called n times and requires \"O\"(log \"n\") work each time, due to its traversal starting from the root node. Therefore, the performance of this algorithm is \"O\"(\"n\" + \"n\" log \"n\") = \"O\"(\"n\" log \"n\").\nThe heart of the algorithm is the function. This constructs binary heaps out of smaller heaps, and may be thought of in two equivalent ways:\nTo establish the max-heap property at the root, up to three nodes must be compared (the root and its two children), and the greatest must be made the root. This is most easily done by finding the greatest child, then comparing that child to the root. There are three cases:\nThe number of iterations in any one call is bounded by the height of the tree, which is \u230alog2 \"n\"\u230b = \"O\"(log \"n\").\nPseudocode.\nThe following is a simple way to implement the algorithm in pseudocode. Arrays are zero-based and is used to exchange two elements of the array. Movement 'down' means from the root towards the leaves, or from lower indices to higher. Note that during the sort, the largest element is at the root of the heap at , while at the end of the sort, the largest element is in .\n procedure heapsort(a, count) is\n input: an unordered array \"a\" of length \"count\"\n \"(Build the heap in array a so that largest value is at the root)\"\n heapify(a, count)\n \"(The following loop maintains the invariants that a[0:end\u22121] is a heap, and\"\n \"every element a[end:count\u22121] beyond end is greater than everything before it,\"\n \"i.e. a[end:count\u22121] is in sorted order.)\"\n end \u2190 count\n while end &gt; 1 do\n \"(the heap size is reduced by one)\"\n end \u2190 end \u2212 1\n \"(a[0] is the root and largest value. The swap moves it in front of the sorted elements.)\"\n swap(a[end], a[0])\n \"(the swap ruined the heap property, so restore it)\"\n siftDown(a, 0, end)\nThe sorting routine uses two subroutines, and . The former is the common in-place heap construction routine, while the latter is a common subroutine for implementing .\n \"(Put elements of 'a' in heap order, in-place)\"\n procedure heapify(a, count) is\n \"(start is initialized to the first leaf node)\"\n \"(the last element in a 0-based array is at index count-1; find the parent of that element)\"\n start \u2190 iParent(count-1) + 1\n while start &gt; 0 do\n \"(go to the last non-heap node)\"\n start \u2190 start \u2212 1\n \"(sift down the node at index 'start' to the proper place such that all nodes below\"\n \" the start index are in heap order)\"\n siftDown(a, start, count)\n \"(after sifting down the root all nodes/elements are in heap order)\"\n \"(Repair the heap whose root element is at index 'start', assuming the heaps rooted at its children are valid)\"\n procedure siftDown(a, root, end) is\n while iLeftChild(root) &lt; end do \"(While the root has at least one child)\"\n child \u2190 iLeftChild(root) \"(Left child of root)\"\n \"(If there is a right child and that child is greater)\"\n if child+1 &lt; end and a[child] &lt; a[child+1] then\n child \u2190 child + 1\n if a[root] &lt; a[child] then\n swap(a[root], a[child])\n root \u2190 child \"(repeat to continue sifting down the child now)\"\n else\n \"(The root holds the largest element. Since we may assume the heaps rooted\"\n \" at the children are valid, this means that we are done.)\"\n return\nThe procedure operates by building small heaps and repeatedly merging them using . It starts with the leaves, observing that they are trivial but valid heaps by themselves, and then adds parents. Starting with element \"n\"/2 and working backwards, each internal node is made the root of a valid heap by sifting down. The last step is sifting down the first element, after which the entire array obeys the heap property.\nTo see that this takes \"O\"(\"n\") time, count the worst-case number of iterations. The last half of the array requires zero iterations, the preceding quarter requires at most one iteration, the eighth before that requires at most two iterations, the sixteenth before that requires at most three, and so on.\nLooked at a different way, if we assume every call requires the maximum number of iterations, the first half of the array requires one iteration, the first quarter requires one more (total 2), the first eighth requires yet another (total 3), and so on.\nThis totals \"n\"/2 + \"n\"/4 + \"n\"/8 + \u22ef = n\u22c5(1/2 + 1/4 + 1/8 + \u22ef), where the infinite sum is a well-known geometric series whose sum is 1, thus the product is simply n.\nThe above is an approximation. The exact worst-case number of comparisons during the heap-construction phase of heapsort is known to be equal to 2\"n\" \u2212 2\"s\"2(\"n\") \u2212 \"e\"2(\"n\"), where \"s\"2(\"n\") is the number of 1 bits in the binary representation of n and \"e\"2(\"n\") is the number of trailing 0 bits.\nStandard implementation.\nAlthough it is convenient to think of the two phases separately, most implementations combine the two, allowing a single instance of to be expanded inline. Two variables (here, and ) keep track of the bounds of the heap area. The portion of the array before is unsorted, while the portion beginning at is sorted. Heap construction decreases until it is zero, after which heap extraction decreases until it is 1 and the array is entirely sorted.\n procedure heapsort(a, count) is\n input: an unordered array \"a\" of length \"count\"\n start \u2190 floor(count/2)\n end \u2190 count\n while end &gt; 1 do\n if start &gt; 0 then \"(Heap construction)\"\n start \u2190 start \u2212 1\n else \"(Heap extraction)\"\n end \u2190 end \u2212 1\n swap(a[end], a[0])\n \"(The following is siftDown(a, start, end))\"\n root \u2190 start\n while iLeftChild(root) &lt; end do\n child \u2190 iLeftChild(root)\n \"(If there is a right child and that child is greater)\"\n if child+1 &lt; end and a[child] &lt; a[child+1] then\n child \u2190 child + 1\n if a[root] &lt; a[child] then\n swap(a[root], a[child])\n root \u2190 child \"(repeat to continue sifting down the child now)\"\n else\n break \"(return to outer loop)\"\nVariations.\nWilliams' heap construction.\nThe description above uses Floyd's improved heap-construction algorithm, which operates in \"O\"(\"n\") time and uses the same primitive as the heap-extraction phase. Although this algorithm, being both faster and simpler to program, is used by all practical heapsort implementations, Williams' original algorithm may be easier to understand, and is needed to implement a more general binary heap priority queue.\nRather than merging many small heaps, Williams' algorithm maintains one single heap at the front of the array and repeatedly appends an additional element using a primitive. Being at the end of the array, the new element is a leaf and has no children to worry about, but may violate the heap property by being greater than its parent. In this case, exchange it with its parent and repeat the test until the parent is greater or there is no parent (we have reached the root). In pseudocode, this is:\n procedure siftUp(a, end) is\n input: \"a is the array, which heap-ordered up to end-1.\"\n \"end is the node to sift up.\"\n while end &gt; 0\n parent := iParent(end)\n if a[parent] &lt; a[end] then \"(out of max-heap order)\"\n swap(a[parent], a[end])\n end := parent \"(continue sifting up)\"\n else\n return\n procedure heapify(a, count) is\n \"(start with a trivial single-element heap)\"\n end := 1\n while end &lt; count\n \"(sift up the node at index end to the proper place such that\"\n \" all nodes above the end index are in heap order)\"\n siftUp(a, end)\n end := end + 1\n \"(after sifting up the last node all nodes are in heap order)\"\nTo understand why this algorithm can take asymptotically more time to build a heap (\"O\"(\"n\" log \"n\") vs. \"O\"(\"n\") worst case), note that in Floyd's algorithm, almost all the calls to operations apply to very \"small\" heaps. Half the heaps are height-1 trivial heaps and can be skipped entirely, half of the remainder are height-2, and so on. Only two calls are on heaps of size \"n\"/2, and only one operation is done on the full n-element heap. The overall average operation takes \"O\"(1) time.\nIn contrast, in Williams' algorithm most of the calls to are made on \"large\" heaps of height \"O\"(log \"n\"). Half of the calls are made with a heap size of \"n\"/2 or more, three-quarters are made with a heap size of \"n\"/4 or more, and so on. Although the \"average\" number of steps is similar to Floyd's technique, 3 pre-sorted input will cause the worst case: each added node is sifted up to the root, so the average call to will require approximately (log2\"n\" \u2212 1)/2 + (log2\"n\" \u2212 2)/4 + (log2\"n\" \u2212 3)/8 + \u22ef = log2\"n\" \u2212 (1 + 1/2 + 1/4 + \u22ef) = log2\"n\" \u2212 2 iterations.\nBecause it is dominated by the second heap-extraction phase, the heapsort algorithm itself has \"O\"(\"n\" log \"n\") time complexity using either version of heapify.\nBottom-up heapsort.\nBottom-up heapsort is a variant that reduces the number of comparisons required by a significant factor. While ordinary \"top-down\" heapsort requires 2\"n\" log2 \"n\" + \"O\"(\"n\") comparisons worst-case and on average, the bottom-up variant requires \"n\" log2\"n\" + \"O\"(1) comparisons on average, and 1.5\"n\" log2\"n\" + \"O\"(\"n\") in the worst case.\nIf comparisons are cheap (e.g. integer keys) then the difference is unimportant, as top-down heapsort compares values that have already been loaded from memory. If, however, comparisons require a function call or other complex logic, then bottom-up heapsort is advantageous.\nThis is accomplished by using a more elaborate procedure. The change improves the linear-time heap-building phase slightly, but is more significant in the second phase. Like top-down heapsort, each iteration of the second phase extracts the top of the heap, , and fills the gap it leaves with , then sifts this latter element down the heap. But this element came from the lowest level of the heap, meaning it is one of the smallest elements in the heap, so the sift-down will likely take many steps to move it back down. In top-down heapsort, each step of requires two comparisons, to find the minimum of three elements: the new node and its two children.\nBottom-up heapsort conceptually replaces the root with a value of \u2212\u221e and sifts it down using only one comparison per level (since no child can possibly be less than \u2212\u221e) until the leaves are reached, then replaces the \u2212\u221e with the correct value and sifts it \"up\" (again, using one comparison per level) until the correct position is found.\nThis places the root in the same location as top-down , but fewer comparisons are required to find that location. For any single operation, the bottom-up technique is advantageous if the number of downward movements is at least &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 of the height of the tree (when the number of comparisons is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u20443 times the height for both techniques), and it turns out that this is more than true on average, even for worst-case inputs.\nA na\u00efve implementation of this conceptual algorithm would cause some redundant data copying, as the sift-up portion undoes part of the sifting down. A practical implementation searches downward for a leaf where \u2212\u221e \"would\" be placed, then upward for where the root \"should\" be placed. Finally, the upward traversal continues to the root's starting position, performing no more comparisons but exchanging nodes to complete the necessary rearrangement. This optimized form performs the same number of exchanges as top-down .\nBecause it goes all the way to the bottom and then comes back up, it is called heapsort with bounce by some authors.\n function leafSearch(a, i, end) is\n j \u2190 i\n while iRightChild(j) &lt; end do\n \"(Determine which of j's two children is the greater)\"\n if a[iRightChild(j)] &gt; a[iLeftChild(j)] then\n j \u2190 iRightChild(j)\n else\n j \u2190 iLeftChild(j)\n \"(At the last level, there might be only one child)\"\n if iLeftChild(j) &lt; end then\n j \u2190 iLeftChild(j)\n return j\nThe return value of the codice_1 is used in the modified codice_2 routine:\n procedure siftDown(a, i, end) is\n j \u2190 leafSearch(a, i, end)\n while a[i] &gt; a[j] do\n j \u2190 iParent(j)\n while j &gt; i do\n swap(a[i], a[j])\n j \u2190 iParent(j)\nBottom-up heapsort was announced as beating quicksort (with median-of-three pivot selection) on arrays of size \u226516000.\nA 2008 re-evaluation of this algorithm showed it to be no faster than top-down heapsort for integer keys, presumably because modern branch prediction nullifies the cost of the predictable comparisons that bottom-up heapsort manages to avoid.\nA further refinement does a binary search in the upward search, and sorts in a worst case of (\"n\"+1)(log2(\"n\"+1) + log2 log2(\"n\"+1) + 1.82) + \"O\"(log2\"n\") comparisons, approaching the information-theoretic lower bound of \"n\" log2\"n\" \u2212 1.4427\"n\" comparisons.\nA variant that uses two extra bits per internal node (\"n\"\u22121 bits total for an \"n\"-element heap) to cache information about which child is greater (two bits are required to store three cases: left, right, and unknown) uses less than \"n\" log2\"n\" + 1.1\"n\" compares.\nComparison with other sorts.\nHeapsort primarily competes with quicksort, another very efficient general purpose in-place unstable comparison-based sort algorithm.\nHeapsort's primary advantages are its simple, non-recursive code, minimal auxiliary storage requirement, and reliably good performance: its best and worst cases are within a small constant factor of each other, and of the theoretical lower bound on comparison sorts. While it cannot do better than \"O\"(\"n\" log \"n\") for pre-sorted inputs, it does not suffer from quicksort's \"O\"(\"n\"2) worst case, either.\nReal-world quicksort implementations use a variety of heuristics to avoid the worst case, but that makes their implementation far more complex, and implementations such as introsort and pattern-defeating quicksort use heapsort as a last-resort fallback if they detect degenerate behaviour. Thus, their worst-case performance is slightly worse than if heapsort had been used from the beginning.\nHeapsort's primary disadvantages are its poor locality of reference and its inherently serial nature; the accesses to the implicit tree are widely scattered and mostly random, and there is no straightforward way to convert it to a parallel algorithm.\nThe worst-case performance guarantees make heapsort popular in real-time computing, and systems concerned with maliciously chosen inputs such as the Linux kernel. The combination of small implementation and dependably \"good enough\" performance make it popular in embedded systems, and generally any application where sorting is not a performance bottleneck. E.g. heapsort is ideal for sorting a list of filenames for display, but a database management system would probably want a more aggressively optimized sorting algorithm.\nA well-implemented quicksort is usually 2\u20133 times faster than heapsort. Although quicksort requires fewer comparisons, this is a minor factor. (Results claiming twice as many comparisons are measuring the top-down version; see .) The main advantage of quicksort is its much better locality of reference: partitioning is a linear scan with good spatial locality, and the recursive subdivision has good temporal locality. With additional effort, quicksort can also be implemented in mostly branch-free code, and multiple CPUs can be used to sort subpartitions in parallel. Thus, quicksort is preferred when the additional performance justifies the implementation effort.\nThe other major \"O\"(\"n\" log \"n\") sorting algorithm is merge sort, but that rarely competes directly with heapsort because it is not in-place. Merge sort's requirement for \u03a9(\"n\") extra space (roughly half the size of the input) is usually prohibitive except in the situations where merge sort has a clear advantage:\nExample.\nThe examples sort the values { 6, 5, 3, 1, 8, 7, 2, 4 } in increasing order using both heap-construction algorithms. The elements being compared are shown in a bold font. There are typically two when sifting up, and three when sifting down, although there may be fewer when the top or bottom of the tree is reached.\nHeap construction (Williams' algorithm).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13996", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13996", "title": "Heap (data structure)", "text": "Computer science data structure\nIn computer science, a heap is a tree-based data structure that satisfies the heap property: In a \"max heap\", for any given node C, if P is the parent node of C, then the \"key\" (the \"value\") of P is greater than or equal to the key of C. In a \"min heap\", the key of P is less than or equal to the key of C. The node at the \"top\" of the heap (with no parents) is called the \"root\" node.\nThe heap is one maximally efficient implementation of an abstract data type called a priority queue, and in fact, priority queues are often referred to as \"heaps\", regardless of how they may be implemented. In a heap, the highest (or lowest) priority element is always stored at the root. However, a heap is not a sorted structure; it can be regarded as being partially ordered. A heap is a useful data structure when it is necessary to repeatedly remove the object with the highest (or lowest) priority, or when insertions need to be interspersed with removals of the root node.\nA common implementation of a heap is the binary heap, in which the tree is a complete binary tree (see figure). The heap data structure, specifically the binary heap, was introduced by J. W. J. Williams in 1964, as a data structure for the heapsort sorting algorithm. Heaps are also crucial in several efficient graph algorithms such as Dijkstra's algorithm. When a heap is a complete binary tree, it has the smallest possible height\u2014a heap with \"N\" nodes and \"a\" branches for each node always has log\"a\" \"N\" height.\nNote that, as shown in the graphic, there is no implied ordering between siblings or cousins and no implied sequence for an in-order traversal (as there would be in, e.g., a binary search tree). The heap relation mentioned above applies only between nodes and their parents, grandparents. The maximum number of children each node can have depends on the type of heap.\nHeaps are typically constructed in-place in the same array where the elements are stored, with their structure being implicit in the access pattern of the operations. Heaps differ in this way from other data structures with similar or in some cases better theoretic bounds such as radix trees in that they require no additional memory beyond that used for storing the keys.\nOperations.\nThe common operations involving heaps are:\nImplementation using arrays.\nHeaps are usually implemented with an array, as follows:\nFor a binary heap, in the array, the first index contains the root element. The next two indices of the array contain the root's children. The next four indices contain the four children of the root's two child nodes, and so on. Therefore, given a node at index i, its children are at indices &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and its parent is at index \u230a(\"i\"\u22121)/2\u230b. This simple indexing scheme makes it efficient to move \"up\" or \"down\" the tree.\nBalancing a heap is done by sift-up or sift-down operations (swapping elements which are out of order). As we can build a heap from an array without requiring extra memory (for the nodes, for example), heapsort can be used to sort an array in-place.\nAfter an element is inserted into or deleted from a heap, the heap property may be violated, and the heap must be re-balanced by swapping elements within the array.\nAlthough different types of heaps implement the operations differently, the most common way is as follows:\nConstruction of a binary (or \"d\"-ary) heap out of a given array of elements may be performed in linear time using the classic Floyd algorithm, with the worst-case number of comparisons equal to 2\"N\" \u2212 2\"s\"2(\"N\") \u2212 \"e\"2(\"N\") (for a binary heap), where \"s\"2(\"N\") is the sum of all digits of the binary representation of \"N\" and \"e\"2(\"N\") is the exponent of 2 in the prime factorization of \"N\". This is faster than a sequence of consecutive insertions into an originally empty heap, which is log-linear.\nVariants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nComparison of theoretic bounds for variants.\nHere are time complexities of various heap data structures. The abbreviation am. indicates that the given complexity is amortized, otherwise it is a worst-case complexity. For the meaning of \"O\"(\"f\")\" and \"\"\u0398\"(\"f\")\" see Big O notation. Names of operations assume a max-heap.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nApplications.\nThe heap data structure has many applications.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13997", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13997", "title": "Hierarchical tree structure", "text": ""}
{"id": "13998", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13998", "title": "Hierarchy", "text": "System of elements that are subordinated to each other\nA hierarchy (from Greek: , from , 'president of sacred rites') is an arrangement of items (objects, names, values, categories, etc.) that are represented as being \"above\", \"below\", or \"at the same level as\" one another. Hierarchy is an important concept in a wide variety of fields, such as architecture, philosophy, design, mathematics, computer science, organizational theory, systems theory, systematic biology, and the social sciences (especially political science).\nA hierarchy can link entities either directly or indirectly, and either vertically or diagonally. The only direct links in a hierarchy are to one's immediate superior or subordinate. Hierarchical links can extend \"vertically\" upwards or downwards via multiple links in the same direction, following a path. All parts of the hierarchy that are not linked vertically to one another can also be \"horizontally\" linked through a path by traveling up the hierarchy to find a common direct or indirect superior, and then down again. This is a system of co-workers or colleagues; each reports to a common superior, but they have the same relative amount of authority. Organizational forms exist that are both alternative and complementary to hierarchy. Heterarchy is one such form.\nNomenclature.\nHierarchies have their own special vocabulary. These terms are easiest to understand when a hierarchy is diagrammed (see below).\nIn an organizational context, the following terms are often used related to hierarchies:\nIn a mathematical context (in graph theory), the general terminology used is different.\nMost hierarchies use a more specific vocabulary pertaining to their subject, but the idea behind them is the same. For example, with data structures, objects are known as nodes, superiors are called parents and subordinates are called children. In a business setting, a superior is a supervisor/boss and a peer is a colleague.\nDegree of branching.\nDegree of branching refers to the number of direct subordinates or children an object has (in graph theory, equivalent to the number of other vertices connected to via outgoing arcs, in a directed graph) a node has. Hierarchies can be categorized based on the \"maximum degree\", the highest degree present in the system as a whole. Categorization in this way yields two broad classes: \"linear\" and \"branching\".\nIn a linear hierarchy, the maximum degree is 1. In other words, all of the objects can be visualized in a line-up, and each object (excluding the top and bottom ones) has exactly one direct subordinate and one direct superior. This is referring to the \"objects\" and not the \"levels\"; every hierarchy has this property with respect to levels, but normally each level can have an infinite number of objects.\nIn a branching hierarchy, one or more objects has a degree of 2 or more (and therefore the minimum degree is 2 or higher). For many people, the word \"hierarchy\" automatically evokes an image of a branching hierarchy. Branching hierarchies are present within numerous systems, including organizations and classification schemes. The broad category of branching hierarchies can be further subdivided based on the degree.\nA flat hierarchy (also known for companies as flat organization) is a branching hierarchy in which the maximum degree approaches infinity, i.e., that has a wide span. Most often, systems intuitively regarded as hierarchical have at most a moderate span. Therefore, a flat hierarchy is often not viewed as a hierarchy at all. For example, diamonds and graphite are flat hierarchies of numerous carbon atoms that can be further decomposed into subatomic particles.\nAn overlapping hierarchy is a branching hierarchy in which at least one object has two parent objects. For example, a graduate student can have two co-supervisors to whom the student reports directly and equally, and who have the same level of authority within the university hierarchy (i.e., they have the same position or tenure status).\nEtymology.\nPossibly the first use of the English word \"hierarchy\" cited by the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" was in 1881, when it was used in reference to the three orders of three angels as depicted by Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite (5th\u20136th centuries). Pseudo-Dionysius used the related Greek word (\u1f31\u03b5\u03c1\u03b1\u03c1\u03c7\u03af\u03b1, ) both in reference to the celestial hierarchy and the ecclesiastical hierarchy. The Greek term \"hierarchia\" means 'rule of a high priest', from (\u1f31\u03b5\u03c1\u03ac\u03c1\u03c7\u03b7\u03c2, 'president of sacred rites, high-priest') and that from \"hiereus\" (\u1f31\u03b5\u03c1\u03b5\u03cd\u03c2, 'priest') and \"arche\" (\u1f00\u03c1\u03c7\u03ae, 'first place or power, rule'). Dionysius is credited with first use of it as an abstract noun.\nSince hierarchical churches, such as the Roman Catholic (see Catholic Church hierarchy) and Eastern Orthodox churches, had tables of organization that were \"hierarchical\" in the modern sense of the word (traditionally with God as the pinnacle or head of the hierarchy), the term came to refer to similar organizational methods in secular settings.\nRepresenting hierarchies.\nA hierarchy is typically depicted as a pyramid, where the height of a level represents that level's status and width of a level represents the quantity of items at that level relative to the whole. For example, the few Directors of a company could be at the apex, and the base could be thousands of people who have no subordinates.\nThese pyramids are often diagrammed with a triangle diagram which serves to emphasize the size differences between the levels (but not all triangle/pyramid diagrams are hierarchical; for example, the 1992 USDA food guide pyramid). An example of a triangle diagram appears to the right.\nAnother common representation of a hierarchical scheme is as a tree diagram. Phylogenetic trees, charts showing the structure of , and playoff brackets in sports are often illustrated this way.\nMore recently, as computers have allowed the storage and navigation of ever larger data sets, various methods have been developed to represent hierarchies in a manner that makes more efficient use of the available space on a computer's screen. Examples include fractal maps, TreeMaps and Radial Trees.\nVisual hierarchy.\nIn the design field, mainly graphic design, successful layouts and formatting of the content on documents are heavily dependent on the rules of visual hierarchy. Visual hierarchy is also important for proper organization of files on computers.\nAn example of visually representing hierarchy is through nested clusters. Nested clusters represent hierarchical relationships using layers of information. The child element is within the parent element, such as in a Venn diagram. This structure is most effective in representing simple hierarchical relationships. For example, when directing someone to open a file on a computer desktop, one may first direct them towards the main folder, then the subfolders within the main folder. They will keep opening files within the folders until the designated file is located.\nFor more complicated hierarchies, the stair structure represents hierarchical relationships through the use of visual stacking. Visually imagine the top of a downward staircase beginning at the left and descending on the right. Child elements are towards the bottom of the stairs and parent elements are at the top. This structure represents hierarchical relationships through the use of visual stacking.\nInformal representation.\nIn plain English, a hierarchy can be thought of as a set in which:\nThe first requirement is also interpreted to mean that a hierarchy can have no circular relationships; the association between two objects is always transitive.\nThe second requirement asserts that a hierarchy must have a leader or root that is common to all of the objects.\nMathematical representation.\nMathematically, in its most general form, a hierarchy is a partially ordered set or \"poset\". The system in this case is the entire poset, which is constituted of elements. Within this system, each element shares a particular unambiguous property. Objects with the same property value are grouped together, and each of those resulting levels is referred to as a class.\n\"Hierarchy\" is particularly used to refer to a poset in which the classes are organized in terms of increasing complexity. \nOperations such as addition, subtraction, multiplication and division are often performed in a certain sequence or order. Usually, addition and subtraction are performed after multiplication and division has already been applied to a problem. The use of parentheses is also a representation of hierarchy, for they show which operation is to be done prior to the following ones. For example:\n(2 + 5) \u00d7 (7 - 4).\nIn this problem, typically one would multiply 5 by 7 first, based on the rules of mathematical hierarchy. But when the parentheses are placed, one will know to do the operations within the parentheses first before continuing on with the problem. These rules are largely dominant in algebraic problems, ones that include several steps to solve. The use of hierarchy in mathematics is beneficial to quickly and efficiently solve a problem without having to go through the process of slowly dissecting the problem. Most of these rules are now known as the proper way into solving certain equations.\nSubtypes.\nNested hierarchy.\nA nested hierarchy or \"inclusion hierarchy\" is a hierarchical ordering of nested sets. The concept of nesting is exemplified in Russian matryoshka dolls. Each doll is encompassed by another doll, all the way to the outer doll. The outer doll holds all of the inner dolls, the next outer doll holds all the remaining inner dolls, and so on. Matryoshkas represent a nested hierarchy where each level contains only one object, i.e., there is only one of each size of doll; a generalized nested hierarchy allows for multiple objects within levels but with each object having only one parent at each level. The general concept is both demonstrated and mathematically formulated in the following example:\n formula_1\nA square can always also be referred to as a quadrilateral, polygon or shape. In this way, it is a hierarchy. However, consider the set of polygons using this classification. A square can \"only\" be a quadrilateral; it can never be a triangle, hexagon, etc.\nNested hierarchies are the organizational schemes behind taxonomies and systematic classifications. For example, using the original Linnaean taxonomy (the version he laid out in the 10th edition of \"Systema Naturae\"), a human can be formulated as:\n formula_2\nTaxonomies may change frequently (as seen in biological taxonomy), but the underlying concept of nested hierarchies is always the same.\nIn many programming taxonomies and syntax models (as well as fractals in mathematics), nested hierarchies, including Russian dolls, are also used to illustrate the properties of self-similarity and recursion. Recursion itself is included as a subset of hierarchical programming, and recursive thinking can be synonymous with a form of hierarchical thinking and logic.\nContainment hierarchy.\nA containment hierarchy is a direct extrapolation of the nested hierarchy concept. All of the ordered sets are still nested, but every set must be \"strict\"\u2014no two sets can be identical. The shapes example above can be modified to demonstrate this:\n formula_3\nThe notation formula_4 means \"x\" is a subset of \"y\" but is not equal to\u00a0\"y\".\nA general example of a containment hierarchy is demonstrated in class inheritance in object-oriented programming.\nTwo types of containment hierarchies are the \"subsumptive\" containment hierarchy and the \"compositional\" containment hierarchy. A subsumptive hierarchy \"subsumes\" its children, and a compositional hierarchy is \"composed\" of its children. A hierarchy can also be both subsumptive \"and\" compositional.\nSubsumptive containment hierarchy.\nA \"subsumptive\" containment hierarchy is a classification of object classes from the general to the specific. Other names for this type of hierarchy are \"taxonomic hierarchy\" and \"IS-A hierarchy\". The last term describes the relationship between each level\u2014a lower-level object \"is a\" member of the higher class. The taxonomical structure outlined above is a subsumptive containment hierarchy. Using again the example of Linnaean taxonomy, it can be seen that an object that is a member of the level \"Mammalia\" \"is a\" member of the level \"Animalia\"; more specifically, a human \"is a\" primate, a primate \"is a\" mammal, and so on. A subsumptive hierarchy can also be defined abstractly as a hierarchy of \"concepts\". For example, with the Linnaean hierarchy outlined above, an entity name like \"Animalia\" is a way to group all the species that fit the conceptualization of an animal.\nCompositional containment hierarchy.\nA \"compositional\" containment hierarchy is an ordering of the parts that make up a system\u2014the system is \"composed\" of these parts. Most engineered structures, whether natural or artificial, can be broken down in this manner.\nThe compositional hierarchy that every person encounters at every moment is the hierarchy of life. Every person can be reduced to organ systems, which are composed of organs, which are composed of tissues, which are composed of cells, which are composed of molecules, which are composed of atoms. In fact, the last two levels apply to all matter, at least at the macroscopic scale. Moreover, each of these levels inherit all the properties of their children.\nIn this particular example, there are also \"emergent properties\"\u2014functions that are not seen at the lower level (e.g., cognition is not a property of neurons but is of the brain)\u2014and a scalar quality (molecules are bigger than atoms, cells are bigger than molecules, etc.). Both of these concepts commonly exist in compositional hierarchies, but they are not a required general property. These \"level hierarchies\" are characterized by bi-directional causation. \"Upward causation\" involves lower-level entities causing some property of a higher level entity; children entities may interact to yield parent entities, and parents are composed at least partly by their children. \"Downward causation\" refers to the effect that the incorporation of entity \"x\" into a higher-level entity can have on \"x\"'s properties and interactions. Furthermore, the entities found at each level are \"autonomous\".\nContexts and applications.\nKulish (2002) suggests that almost every system of organization which humans apply to the world is arranged hierarchically. Some conventional definitions of the terms \"nation\" and \"government\" suggest that every nation has a government and that every government is hierarchical. Sociologists can analyse socioeconomic systems in terms of stratification into a social hierarchy (the social stratification of societies), and all systematic classification schemes (taxonomies) are hierarchical. Most organized religions, regardless of their internal governance structures, operate as a hierarchy under deities and priesthoods. Many Christian denominations have an autocephalous ecclesiastical hierarchy of leadership. Families can be viewed as hierarchical structures in terms of cousinship (e.g., first cousin once removed, second cousin, etc.), ancestry (as depicted in a family tree) and inheritance (succession and heirship). All the requisites of a well-rounded life and lifestyle can be organized using Maslow's hierarchy of human needs - according to Maslow's hierarchy of human needs. Learning steps often follow a hierarchical scheme\u2014to master differential equations one must first learn calculus; to learn calculus one must first learn elementary algebra; and so on. Nature offers hierarchical structures, as numerous schemes such as Linnaean taxonomy, the organization of life, and biomass pyramids attempt to document.\nWhile the above examples are often clearly depicted in a hierarchical form and are classic examples, hierarchies exist in numerous systems where this branching structure is not immediately apparent. For example, most postal-code systems are hierarchical. Using the Canadian postal code system as an example, the top level's binding concept, the \"postal district\", consists of 18 objects (letters). The next level down is the \"zone\", where the objects are the digits 0\u20139. This is an example of an overlapping hierarchy, because each of these 10 objects has 18 parents. The hierarchy continues downward to generate, in theory, 7,200,000 unique codes of the format \"A0A 0A0\" (the second and third letter positions allow 20 objects each). Most library classification systems such as the Dewey Decimal Classification are also hierarchical.\nOrganizations.\nOrganizations can be structured as a dominance hierarchy. In an organizational hierarchy, there is a single person or group with the most power or authority, and each subsequent level represents a lesser authority. Most organizations are structured in this manner, including governments, companies, armed forces, militia and organized religions. The units or persons within an organization may be depicted hierarchically in an organizational chart.\nIn a reverse hierarchy, the conceptual pyramid of authority is turned upside-down, so that the apex is at the bottom and the base is at the top. This mode represents the idea that members of the higher rankings are responsible for the members of the lower rankings.\nBiology.\nEmpirically, when we observe in nature a large proportion of the (complex) biological systems, they exhibit hierarchic structure. On theoretical grounds we could expect complex systems to be hierarchies in a world in which complexity had to evolve from simplicity. System hierarchies analysis performed in the 1950s, laid the empirical foundations for a field that would become, from the 1980s, hierarchical ecology.\nThe theoretical foundations are summarized by thermodynamics.\nWhen biological systems are modeled as physical systems, in the most general abstraction, they are thermodynamic open systems that exhibit self-organised behavior, and the set/subset relations between dissipative structures can be characterized in a hierarchy.\nOther hierarchical representations related to biology include ecological pyramids which illustrate energy flow or trophic levels in ecosystems, and taxonomic hierarchies, including the Linnean classification scheme and phylogenetic trees that reflect inferred patterns of evolutionary relationship among living and extinct species.\nComputer-graphic imaging.\nCGI and computer-animation programs mostly use hierarchies for models. On a 3D model of a human for example, the chest is a parent of the upper left arm, which is a parent of the lower left arm, which is a parent of the hand. This pattern is used in modeling and animation for almost everything built as a 3D digital model.\nLinguistics.\nMany grammatical theories, such as phrase-structure grammar, involve hierarchy.\nDirect\u2013inverse languages such as Cree and Mapudungun distinguish subject and object on verbs not by different subject and object markers, but via a hierarchy of persons.\nIn this system, the three (or four with Algonquian languages) persons occur in a hierarchy of salience. To distinguish which is subject and which object, \"inverse markers\" are used if the object outranks the subject.\nOn the other hand, languages include a variety of phenomena that are not hierarchical. For example, the relationship between a pronoun and a prior noun-phrase to which it refers commonly crosses grammatical boundaries in non-hierarchical ways.\nMusic.\nThe structure of a musical composition is often understood hierarchically (for example by Heinrich Schenker (1768\u20131835, see Schenkerian analysis), and in the (1985) Generative Theory of Tonal Music, by composer Fred Lerdahl and linguist Ray Jackendoff). The sum of all notes in a piece is understood to be an all-inclusive surface, which can be reduced to successively more sparse and more fundamental types of motion. The levels of structure that operate in Schenker's theory are the foreground, which is seen in all the details of the musical score; the middle ground, which is roughly a summary of an essential contrapuntal progression and voice-leading; and the background or Ursatz, which is one of only a few basic \"long-range counterpoint\" structures that are shared in the gamut of tonal music literature.\nThe pitches and form of tonal music are organized hierarchically, all pitches deriving their importance from their relationship to a tonic key, and secondary themes in other keys are brought back to the tonic in a recapitulation of the primary theme.\nExamples of other applications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCriticisms.\nIn the work of diverse theorists such as William James (1842 to 1910), Michel Foucault (1926 to 1984) and Hayden White (1928 to 2018), important critiques of hierarchical epistemology are advanced. James famously asserts in his work Radical Empiricism that clear distinctions of type and category are a constant but unwritten goal of scientific reasoning, so that when they are discovered, success is declared. But if aspects of the world are organized differently, involving inherent and intractable ambiguities, then scientific questions are often considered unresolved.\nFeminists, Marxists, anarchists, communists, critical theorists and others, all of whom have multiple interpretations, criticize the hierarchies commonly found within human society, especially in social relationships. Hierarchies are present in all parts of society: in businesses, schools, families, etc. These relationships are often viewed as necessary. Entities that stand in hierarchical arrangements are animals, humans, plants, etc.\nEthics, behavioral psychology, philosophies of identity.\nIn ethics, various virtues are enumerated and sometimes organized hierarchically according to certain brands of virtue theory.\nIn some of these random examples, there is an asymmetry of 'compositional' significance between levels of structure, so that small parts of the whole hierarchical array depend, for their meaning, on their membership in larger parts. There is a hierarchy of activities in human life: productive activity serves or is guided by the moral life; the moral life is guided by practical reason; practical reason (used in moral and political life) serves contemplative reason (whereby we contemplate God). Practical reason sets aside time and resources for contemplative reason.\nSee also.\nStructure-related concepts.\n\"(For example, in )\"\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13999", "revid": "15911580", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13999", "title": "Hierarchy member", "text": ""}
{"id": "14001", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14001", "title": "List of basic history of science and technology topics", "text": ""}
{"id": "14002", "revid": "50800701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14002", "title": "Outline of health sciences", "text": "Sciences that focus on health or health care\nThe following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to health sciences:\nHealth sciences \u2013 those sciences that focus on health, or health care, as core parts of their subject matter. Health sciences relate to multiple academic disciplines, including STEM disciplines and emerging patient safety disciplines (such as social care research).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedicine and its branches.\nMedicine is an applied science or practice of the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of disease. It encompasses a variety of health care practices evolved to maintain and restore health by the prevention and treatment of illness. Below are some of the branches of medicine."}
{"id": "14004", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14004", "title": "Hour", "text": "Unit of time equal to 60 minutes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAn hour (symbol: h; also abbreviated hr) is a unit of time historically reckoned as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204424 of a day and defined contemporarily as exactly 3,600 seconds (SI). There are 60 minutes in an hour, and 24 hours in a day.\nThe hour was initially established in the ancient Near East as a variable measure of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204412 of the night or daytime. Such seasonal hours, also known as temporal hours or unequal hours, varied by season and latitude.\nEqual hours or equinoctial hours were taken as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204424 of the day as measured from noon to noon; the minor seasonal variations of this unit were eventually smoothed by making it &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204424 of the mean solar day. Since this unit was not constant due to long term variations in the Earth's rotation, the hour was finally separated from the Earth's rotation and defined in terms of the atomic or physical second.\nIt is a non-SI unit that is accepted for use with SI. In the modern metric system, one hour is defined as 3,600 atomic seconds. However, on rare occasions an hour may incorporate a positive or negative leap second, effectively making it appear to last 3,599 or 3,601 seconds, in order to keep UTC within 0.9 seconds of UT1, the latter of which is based on measurements of the mean solar day.\nEtymology.\n\"Hour\" is a development of the Anglo-Norman ' and Middle English ', first attested in the 13th century. It was a borrowing of Old French , a variant of , which derived from Latin and Greek () originating in Proto-Indo-European root (\"year, summer\"), making \"hour\" distantly cognate with \"year\"; the Greek word \"h\u1e53r\u0101\" was originally a vaguer word for any span of time, including seasons and years. The Anglo-Norman word \"hour\" displaced older native words like tide () and stound (}, 'span of time'). \nThe time of day is typically expressed in English in terms of hours. Whole hours on a 12-hour clock are expressed using the contracted phrase \"o'clock\", from the older \"of the clock\". (10 am and 10 pm are both read as \"ten o'clock\".)\nHours on a 24-hour clock (\"military time\") are expressed as \"hundred\" or \"hundred hours\". (1000 is read \"ten hundred\" or \"ten hundred hours\"; 10 pm would be \"twenty-two hundred\".)\nFifteen and thirty minutes past the hour is expressed as \"a quarter past\" or \"after\" and \"half past\", respectively, from their fraction of the hour. Fifteen minutes before the hour may be expressed as \"a quarter to\", \"of\", \"till\", or \"before\" the hour. (9:45 may be read \"nine forty-five\" or \"a quarter till ten\".)\nTime based on the 48 hour day moves twice as fast to synchronise with the time of the 24 hour day.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nAncient Egypt.\nIn ancient Egypt the flooding of the Nile was, and still is, an important annual event, crucial for agriculture. It was accompanied by the rise of Sirius before the sunrise, and the appearance of 12 constellations across the night sky, to which the Egyptians assigned some significance. Influenced by this, the Egyptians divided the night into 12 equal intervals. These were seasonal hours, shorter in the summer than in the winter. Subsequently, the day was divided into intervals as well, which eventually became more important than the nightly intervals. These subdivisions of a day spread to Greece, and later to Rome.\nAncient Greece.\nThe ancient Greeks kept time differently than is done today. Instead of dividing the time between one midnight and the next into 24 equal hours, they divided the time from sunrise to sunset into 12 \"seasonal hours\" (their actual duration depending on season), and the time from sunset to the next sunrise again in 12 \"seasonal hours\". Initially, only the day was divided into 12\u00a0seasonal hours and the night into three or four night watches.\nBy the Hellenistic period the night was also divided into 12 hours. The day-and-night () was probably first divided into 24 hours by Hipparchus of Nicaea. The Greek astronomer Andronicus of Cyrrhus oversaw the construction of a horologion called the Tower of the Winds in Athens during the first century BCE. This structure tracked a 24-hour day using both sundials and mechanical hour indicators.\nThe canonical hours were inherited into early Christianity from Second Temple Judaism.\nBy AD 60, the \"Didache\" recommends disciples to pray the Lord's Prayer three times a day; this practice found its way into the canonical hours as well. By the second and third centuries, such Church Fathers as Clement of Alexandria, Origen, and Tertullian wrote of the practice of Morning and Evening Prayer, and of the prayers at the third, sixth and ninth hours.\nIn the early church, during the night before every feast, a vigil was kept. The word \"Vigils\", at first applied to the Night Office, comes from a Latin source, namely the \"Vigiliae\" or nocturnal watches or guards of the soldiers. The night from six o'clock in the evening to six o'clock in the morning was divided into four watches or vigils of three hours each, the first, the second, the third, and the fourth vigil.\nThe \"Horae\" were originally personifications of seasonal aspects of nature, not of the time of day.\nThe list of 12 \"Horae\" representing the 12 hours of the day is recorded only in Late Antiquity, by Nonnus. The first and twelfth of the \"Horae\" were added to the original set of ten:\nMiddle Ages.\nMedieval astronomers such as al-Biruni and Sacrobosco, divided the hour into 60 minutes, each of 60 seconds; this derives from Babylonian astronomy, where the corresponding terms denoted the time required for the Sun's apparent motion through the ecliptic to describe one minute or second of arc, respectively. In present terms, the Babylonian degree of time was thus four minutes long, the \"minute\" of time was thus four seconds long and the \"second\" 1/15 of a second.\nIn medieval Europe, the Roman hours continued to be marked on sundials but the more important units of time were the canonical hours of the Orthodox and Catholic Church. During daylight, these followed the pattern set by the three-hour bells of the Roman markets, which were succeeded by the bells of local churches. They rang prime at about 6am, terce at about 9am, sext at noon, nones at about 3pm, and vespers at either 6pm or sunset. Matins and lauds precede these irregularly in the morning hours; compline follows them irregularly before sleep; and the midnight office follows that. Vatican II ordered their reformation for the Catholic Church in 1963, though they continue to be observed in the Orthodox churches.\nWhen mechanical clocks began to be used to show hours of daylight or nighttime, their period needed to be changed every morning and evening (for example, by changing the length of their pendula). The use of 24 hours for the entire day meant hours varied much less and the clocks needed to be adjusted only a few times a month.\nModernity.\nThe minor irregularities of the apparent solar day were smoothed by measuring time using the mean solar day, using the Sun's movement along the celestial equator rather than along the ecliptic. The irregularities of this time system were so minor that most clocks reckoning such hours did not need adjustment. However, scientific measurements eventually became precise enough to note the effect of tidal deceleration of the Earth by the Moon, which gradually lengthens the Earth's days.\nDuring the French Revolution, a general decimalisation of measures was enacted, including decimal time between 1794 and 1800. Under its provisions, the French hour () was &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204410 of the day and divided formally into 100 decimal minutes (') and informally into 10 tenths ('). Mandatory use for all public records began in 1794, but was suspended six months later by the same 1795 legislation that first established the metric system. In spite of this, a few localities continued to use decimal time for six years for civil status records, until 1800, after Napoleon's Coup of 18 Brumaire.\nThe metric system bases its measurements of time upon the second, defined since 1952 in terms of the Earth's rotation in AD1900. Its hours are a secondary unit computed as precisely 3,600 seconds. However, an hour of Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), used as the basis of most civil time, has lasted 3,601 seconds 27 times since 1972 in order to keep it within 0.9 seconds of universal time, which is based on measurements of the mean solar day at 0\u00b0 longitude. The addition of these seconds accommodates the very gradual slowing of the rotation of the Earth.\nIn modern life, the ubiquity of clocks and other timekeeping devices means that segmentation of days according to their hours is commonplace. Most forms of employment, whether wage or salaried labour, involve compensation based upon measured or expected hours worked. The fight for an eight-hour day was a part of labour movements around the world. Informal rush hours and happy hours cover the times of day when commuting slows down due to congestion or alcoholic drinks being available at discounted prices. The hour record for the greatest distance travelled by a cyclist within the span of an hour is one of cycling's greatest honours.\nCounting hours.\nMany different ways of counting the hours have been used. Because sunrise, sunset, and, to a lesser extent, noon, are the conspicuous points in the day, starting to count at these times was, for most people in most early societies, much easier than starting at midnight. However, with accurate clocks and modern astronomical equipment (and the telegraph or similar means to transfer a time signal in a split-second), this issue is much less relevant.\nAstrolabes, sundials, and astronomical clocks sometimes show the hour length and count using some of these older definitions and counting methods.\nCounting from dawn.\nIn ancient and medieval cultures, the counting of hours generally started with sunrise. Before the widespread use of artificial light, societies were more concerned with the division between night and day, and daily routines often began when light was sufficient.\n\"Babylonian hours\" divide the day and night into 24 equal hours, reckoned from the time of sunrise. They are so named from the false belief of ancient authors that the Babylonians divided the day into 24 parts, beginning at sunrise. In fact, they divided the day into 12 parts (called \"kaspu\" or \"double hours\") or into 60 equal parts.\nUnequal hours.\nSunrise marked the beginning of the first hour, the middle of the day was at the end of the sixth hour and sunset at the end of the twelfth hour. This meant that the duration of hours varied with the season. In the Northern hemisphere, particularly in the more northerly latitudes, summer daytime hours were longer than winter daytime hours, each being one twelfth of the time between sunrise and sunset. These variable-length hours were variously known as temporal, unequal, or seasonal hours and were in use until the appearance of the mechanical clock, which furthered the adoption of equal length hours.\nThis is also the system used in Jewish law and frequently called \"Talmudic hour\" (\"Sha'a Zemanit\") in a variety of texts. The Talmudic hour is one twelfth of time elapsed from sunrise to sunset, day hours therefore being longer than night hours in the summer; in winter they reverse.\nThe Indic day began at sunrise. The term \"hora\" was used to indicate an hour. The time was measured based on the length of the shadow at day time. A \"hora\" translated to 2.5 \"pe\". There are 60 \"pe\" per day, 60 minutes per \"pe\" and 60 \"kshana\" (snap of a finger or instant) per minute. \"Pe\" was measured with a bowl with a hole placed in still water. Time taken for this graduated bowl was one \"pe\". Kings usually had an officer in charge of this clock.\nCounting from sunset.\nIn so-called \"Italian time\", \"Italian hours\", or \"old Czech time\", the first hour started with the sunset Angelus bell (or at the end of dusk, i.e., half an hour after sunset, depending on local custom and geographical latitude). The hours were numbered from 1 to 24. For example, in Lugano, the sun rose in December during the 14th hour and noon was during the 19th hour; in June the sun rose during the 7th hour and noon was in the 15th hour. Sunset was always at the end of the 24th hour. The clocks in church towers struck only from 1 to 12, thus only during night or early morning hours.\nThis manner of counting hours had the advantage that everyone could easily know how much time they had to finish their day's work without artificial light. It was already widely used in Italy by the 14th century and lasted until the mid-18th century; it was officially abolished in 1755, or in some regions customary until the mid-19th century.\nThe system of Italian hours can be seen on a number of clocks in Europe, where the dial is numbered from 1 to 24 in either Roman or Arabic numerals. The St Mark's Clock in Venice, and the Orloj in Prague are famous examples. It was also used in Poland, Silesia, and Bohemia until the 17th century.\nIts replacement by the more practical division into twice twelve (equinoctial) hours (also called small clock or civic hours) began as early as the 16th century.\nThe Islamic day begins at sunset. The first prayer of the day (maghrib) is to be performed between just after sunset and the end of twilight. Until 1968 Saudi Arabia used the system of counting 24 equal hours with the first hour starting at sunset.\nCounting from noon.\nFor many centuries, up to 1925, astronomers counted the hours and days from noon, because it was the easiest solar event to measure accurately. An advantage of this method (used in the Julian Date system, in which a new Julian Day begins at noon) is that the date doesn't change during a single night's observing.\nCounting from midnight.\nIn the modern 12-hour clock, counting the hours starts at midnight and restarts at noon. Hours are numbered 12, 1, 2, ..., 11. Solar noon is always close to 12 noon (ignoring artificial adjustments due to time zones and daylight saving time), differing according to the equation of time by as much as fifteen minutes either way. At the equinoxes sunrise is around 6\u00a0a.m. (, before noon), and sunset around 6\u00a0p.m. (, after noon).\nIn the modern 24-hour clock, counting the hours starts at midnight, and hours are numbered from 0 to 23. Solar noon is always close to 12:00, again differing according to the equation of time. At the equinoxes sunrise is around 06:00, and sunset around 18:00.\nHistory of timekeeping in other cultures.\nEgypt.\nThe ancient Egyptians began dividing the night into \"\" at some time before the compilation of the Dynasty V Pyramid Texts in the 24thcenturyBC. By 2150BC (Dynasty IX), diagrams of stars inside Egyptian coffin lids\u2014variously known as \"diagonal calendars\" or \"star clocks\"\u2014attest that there were exactly 12 of these. Clagett writes that it is \"certain\" this duodecimal division of the night followed the adoption of the Egyptian civil calendar, usually placed c.\u20092800BC on the basis of analyses of the Sothic cycle, but a lunar calendar presumably long predated this and also would have had 12 months in each of its years. The coffin diagrams show that the Egyptians took note of the heliacal risings of 36 stars or constellations (now known as \"decans\"), one for each of the ten-day \"weeks\" of their civil calendar. (12 sets of alternate \"triangle decans\" were used for the 5 epagomenal days between years.) Each night, the rising of eleven of these decans were noted, separating the night into 12 divisions whose middle terms would have lasted about 40minutes each. (Another seven stars were noted by the Egyptians during the twilight and predawn periods, although they were not important for the hour divisions.) The original decans used by the Egyptians would have fallen noticeably out of their proper places over a span of several centuries. By the time of Amenhotep III (c.\u20091350BC), the priests at Karnak were using water clocks to determine the hours. These were filled to the brim at sunset and the hour determined by comparing the water level against one of its 12 gauges, one for each month of the year. During the New Kingdom, another system of decans was used, made up of 24 stars over the course of the year and 12 within any one night.\nThe later division of the day into 12 hours was accomplished by sundials marked with ten equal divisions. The morning and evening periods when the sundials failed to note time were observed as the first and last hours.\nThe Egyptian hours were closely connected both with the priesthood of the gods and with their divine services. By the New Kingdom, each hour was conceived as a specific region of the sky or underworld through which Ra's solar barge travelled. Protective deities were assigned to each and were used as the names of the hours. As the protectors and resurrectors of the sun, the goddesses of the night hours were considered to hold power over all lifespans and thus became part of Egyptian funerary rituals. Two fire-spitting cobras were said to guard the gates of each hour of the underworld, and Wadjet and the rearing cobra (uraeus) were also sometimes referenced as ' from their role protecting the dead through these gates. The Egyptian word for astronomer, used as a synonym for priest, was ', \"one of the \"wnwt\"\", as it were \"one of the hours\". The earliest forms of \"\" include one or three stars, with the later solar hours including the determinative hieroglyph for \"sun\".\nEast Asia.\nAncient China divided its day into 100 \"marks\" (Chinese: , *\"k\u02b0\u0259k\", \"k\u00e8\") running from midnight to midnight. The system is said to have been used since remote antiquity, credited to the legendary Yellow Emperor, but is first attested in Han-era water clocks and in the 2nd-century history of that dynasty. It was measured with sundials and water clocks. Into the Eastern Han, the Chinese measured their day schematically, adding the 20-\"ke\" difference between the solstices evenly throughout the year, one every nine days. During the night, time was more commonly reckoned during the night by the \"watches\" (Chinese: , *\"k\u00e6\u014b\", \"g\u0113ng\") of the guard, which were reckoned as a fifth of the time from sunset to sunrise.\nImperial China continued to use \"ke\" and \"geng\" but also began to divide the day into 12 \"double hours\" ( , , *\"d\u0259\", \"sh\u00ed\", named after the earthly branches and sometimes also known by the name of the corresponding animal of the Chinese zodiac. The first \"shi\" originally ran from 11pm to 1am but was reckoned as starting at midnight by the time of the History of Song, compiled during the early Yuan. These apparently began to be used during the Eastern Han that preceded the Three Kingdoms era, but the sections that would have covered them are missing from their official histories; they first appear in official use in the Tang-era Book of Sui. Variations of all these units were subsequently adopted by Japan and the other countries of the Sinosphere.\nThe 12 \"shi\" supposedly began to be divided into 24 hours under the Tang, although they are first attested in the Ming-era Book of Yuan. In that work, the hours were known by the same earthly branches as the \"shi\", with the first half noted as its \"starting\" and the second as \"completed\" or \"proper\" \"shi\". In modern China, these are instead simply numbered and described as \"little \"shi\"\". The modern \"ke\" is now used to count quarter-hours, rather than a separate unit.\nAs with the Egyptian night and daytime hours, the division of the day into 12 \"shi\" has been credited to the example set by the rough number of lunar cycles in a solar year, although the 12-year Jovian orbital cycle was more important to traditional Chinese and Babylonian reckoning of the zodiac.\nSoutheast Asia.\nIn Thailand, Laos, and Cambodia, the traditional system of noting hours is the six-hour clock. This reckons each of a day's 24 hours apart from noon as part of a fourth of the day. The first hour of the first half of daytime was 7 am; 1 pm the first hour of the latter half of daytime; 7 pm the first hour of the first half of nighttime; and 1 am the first hour of the latter half of nighttime. This system existed in the Ayutthaya Kingdom, deriving its current phrasing from the practice of publicly announcing the daytime hours with a gong and the nighttime hours with a drum. It was abolished in Laos and Cambodia during their French occupation and is uncommon there now. The Thai system remains in informal use in the form codified in 1901 by King Chulalongkorn.\nIndia.\nThe Vedas and Puranas employed units of time based on the sidereal day (\"nak\u1e63atra ahor\u0101tra\"). This was variously divided into 30 \"muh\u016brta-s\" of 48 minutes each or 60 \"dandas\" or \"nad\u012b-s\" of 24 minutes each. The solar day was later similarly divided into 60 \"gha\u1e6dik\u00e1s\" of about the same duration, each divided in turn into 60 \"vinadis\". The Sinhalese followed a similar system but called their sixtieth of a day a \"peya\".\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; "}
