{"id": "16132", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16132", "title": "Joseph Yoakum", "text": "20th century African-American outsider artist\nJoseph Elmer Yoakum (c. February 22, 1891 \u2013 December 25, 1972) was an American self-taught painter. He was of African-American and possibly of Native American\u2013descent, and was known for his landscape paintings in the outsider art-style. He was age 76 when he started to record his memories in the form of imaginary landscapes and produced over 2,000 drawings during the last decade of his life.\nEarly life.\nJoseph Elmer Yoakum's biographical information is difficult to verify but he also claimed to be of African, French, and Cherokee descent. New York Times critic Will Heinrich called his biography \"tricky...It\u2019s poorly documented, and the artist himself was not a reliable narrator.\" His birthdates have also been given as 1886, 1888, and 1891, and his Veteran's Administration record says he was born in Springfield, Missouri. A 9 year old Joe Yoakum does show up in the 1900 U.S. census in Greene County, Missouri, listed as Black with his father's birthplace being listed as Indian Territory. His father John Yoakum is listed in the 1880 census as Black with his birthplace listed as Cherokee Nation.\nYoakum was born in Ash Grove, Missouri, but told a story of being born in Arizona, in 1888, as a Navajo Indian on the Window Rock Navajo reservation. Taking pride in his exaggerated Native heritage, Yoakum would pronounce \"Navajo\" as \"Na-va-JOE\" (as in \"Joseph\"). He spent his early childhood on a Missouri farm. \nYoakum left home when he was nine years old to join the Great Wallace Circus. As a bill poster, he also traveled across the U.S. with Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show and the Ringling Brothers, among the five different circuses. He later traveled to Europe as a stowaway.\nIn 1908, he returned to Missouri and started a family with his girlfriend Myrtle Julian, with whom he had his first son in 1909; the couple married in 1910. Around 1916, he worked in a coal mine, Hale Coal and Mining to support his family. Yoakum was drafted into the United States Army in 1918 and worked in the 805th Pioneer Infantry repairing roads and railroads. After the war, he traveled around the United States, working odd jobs, but never returned to his family. He later remarried and moved to Chicago. In 1946, Yoakum was committed to a psychiatric hospital there. He soon left and by the early 1950s he was drawing on a regular basis.\nArtistic work.\nYoakum was again living and painting in Chicago by 1962. Tom Brand, owner of Galaxy Press on the south side of Chicago, in 1968 had some printing to deliver to a coffee shop called \"The Whole\". While there he noticed the colored pencil drawings of Yoakum and was immediately taken by them. Brand had an account with the Ed Sherbyn Gallery on the north side of Chicago, and he persuaded Sherbyn to exhibit Yoakum's works and even printed his own poster for this show. Norman Mark of \"The Chicago Daily News\" wrote an article about Yoakum called \"My drawings are a spiritual unfoldment\"; this article was printed on the back of the poster. Brand informed his artist friends (including Whitney Halstead) about Yoakum and encouraged them to visit \"The Whole\" coffee shop. Halstead, an artist and instructor at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, became the greatest promoter of Yoakum's work during his lifetime. He believed that his story was \"more invention than reality... in part myth, Yoakum's life as he would have wished to have lived it.\"\nIn 1967, Yoakum was discovered by the mainstream art community through John Hopgood, an instructor at the Chicago State College, who saw Yoakum's work hanging in his studio window and purchased twenty-two pictures. A group of students including Roger Brown, Gladys Nilsson, Jim Nutt, and Barbara Rossi, and teachers at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, including Ray Yoshida and Whitney Halstead, took an interest in promoting his work. In 1972, just one month before his death, Yoakum was given a one-man show at the Whitney Museum in New York City.\nHe started drawing familiar places, such as \"Green Valley Ashville Kentucky\", as a method to capture his memories. However, he shifted towards imaginary landscapes in places he had never visited, like \"Mt Cloubelle of West India\" or \"Mt Mowbullan in Dividing Range near Brisbane Australia\". Drawing outlines with ballpoint pen, rarely making corrections, he colored his drawings within the lines using watercolors and pastels. He became known for his organic forms, always using two lines to designate land masses.\nDuring the final four months of his life Yoakum's work was marked by a use of pure abstraction, as in his illustration \"Flooding of Sock River through Ash Grove Mo [Missouri] on July 4, 1914 in that [waters] drove many persons from Homes I were with the Groupe leiving [\"sic\"] their homes for safety\". That painting was one of his autobiographical works.\nIn 2018\u201319 Yoakum's work was included in the exhibition \"Outliers and American Vanguard Art\" at the National Gallery of Art, High Museum of Art, and Los Angeles County Museum of Art. Following this event, Venus Over Manhattan presented an exhibition featuring more than sixty works on paper, which constituted the largest collection of Yoakum\u2019s art assembled in New York since 1972. In 2021, the Museum of Modern Art presented more than 100 of his works in an exhibition called \"Joseph E. Yoakum: What I Saw.\" It was organized by the Art Institute of Chicago, the Museum of Modern Art, and the Menil Drawing Institute, which is part of the Menil Collection. His work is represented in the National Gallery of Art, among other institutions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16133", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16133", "title": "John Brunner/The Shockwave Rider", "text": ""}
{"id": "16134", "revid": "18984730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16134", "title": "Jefferson Davis", "text": "President of the Confederate States from 1861 to 1865\nJefferson F. Davis (June 3, 1808\u00a0\u2013 December 6, 1889) was an American politician who served as the only president of the Confederate States from 1861 to 1865. He represented Mississippi in the United States Senate and the House of Representatives as a member of the Democratic Party before the American Civil War. He was the United States Secretary of War from 1853 to 1857.\nDavis, the youngest of ten children, was born in Fairview, Kentucky, but spent most of his childhood in Wilkinson County, Mississippi. His eldest brother Joseph Emory Davis secured the younger Davis's appointment to the United States Military Academy. Upon graduating, he served six years as a lieutenant in the United States Army. After leaving the army in 1835, Davis married Sarah Knox Taylor, daughter of future president Zachary Taylor. Sarah died from malaria three months after the wedding. Davis became a cotton planter, building Brierfield Plantation in Mississippi on his brother Joseph's land and eventually owning as many as 113 slaves.\nIn 1845, Davis married Varina Howell. During the same year, he was elected to the United States House of Representatives, serving for one year. From 1846 to 1847, he fought in the Mexican\u2013American War as the colonel of a volunteer regiment. He was appointed to the United States Senate in 1847, resigning to unsuccessfully run as governor of Mississippi. In 1853, President Franklin Pierce appointed him Secretary of War. After Pierce's administration ended in 1857, Davis returned to the Senate. He resigned in 1861 when Mississippi seceded from the United States.\nDuring the Civil War, Davis guided the Confederacy's policies and served as its commander in chief. When the Confederacy was defeated in 1865, Davis was captured, arrested for alleged complicity in the assassination of Abraham Lincoln, accused of treason, and imprisoned at Fort Monroe. He was released without trial after two years. Immediately after the war, Davis was often blamed for the Confederacy's defeat, but after his release from prison, the Lost Cause of the Confederacy movement considered him to be a hero. In the late 19th and the 20th centuries, his legacy as Confederate leader was celebrated in the South. In the twenty-first century, his leadership of the Confederacy has been seen as constituting treason, and he has been frequently criticized as a supporter of slavery and racism. Many of the memorials dedicated to him throughout the United States have been removed.\nEarly life.\nBirth and family background.\nJefferson F. Davis was the youngest of ten children of Jane and Samuel Emory Davis. Samuel Davis's father, Evan, who had a Welsh background, came to the colony of Georgia from Philadelphia. Samuel served in the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War, and received a land grant for his service near present-day Washington, Georgia. He married Jane Cook, a woman of Scotch-Irish descent whom he had met in South Carolina during his military service, in 1783. Around 1793, Samuel and Jane moved to Kentucky. Jefferson was born on June 3, 1808, at the family homestead in Davisburg, a village Samuel had established that later became Fairview, Kentucky. He was named after then-President Thomas Jefferson.\nEarly education.\nIn 1810, the Davis family moved to Bayou Teche, Louisiana. Less than a year later, they moved to a farm near Woodville, Mississippi, where Samuel cultivated cotton, acquired twelve slaves, and built a house that Jane called Rosemont. During the War of 1812, three of Davis's brothers served in the military. When Davis was around five, he received a rudimentary education at a small schoolhouse near Woodville. When he was about eight, his father sent him with Major Thomas Hinds and his relatives to attend Saint Thomas College, a Catholic preparatory school run by Dominicans near Springfield, Kentucky. In 1818, Davis returned to Mississippi, where he briefly studied at Jefferson College in Washington. He then attended the Wilkinson County Academy near Woodville for five years. In 1823, Davis attended Transylvania University in Lexington. While he was still in college in 1824, he learned that his father Samuel had died. Before his death, Samuel had fallen into debt and sold Rosemont and most of his slaves to his eldest son Joseph Emory Davis, who already owned a large estate in Davis Bend, Mississippi, about south of Vicksburg, Mississippi. Joseph, who was 23 years older than Davis, informally became his surrogate father.\nWest Point and early military career.\nHis older brother Joseph got Davis appointed to the United States Military Academy at West Point in 1824, where he became friends with classmates Albert Sidney Johnston and Leonidas Polk. Davis frequently challenged the academy's discipline. In his first year, he was court-martialed for drinking at the nearby tavern of Benny Havens. He was found guilty but was pardoned. The following year, he was placed under house arrest for his role in the eggnog riot during Christmas 1826 but was not dismissed. He graduated 23rd in a class of 33.\nSecond Lieutenant Davis was assigned to the 1st Infantry Regiment. He was accompanied by his personal servant James Pemberton, an enslaved African American whom he inherited from his father. In early 1829, he was stationed at Forts Crawford and Winnebago in Michigan Territory under the command of Colonel Zachary Taylor, who later became president of the United States.\nThroughout his life, Davis regularly suffered from ill health. During the northern winters, he had pneumonia, colds, and bronchitis. He went to Mississippi on furlough in March 1832, missing the outbreak of the Black Hawk War, and returned to duty just before the Battle of Bad Axe, which ended the war. When Black Hawk was captured, Davis escorted him for detention in St. Louis. Black Hawk stated that Davis treated him with kindness.\nAfter Davis's return to Fort Crawford in January 1833, he and Taylor's daughter, Sarah, became romantically involved. Davis asked Taylor if he could marry Sarah, but Taylor refused. In spring, Taylor had him assigned to the United States Regiment of Dragoons under Colonel Henry Dodge. He was promoted to first lieutenant and deployed at Fort Gibson in Arkansas Territory. In February 1835, Davis was court-martialed for insubordination. He was acquitted. He requested a furlough, and immediately after it ended, he tendered his resignation, which was effective on June 30.\nPlanting career and first marriage.\nDavis decided to become a cotton planter. He returned to Mississippi where his brother Joseph had developed Davis Bend into Hurricane Plantation, which eventually had of cultivated fields with over 300 slaves. Joseph loaned him funds to buy ten slaves and provided him with , though Joseph retained the title to the property. Davis named his section Brierfield Plantation.\nDavis continued his correspondence with Sarah, and they agreed to marry with Taylor giving his reluctant assent. They married at Beechland on June 17, 1835. In August, he and Sarah traveled to Locust Grove Plantation, his sister Anna Smith's home in West Feliciana Parish, Louisiana. Within days, both became severely ill with malaria. Sarah died at the age of 21 on September 15, 1835, after only three months of marriage.\nFor several years after Sarah's death, Davis spent much of his time developing Brierfield. In 1836, he possessed 23 slaves; by 1840, he possessed 40; and by 1860, 113. He made his first slave, James Pemberton, Brierfield's effective overseer, a position Pemberton held until his death around 1850. Davis continued his intellectual development by reading about politics, law and economics at the large library Joseph and his wife, Eliza, maintained at Hurricane Plantation. Around this time, Davis became increasingly engaged in politics, benefiting from his brother's mentorship and political influence.\nEarly political career and second marriage.\nDavis became publicly involved in politics in 1840 when he attended a Democratic Party meeting in Vicksburg and served as a delegate to the party's state convention in Jackson; he served again in 1842. One week before the state election in November 1843, he was chosen to be the Democratic candidate for the Mississippi House of Representatives for Warren County when the original candidate withdrew his nomination, though Davis lost the election.\nIn early 1844, Davis was chosen to serve as a delegate to the state convention again. On his way to Jackson, he met Varina Banks Howell, the 18-year-old daughter of William Burr Howell and Margaret Kempe Howell, when he delivered an invitation from Joseph for her to visit the Hurricane Plantation for the Christmas season. At the convention, Davis was selected as one of Mississippi's six presidential electors for the 1844 presidential election.\nWithin a month of their meeting, 35-year-old Davis and Varina became engaged despite her parents' initial concerns about his age and politics. During the remainder of the year, Davis campaigned for the Democratic party, advocating for the nomination of John C. Calhoun. He preferred Calhoun because he championed Southern interests including the annexation of Texas, reduction of tariffs, and building naval defenses in southern ports. When the party chose James K. Polk for their presidential candidate, Davis campaigned for him.\nDavis and Varina married on February 26, 1845. They had six children: Samuel Emory, born in 1852, who died of an undiagnosed disease two years later; Margaret Howell, born in 1855, who married, raised a family and lived to be 54; Jefferson Davis Jr., born in 1857, who died of yellow fever at age 21; Joseph Evan, born 1859, who died from an accidental fall at age five; William Howell, born 1861, who died of diphtheria at age 10; and Varina Anne, born 1864, who remained single and lived to be 34.\nIn July 1845, Davis became a candidate for the United States House of Representatives. He ran on a platform emphasizing a strict constructionist view of the constitution, states' rights, tariff reductions, and opposition to a national bank. He won the election and entered the 29th Congress. Davis opposed using federal monies for internal improvements, which he believed would undermine the autonomy of the states. He supported the American annexation of Oregon, but through peaceful compromise with Britain. On May 11, 1846, he voted for war with Mexico.\nMexican\u2013American War.\nAt the beginning of the Mexican\u2013American War, Mississippi raised a volunteer unit, the First Mississippi Regiment, for the U.S. Army. Davis expressed his interest in joining the regiment if he was elected its colonel, and in the second round of elections in June 1846 he was chosen. He did not give up his position as a U.S. Representative, but left a letter of resignation with his brother Joseph to submit when he thought it was appropriate.\nDavis was able to get his regiment armed with new percussion rifles instead of the smoothbore muskets used by other units. President Polk approved their purchase as a political favor in return for Davis marshalling enough votes to pass the Walker Tariff. Because of its association with the regiment, the weapon became known as the \"Mississippi rifle\", and the regiment became known as the \"Mississippi Rifles\".\nDavis's regiment was assigned to the army of his former father-in-law, Zachary Taylor, in northeastern Mexico. Davis distinguished himself at the Battle of Monterrey in September by leading a charge that took the fort of La Teneria. He then went on a two-month leave and returned to Mississippi, where he learned that Joseph had submitted Davis's resignation from the House of Representatives in October. Davis returned to Mexico and fought in the Battle of Buena Vista on February 22, 1847. He was wounded in the heel during the fighting, but his actions stopped an attack by the Mexican forces that threatened to collapse the American line. In May, Polk offered him a federal commission as a brigadier general. Davis declined the appointment, arguing he could not directly command militia units because the U.S. Constitution gives the power of appointing militia officers to the states, not the federal government. Instead, he accepted an appointment by Mississippi governor Albert G. Brown to fill a vacancy in the U.S. Senate left when Jesse Speight died.\nSenator and Secretary of War.\nSenator.\nDavis took his seat in December 1847 and was made a regent of the Smithsonian Institution. The Mississippi state legislature confirmed his appointment as senator in January 1848. He quickly established himself as an advocate of expanding slavery into the Western territories. He argued that because the territories were the common property of all the United States and lacked state sovereignty to ban slavery, slave owners had the equal right to settle them as any other citizens. Davis tried to amend the Oregon Bill to allow settlers to bring their slaves into Oregon Territory. He opposed ratifying the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which ended the Mexican\u2013American War, claiming that Nicholas Trist, who negotiated the treaty, had done so as a private citizen and not a government representative. Instead, he advocated negotiating a new treaty ceding additional land to the United States, and opposed the application of the Wilmot Proviso to the treaty, which would have banned slavery in any territory acquired from Mexico.\nDuring the 1848 presidential election, Davis chose not to campaign against Zachary Taylor, who was the Whig candidate. After the Senate session following Taylor's inauguration ended in March 1849, Davis returned to Brierfield Plantation. He was reelected by the state legislature for another six-year term in the Senate. Around this time, he was approached by the Venezuelan adventurer Narciso L\u00f3pez to lead a filibuster expedition to liberate Cuba from Spain. He turned down the offer, saying it was inconsistent with his duty as a senator.\nWhen Calhoun died in the spring of 1850, Davis became the senatorial spokesperson for the South. The Congress debated Henry Clay's resolutions, which sought to address the sectional and territorial problems of the nation and became the basis for the Compromise of 1850. Davis was against the resolutions because he felt they would put the South at a political disadvantage. He opposed the admission of California as a free state without its first becoming a territory, asserting that a territorial government would give slaveowners the opportunity to colonize the region. He also tried to extend the Missouri Compromise Line to allow slavery to expand to the Pacific Ocean. He stated that not allowing slavery into the new territories denied the political equality of Southerners, and threatened to undermine the balance of power between Northern and Southern states in the Senate.\nIn the autumn of 1851, Davis was nominated to run for governor of Mississippi against Henry Stuart Foote, who had favored the Compromise of 1850. He accepted the nomination and resigned from the Senate, but Foote won the election by a slim margin. Davis turned down a reappointment to his Senate seat by outgoing Governor James Whitfield, settling in Brierfield for the next fifteen months. He remained politically active, attending the Democratic convention in January 1852 and campaigning for Democratic candidates Franklin Pierce and William R. King during the presidential election of 1852.\nSecretary of War.\nIn March 1853, President Franklin Pierce named Davis his Secretary of War. He championed a transcontinental railroad to the Pacific Ocean, arguing it was needed for national defense, and was entrusted with overseeing the Pacific Railroad Surveys to determine which of four possible routes was the best. He promoted the Gadsden Purchase of today's southern Arizona from Mexico, partly because he preferred a southern route for the new railroad. The Pierce administration agreed and the land was purchased in December 1853. He presented the surveys' findings in 1855, but they failed to clarify the best route and sectional problems prevented any choice being made. Davis also argued for the acquisition of Cuba from Spain, seeing it as an opportunity to add the island, a strategic military location and potential slave state. He suggested that the size of the regular army was too small and that its salaries were too meagre. Congress agreed and authorized four new regiments and increased its pay scale. He ended the manufacture of smoothbore muskets and shifted production to rifles, working to develop the tactics that accompany them. He oversaw the building of public works in Washington D.C., including the initial construction of the Washington Aqueduct.\nDavis assisted in the passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act in 1854 by allowing President Pierce to endorse it before it came up for a vote. This bill, which created Kansas and Nebraska territories, repealed the Missouri Compromise's limits on slavery and left the decision about a territory's slaveholding status to popular sovereignty, which allowed the territory's residents to decide. The passage of this bill led to the demise of the Whig party, which had tried to limit expansion of slavery in the territories. It also contributed to the rise of the Republican Party and the increase of civil violence in Kansas.\nThe Democratic nomination for the 1856 presidential election went to James Buchanan. Knowing his term was over when the Pierce administration ended in 1857, Davis ran for the Senate once more and re-entered it on March 4, 1857. In the same month, the United States Supreme Court decided the Dred Scott case, which ruled that slavery could not be barred from any territory.\nReturn to Senate.\nThe Senate recessed in March and did not reconvene until November 1857. The session opened with a debate on the Lecompton Constitution submitted by a convention in Kansas Territory. If approved, it would have allowed Kansas to be admitted as a slave state. Davis supported it, but it was not accepted, in part because the leading Democrat in the North, Stephen Douglas, argued it did not represent the true will of the settlers in the territory. The controversy undermined the alliance between Northern and Southern Democrats.\nDavis's participation in the Senate was interrupted in early 1858 by a recurring case of iritis, which threatened the loss of his left eye. It left him bedridden for seven weeks. He spent the summer of 1858 in Portland, Maine recovering, and gave speeches in Maine, Boston, and New York, emphasizing the common heritage of all Americans and the importance of the constitution for defining the nation. His speeches angered some states' rights supporters in the South, requiring him to clarify his comments when he returned to Mississippi. Davis said that he appreciated the benefits of Union, but acknowledged that it could be dissolved if states' rights were violated or one section of the country imposed its will on another. Speaking to the Mississippi Legislature on November 16, 1858, Davis stated \"if an Abolitionist be chosen President of the United States... I should deem it your duty to provide for your safety outside of a Union with those who have already shown the will...to deprive you of your birthright and to reduce you to worse than the colonial dependence of your fathers.\"\nIn February 1860, Davis presented a series of resolutions defining the relationship between the states under the constitution, including the assertion that Americans had a constitutional right to bring slaves into territories. These resolutions were seen as setting the agenda for the Democratic Party nomination, ensuring that Douglas's idea of popular sovereignty, known as the Freeport Doctrine, would be excluded from the party platform. The Democratic party split\u2014Douglas was nominated by the North and Vice President John C. Breckinridge was nominated by the South\u2014and the Republican Party nominee Abraham Lincoln won the 1860 presidential election. Davis counselled moderation after the election, but South Carolina adopted an ordinance of secession on December 20, 1860. Mississippi seceded on January 9, 1861, though Davis stayed in Washington until he received official notification on January 21. Calling it \"the saddest day of my life\", he delivered a farewell address, resigned from the Senate, and returned to Mississippi.\nPresident of the Confederate States.\nInauguration.\nBefore his resignation, Davis had sent a telegraph to Mississippi Governor John J. Pettus informing him that he was available to serve the state. On January 27, 1861, Pettus appointed him a major general of Mississippi's army. On February 9, Davis was unanimously elected to the provisional presidency of the Confederacy by a constitutional convention in Montgomery, Alabama including delegates from the six states that had seceded: South Carolina, Mississippi, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, and Alabama. He was chosen because of his political prominence, his military reputation, and his moderate approach to secession, which Confederate leaders thought might persuade undecided Southerners to support their cause. He learned about his election the next day. Davis had been hoping for a military command, but he committed himself fully to his new role. Davis was inaugurated on February 18.\nDavis formed his cabinet by choosing a member from each of the states of the Confederacy, including Texas which had recently seceded: Robert Toombs of Georgia for Secretary of State, Christopher Memminger of South Carolina for Secretary of the Treasury, LeRoy Walker of Alabama for Secretary of War, John Reagan of Texas for Postmaster General, Judah P. Benjamin of Louisiana for Attorney General, and Stephen Mallory of Florida for Secretary of the Navy. Davis stood in for Mississippi. During his presidency, Davis's cabinet often changed; there were fourteen different appointees for the positions, including six secretaries of war. On November 6, 1861, Davis was elected president for a six-year term. He took office on February 22, 1862.\nAmerican Civil War.\nAs the Southern states seceded, state authorities took over most federal facilities without bloodshed. But four forts, including Fort Sumter in Charleston, South Carolina, had not surrendered. Davis preferred to avoid a crisis because the Confederacy needed time to organize its resources. To ensure that no attack on Fort Sumter was launched without his command, Davis had appointed Brigadier General P. G. T. Beauregard to command all Confederate troops in the vicinity of Charleston, South Carolina. Davis sent a commission to Washington to negotiate the evacuation of the forts, but President of the United States Lincoln refused to meet with it.\nWhen Lincoln informed Davis that he intended to reprovision Fort Sumter, Davis convened with the Confederate Congress on April 8 and gave orders to demand the immediate surrender of the fort or to reduce it. The commander of the fort, Major Robert Anderson, refused to surrender, and Beauregard began the attack on Fort Sumter early on April 12. After over thirty hours of bombardment, the fort surrendered. When Lincoln called for 75,000 militiamen to suppress the rebellion, four more states\u2014Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas\u2014joined the Confederacy. The American Civil War had begun.\n1861.\nIn addition to being the constitutional commander-in-chief of the Confederacy, Davis was operational military leader as the military departments reported directly to him. Many people, including Generals Joseph E. Johnston and Major General Leonidas Polk, thought he would direct the fighting, but he left that to his generals.\nMajor fighting in the East began when a Union army advanced into northern Virginia in July 1861. It was defeated at Manassas by two Confederate forces commanded by Beauregard and Joseph Johnston. After the battle, Davis had to manage disputes with the two generals, both of whom felt they did not get the recognition they deserved.\nIn the West, Davis had to address a problem caused by another general. Kentucky, which was leaning toward the Confederacy, had declared its neutrality. In September 1861, Polk violated the state's neutrality by occupying Columbus, Kentucky. Secretary of War Walker ordered him to withdraw. Davis initially agreed with Walker, but changed his mind and allowed Polk to remain. The violation led Kentucky to request aid from the Union, effectively losing the state for the Confederacy. Walker resigned as secretary of war and was replaced by Judah P. Benjamin. Davis appointed General Albert Sidney Johnston, as commander of the Western Military Department that included much of Tennessee, Kentucky, western Mississippi, and Arkansas.\n1862.\nIn February 1862, the Confederate defenses in the West collapsed when Union forces captured Forts Henry, Donelson, and nearly half the troops in A. S. Johnston's department. Within weeks, Kentucky, Nashville and Memphis were lost, as well as control of the Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers. The commanders responsible for the defeat were Brigadier Generals Gideon Pillow and John B. Floyd, political generals that Davis had been required to appoint. Davis gathered troops defending the Gulf Coast and concentrated them with A. S. Johnston's remaining forces. Davis favored using this concentration in an offensive. Johnston attacked the Union forces at Shiloh in southwestern Tennessee on April 6. The attack failed, and Johnston was killed. General Beauregard took command, falling back to Corinth, Mississippi, and then to Tupelo, Mississippi. When Beauregard then put himself on leave, Davis replaced him with General Braxton Bragg.\nOn February 22, Davis was inaugurated as president. In his inaugural speech, he admitted that the South had suffered disasters, but called on the people of the Confederacy to renew their commitment. He replaced Secretary of War Benjamin, who had been scapegoated for the defeats, with George W. Randolph. Davis kept Benjamin in the cabinet, making him secretary of state to replace Hunter, who had stepped down. In March, Davis vetoed a bill to create a commander in chief for the army, but he selected General Robert E. Lee to be his military advisor. They formed a close relationship, and Davis relied on Lee for counsel until the end of the war.\nIn March, Union troops in the East began an amphibious attack on the Virginia Peninsula, 75 miles from the Confederate capital of Richmond. Davis and Lee wanted Joseph Johnston, who commanded the Confederate army near Richmond, to make a stand at Yorktown. Instead, Johnston withdrew from the peninsula without informing Davis. Davis reminded Johnston that it was his duty to not let Richmond fall. On May 31, 1862, Johnston engaged the Union army less than ten miles from Richmond at the Battle of Seven Pines, where he was wounded. Davis put Lee in command. Lee began the Seven Days Battles less than a month later, pushing the Union forces back down the peninsula and eventually forcing them to withdraw from Virginia. Lee beat back another army moving into Virginia at the Battle of Second Manassas in August 1862. Knowing Davis desired an offensive into the North, Lee invaded Maryland, but retreated back to Virginia after a bloody stalemate at Antietam in September. In December, Lee stopped another invasion of Virginia at the Battle of Fredericksburg.\nIn the West, Bragg shifted most of his available forces from Tupelo to Chattanooga in July 1862 for an offensive toward Kentucky. Davis approved, suggesting that an attack could win Kentucky for the Confederacy and regain Tennessee, but he did not create a unified command. He formed a new department independent of Bragg under Major General Edmund Kirby Smith at Knoxville, Tennessee. In August, both Bragg and Smith invaded Kentucky. Frankfort was briefly captured and a Confederate governor was inaugurated, but the attack collapsed, in part due to lack of coordination between the two generals. After a stalemate at the Battle of Perryville, Bragg and Smith retreated to Tennessee. In December, Bragg was defeated at the Battle of Stones River.\nIn response to the defeat and the lack of coordination, Davis reorganized the command in the West in November, combining the armies in Tennessee and Vicksburg into a department under the overall command of Joseph Johnston. Davis expected Johnston to relieve Bragg of his command, but Johnston refused. During this time, Secretary of War Randolph resigned because he felt Davis refused to give him the autonomy to do his job; Davis replaced him with James Seddon.\nIn the winter of 1862, Davis decided to join the Episcopal Church; in May 1863, he was confirmed at St. Paul's Episcopal Church in Richmond.\n1863.\nOn January 1, Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation. Davis saw this as attempt to destroy the South by inciting its enslaved people to revolt, declaring the proclamation \"the most execrable measure recorded in the history of guilty man\". He requested a law that Union officers captured in Confederate states be delivered to state authorities and put on trial for inciting slave rebellion. In response, the Congress passed a law that Union officers of United States Colored Troops could be tried and executed, though none were during the war. The law also stated that captured black soldiers would be turned over to the states they were captured in to be dealt with as the state saw fit.\nIn May, Lee broke up another invasion of Virginia at the Battle of Chancellorsville, and countered with an invasion into Pennsylvania. Davis approved, thinking that a victory in Union territory could gain recognition of Confederate independence, but Lee's army was defeated at the Battle of Gettysburg in July. After retreating to Virginia, Lee blocked any major Union offensives into the state.\nIn April, Union forces resumed their attack on Vicksburg. Davis concentrated troops from across the south to counter the move, but Joseph Johnston did not stop the Union forces. Lieutenant General John C. Pemberton withdrew his army into Vicksburg, and after a siege, surrendered on July 4. The loss of Vicksburg and Port Hudson, Louisiana, led to Union control of the Mississippi. Davis relieved Johnston of his department command. During this time, Brierfield was occupied; Davis's slaves gained their freedom, and almost all of his property was confiscated or destroyed.\nIn the summer, Bragg's army was maneuvered out of Chattanooga and fell back to Georgia. In September, Bragg defeated the Union army at the Battle of Chickamauga, driving it back to Chattanooga, which he put under siege. Davis visited Bragg to address leadership problems in his army. Davis acknowledged that Bragg did not have the confidence of his subordinates but kept him in command. In mid-November, the Union army counterattacked and Bragg's forces retreated to northern Georgia. Bragg resigned his command; Davis replaced him with Joseph Johnston but retained Bragg as an informal chief of staff.\nDavis had to address faltering civilian morale. In early spring, there were riots in Confederate cities as people began to suffer food shortages and price inflation. During one riot in Richmond, the mayor of Richmond called the militia when a mob protesting food shortages broke into shops. Davis went to the scene and addressed the protesters, reminding them of their patriotic duty and promising them that he would get food. He then ordered them to disperse or he would command the soldiers to open fire; they dispersed. In October, Davis went on a month-long journey to rally the Confederacy, giving public speeches across the south and meeting with civic and military leaders.\n1864\u20131865.\nIn his address to the Second Confederate Congress on May 2, 1864, Davis outlined his strategy of achieving Confederate independence by exhausting the Union will to fight: If the South could show it could not be subjugated, the North would elect a president who would make peace.\nIn early 1864, Davis encouraged Joseph E. Johnston to take action in Tennessee, but Johnston refused. In May, the Union armies advanced toward Johnston's army, which repeatedly retreated toward Atlanta, Georgia. In July, Davis replaced Johnston with General John B. Hood, who immediately engaged the Union forces in a series of battles around Atlanta. The battles did not stop the Union army and Hood abandoned the city on September 2. The victory raised Northern morale and assured Lincoln's reelection. The Union forces then marched to Savannah, Georgia, capturing it. In December, they advanced into South Carolina, forcing the Confederates to evacuate Charleston. In the meantime, Hood advanced north and was repulsed in a drive toward Nashville in December 1864.\nUnion forces began a new advance into northern Virginia. Lee put up a strong defense and they were unable to directly advance on Richmond, but managed to cross the James River. In June 1864, Lee fought the Union armies to a standstill; both sides settled into trench warfare around Petersburg, which would continue for nine months.\nDavis signed a Congressional resolution in February making Lee general-in-chief. Seddon resigned as Secretary of War and was replaced by John C. Breckinridge. Davis sent envoys to Hampton Roads for peace talks, but Lincoln refused to consider any offer that included an independent Confederacy. Davis also sent Duncan F. Kenner, the chief Confederate diplomat, on a mission to Great Britain and France, offering to gradually emancipate the enslaved people of the South for political recognition.\nMajor General Patrick Cleburne sent a proposal in early 1864 to Davis to enlist African Americans in the army. Davis initially suppressed it, but by the end of the year, he reconsidered and endorsed the idea. Congress passed an act supporting him. It left the principle of slavery intact by leaving it to the states and individual owners to decide which slaves could be used for military service, but Davis's administration accepted only African Americans who had been freed by their masters as a condition of their being enlisted. The act came too late to have an effect on the war.\nEnd of the Confederacy and capture.\nThe Union army broke through the Confederate trench lines at the end of March 1865, forcing Lee to withdraw and abandon Richmond, Virginia. Davis evacuated his family, which included Jim Limber, a free black orphan they briefly adopted, on March 29. On April 2, Davis and his cabinet escaped by rail to Danville, Virginia. He issued a proclamation on April 4, encouraging the people of the Confederacy to continue resistance, but Lee surrendered at Appomattox Courthouse on April 9. The president and his cabinet headed to Greensboro, North Carolina where they met with Joseph Johnston, Beauregard, and North Carolina Governor Zebulon Vance. Davis wanted to cross the Mississippi River and continue the war, but his generals stated that they did not have the forces. He gave Johnston authorization to negotiate the surrender of his army, but Davis headed south to carry on the fight.\nWhen Lincoln was assassinated on April 14, the Union government implicated Davis, and a bounty of $100,000 () was put on his head. On May 2, Davis met with Secretary of War Breckinridge and Bragg in Abbeville, Georgia, to see if they could pull together an army. They said they could not. On May 5, he met with the remainder of his cabinet in Washington, Georgia, and officially dissolved the Confederate government. He moved on, hoping to join Kirby Smith's army across the Mississippi. On May 9, Union soldiers found Davis's encampment near Irwinville, Georgia. He tried to evade them, but was captured wearing a loose-sleeved cloak and covering his head with a black shawl, which gave rise to depictions of him in political cartoons fleeing in women's clothes.\nCivil War policies.\nNational policy.\nDavis's central concern during the war was to achieve Confederate independence. After Virginia seceded, the provisional government of the Confederacy moved the capital to Richmond. The Confederate federal government had almost no institutional structures in place, lacking an army, navy, treasury, diplomatic missions, and bureaucracy. Davis had to work with the Confederate Congress quickly to create them.\nThough Davis supported states' rights, he believed the Confederate constitution empowered him with the right to centralize authority to prosecute the war. He worked with the Congress to bring military facilities in the South, which had been controlled by the states, under Confederate authority. Confederate governors wanted their states' militia available for local defense. Davis knew he needed to deploy military forces to defend the Confederacy as a whole and created a centralized army that could enlist volunteers directly. When soldiers in the volunteer army seemed unwilling to re-enlist in 1862, Davis instituted the first conscription in American history. He received authorization from Congress to suspend the writ of habeas corpus when needed. In 1864, he challenged property rights by recommending a direct 5% tax on land and slaves, and implemented the impressment of supplies and slave labor for the military effort. In 1865, Davis's commitment to independence led him to even compromise slavery when he advocated for allowing African Americans to earn their freedom by serving in the military. These policies made him unpopular with states' rights advocates and state governors, who saw him as creating the same kind of government they had seceded from.\nForeign policy.\nThe main objective of Davis's foreign policy was to achieve foreign recognition, allowing the Confederacy to secure international loans, receive foreign aid to open trade, and provide the possibility of a military alliance. Davis was confident that most European nations' economic dependence on cotton from the South would quickly convince them to sign treaties with the Confederacy. Cotton had made up 61% of the value of all U.S. exports and the South filled most of the European cloth industry's need for cheap imported raw cotton.\nThere was no consensus on how to use cotton to gain European support. Davis did not want an embargo on cotton, he wanted to make cotton available to European nations, but require them to acquire it by violating the blockade declared by the Union. The majority of Congress wanted an embargo to coerce Europe to help the South. Though there was no official policy, cotton was effectively embargoed. By 1862, the price of cotton in Europe had quadrupled and European imports of cotton from the United States were down 96%, but instead of joining with the Confederacy, European cotton manufacturers found new sources, such as India, Egypt and Brazil. By the end of the war, not a single foreign nation had recognized the Confederate States of America.\nFinancial policy.\nDavis did not take executive action to create the needed financial structure for the Confederacy. He knew very little about public finance, largely deferring to Secretary of the Treasury Memminger. Memminger's knowledge of economics was limited, and he was ineffective at getting Congress to listen to his suggestions. Until 1863, Davis's reports on the financial state of the Confederacy to Congress tended to be unduly optimistic.\nDavis's failure to argue for needed financial reform allowed Congress to avoid unpopular economic measures, such as taxing planters' property\u2014both land and slaves\u2014that made up two-thirds of the South's wealth. At first the government thought it could raise money with a low export tax on cotton, but the blockade prevented this. In his opening address to the fourth session of Congress in December 1863, Davis demanded the Congress pass a direct tax on property despite the constitution. Congress complied, but the tax had too many loopholes and exceptions, and failed to produce the needed revenue. Throughout the existence of the Confederacy, taxes accounted for only one-fourteenth of the government's income; consequently, the government printed money to fund the war, destroying the value of the Confederate currency. By 1865, the government was relying on impressments to fill the gaps caused by lack of finances.\nImprisonment.\nOn May 22, 1865, Davis was imprisoned in Fort Monroe, Virginia, under the watch of Major General Nelson A. Miles. Initially, he was confined to a casemate, forced to wear fetters on his ankles, required to have guards constantly in his room, forbidden contact with his family, and given only a Bible and his prayerbook to read. Over time, his treatment improved: due to public outcry, the fetters were removed after five days; within two months, the guard was removed from his room, he could walk outside for exercise, and he was allowed to read newspapers and other books. In October, he was moved to better quarters. In April 1866, Varina was permitted to regularly visit him. In September, Miles was replaced by Brevet Brigadier General Henry S. Burton, who permitted Davis to live with Varina in a four-room apartment. In December, Pope Pius IX sent a photograph of himself to Davis.\nPresident Andrew Johnson's cabinet was unsure what to do with Davis. He had been arrested for complicity in the assassination of Abraham Lincoln. The cabinet considered trying him by military court for war crimes\u2014his alleged involvement in the assassination of Abraham Lincoln or the mistreatment of Union prisoners of war at Andersonville Prison\u2014but could not find any reliable evidence directly linking Davis to either. In late summer 1865, Attorney General James Speed determined that it was best to try Davis for treason in a civil criminal trial. In June 1866, the House of Representatives passed a resolution by a vote of 105 to 19 to put Davis on trial for treason. Davis also desired a trial to vindicate his actions. His defense lawyer, Charles O'Conor wanted to argue that Davis did not commit treason because he was no longer a citizen of the United States when Mississippi left the United States. Because the trial was to be held in Richmond, Union prosecutors worried a jury might sympathize with Davis and acquit him in an act of jury nullification that would be interpreted as validating the constitutionality of secession. \nAfter two years of imprisonment, Davis was released at Richmond on May 13, 1867, on bail of $100,000 (~$ in 2024), which was posted by prominent citizens including Horace Greeley, Cornelius Vanderbilt and Gerrit Smith. Davis and Varina went to Montreal, Quebec, to join their children who had been sent there while he was in prison, and they moved to Lennoxville, Quebec. Davis remained under indictment until after Johnson's proclamation on Christmas 1868 granting amnesty and pardon to all participants in the rebellion. Davis's case never went to trial. In February 1869, Attorney General William Evarts informed the court that the federal government declared it was no longer prosecuting the charges against him.\nLater years.\nSeeking a livelihood.\nDespite his financial situation after his release, Davis refused work that he perceived as diminishing his status as a former senator and president. He turned down a position as head of Randolph\u2013Macon College in Virginia because he did not want to damage the school's reputation while he was under indictment. In the summer of 1869, he traveled to Britain and France, but found no business opportunities there. When the federal government dropped its case against him, Davis left his family in England and returned to the U.S. in October 1869 to become president of the Carolina Life Insurance Company in Tennessee. On his arrival to Tennessee, the University of the South offered him their top position, but he declined because the salary was insufficient. Davis was not able to retrieve his family from England until August 1870.\nDavis received numerous invitations to speak during this time, declining most. In 1870, he delivered a eulogy to Robert E. Lee at the Lee Monument Association in Richmond in which he avoided politics and emphasized Lee's character. Davis's 1873 speech to the Virginia Historical Society was more political; he stated that the South would not have surrendered had it known what to expect from Reconstruction, particularly the enfranchisement of African Americans. He became a life-time member of the Southern Historical Society, which was devoted to presenting the Lost Cause explanation of the Civil War. Initially, the society had scapegoated political leaders like Davis for losing the war, but eventually shifted the blame for defeat to the former Confederate general James Longstreet. Davis avoided public disputes regarding blame, but consistently maintained he had done nothing wrong and had always upheld the Constitution.\nThe Panic of 1873 adversely affected the Carolina Life Company, and Davis resigned in August 1873 when the directors merged the company over his objections. He went to Europe again in 1874 to seek opportunities to earn money, but was still not able to find any. After returning to the United States in 1874, Davis continued to explore ways to make a living, including investments in railroads, mining. and manufacturing an ice-making machine. In 1876, he was offered the presidency of the Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas. He declined because Varina also did not want to live in Texas, recommending Thomas S. Gathright instead. He worked for an English company, the Mississippi Valley Society, to promote trade and European immigration. When he and Varina went to Europe again in 1876, he determined the company was failing. He returned to the United States while Varina stayed in England.\nDavis sought to reclaim Brierfield as well. After the war, Davis Bend had been taken over by the Freedmen's Bureau, which employed former enslaved African Americans as laborers. After Davis's elder brother, Joseph, successfully applied for a pardon, he regained ownership of Davis Bend. Unable to maintain it, Joseph gave his former slave Ben Montgomery and his sons, Isaiah and William, a mortgage loan to buy the property. When Joseph died in 1870, he had made Davis one of his executors but did not deed any land to him in the will. Davis litigated to obtain Brierfield. A judge dismissed his suit in 1876. He appealed, and the Mississippi supreme court found in his favor in 1878. He foreclosed on the Montgomerys, who were in default on their mortgage. By December 1881, Brierfield was legally his, although he did not live there, and it did not produce a reliable income.\nAuthor.\nIn January 1877, the author Sarah Dorsey invited him to live on her estate at Beauvoir, Mississippi, and to begin writing his memoirs. He agreed, but insisted on paying board. At the time, Davis and Varina lived separately. When Varina came back to the United States, she initially refused to come to Beauvoir because she did not like Davis's close relationship with Dorsey, who was serving as his amanuensis. In the summer of 1878, Varina relented, moving to Beauvoir and taking over the role of Davis's assistant. Dorsey died in July 1879, and left Beauvoir to Davis in her will, and he lived there for most of his remaining years.\nDavis's first book, \"The Rise and Fall of the Confederate Government\", was published in 1881. The book was intended as a vindication of Davis's actions during the war and an argument for the righteousness of secession, though it downplayed slavery's role as a cause of the war. James Redpath, editor of the \"North American Review\", encouraged him to write a series of articles for the magazine and to complete his final book \"A Short History of the Confederate States of America\". He also began dictating his memoirs, although they were never finished.\nIn 1886, Henry W. Grady, an advocate for the New South, convinced Davis to lay the cornerstone for a monument to the Confederate dead in Montgomery, Alabama, and to attend the unveilings of statues memorializing Davis's friend Benjamin H. Hill in Savannah and the Revolutionary War hero Nathanael Greene in Atlanta. The tour was a triumph for Davis and got extensive newspaper coverage, which emphasized national unity and the South's role as a permanent part of the United States. At each stop along the way, large crowds came out to cheer Davis, solidifying his image as an icon of the South and the Confederacy. In October 1887, Davis held his last tour, traveling to the Georgia State Fair in Macon, Georgia, for a grand reunion with Confederate veterans.\nDeath.\nIn November 1889, Davis embarked on a steamboat in New Orleans in a cold rain, intending to visit Brierfield plantation. He fell ill during the trip, but refused to send for a doctor. An employee sent a telegram to Varina, who came to get him. Davis was diagnosed with acute bronchitis complicated by malaria. When he returned to New Orleans, Davis's doctor Stanford E. Chaille pronounced him too ill to travel further. He was taken to the home of Charles Erasmus Fenner, the son-in-law of his friend J. M. Payne, where he died at 12:45a.m. on December 6, 1889, in the presence of several friends and holding Varina's hand.\nFuneral and reburial.\nDavis's body lay in state at the New Orleans City Hall from December 7 to 11. Davis's funeral was one of the largest held in the South; over 200,000 mourners were estimated to have attended. The coffin was transported on a two-mile journey to the cemetery in a modified, four-wheeled caisson to emphasize his role as a military hero. Davis was buried according to the Episcopal rites and a brief eulogy was pronounced by Bishop John Nicholas Galleher.\nAfter Davis's funeral, various Southern states requested to be the final resting site for Davis's remains. Varina decided that Davis should be buried in Richmond, which she saw as the appropriate resting place for dead Confederate heroes. She chose Hollywood Cemetery. In May 1893, Davis's remains traveled from New Orleans to Richmond. Along the way, the train stopped at various cities, receiving military honors and visits from governors, and the coffin was allowed to lie in state in three state capitols: Montgomery, Alabama; Atlanta, Georgia; and Raleigh, North Carolina. When Davis was reburied, his children were reinterred on the site as Varina requested, and, when Varina died in 1906, she was buried beside him.\nPolitical views on slavery.\nDuring his years as a senator, Davis was an advocate for the Southern states' right to slavery.\nIn an 1848 speech on the Oregon Bill, he argued for a strict constructionist understanding of the Constitution. He insisted that the states are sovereign, all powers of the federal government are granted by those states, the Constitution recognized the right of states to allow citizens to have slaves as property, and the federal government was obligated to defend encroachments upon this right. In his February 13\u201314, 1850 speech, Davis declared that slaveholders must be allowed to bring their slaves into federal territories. He stated that slavery does not need to be justified: it was sanctioned by religion and history. He argued that African Americans were destined for bondage, and their enslavement was a civilizing blessing to them that brought economic and social good to everyone.\nDavis's speeches after secession acknowledged the relationship between the Confederacy and slavery. In his resignation speech to the Senate, delivered 12 days after his state seceded, he said Mississippi \"has heard proclaimed the theory that all men are created free and equal, and this made the basis of an attack upon her social institutions and the sacred Declaration of Independence has been invoked to maintain the position of the equality of the races.\" In his February 1861 inaugural speech as provisional president of the Confederacy, Davis asserted that the Confederate Constitution, which explicitly prevented Congress from passing any law affecting African-American slavery and mandated its protection in all Confederate territories, was a return to the intent of the original founders. When he spoke to Congress in April on the ratification of the Constitution, he stated that the war was caused by Northerners whose desire to end slavery would destroy Southern property worth millions of dollars.\" In his 1863 address to the Confederate Congress, Davis denounced the Emancipation Proclamation as evidence of the North's long-standing intention to abolish slavery and doom African Americans, whom he called an inferior race, to extermination.\nPerformance as commander in chief.\nDavis came to the role of commander in chief confident in his military abilities. He had graduated from the United States Military Academy, served in the regular army, and commanded troops in combat. He actively oversaw the military policy of the Confederacy and worked long hours attending to paperwork related to the organization, finance, and logistics needed to maintain the Confederate armies.\nSome historians argue that Davis's personality contributed to the defeat of the Confederacy. His constant attention to minor military details has been used to illustrate an inability to delegate, which led him to lose focus on larger issues. He has been accused of being a poor judge of generals: appointing people\u2014such as Bragg, Pemberton, and Hood\u2014\u2013who failed to meet expectations, overly trusting long-time friends, and retaining generals\u2014like Joseph Johnston\u2014long after they should have been removed. His need to be seen as always in the right has also been described as a problem. Historians have argued that the time spent vindicating himself took time away from pressing problems and accomplished little. His reactions to criticism made unnecessary enemies and created hostile relationships with the politicians and generals he depended on. It has been argued that his focus on military victory at all costs undermined the values the South was fighting for, such as states' rights and slavery, but provided no alternatives to replace them.\nOther historians have pointed out his strengths. Davis quickly mobilized the Confederacy despite the South's focus on states' rights, and he stayed focused on gaining independence. He was a skilled orator who attempted to share the vision of national unity. He shared his message through newspapers, public speeches, and trips where he would meet with the public. His policies sustained the Confederate armies through numerous campaigns, buoying Southern hopes for victory and undermining the North's will to continue the war. A few historians have argued that Davis may have been one of the best people available to serve as commander in chief. Though he was unable to win the war, he rose to the challenge of the presidency, pursuing a strategy that not only enabled the Confederacy to hold out as long as it did, but almost achieved its independence.\nLegacy.\nAlthough Davis served the United States as a soldier and a war hero, a politician who sat in both houses of Congress, and a cabinet officer, his legacy is mainly defined by his role as president of the Confederacy. After the Civil War, journalist Edward A. Pollard, who first popularized the Lost Cause mythology, placed much of the blame for losing the war on Davis. Into the twentieth century, many biographers and historians have also emphasized Davis's responsibility for the Confederacy's failure to achieve independence. Since the second half of the twentieth century, this assumption has been questioned. Some scholars argued that he was a capable leader, while acknowledging his skills were insufficient to overcome the challenges the Confederacy faced and exploring how his limitations may have contributed to the war's outcome.\nDavis's standing among white Southerners was at a low point at the end of the Civil War, but it rebounded after his release from prison. After Reconstruction, he became a venerated figure of the white South, and he was often depicted as a martyr who suffered for his nation. His birthday was made a legal holiday in six Southern states. His popularity among white Southerners remained strong in the early twentieth century. Around 200,000 people attended the unveiling of the Jefferson Davis Memorial at Richmond, Virginia, in 1907. Mississippi officials honored him with a life-size likeness in the National Statuary Hall at the U.S. Capitol in 1931. In 1961, a centennial celebration reenacted Davis's inauguration in Montgomery, Alabama, with fireworks and a cast of thousands in period costumes. In the early twenty-first century, there were at least 144 Confederate memorials commemorating him throughout the United States.\nOn October 17, 1978, Davis's U.S. citizenship was posthumously restored after the Senate passed Joint Resolution 16. President Jimmy Carter described it as an act of reconciliation reuniting the people of the United States and expressing the need to establish the nation's founding principles for all. However, Davis's legacy continued to spark controversy. In the twenty-first century, most historians agree that Davis's participation in the Confederacy constituted treason. His memorials, such as the Jefferson Davis Highway, have been argued to legitimize the white supremacist, slaveholding ideology of the Confederacy, and a number have been removed, including his statues at the University of Texas at Austin, New Orleans, Memphis, Tennessee, and the Kentucky State Capitol in Frankfort. After the murder of George Floyd in May 2020, protesters toppled Davis's statue on his Richmond monument along with the statues of other figures considered racists. As part of its initiative to dismantle Confederate monuments, the Richmond City Council funded the removal of the statue's pedestal, which was completed in February 2022, and ownership of its artifacts was given to the Black History Museum and Cultural Center of Virginia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nBooks\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournal articles\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOnline\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "16135", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16135", "title": "Jonathan Meades", "text": "British writer (born 1947)\nJonathan Turner Meades (born 21 January 1947) is an English writer and film-maker. His work spans journalism, fiction, essays, memoir and over fifty television films, mainly for the BBC. His most recent novel, \"Empty Wigs\", was published in February 2025.\nHe has described himself as a \"cardinal of atheism\" and is both an Honorary Associate of the National Secular Society and a Patron of Humanists UK.\nMeades was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 2019.\nEarly life and education.\nJonathan Meades was born in Salisbury, Wiltshire, the only child of John William Meades, a biscuit company sales rep, and Margery Agnes Meades (\"n\u00e9e\" Hogg), a primary school teacher. The family lived in an \"unbelievably cramped\" terraced, thatched cottage in the East Harnham area of the city. Meades was educated until the age of 13 at the nearby Salisbury Cathedral School, within Salisbury Cathedral Close.\nHe discovered a fascination for place and the built environment whilst accompanying his father on sales trips during school holidays; he would be left unattended and free to explore while the elder Meades conducted his business with the grocer. This later developed into a full-blown passion for architecture following a visit to Edwin Lutyens' Marsh Court on a school cricket trip at the age of 13. He also developed an early love of France on the frequent trips which his family took there, made possible by his Francophile mother's father, who worked for Southern Railway, the company which ran the Saint-Malo and Le Havre ferries.\nIn 1960 he was sent as a boarder to King's College, Taunton, which he has described as \"a dim, backward, muscular Christian boot camp\". He later \"walked out\" of the school and was sent instead to a crammer in London, where he lodged with the painter Vivien White, daughter of Augustus John.\nAfter a year at the University of Bordeaux and unsure of what to do next, he decided to become an actor after a chance meeting with Charles Collingwood and trained at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA) from 1966 to 1969. His contemporaries there included Robert Lindsay, David Bradley, Stephanie Beacham, Michael Kitchen and Richard Beckinsale. He later described it as a \"Sandhurst for chorus boys\" where students were \"martially drilled\", teaching them the value of discipline, craft and technique.\nAlthough he ultimately decided against joining the acting profession, the training which he received would prove essential in his later television career, as would his extra-curricular interest in French New Wave cinema, in particular the work of Jean-Pierre Melville and Alain Robbe-Grillet. His regular Sunday pastime of exploring the capital with his \"Pevsner Architectural Guide\" would also benefit him later. On leaving RADA, he was told by the Principal, Hugh Cruttwell, that he might as well abandon acting until he reached middle age, at which point he might become an interesting character actor. When the two met again decades later, after Meades had established himself on television, Cruttwell joked that he had not realised that the character would be called \"Jonathan Meades\".\nWriting.\nJournalism.\nFollowing a period as a freelance copywriter, Meades began writing for the literary magazine \"Books &amp; Bookmen\" in 1971, setting him on a career as a journalist and critic. In 1973 he reviewed a V&amp;A exhibition on Victorian architecture for the magazine, igniting a passion for the style and prompting him to explore even more of London than he had to date. Using the unlimited travel afforded by Red Rover bus passes, he rode on random buses for 20 minutes and then got off, no matter where he was.\nAfter leaving \"Books and Bookmen\" in 1975 he wrote for the sex education magazine \"Curious\" and joined the staff of \"Time Out\", then became \"The Observer\"'s TV critic in 1977. This led to the publication of his first book, \"This Is Their Life\", an A to Z of TV star biographies with an introduction by Mike Yarwood. He moved to \"Architects' Journal\" in 1979 and around this time worked on another book, \"The Illustrated Atlas of the World's Great Buildings\", with Philip Bagenal.\nIn 1981 he became the editor of Richard Branson's short-lived listings magazine \"Event\", then from 1982 was the features editor of \"Tatler\". It was here that he first had the opportunity to write about food, filling in as restaurant critic after Julian Barnes resigned, using the pseudonym \"John Beaver\". He was also invited to contribute to the bi-monthly restaurant magazine \"\u00c0 la Carte\" around this time. In 1986 he was offered the job of restaurant critic at \"The Times\", replacing comedy writer Stan Hey. Meades was a great success in this position, taking the job more seriously than his predecessor. He won Best Food Journalist at the 1986, 1990, 1996 and 1999 Glenfiddich Awards.\nDespite his success, he often tired of the repetitive nature of the job and threatened to leave several times. The paper responded by increasing his salary. He finally quit around 2000, having been pronounced morbidly obese by his doctor: he had put on around five pounds per year, or one ounce per meal, during his tenure. He then managed to lose a third of his body weight over the course of the following twelve months, using a strict diet of protein and citrus. He remained with \"The Times\" as a columnist until 2005.\nIn the years since, he has done less journalism but has contributed essays and reviews to numerous publications including the \"New Statesman\", \"The Independent\", \"The Guardian\", \"The Spectator\", \"The Daily Telegraph\" and \"The Times Literary Supplement\".\nBooks and other writing.\nIn 1982, \"Harpers &amp; Queen\" published three short stories which Meades had written about \"rural lowlife\". These, along with four more, were collected in 1984 as \"Filthy English\", his first volume of fiction. Andrew Billen of the \"London Evening Standard\" later described them as \"bucolic horror stories\". A few more stories appeared in his first anthology of journalism and essays, 1989's \"Peter Knows What Dick Likes\", the title of which is a reference to the supposed superiority of male-on-male fellatio.\nHe contributed to the screenplay of the 1992 French-Italian adventure film \"L'Atlantide\", directed by Bob Swaim and also wrote three unproduced screenplays in the 1980s and the 1990s: \"Millie's Problem\" (1985), \"The Side I Dressed On\" (1987) and \"The Brute's Price\" (1996).\nHis first novel, \"Pompey\", was published in 1993. A dark, epic family saga set in the titular city of Portsmouth, it was widely praised and favourably compared to Sterne, Scarfe, Steadman, Nabokov and Joyce, amongst other \"great stylists\". On its 2013 reissue, Matthew Adams wrote in \"The Independent\", \"Where his first collection of stories, \"Filthy English\", achieved the distinction of covering in aggressively vivid prose the disciplines of murder, addiction, incest and bestial pornography, \"Pompey\" exhibits an even greater concentration of his aptitude for squalor ... by the end of the opening two pages, which must rank among the most startling affirmations of omniscience in 20th-century literature, the reader has met with an arresting injunction: 'After using this book please wash your hands.'\"\nA second novel, \"The Fowler Family Business\", followed in 2002. A tale of suburban sexual deceit in the funeral trade, it was described by the \"London Evening Standard\" as \"hilarious and very black\". An anthology of his food journalism, \"Incest and Morris Dancing: A Gastronomic Revolution\", was published in the same year. In a 2010 interview with \"The Arts Desk\", he discussed his work on a third novel.\nAn anthology of journalism, essays and TV scripts on the built environment, \"Museum Without Walls\", was published by the crowdfunded imprint Unbound in 2012.\nMeades' memoir of his childhood in the 1950s and early 1960s, \"An Encyclopaedia of Myself\", was published in May 2014. It was long-listed for that year's Samuel Johnson Prize and won Best Memoir in the Spear's Book Awards 2014. Roger Lewis of the \"Financial Times\" said of the work that \"If this book is thought of less as a memoir than as a symphonic poem about post-war England and Englishness \u2013 well, then it is a masterpiece.\".\nIn 2015, the publisher and record label Test Centre released a spoken word vinyl album by Meades entitled \"Pedigree Mongrel\", consisting of readings from \"Pompey\", \"Museum Without Walls\", \"An Encyclopaedia of Myself\" and unpublished fiction, combined with soundscapes created by Mordant Music. The sleeve of the album featured photography by Meades, including an abstract self-portrait on the front cover. Also in 2015, Meades, along with Laura Noble, contributed essays to Robert Clayton's photographic collection \"Estate\", which documented life on the soon-to-be-demolished Lion Farm housing estate in Oldbury, West Midlands in 1990.\nA book of \"borrowed\" recipes, \"The Plagiarist in the Kitchen: A Lifetime's Culinary Thefts\", was published by Unbound in 2017. According to Meades, it is \"devoted to the idea that you shouldn't try and invent anything in the kitchen, just rely on what has already been done ... I hate the idea of experimental cookery, but I like the idea of experimental literature.\".\n\"Isle of Rust\", a collaboration with the photographer Alex Boyd featuring text based on Meades' script for his 2009 film about Lewis and Harris, was published by Luath Press in 2019.\nAn anthology of uncollected writing from 1988 to 2020 entitled \"Pedro and Ricky Come Again\", described as \"the best of three decades of Jonathan Meades\" and the sequel to \"Peter Knows What Dick Likes\", was published by Unbound in March 2021.\nMeades' long-awaited third novel, \"Empty Wigs\", was published by Unbound in February 2025 and received critical acclaim.\nTelevision.\nMeades' first foray into television was in 1985: a short film on the art and architecture of Barcelona for the BBC Two arts magazine programme \"Saturday Review\". His first big project was the 1987 six-part Channel 4 architectural documentary series \"The Victorian House\". This contained many stylistic similarities to his other work, but the producer of the series, John Marshall, received the sole writing credit and it was not a happy experience for Meades. He would be credited as the sole author of all his subsequent work.\nHis next series was \"Abroad in Britain\", broadcast on BBC Two in 1990. It featured five irreverent, \"slightly bonkers\" films which explored unusual and neglected aspects of the built environment: informal plotland dwellings along the Severn Valley, nautical culture around the Solent and architectural forms associated with utopianism, bohemians and the military. Each episode was introduced by Meades as being \"devoted to the proposition that the exotic begins at home\". The series was influenced by the work of architectural critic Ian Nairn and French New Wave film director Alain Robbe-Grillet and it cemented Meades' uniquely incongruous on-screen persona: dark glasses, dark suits, inscrutable, didactic delivery and dense, mordant language peppered with gags and surreal interludes. Rachel Cooke of \"The Guardian\" later described his TV persona as \"pugnacious, sardonic and seemingly super-confident\", while noting the RADA training and that it was \"not the real Jonathan Meades, who is an altogether more diffident and shy character ... except when drunk\". The series spawned four sequels: \"Further Abroad\" (1994), \"Even Further Abroad\" (1997), \"Abroad Again in Britain\" (2005) and \"Abroad Again\" (2007), along with several other series and films, the majority of which have been archived on the website \"MeadesShrine\".\nPreferring to be thought of as a performer rather than as a presenter, Meades has described his style as \"heavy entertainment\"; \"staged essays\" which seek to combine \"lecture hall\" and \"music hall\", Geoffrey Hill and Benny Hill.\nThe 1998 film \"Heart By-Pass\" looked affectionately at Birmingham; particularly at how its architecture, transport system and ethnic mix have changed since the 1960s. It featured the music of many of the city's best-known 1960s and 1970s rock bands such as The Moody Blues, The Move, Traffic, Black Sabbath and ELO.\nHe made two films on the architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner. The first, in 1998, was the Worcestershire episode of the series \"Travels with Pevsner\", in which noted writers followed his guide books on particular counties. The second, in 2001, was a biography entitled \"Pevsner Revisited\".\nMeades made two films which aired earlier in 2001, \"Victoria Died in 1901 and is Still Alive Today\" examined the other-worldly legacy of Victorian architecture and culture a hundred years on, set to a soundtrack of late 1960s psychedelic rock by artists such as The Velvet Underground, The Kinks and Pink Floyd, while \"suRREAL FILM\" (or \"tvSSFBM EHKL\", the letters of the title moved forwards then backwards) sought to expound on surrealism in a manner befitting the subject, and reflected on, \"inter alia\", the fact that Meades had recently lost a considerable amount of weight. Both films featured the comic actor Christopher Biggins, notably as Queen Victoria and were the first of Meades' films to be directed by Francis Hanly, who would go on to be his main collaborator, directing and shooting virtually all of his films from 2008.\nA three-part series on food, \"Meades Eats\", aired on BBC Four in 2003, again featuring Biggins and Hanly. The episodes dealt with fast food, the notion of a gastronomic revolution in the UK and with the ever-increasing influence of immigrant cuisines.\nThe 2008 two-part BBC Four film \"Jonathan Meades: Magnetic North\" celebrated the culture of Northern Europe, examining why the North suffers in the British popular imagination in comparison with the South. Meades travelled from the slag heaps of northern France to Belgian cities, the red-light district of Hamburg, Gda\u0144sk, the Baltic States and finally Helsinki, musing on the architecture, food and art of the places he visited. Writing in \"The Daily Telegraph\", James Walton praised the programme as \"Sparkling, thought-provoking, constantly challenging the accepted view, Meades seemed at times inspired, at others deranged. The only thing he never was, thank heaven, was obvious.\".\nA 9-DVD box set collecting all of his BBC work to date was planned for release in April 2008, but was reduced to a 3-disc anthology due to the expense of licensing the music used in the programmes. Much of the carefully chosen popular music used in the original edits was replaced by library music, and the more music-dependent films such as \"Surreal Film\", \"Victoria Died in 1901\" and \"Heart By-Pass\" were not included.\nIn 2009, Meades toured Scotland in a three-part BBC Four series entitled \"Jonathan Meades: Off Kilter\". He visited Aberdeen, Lewis and Harris (the 'Isle of Rust') and the less-renowned footballing towns of south-west Fife, Clackmannanshire and Falkirk, guided by his foul-mouthed 'ScotNav'.\nIn 2012, BBC Four screened \"Jonathan Meades on France\", a series in which he explored his \"second country\". The first episode, \"Fragments of an Arbitrary Encyclopaedia\", focused on the Lorraine region, using a miscellany of words beginning with the letter V. The second episode, \"A Biased Anthology of Parisian Peripheries\", focused on Frenchness and its major traits. The series concluded with \"Just a Few Debts France Owes to America\".\nThe 2013 film \"The Joy of Essex\" examined that county's little-known history of utopian communities.\nA two-part series on Brutalist architecture, \"Bunkers, Brutalism and Bloodymindedness: Concrete Poetry\", aired in 2014.\nIn a 2017 interview with \"The Guardian\", Meades quoted his director, Francis Hanly, on how their production budgets had declined over the years: \"We used to be a convoy, now we are a Smart car\". In a 2008 interview with \"The Independent\", he indicated that the blame for this lay mostly with former BBC Two controller Jane Root.\n\"Jonathan Meades on Jargon\" aired on BBC Four in May 2018. The BBC Four website described it as a \"provocative television essay\" which \"dissects politics, the law, football commentary, business, the arts, tabloid-speak and management consultancy to show how jargon is used to cover up, confuse and generally keep us in the dark\". \"The Guardian\" described it as \"blisteringly brutal, clever and hilarious\", while \"The Times\" also declared Meades to be \"on blistering form\".\nOver a period of 25 years, Meades has written and presented four films on the architectural legacy of 20th-century European dictators, the latest of which, \"Franco Building with Jonathan Meades\", looking at Franco's Spain, aired in August 2019. The previous instalments were \"Jerry Building\" (Nazi Germany, 1994), \"Joe Building\" (Joseph Stalin's Soviet Union, 2006) and \"Ben Building\" (Benito Mussolini's Italy, 2016).\nPhotography.\nMeades entered the world of photography with the 2013 collection \"Pidgin Snaps\". Published by Unbound as a \"boxette\" of 100 postcards, it featured mostly abstract digital work. It was followed in April 2016 by an exhibition entitled \"Ape Forgets Medication: Treyfs and Artknacks\" at the Londonewcastle Project in Shoreditch, London. A second exhibition, \"After Medication: Random Treyfs and Artknacks\", was held in October 2017 at 108 Fine Art, Harrogate.\nPersonal life.\nMeades has been married three times and has four daughters from his first two marriages. In 1980 he married Sally Brown, director of the British Theatre Association, and the couple had twins. His second wife was Frances Bentley, managing editor of \"Vogue\", whom he married in 1988. They had two daughters and divorced in 1997. In 2003 he married his girlfriend Colette Forder, a colleague from \"The Times\". In around 2007, the couple sold their penthouse flat on Tyers Gate, off Bermondsey Street, Southwark, where they had lived for 10 years, and moved to a converted mill near Bordeaux. Discovering that they found country life boring, they then moved to Marseille in around 2011, where they live in Le Corbusier's apartment block.\nDuring his time at RADA, he became friends with the painter Duggie Fields, whose flatmate was the former Pink Floyd singer, songwriter and guitarist Syd Barrett. He was also friendly with Aubrey \"Po\" Powell, co-founder of the graphic design company Hipgnosis, most famous for their Pink Floyd album covers. He has described himself as \"a hanger-on to the hangers-on\" around the band and has admitted to taking LSD three times, describing it as \"the only remotely interesting drug\".\nMeades was called \"the best amateur chef in the world\" by Marco Pierre White. He taught himself to cook as a young man using \"Mastering the Art of French Cooking\" (1961, 1970), by Simone Beck, Louisette Bertholle and Julia Child.\nHe is a football fan and supports Southampton F.C.\nHe has been a member of Soho's Groucho and Academy clubs.\nHe won the first ever episode of the BBC's \"Celebrity Mastermind\", broadcast in December 2002. His specialist subject was English Architecture, 1850\u20132002.\nIn the autumn of 2016, he was rushed to hospital and underwent five hours of cardiac surgery. Earlier in the year he had suffered from pleurisy and an embolism.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16137", "revid": "488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16137", "title": "Timeline of Jefferson Davis", "text": ""}
{"id": "16139", "revid": "1315482170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16139", "title": "Joe Pass", "text": "American jazz guitarist (1929\u20131994)\nJoe Pass (born Joseph Anthony Jacobi Passalacqua; January 13, 1929 \u2013 May 23, 1994) was an American jazz guitarist. Pass recorded and performed live with pianist Oscar Peterson, composer Duke Ellington, and vocalist Ella Fitzgerald, and he is generally esteemed as one of the most notable jazz guitarists of the 20th century for his solo guitar playing, found on recordings such as \"Virtuoso\".\nEarly life.\nPass was born in New Brunswick, New Jersey, on January 13, 1929. His father, Mariano Passalacqua, was a steel-mill worker who was born in Sicily. The family later moved to Johnstown, Pennsylvania. Although it is commonly believed that Pass became interested playing guitar after seeing Gene Autry perform in the Western film \"Ride, Tenderfoot, Ride\" (an account that had been given by Pass himself), Pass later stated he did not remember who or what inspired him to pursue music. \nPass received his first guitar and started creating music when at age 9. Pass stated his first guitar was a Harmony, and that he had asked for a guitar for his birthday. He began playing for neighbors, and learned chords from his father's Italian friends. He attended guitar lessons every Sunday with a local teacher for six to eight months and practiced for up to six hours per day, rapidly advancing in skill level. As he improved his craft, he participated in the local music scene of Johnstown, where he would enjoy the company of other guitarists and listen to the music that was being created. \nPass was finding paying gigs at dances and weddings in Johnstown as early as age 14, playing with bands led by Tony Pastor and Charlie Barnet, honing his guitar skills while \"learning the ropes\" in the music industry. He began traveling with small jazz groups and moved from Pennsylvania to New York City. \nPass would continue to perform with big bands until 1947, when he enlisted and served in the US military. \nPass developed an addiction to heroin after his tenure in the military had ended. He lived in New Orleans for a year, playing bebop at strip clubs. Pass later revealed that he had suffered a \"nervous breakdown\" in New Orleans due to virtually unlimited access to drugs that enabled the musician to engage in severe benders. Pass recalled, \"I would come to New York a lot, then get strung out and leave.\"\nPass spent much of the 1950s in and out of prison for drug-related convictions. Pass said, \"Staying high was my first priority; playing was second; girls were third. But the first thing really took all my energy.\" He recovered after a two-and-a-half-year stay in the Synanon rehabilitation program, largely putting his music on hold during his prison sentence.\nCareer.\nPass released his studio debut \"Sounds of Synanon\" on July 1, 1962.\nPass recorded and released a series of albums during the 1960s under Pacific Jazz Records, including \"Catch Me,\" \"12-String Guitar,\" \"For Django,\" and \"Simplicity.\" In 1963, he received \"DownBeat\" magazine's New Star Award. \nHe also played on Pacific Jazz recordings by Gerald Wilson, Bud Shank, and Les McCann. Pass was a member of the George Shearing Quintet from 1965 through 1967. \nThroughout the 1960s, Pass primarily performed TV and recording session work in Los Angeles, including performing in television orchestras. Norman Granz, the producer of Jazz at the Philharmonic and the founder of Verve Records, signed Pass to Pablo Records in December 1973. \nIn December 1974, Pass released his solo album \"Virtuoso\" on Pablo. Also in 1974, Pablo released the album \"The Trio\" with Pass, Oscar Peterson, and Niels-Henning \u00d8rsted Pedersen. He performed with them on many occasions throughout the 1970s and 1980s. At the Grammy Awards of 1975, \"The Trio\" won the Grammy Award for Best Jazz Performance by a Group. As part of the Pablo roster, Pass recorded with Benny Carter, Milt Jackson, Herb Ellis, Zoot Sims, Duke Ellington, Dizzy Gillespie, Ella Fitzgerald, and Count Basie.\nPass and Ella Fitzgerald recorded six albums together on Pablo toward the end of Fitzgerald's career: \"Take Love Easy\" (1973), \"Fitzgerald and Pass... Again\" (1976), \"Hamburg Duets - 1976\" (1976), \"Sophisticated Lady\" (1975, 1983), \"Speak Love\" (1983), and \"Easy Living\" (1986).\nLater life and death.\nPass was diagnosed with liver cancer in 1992. Although he was initially responsive to treatment and continued to play into 1993, his health eventually declined, forcing him to cancel his tour with Pepe Romero, Paco Pe\u00f1a, and Leo Kottke. Pass performed for the final time on May 7, 1994, with fellow guitarist John Pisano at a nightclub in Los Angeles. Pisano told \"Guitar Player\" that after the performance Pass said \"I can't play anymore\", an exchange that Pisano described as \"like a knife in my heart.\" Pass died from liver cancer in Los Angeles 16 days later, at the age of 65. Prior to his death, he recorded an album of Hank Williams songs with country guitarist Roy Clark.\nSpeaking about \"Nuages: Live at Yoshi's, Volume 2,\" Jim Ferguson wrote:\nThe follow up to 1993's \"Joe Pass &amp; Co. Live at Yoshi's,\" this release was colored by sad circumstances: both bassist Monty Budwig and Pass were stricken with fatal illnesses. Nevertheless, all concerned, including drummer Colin Bailey and second guitarist John Pisano, play up to their usual high levels...Issued posthumously, this material is hardly sub-standard. Bristling with energy throughout, it helps document the final stages in the career of a player who, arguably, was the greatest mainstream guitarist since Wes Montgomery.\nArtistry.\nTechnique.\nPass's playing style was particularly recognizable for his ability to play melody, harmony and basslines simultaneously or contrapuntally, both in-tempo and in an \u201cun-metered\u201d style. Pass's single-note playing style is similar to the instrumental stylings of classic bebop and hard bop, drawing comparisons to the tones and timbres of wind instruments used in jazz music, such as the saxophone and trumpet, as well as other string instruments such as the piano. Jazz educator Wolf Marshall said Pass's musical flavorings were \"hornlike and on par with his wealth of ideas and immense vocabulary, allowing single-note improvisations to flow like a saxophonist's stream of consciousness.\" \nAs Pass's career progressed, he developed an increasingly harmonic approach to improvisation that made extensive use of chord-melody solos, which produced a similar effect to that of a piano. He also employed a variety of different picking techniques such as fingerpicking, hybrid picking and \"flat picking\".\nPass's style was also said to have exhibited a \"tougher funky aspect\" by incorporating string bends, double stops and partial chords that variously borrow from blues, R&amp;B and swing styles.\nInfluences.\nThroughout the 1940s, Pass became interested in modern jazz sounds that were emerging from New York City, where he would jam with many quintessential bebop musicians. Pass cited Dizzy Gillespie, Charlie Parker, Art Tatum and Coleman Hawkins as influences during this time. Pass was later influenced by the piano stylings of Oscar Peterson. Ironically, only three of the various jazz musicians he had cited as influences on his playing were actually guitarists; he cited Charlie Christian, Django Reinhardt and Wes Montgomery as instrumental in his development as a musician.\nEquipment.\nOn Pass's early recordings, he played Fender solid-body electric guitars, such as the Jaguar and Jazzmaster. Additionally, Pass experimented with a Fender Bass VI 6-string bass on his 1963 album \"Catch Me\". In 1963, Pass was given as a gift a Gibson ES175D arch-top electric-acoustic guitar that had twin humbucking pickups.\nLegacy.\n\"New York\" magazine wrote: \"Joe Pass looks like somebody's uncle and plays guitar like nobody's business. He's called 'the world's greatest' and often compared to Paganini for his virtuosity. There is a certain purity to his sound that makes him stand out easily from other first-rate jazz guitarists.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He weaves his own fast-moving chords and filigree work so nimbly that it is hard to believe fingers can physically shift so quickly. Slight moustached, fairly balding, he frowns over his fretwork like a worried head waiter with more guests than tables but the sound that comes out could only be the confident product of years of devotion to the instrument... But it is when he plays completely solo, which he does for half of each set, that he comes into his own, because without hindrance of the rhythm section he can completely orchestrate each number. Sometimes it is by contrasting out of tempo sections with fast-moving interludes, sometimes by switching mood from wistful to lightly swinging, sometimes by alternating single-note lines with chords or simultaneous bass line and melody \u2013 the possibilities seem endless.\u2014\u200a \nVeteran jazz writer Scott Yanow has conferred the titles of \"the ultimate bebop guitarist\", \"the epitome of virtuoso guitarists\", and \"one of the top jazz voices of his generation\" on Pass.\nInternet personality and music analyst Rick Beato describes Pass as an early influence, and in several interviews has noted that among his adolescent achievements on the guitar was the performance of songs from Virtuoso at the encouragement of his father.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16141", "revid": "34573757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16141", "title": "Jazz guitar", "text": "Jazz instrument and associated playing style\nJazz guitar may refer to either a type of electric guitar or a guitar playing style in jazz, using electric amplification to increase the volume of acoustic guitars.\nIn the early 1930s, jazz musicians sought to amplify their sound to be heard over loud big bands. When guitarists in big bands switched from acoustic to semi-acoustic guitar and began using amplifiers, it enabled them to play solos. Jazz guitar had an important influence on jazz in the beginning of the twentieth century. Although the earliest guitars used in jazz were acoustic and acoustic guitars are still sometimes used in jazz, most jazz guitarists since the 1940s have performed on an electrically amplified guitar or electric guitar.\nTraditionally, jazz electric guitarists use an archtop with a relatively broad hollow sound-box, violin-style f-holes, a \"floating bridge\", and a magnetic pickup. Solid body guitars, mass-produced since the early 1950s, are also used.\nJazz guitar playing styles include \"comping\" with jazz chord voicings (and in some cases walking bass lines) and \"blowing\" (improvising) over jazz chord progressions with jazz-style phrasing and ornaments. Comping refers to playing chords underneath a song's melody or another musician's solo improvisations.\nHistory.\n1900\u2013mid-1930s.\nThe stringed, chord-playing rhythm can be heard in groups which included military band-style instruments such as brass, saxes, clarinets, and drums, such as early jazz groups. As the acoustic guitar became a more popular instrument in the early 20th century, guitar-makers began building louder guitars which would be useful in a wider range of settings. Nick Lucas is regarded as the grandfather of jazz guitar, with two of his guitar compositions recorded in 1922, Picking the Guitar and Teasing the Frets, being the first guitar solos ever recorded. Lucas built the foundations for jazz guitar through his development of various rhythmic, single string, and sweep picking techniques. \nThe Gibson L5, an acoustic archtop guitar which was first produced in 1923, was an early \u201cjazz\u201d-style guitar which was used by early jazz guitarists such as Eddie Lang. By the 1930s, the guitar began to displace the banjo as the primary chordal rhythm instrument in jazz because the guitar could be used to voice chords of greater harmonic complexity, and it had a somewhat more muted tone that blended well with the upright bass, which, by this time, had almost completely replaced the tuba as the dominant bass instrument in jazz.\nLate 1930s-1960s.\nDuring the late 1930s and through the 1940s\u2014the heyday of big band jazz and swing music\u2014the guitar was an important rhythm section instrument. Some guitarists, such as Freddie Green of Count Basie's band, developed a guitar-specific style of accompaniment. Few of the big bands, however, featured amplified guitar solos, which were done instead in the small combo context. The most important jazz guitar soloists of this period included Django Reinhardt, the Manouche virtuoso; Oscar Moore who was featured with Nat \u201cKing\u201d Cole's trio and Charlie Christian of Benny Goodman's band and sextet who was a major influence despite his death early in 1942 at the age of 25. Also noteworthy was Mike Danzi who performed with the Alex Hyde Orchestra in the United States as well as with several jazz orchestras throughout Germany during the 1930s. \nIt was not until the large-scale emergence of small combo jazz post-WWII that the guitar took off as a versatile instrument which was used both in the rhythm section and as a featured melodic instrument and solo improviser. In the hands of George Barnes, Billy Bauer, Kenny Burrell, Herb Ellis, Barney Kessel, Jimmy Raney, and Tal Farlow, who had absorbed the language of bebop, the guitar began to be seen as a \"serious\" jazz instrument. Improved electric guitars such as Gibson's ES-175 (released in 1949), gave players a larger variety of tonal options. In the 1940s through the 1960s, players such as Wes Montgomery, Joe Pass, Al Caiola Tony Mottola and Jim Hall laid the foundation of what is now known as \"jazz guitar\" playing.\n1970s.\nAs a result of the ubiquity of the guitar in rock and pop bands during the 1960s, jazz guitarists began to pursue rock-based styles and genres, radically changing the face of jazz guitar and developing the style of \"jazz fusion\", which broke out of standard jazz idioms and explored rock, funk, and electronic music. As early as 1967, Larry Coryell and his band The Free Spirits recorded Out of Sight and Sound, a groundbreaking album that was one of the earliest examples of rock music being interpreted and played by jazz musicians. More prevalently, Miles Davis featured George Benson as a soloist on the track \"Paraphernalia\" off of his 1968 album Miles in the Sky, which marked the first example of his long-standing associations with guitarists. Shortly after this, he recruited John McLaughlin to play on In A Silent Way and Bitches Brew, some of the first jazz albums to be called \"fusion\" and the first serious jazz-rock albums. McLaughlin was a veteran of the British blues scene, and had cut his teeth playing with popular blues and rock groups, such as The Graham Bond Quartet, The Rolling Stones, and Georgie Fame and the Blue Flames. McLaughlin was an avowed fan of Jimi Hendrix, and utilized phrasing closer to that of blues and funk guitarists than stereotypical bebop phrasing, and even had a track off of Bitches Brew named after him. He also played with the Tony Williams Lifetime for two years, before departing, radically altering his approach, and founding a new band. Davis would continue experimenting with guitar-based music during the 1970s, spearheaded by experimental soloist Pete Cosey, and rhythm guitarists Reggie Lucas and, for some time, Dominique Gaumont. Cosey made heavy use of effects, including a synthesizer, as well as 10 string guitars and experimental tunings. His work and influence is recognized by several avant-garde guitarists, such as Television guitarist Tom Verlaine.\nThe Mahavishnu Orchestra, the resulting band, broke significant ground in both rock and jazz realms, and was headlined by McLaughlin's newer, more experimental style. His guitar playing began to utilize bends, sustain, and distortion common to blues rock musicians, as well as a vocabulary heavily influenced by Hindustani and Carnatic styles of Indian classical music which had become popular in psychedelic rock. His aggression and virtuosity earned him and his band fame, and he became a dominant force in jazz guitar. Inspired by him, pianist Chick Corea reorganized his Latin jazz band Return to Forever into a guitar-led rock band, first with blues-based guitarist Bill Connors, then with young virtuoso Al Di Meola. Di Meola would also accrue much respect as a soloist, and influenced numerous rock and jazz guitarists after his time.\nMany rock guitarists also began to utilize jazz vocabulary and jazz-based ideas, reflective of progressive rock's convergent evolution with fusion jazz. Yes guitarists Peter Banks and Steve Howe had styles akin to that of many jazz guitarists early on, and helped define Yes's sound apart from other bands. John Goodsall, guitarist for the seminal jazz-rock band Brand X, utilized a fusion guitar style in the context of a progressive rock sound. Most notably, though, was Allan Holdsworth, who played with numerous progressive rock groups and musicians(Soft Machine, Gong, Tempest, Bill Bruford, U.K.) before embarking on a decades-long solo career that saw him become of the most revered soloists in the guitar world. Rather than utilizing standard picking, Holdsworth relied on legato phrasing inspired by horn players like John Coltrane and wildly unique and extremely advanced harmonic ideas. Despite being an \"underground\" musician and getting very little commercial success, Holdsworth inspired several guitarists over the years, most particularly, Eddie Van Halen.\n1980s\u20132000s.\nBy the early 1980s, the radical experiments of early 1970s-era fusion gave way to a more radio-friendly sounds of smooth jazz. Guitarist Pat Metheny mixed the sounds of rock, blues, country, and \u201cworld\u201d music, while still maintaining a strong foundation in bebop and cool jazz, playing both a flat-top acoustic guitar and an electric guitar with a softer, more mellow tone which was sweetened with a shimmering effect known as \u201cchorusing\". During the 1980s, a neo-traditional school of jazz sought to reconnect with the past. In keeping with such an aesthetic, young guitarists of this era sought a clean and round tone, and they often played traditional hollow-body arch-top guitars without electronic effects, frequently through vacuum tube amplifiers.\nAs players such as Bobby Broom, Peter Bernstein, Howard Alden, Russell Malone, and Mark Whitfield revived the sounds of traditional jazz guitar, there was also a resurgence of archtop luthierie (guitar-making). By the early 1990s many small independent luthiers began making archtop guitars. In the 2000s, jazz guitar playing continues to change. Some guitarists incorporate a Latin jazz influence, acid jazz-style dance club music uses samples from Wes Montgomery, and guitarists such as Bill Frisell continue to defy categorization.\nTypes of guitars.\nArchtop guitars.\n While jazz can be played on any type of guitar, from an acoustic instrument to a solid-bodied electric guitar such as a Fender Stratocaster, the full-depth archtop guitar has become known as the prototypical \"jazz guitar.\" Archtop guitars are steel-string acoustic guitars with a big soundbox, arched top, violin-style f-holes, a \"floating bridge\" and magnetic or piezoelectric pickups. Early makers of jazz guitars included Gibson, Epiphone, D'Angelico and Stromberg. The electric guitar is plugged into a guitar amplifier to make it sound loud enough for performance. Guitar amplifiers have equalizer controls that allow the guitarist to change the tone of the instrument, by emphasizing or de-emphasizing certain frequency bands. The use of reverb effects, often included in guitar amplifiers, has long been part of the jazz guitar sound. Particularly since the 1970s jazz fusion era, some jazz guitarists have also used effects pedals such as overdrive pedals, chorus pedals and wah pedals.\nThe earliest guitars used in jazz were acoustic, later superseded by a typical electric configuration of two humbucking pickups. In the 1990s, there was a resurgence of interest among jazz guitarists in acoustic archtop guitars with floating pickups. The original acoustic archtop guitars were designed to enhance volume: for that reason they were constructed for use with relatively heavy guitar strings. Even after electrification became the norm, jazz guitarists continued to fit strings of 0.012\" gauge or heavier for reasons of tone, and also prefer flatwound strings. The characteristic arched top can be made of a solid piece of wood that is carved into the arched shape, or a piece of laminated wood (essentially a type of plywood) that is pressed into shape. Spruce is often used for tops, and maple for backs. Archtop guitars can be mass-produced, such as the Ibanez Artcore series, or handmade by luthiers such as Robert Benedetto.\nMusical elements.\nRhythm.\nJazz rhythm guitar often consists of very textural, odd-meter playing that includes generous use of exotic, difficult-to-fret chords. In 4/4 timing, it is common to play 2.5 beat intervals such as on the 2 and then the half beat or \"and\" after 4. Jazz guitarists may play chords \"ahead\" of the beat, by playing the chord a swung eighth note before the actual chord change. Chords are not generally played in a repetitive rhythmic fashion, like a rock rhythm guitarist would play.\nHarmony.\nJazz guitarists use their knowledge of harmony and jazz theory to create jazz chord \"voicings,\" which emphasize the 3rd and 7th notes of the chord. Some more sophisticated chord voicings also include the 9th, 11th, and 13th notes of the chord. In some modern jazz styles, dominant 7th chords in a tune may contain altered 9ths (either flattened by a semitone, which is called a \"flat 9th\", or sharpened by a semitone, which is called a \"sharp 9th\"); 11ths (sharpened by a semitone, which is called a \"sharp 11th\"); 13ths (typically flattened by a semitone, which is called a \"flat 13th\").\nJazz guitarists need to learn about a range of different chords, including major 7th, major 6th, minor 7th, minor/major 7th, dominant 7th, diminished, half-diminished, and augmented chords. As well, they need to learn about chord transformations (e.g., altered chords, such as \"alt dominant chords\" described above), chord substitutions, and re-harmonization techniques. Some jazz guitarists use their knowledge of jazz scales and chords to provide a walking bass-style accompaniment.\nJazz guitarists learn to perform these chords over the range of different chord progressions used in jazz, such as the ubiquitous ii-V-I progression, the jazz-style blues progression (which, in contrast to a blues-style 12 bar progression, may have two or more chord changes per bar) the minor jazz-style blues form, the I-vi-ii-V based \"rhythm changes\" progression, and the variety of modulation-rich chord progressions used in jazz ballads, and jazz standards. Guitarists may also learn to use the chord types, strumming styles, and effects pedals (e.g., chorus effect or fuzzbox) used in 1970s-era jazz-Latin, jazz-funk, and jazz-rock fusion music.\nMelody.\nJazz guitarists integrate the basic building blocks of scales and arpeggio patterns into balanced rhythmic and melodic phrases that make up a cohesive solo. Jazz guitarists often try to imbue their melodic phrasing with the sense of natural breathing and legato phrasing used by horn players such as saxophone players. As well, a jazz guitarists' solo improvisations have to have a rhythmic drive and \"timefeel\" that creates a sense of \"swing\" and \"groove.\" The most experienced jazz guitarists learn to play with different \"timefeels\" such as playing \"ahead of the beat\" or \"behind the beat,\" to create or release tension.\nAnother aspect of the jazz guitar style is the use of stylistically appropriate ornaments, such as grace notes, slides, and muted notes. Each subgenre or era of jazz has different ornaments that are part of the style of that subgenre or era. Jazz guitarists usually learn the appropriate ornamenting styles by listening to prominent recordings from a given style or jazz era. Some jazz guitarists also borrow ornamentation techniques from other jazz instruments, such as Wes Montgomery's borrowing of playing melodies in parallel octaves, which is a jazz piano technique. Jazz guitarists also have to learn how to add in passing tones, use \"guide tones\" and chord tones from the chord progression to structure their improvisations.\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, with jazz-rock fusion guitar playing, jazz guitarists incorporated rock guitar soloing approaches, such as riff-based soloing and usage of pentatonic and blues scale patterns. Some guitarists used Jimi Hendrix-influenced distortion and wah-wah effects to get a sustained, heavy tone, or even used rapid-fire guitar shredding techniques, such as tapping and tremolo bar bending. Guitarist Al Di Meola, who started his career with Return to Forever in 1974, was one of the first guitarists to perform in a \"shred\" style, a technique later used in rock and heavy metal playing. Di Meola used alternate-picking to perform very rapid sequences of notes in his solos.\nImprovisation.\nWhen jazz guitar players improvise, they use the scales, modes, and arpeggios associated with the chords in a tune's chord progression. The approach to improvising has changed since the earliest eras of jazz guitar. During the Swing era, many soloists improvised \"by ear\" by embellishing the melody with ornaments and passing notes. However, during the bebop era, the rapid tempo and complicated chord progressions made it increasingly harder to play \"by ear.\" Along with other improvisers, such as saxes and piano players, bebop-era jazz guitarists began to improvise over the chord changes using scales (whole tone scale, chromatic scale, etc.) and arpeggios. Jazz guitar players tend to improvise around chord/scale relationships, rather than reworking the melody, possibly due to their familiarity with chords resulting from their comping role. A source of melodic ideas for improvisation is transcribing improvised solos from recordings. This provides jazz guitarists with a source of \"licks\", melodic phrases and ideas they incorporate either intact or in variations, and is an established way of learning from the previous generations of players.\nPlaying styles.\nBig band rhythm.\nIn jazz big bands, popular during the 1930s and 1940s, the guitarist is considered an integral part of the rhythm section (guitar, drums and bass). They usually played a regular four strums to the bar, although an amount of harmonic improvisation is possible. Freddie Green, guitarist in the Count Basie orchestra, was a noted exponent of this style. The harmonies are often minimal; for instance, the root note is often omitted on the assumption that it will be supplied by the bassist.\nSmall group comping.\nWhen jazz guitarists play chords underneath a song's melody or another musician's solo improvisations, it is called \"comping\", short for \"accompanying\". The accompanying style in most jazz styles differs from the way chordal instruments accompany in many popular styles of music. In many popular styles of music, such as rock and pop, the rhythm guitarist usually performs the chords in rhythmic fashion which sets out the beat or groove of a tune. In contrast, in many modern jazz styles within smaller groups, the guitarist plays much more sparsely, intermingling periodic chords and delicate voicings into pauses in the melody or solo, and using periods of silence. Jazz guitarists commonly use a wide variety of inversions when comping, rather than only using standard voicings.\nChord-melody and unaccompanied soloing.\nIn this style, the guitarist aims to render an entire song \u2014 harmony, melody and bass \u2014 in something like the way a classical guitarist or pianist can. Chord roots cannot be left to the bassist in this style. Chords themselves can be used sparsely or more densely, depending on both the individual player and his or her arrangement of a particular piece. In the sparse style, a full chord is often played only at the beginning of a melodic phrase. The denser chordal textures, in contrast, approach chord soloing (see below). A third approach is to maintain a steady, busy bass-line, like a New Orleans pianist. Here, no more than two or three notes are played at a time, and the full harmony is indicated by arpeggiation. Exponents of this style often come from a country, folk or ragtime background, such as Chet Atkins, although it is also sometimes employed by straight-ahead jazz practitioners, for instance Martin Taylor. Chord-melody is often played with a plectrum (see Tal Farlow, George Benson and others); whereas fingerstyle, as practised by Joe Pass, George van Eps, Ted Greene, Robert Conti, Lenny Breau or hybrid picking as practised by Ed Bickert, Laszlo Sirsom and others allows for a more complex, polyphonic approach to unaccompanied soloing.\n\"Blowing\" or single-note soloing.\nEddie Lang and Lonnie Johnson were two of the earliest practitioners of single note improvised solos. Both played with Louis Armstrong and other leading jazz and blues musicians of the 1920s and 1930s. In later years Charlie Christian and Django Reinhardt, the former on electric guitar and the latter playing forcefully on an acoustic guitar, are acknowledged as the first soloists to put jazz guitar improvisation on an equal footing with that of other instruments. Over the years, jazz guitarists have been able to solo in standard jazz idioms, such as bebop, cool jazz and so on, while in also absorbing influences from rock guitarists, such as the use of electronic effects.\nChord soloing.\nJazz guitarists are not limited to single note improvisation. When working with accompaniment, chord solos are created by improvising chords (harmony) and melody simultaneously, usually in the upper register on strings 1,2,3 and 4. Wes Montgomery was noted for playing successive choruses in single notes, then octaves and finally a chord solo - this can be heard in his improvisation on the standard Lover Man (Oh, Where Can You Be?). When playing without accompaniment, jazz guitarists may create chord solos by playing bass, melody and chords, individually or simultaneously, on any or all strings - such as the work of Lenny Breau, Joe Pass, Martin Taylor and others. This technique can also be incorporated into unaccompanied soloing: for instance Django Reinhardt's \"improvisations\", as he called his solo pieces.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16142", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16142", "title": "James Watt", "text": "Scottish inventor, engineer and chemist (1736\u20131819)\nJames Watt (; 30 January 1736 \u2013 25 August 1819) was a Scottish inventor, engineer and chemist who improved on Thomas Newcomen's 1712 Newcomen steam engine with his Watt steam engine in 1776, which was fundamental to the changes brought by the Industrial Revolution in both his native Great Britain and the rest of the world.\nWhile working as an instrument maker at the University of Glasgow, Watt became interested in the technology of steam engines. At the time engineers such as John Smeaton were aware of the inefficiencies of Newcomen's engine and aimed to improve it. Watt's insight was to realise that contemporary engine designs wasted a great deal of energy by repeatedly cooling and reheating the cylinder. Watt introduced a design enhancement, the separate condenser, which avoided this waste of energy and radically improved the power, efficiency, and cost-effectiveness of steam engines. Eventually, he adapted his engine to produce rotary motion, greatly broadening its use beyond pumping water.\nWatt attempted to commercialise his invention, but experienced great financial difficulties until he entered a partnership with Matthew Boulton in 1775. The new firm of Boulton and Watt was eventually highly successful and Watt became a wealthy man. In his retirement, Watt continued to develop new inventions though none was as significant as his steam engine work.\nAs Watt developed the concept of horsepower, the SI unit of power, the watt, was named after him.\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nJames Watt was born on 19 January 1736 in Greenock, Renfrewshire, the eldest of the five surviving children of Agnes Muirhead (1703\u20131755) and James Watt (1698\u20131782). Watt was baptised on 25 January 1736 at Old West Kirk, in Greenock. His mother came from a distinguished family, was well educated and said to be of forceful character, while his father was a shipwright, ship owner and contractor, and served as the Greenock's chief baillie in 1751. The Watt family's wealth came in part from Watt's father's trading in slaves and slave-produced goods. \nWatt's parents were Presbyterians and strong Covenanters, but despite his religious upbringing he later became a deist. Watt's grandfather, Thomas Watt (1642\u20131734), was a teacher of mathematics, surveying and navigation and baillie to the Baron of Cartsburn.\nInitially, Watt was educated at home by his mother, later going on to attend Greenock Grammar School. There he exhibited an aptitude for mathematics, while Latin and Greek failed to interest him.\nWatt is said to have suffered prolonged bouts of ill-health as a child and from frequent headaches all his life.\nAfter leaving school, Watt worked in the workshops of his father's businesses, demonstrating considerable dexterity and skill in creating engineering models. After his father suffered unsuccessful business ventures, Watt left Greenock to seek employment in Glasgow as a mathematical instrument maker.\nWhen he was 18, Watt's mother died and his father's health began to fail. Watt travelled to London and was able to obtain a period of training as an instrument maker for a year (1755\u201356), then returned to Scotland, settling in the major commercial city of Glasgow, intent on setting up his own instrument-making business. He was still very young and, having not had a full apprenticeship, did not have the usual connections via a former master to establish himself as a journeyman instrument maker.\nWatt was saved from this impasse by the arrival from Jamaica of astronomical instruments bequeathed by Alexander MacFarlane to the University of Glasgow \u2013 instruments that required expert attention. Watt restored them to working order and was remunerated. These instruments were eventually installed in the Macfarlane Observatory. Subsequently, three professors offered him the opportunity to set up a small workshop within the university. It was initiated in 1757 and two of the professors, the physicist and chemist Joseph Black as well as the famed economist Adam Smith, became Watt's friends.\nAt first, he worked on maintaining and repairing scientific instruments used in the university, helping with demonstrations, and expanding the production of quadrants. He made and repaired brass reflecting quadrants, parallel rulers, scales, parts for telescopes, and barometers, among other things.\nBiographers such as Samuel Smiles assert that Watt struggled to establish himself in Glasgow due to opposition from the Trades House, but this has been disputed by other historians, such as . The records from this period are fragmentary, but while it is clear that Watt encountered opposition, he was nevertheless able to work and trade as a skilled metal worker, suggesting that the Incorporation of Hammermen were satisfied that he met their requirements for membership, or that Watt managed to avoid their outright opposition.\nIn 1759, he formed a partnership with John Craig, an architect and businessman, to manufacture and sell a line of products including musical instruments and toys. This partnership lasted for the next six years, and employed up to 16 workers. Craig died in 1765. One employee, Alex Gardner, eventually took over the business, which lasted into the 20th century.\nIn 1764, Watt married his cousin Margaret (Peggy) Miller, with whom he had 5 children, 2 of whom lived to adulthood: James Jr. (1769\u20131848) and Margaret (1767\u20131796). His wife died in childbirth in 1773. In 1777, he married again, to Ann MacGregor, daughter of a Glasgow dye-maker, with whom he had 2 children: Gregory (1777\u20131804), who became a geologist and mineralogist, and Janet (1779\u20131794). Ann died in 1832. Between 1777 and 1790 he lived in Regent Place, Birmingham.\nScientific studies and inventions.\nWatt and the kettle.\nThere is a popular story that Watt was inspired to invent the steam engine by seeing a kettle boiling, the steam forcing the lid to rise and thus showing Watt the power of steam. This story is told in many forms; in some Watt is a young lad, in others he is older, sometimes it's his mother's kettle, sometimes his aunt's, suggesting that it may be apocryphal. In any event, Watt did not \"invent\" the steam engine, but significantly \"improved the efficiency\" of the existing Newcomen engine by adding a separate condenser, consistent with the now-familiar principles of thermal efficiency. The story was possibly created by Watt's son, James Watt, Jr., who was determined to preserve and embellish his father's legacy. In this light, it can be seen as akin to the story of Isaac Newton and the falling apple and his discovery of gravity.\nAlthough likely a myth, the story of Watt and the kettle has a basis in fact. In trying to understand the thermodynamics of heat and steam, James Watt carried out many laboratory experiments and his diaries record that in conducting these, he used a kettle as a boiler to generate steam.\nEarly experiments with steam.\nIn 1759 Watt's friend John Robison called his attention to the use of steam as a source of motive power. The design of the Newcomen engine, in use for almost 50 years for pumping water from mines, had hardly changed from its first implementation. Watt began to experiment with steam, though he had never seen an operating steam engine. He tried constructing a model; it failed to work satisfactorily, but he continued his experiments and began to read everything he could about the subject. He came to realise the importance of latent heat\u2014the thermal energy released or absorbed during a constant-temperature process\u2014in understanding the engine, which, unknown to Watt, his friend Joseph Black had previously discovered years before. Understanding of the steam engine was in a very primitive state, for the science of thermodynamics would not be formalised for nearly another 100 years.\nIn 1763, Watt was asked to repair a model Newcomen engine belonging to the university. Even after repair, the engine barely worked. After much experimentation, Watt demonstrated that about three-quarters of the thermal energy of the steam was being consumed in heating the engine cylinder on every cycle. This energy was wasted because, later in the cycle, cold water was injected into the cylinder to condense the steam to reduce its pressure. Thus, by repeatedly heating and cooling the cylinder, the engine wasted most of its thermal energy rather than converting it into mechanical energy.\nWatt's critical insight, arrived at in May 1765 as he crossed Glasgow Green park, was to cause the steam to condense in a separate chamber apart from the piston, and to maintain the temperature of the cylinder at the same temperature as the injected steam by surrounding it with a \"steam jacket\". Thus, very little energy was absorbed by the cylinder on each cycle, making more available to perform useful work. Watt had a working model later that same year.\nDespite a potentially workable design, there were still substantial difficulties in constructing a full-scale engine. This required more capital, some of which came from Black. More substantial backing came from John Roebuck, the founder of the celebrated Carron Iron Works near Falkirk, with whom he now formed a partnership. Roebuck lived at Kinneil House in Bo'ness, during which time Watt worked at perfecting his steam engine in a cottage adjacent to the house. The shell of the cottage, and a very large part of one of his projects, still exist to the rear.\nThe principal difficulty was in machining the piston and cylinder. The ironmasters at Coalbrookdale had cast and bored cylinders for Newcomen engines for decades, but a cylinder procured from them by William Small for the Kinneil engine proved unsatisfactory. Watt's engine needed a piston that was air tight, whereas Newcomen engines used a little water above the piston, so the seal only had to be water tight. Much capital was spent in pursuing a patent on Watt's invention. Strapped for resources, Watt was forced to take up employment\u2014first as a surveyor, then as a civil engineer\u2014for 8 years.\nRoebuck went bankrupt, and Matthew Boulton, who owned the Soho Manufactory works near Birmingham, acquired his patent rights. An extension of the patent to 1800 was successfully obtained in 1775.\nThrough Boulton, Watt finally had access to some of the best iron workers in the world. The difficulty of the manufacture of a large cylinder with a tightly fitting piston was solved by John Wilkinson, who had developed precision boring techniques for cannon making at Bersham, near Wrexham, North Wales. Watt and Boulton formed a hugely successful partnership, Boulton and Watt, which lasted for the next 25 years.\nFirst engines.\nIn 1776, the first engines were installed and working in commercial enterprises. These first engines were used to power pumps and produced only reciprocating motion to move the pump rods at the bottom of the shaft. The design was commercially successful, and for the next five years, Watt was very busy installing more engines, mostly in Cornwall, for pumping water out of mines.\nBoulton and Watt did not have their own foundry until Soho foundry opened in 1795, so the main castings and cylinders were made by others according to drawings made by Watt, who served in the role of consulting engineer. The erection of the engine and its shakedown was supervised by Watt, at first, and then by men in the firm's employ, with the actual work being accomplished by the purchaser of the engine. Supervising erectors included at various times William Murdoch, John Rennie, William Playfair, John Southern, Logan Henderson, James Lawson, William Brunton, Isaac Perrins, and others.\nThese were large machines. The first, for example, had a cylinder with a diameter of 50\u00a0inches and an overall height of about 24 feet, and required the construction of a dedicated building to house it. Boulton and Watt charged an annual payment, equal to one-third of the value of the coal saved in comparison to a Newcomen engine performing the same work.\nThe field of application for the invention was greatly widened when Boulton urged Watt to convert the reciprocating motion of the piston to produce rotational power for grinding, weaving and milling. Although a crank seemed the obvious solution to the conversion, Watt and Boulton were stymied by a patent for this, whose holder, James Pickard and his associates proposed to cross-license the external condenser. Watt adamantly opposed this and they circumvented the patent by their sun and planet gear in 1781.\nOver the next six years, he made other improvements and modifications to the steam engine. A double-acting engine, in which the steam acted alternately on both sides of the piston, was one. He described methods for working the steam \"expansively\" (i.e., using steam at pressures well above atmospheric). A compound engine, which connected two or more engines, was described. Two more patents were granted for these in 1781 and 1782. Numerous other improvements that made for easier manufacture and installation were continually implemented. One of these included the use of the steam indicator which produced an informative plot of the pressure in the cylinder against its volume, which he kept as a trade secret. Another important invention, one which Watt was most proud of, was the parallel motion linkage, which was essential in double-acting engines as it produced the straight line motion required for the cylinder rod and pump, from the connected rocking beam, whose end moves in a circular arc. This was patented in 1784. A throttle valve to control the power of the engine, and a centrifugal governor, patented in 1788, to keep it from \"running away\" were very important. These improvements taken together produced an engine which was up to five times as fuel efficient as the Newcomen engine.\nBecause of the danger of exploding boilers, which were in a very primitive stage of development, and the ongoing issues with leaks, Watt restricted his use of high pressure steam\u00a0\u2013 all of his engines used steam at near atmospheric pressure.\nPatent trials.\nEdward Bull started constructing engines for Boulton and Watt in Cornwall in 1781. By 1792, he had started making engines of his own design, but which contained a separate condenser, and so infringed Watt's patents. Two brothers, Jabez Carter Hornblower and Jonathan Hornblower Jnr also started to build engines about the same time. Others began to modify Newcomen engines by adding a condenser, and the mine owners in Cornwall became convinced that Watt's patent could not be enforced. They started to withhold payments to Boulton and Watt, which by 1795 had fallen on hard times. Of the total \u00a321,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 as of 2023) owed, only \u00a32,500 had been received. Watt was forced to go to court to enforce his claims.\nHe first sued Bull in 1793. The jury found for Watt, but the question of whether or not the original specification of the patent was valid was left to another trial. In the meantime, injunctions were issued against the infringers, forcing their payments of the royalties to be placed in escrow. The trial on determining the validity of the specifications which was held in the following year was inconclusive, but the injunctions remained in force and the infringers, except for Jonathan Hornblower, all began to settle their cases. Hornblower was soon brought to trial in 1799, and the verdict of the four was decisively in favour of Watt. Their friend John Wilkinson, who had solved the problem of boring an accurate cylinder, was a particularly grievous case. He had erected about 20 engines without Boulton's and Watts' knowledge. They finally agreed to settle the infringement in 1796. Boulton and Watt never collected all that was owed them, but the disputes were all settled directly between the parties or through arbitration. These trials were extremely costly in both money and time, but ultimately were successful for the firm.\nCopying machine.\nBefore 1780, there was no good method for making copies of letters or drawings. The only method sometimes used was a mechanical one using multiple linked pens. Watt at first experimented with improving this method, but soon gave up on this approach because it was so cumbersome. He instead decided to try to physically transfer ink from the front of the original to the back of another sheet, moistened with a solvent, and pressed to the original. The second sheet had to be thin, so that the ink could be seen through it when the copy was held up to the light, thus reproducing the original exactly.\nWatt started to develop the process in 1779, and made many experiments to formulate the ink, select the thin paper, to devise a method for wetting the special thin paper, and to make a press suitable for applying the correct pressure to effect the transfer. All of these required much experimentation, but he soon had enough success to patent the process a year later. Watt formed another partnership with Boulton (who provided financing) and James Keir (to manage the business) in a firm called James Watt and Co. The perfection of the invention required much more development work before it could be routinely used by others, but this was carried out over the next few years. Boulton and Watt gave up their shares to their sons in 1794. It became a commercial success and was widely used in offices even into the 20th century.\nChemical experiments.\nFrom an early age, Watt was very interested in chemistry. In late 1786, while in Paris, he witnessed an experiment by Claude Louis Berthollet in which he reacted hydrochloric acid with manganese dioxide to produce chlorine. He had already found that an aqueous solution of chlorine could bleach textiles, and had published his findings, which aroused great interest among many potential rivals. When Watt returned to Britain, he began experiments along these lines with hopes of finding a commercially viable process. He discovered that a mixture of salt, manganese dioxide and sulphuric acid could produce chlorine, which Watt believed might be a cheaper method. He passed the chlorine into a weak solution of alkali, and obtained a turbid solution that appeared to have good bleaching properties. He soon communicated these results to James McGrigor, his father-in-law, who was a bleacher in Glasgow. Otherwise, he tried to keep his method a secret.\nWith McGrigor and his wife Annie, he started to scale up the process, and in March 1788, McGrigor was able to bleach of cloth to his satisfaction. About this time, Berthollet discovered the salt and sulphuric acid process, and published it, so it became public knowledge. Many others began to experiment with improving the process, which still had many shortcomings, not the least of which was the problem of transporting the liquid product. Watt's rivals soon overtook him in developing the process, and he dropped out of the race. It was not until 1799, when Charles Tennant patented a process for producing solid bleaching powder (calcium hypochlorite) that it became a commercial success.\nBy 1794, Watt had been chosen by Thomas Beddoes to manufacture apparatuses to produce, clean and store gases for use in the new Pneumatic Institution at Hotwells in Bristol. Watt continued to experiment with various gases, but by 1797, the medical uses for the \"factitious airs\" (artificial gases) had come to a dead end.\nPersonality.\nWatt combined theoretical knowledge of science with the ability to apply it practically. The chemist Humphry Davy said of him, \"Those who consider James Watt only as a great practical mechanic form a very erroneous idea of his character; he was equally distinguished as a natural philosopher and a chemist, and his inventions demonstrate his profound knowledge of those sciences, and that peculiar characteristic of genius, the union of them for practical application\".\nHe was greatly respected by other prominent men of the Industrial Revolution. He was an important member of the Lunar Society of Birmingham, and was a much sought-after conversationalist and companion, always interested in expanding his horizons. His personal relationships with his friends and business partners were always congenial and long-lasting.\nAccording to Lord Liverpool (Prime Minister of the UK),\nA more excllent and amikable man in all the relations of life I believe never existed.\nWatt was a prolific correspondent. During his years in Cornwall, he wrote long letters to Boulton several times per week. He was averse to publishing his results in, for example, the \"Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society\" however, and instead preferred to communicate his ideas in patents. He was an excellent draughtsman.\nHe was a rather poor businessman, and especially hated bargaining and negotiating terms with those who sought to use the steam engine. In a letter to William Small in 1772, Watt confessed that \"he would rather face a loaded cannon than settle an account or make a bargain.\" Until he retired, he was always very concerned about his financial affairs, and was something of a worrier. His health was often poor and he suffered frequent nervous headaches and depression. When he retired in 1800, he became a rich enough man to pass the business on to his sons.\nSoho Foundry.\nAt first, the partnership made the drawings and specifications for the engines, and supervised the work to erect them on the customers' property. They produced almost none of the parts themselves. Watt did most of his work at his home in Harper's Hill in Birmingham, while Boulton worked at the Soho Manufactory. Gradually, the partners began to actually manufacture more and more of the parts, and by 1795, they purchased a property about a mile away from the Soho Manufactory, on the banks of the Birmingham Canal, to establish a new foundry for the manufacture of the engines. The Soho Foundry formally opened in 1796 at a time when Watt's sons, Gregory and James Jr. were heavily involved in the management of the enterprise. In 1800, the year of Watt's retirement, the firm made a total of 41 engines.\nLater years.\nWatt retired in 1800, the same year that his fundamental patent and partnership with Boulton expired. The famous partnership was transferred to the men's sons, Matthew Robinson Boulton and James Watt, Junior. The long-time firm engineer William Murdoch was soon made a partner and the firm prospered.\nWatt continued to invent other things before and during his semi-retirement. Within his home in Handsworth, Staffordshire, Watt made use of a garret room as a workshop, and it was here that he worked on many of his inventions. Among other things, he invented and constructed machines for copying sculptures and medallions which worked very well, but which he never patented. One of the first sculptures he produced with the machine was a small head of his old professor friend Adam Smith. He maintained his interest in civil engineering and was a consultant on several significant projects. He proposed, for example, a method for constructing a flexible pipe to be used for pumping water under the River Clyde at Glasgow.\nHe and his second wife travelled to France and Germany, and he purchased an estate in mid-Wales at Doldowlod House, one mile south of Llanwrthwl, which he much improved.\nIn 1816, he took a trip on the paddle-steamer \"Comet\", a product of his inventions, to revisit his home town of Greenock.\nHe died on 25 August 1819 at his home \"Heathfield Hall\" near Handsworth in Staffordshire (now part of Birmingham) at the age of 83. He was buried on 2 September in the graveyard of St Mary's Church, Handsworth. The church has since been extended and his grave is now inside the church.\nFamily.\nOn 14 July 1764, Watt married his cousin Margaret Miller (d. 1773). They had two children, Margaret (1767\u20131796) and James (1769\u20131848). In 1791, their daughter married James Miller. In September 1773, while Watt was working in the Scottish Highlands, he learned that his wife, who was pregnant with their third child, was seriously ill. He immediately returned home but found that she had died and their child was stillborn.\nOn 29 July 1776, he married Ann MacGregor (d. 1832).\nFreemasonry.\nHe was Initiated into Scottish Freemasonry in The Glasgow Royal Arch Lodge, No. 77, in 1763. The Lodge ceased to exist in 1810. A Masonic Lodge was named after him in his home town of Glasgow \u2013 Lodge James Watt, No. 1215.\nMurdoch's contributions.\nWilliam Murdoch joined Boulton and Watt in 1777. At first, he worked in the pattern shop in Soho, but soon he was erecting engines in Cornwall. He became an important part of the firm and made many contributions to its success including important inventions of his own.\nJohn Griffiths, who wrote a biography of him in 1992, has argued that Watt's discouragement of Murdoch's work with high-pressure steam on his steam road locomotive experiments delayed its development: Watt rightly believed that boilers of the time would be unsafe at higher pressures.\nWatt patented the application of the sun and planet gear to steam in 1781 and a steam locomotive in 1784, both of which have strong claims to have been invented by Murdoch. The patent was never contested by Murdoch, however, and Boulton and Watt's firm continued to use the sun and planet gear in their rotative engines, even long after the patent for the crank expired in 1794. Murdoch was made a partner of the firm in 1810, where he remained until his retirement 20 years later at the age of 76.\nLegacy.\nAs one author states, Watt's improvements to the steam engine \"converted it from a prime mover of marginal efficiency into the mechanical workhorse of the Industrial Revolution\".\nHonours.\nWatt was much honoured in his own time. In 1784, he was made a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and was elected as a member of the Batavian Society for Experimental Philosophy, of Rotterdam, the Netherlands, in 1787. In 1789, he was elected to the elite group, the Smeatonian Society of Civil Engineers. In 1806, he was conferred the honorary Doctor of Laws by the University of Glasgow. The French Academy elected him a Corresponding Member and he was made a Foreign Associate in 1814.\nThe watt is named after James Watt for his contributions to the development of the steam engine, and was adopted by the Second Congress of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1889 and by the 11th General Conference on Weights and Measures in 1960 as the unit of power incorporated in the International System of Units (or \"SI\").\nOn 29 May 2009, the Bank of England announced that Boulton and Watt would appear on a new \u00a350 note. The design is the first to feature a dual portrait on a Bank of England note, and presents the two industrialists side by side with images of Watt's steam engine and Boulton's Soho Manufactory. Quotations attributed to each of the men are inscribed on the note: \"I sell here, sir, what all the world desires to have\u2014POWER\" (Boulton) and \"I can think of nothing else but this machine\" (Watt). The inclusion of Watt is the second time that a Scot has featured on a Bank of England note (the first was Adam Smith on the 2007 issue \u00a320 note). In September 2011, it was announced that the notes would enter circulation on 2 November.\nIn 2011, he was one of seven inaugural inductees to the Scottish Engineering Hall of Fame.\nMemorials.\nWatt was buried in the grounds of St. Mary's Church, Handsworth, in Birmingham. Later expansion of the church, over his grave, means that his tomb is now buried \"inside\" the church.\nThe garret room workshop that Watt used in his retirement was left, locked and untouched, until 1853, when it was first viewed by his biographer J. P. Muirhead. Thereafter, it was occasionally visited, but left untouched, as a kind of shrine. A proposal to have it transferred to the Patent Office came to nothing. When the house was due to be demolished in 1924, the room and all its contents were presented to the Science Museum, where it was recreated in its entirety. It remained on display for visitors for many years, but was walled-off when the gallery it was housed in closed. The workshop remained intact, and preserved, and in March 2011 was put on public display as part of a new permanent Science Museum exhibition, \"James Watt and our world\".\nThe approximate location of James Watt's birth in Greenock is commemorated by a statue. Other memorials in Greenock include street names and the Watt Memorial Library, which was begun in 1816 with Watt's donation of scientific books, and developed as part of the Watt Institution by his son (which ultimately became the James Watt College). Taken over by the local authority in 1974, the library now also houses the local history collection and archives of Inverclyde, and is dominated by a large seated statue in the vestibule. Watt is additionally commemorated by statuary in George Square, Glasgow and Princes Street, Edinburgh, as well as others in Birmingham, where he is also remembered by the Moonstones and a school is named in his honour.\nThe James Watt College has expanded from its original location to include campuses in Kilwinning (North Ayrshire), Finnart Street and The Waterfront in Greenock, and the Sports campus in Largs. Heriot-Watt University near Edinburgh was at one time the School of Arts of Edinburgh, founded in 1821 as the world's first Mechanics Institute, but to commemorate George Heriot, the 16th-century financier to King James VI and I, and James Watt, after Royal Charter the name was changed to Heriot-Watt University. Dozens of university and college buildings (chiefly of science and technology) are named after him. Matthew Boulton's home, Soho House, is now a museum, commemorating the work of both men. The University of Glasgow's Faculty of Engineering has its headquarters in the James Watt Building, which also houses the department of Mechanical Engineering and the department of Aerospace Engineering. The huge painting \"James Watt contemplating the steam engine\" by James Eckford Lauder is now owned by the National Gallery of Scotland.\nThere is a statue of James Watt in Piccadilly Gardens, Manchester and City Square, Leeds.\nA colossal statue of Watt by Francis Legatt Chantrey was placed in Westminster Abbey, and later was moved to St. Paul's Cathedral. On the cenotaph, the inscription reads, in part, \"JAMES WATT ... ENLARGED THE RESOURCES OF HIS COUNTRY, INCREASED THE POWER OF MAN, AND ROSE TO AN EMINENT PLACE AMONG THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS FOLLOWERS OF SCIENCE AND THE REAL BENEFACTORS OF THE WORLD\".\nA bust of Watt is in the Hall of Heroes of the National Wallace Monument in Stirling, Scotland.\nA large statue of Watt \u2013 paired with one of George Stephenson \u2013 adorns the main fa\u00e7ade of Budapest Keleti station. \nThe French Navy submarine was named for Watt.\nPatents.\nWatt was the sole inventor listed on his six patents:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16143", "revid": "7770027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16143", "title": "John Locke", "text": "English philosopher and physician (1632\u20131704)\nJohn Locke (; 29 August 1632 (O.S.) \u2013 28 October 1704 (O.S.)) was an English philosopher and physician, widely regarded as one of the most influential of the Enlightenment thinkers and commonly known as the \"father of liberalism\". Considered one of the first of the British empiricists, following the tradition of Francis Bacon, Locke is equally important to social contract theory. His work greatly affected the development of epistemology and political philosophy.\nHis writings influenced Voltaire, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and many Scottish Enlightenment thinkers, as well as the American Revolutionaries. His contributions to classical republicanism and liberal theory are reflected in the United States Declaration of Independence. Internationally, Locke's political-legal principles continue to have a profound influence on the theory and practice of limited representative government and the protection of basic rights and freedoms under the rule of law.\nLocke's philosophy of mind is often cited as the origin of modern conceptions of personal identity and the psychology of self, figuring prominently in the work of later philosophers, such as Rousseau, David Hume, and Immanuel Kant. He postulated that, at birth, the mind is a blank slate, or \"tabula rasa\". Contrary to Cartesian philosophy based on preexisting concepts, he maintained that we are born without innate ideas, and that knowledge is instead determined only by experience derived from sense perception, a concept now known as empiricism. Locke is often credited for describing private property as a natural right, arguing that when a person\u2014metaphorically\u2014mixes their labour with nature, resources can be removed from the common state of nature.\nEarly life.\nLocke was born on 29 August 1632, in a small thatched cottage by the church in Wrington, Somerset, about from Bristol. He was baptised the same day, as both of his parents were Puritans. Locke's father, also named John, was an attorney who served as clerk to the Justices of the Peace in Chew Magna, and as a captain of cavalry for the Parliamentarian forces during the early part of the English Civil War. His mother was Agnes Keene. Soon after Locke's birth, the family moved to the market town of Pensford, about seven miles south of Bristol, where Locke grew up in a rural Tudor house in Belluton.\nIn 1647, Locke was sent to the prestigious Westminster School in London under the sponsorship of Alexander Popham, a member of Parliament and John Sr.'s former commander. At the age of 16, he was at school just half a mile away from the execution of Charles I; however, the boys were not allowed to go and watch. After completing studies at Westminster, he was admitted to Christ Church, Oxford, in the autumn of 1652 at the age of 20. The dean of the college at the time was John Owen, vice-chancellor of the university.\nAlthough a capable student, Locke was irritated by the undergraduate curriculum of the time. He found the works of modern philosophers, such as Ren\u00e9 Descartes, more interesting than the classical material taught at the university. Through his friend Richard Lower, whom he knew from the Westminster School, Locke was introduced to medicine and the experimental philosophy being pursued at other universities and in the Royal Society, of which he eventually became a member.\nLocke was awarded a bachelor's degree in February 1656 and a master's degree in June 1658. He obtained a bachelor of medicine in February 1675, having studied the subject extensively during his time at Oxford. In addition to Lower, he worked with such noted scientists and thinkers as Robert Boyle, Thomas Willis, and Robert Hooke. In 1666, he met Anthony Ashley Cooper, Lord Ashley, who had come to Oxford seeking treatment for a liver infection. Ashley was impressed with Locke and persuaded him to become part of his retinue. At Oxford, he was exposed to the writings of Islamic scholars, such as Ibn Tufayl's Hayy ibn Yaqdhan translated by Edward Pococke, who influenced his perspectives on philosophy and \"tabula rasa\".\nCareer.\nWork.\nLocke had been looking for a career and in 1667 moved into Ashley's home at Exeter House in London to serve as his personal physician. In London, Locke resumed his medical studies under the tutelage of Thomas Sydenham. Sydenham had a major effect on Locke's natural philosophical thinking\u2014an effect evident in \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding.\" Locke's medical knowledge was put to the test when Ashley's liver infection became life-threatening. Locke coordinated the advice of several physicians and was probably instrumental in persuading Ashley to undergo surgery (then life-threatening in itself) to remove the cyst. Ashley survived and prospered, crediting Locke with saving his life. During this time, Locke served as Secretary of the Board of Trade and Plantations and Secretary to the Lords Proprietors of Carolina, which helped shape his ideas on international trade and economics.\nAshley, as a founder of the Whig movement, exerted great influence on Locke's political ideas. Locke became involved in politics when Ashley became Lord Chancellor in 1672 (Ashley was created 1st Earl of Shaftesbury in 1673). After Shaftesbury fell from favour in 1675, Locke spent some time travelling across France as a tutor and medical attendant to Caleb Banks. He returned to England in 1679 when Shaftesbury's political fortunes took a brief positive turn. Around this time, most likely at Shaftesbury's prompting, Locke composed the bulk of the \"Two Treatises of Government\".\nWhile it was once thought that Locke wrote the \"Treatises\" to defend the Glorious Revolution of 1688, recent scholarship has shown that the work was composed well before that. The work is now viewed as a more general argument against absolute monarchy (particularly as espoused by Robert Filmer and Thomas Hobbes) and for individual consent as the basis of political legitimacy. Although Locke was associated with the influential Whigs, his ideas about natural rights and government are considered quite revolutionary for that period in English history.\nNetherlands.\nLocke fled to the Netherlands in 1683 in the company of Shaftesbury, under strong suspicion of involvement in the Rye House Plot, although there is little evidence to suggest that he was directly involved in the scheme. While in the Netherlands, he lived under the pen-name dr. Van Linden. The philosopher and novelist Rebecca Newberger Goldstein argues that during his five years in Holland, Locke chose his friends \"from among the same freethinking members of dissenting Protestant groups as Spinoza's small group of loyal confidants [Baruch Spinoza had died in 1677], Locke almost certainly met men in Amsterdam who spoke of the ideas of that renegade Jew who ... insisted on identifying himself through his religion of reason alone.\"\nWhile she says that \"Locke's strong empiricist tendencies\" would have \"disinclined him to read a grandly metaphysical work such as Spinoza's \"Ethics\", in other ways he was deeply receptive to Spinoza's ideas, most particularly to the rationalist's well thought out argument for political and religious tolerance and the necessity of the separation of church and state.\" Among the friends he made in the Netherlands are Van Leeuwenhoek and Van Limborch, the leader of the Remonstrants. In the Netherlands, Locke had time to return to his writing, spending a great deal of time working on the \"Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" and composing the \"Letter on Toleration.\"\nReturn to England.\nLocke did not return home until after the Glorious Revolution. He accompanied Mary II back to England in 1689. The bulk of Locke's publishing took place upon his return from exile\u2014\"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\", the \"Two Treatises of Government\" and \"A Letter Concerning Toleration\" all appearing in quick succession. Locke's close friend Lady Masham invited him to join her at Otes, the Mashams' country house in Essex. Although his time there was marked by variable health from asthma attacks, he nevertheless became an intellectual hero of the Whigs. During this period, he discussed matters with such figures as John Dryden and Isaac Newton.\nDeath.\nAfter a lengthy period of poor health, Locke died on 28 October 1704. He is buried in the churchyard of All Saints' Church in High Laver, near Harlow in Essex, where he had lived in the household of Sir Francis Masham since 1691. Locke never married or had children. Events that happened during Locke's lifetime include the English Restoration, the Great Plague of London, the Great Fire of London, the Glorious Revolution and war against France including the Battle of Blenheim just before his death.\nHe did not live long enough to see the Act of Union of 1707, but the thrones of England and Scotland were held in personal union throughout his lifetime. Constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy were in their infancy during Locke's time. Locke has an engraved floor memorial plaque at Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford.\nPhilosophy.\nIn the late 17th and early 18th centuries, Locke's \"Two Treatises\" were rarely cited. Historian Julian Hoppit said of the book \"except among some Whigs, even as a contribution to the intense debate of the 1690s it made little impression and was generally ignored until 1703, though in Oxford in 1695 it was reported to have made 'a great noise'.\" \nJohn Kenyon, in his study of British political debate from 1689 to 1720, has remarked that Locke's theories were \"mentioned so rarely in the early stages of the [Glorious] Revolution, up to 1692, and even less thereafter, unless it was to heap abuse on them\" and that \"no one, including most Whigs, [was] ready for the idea of a notional or abstract contract of the kind adumbrated by Locke\". In contrast, Kenyon adds that Algernon Sidney's \"Discourses Concerning Government\" were \"certainly much more influential than Locke's \"Two Treatises.\"\"\nIn the 50 years after Queen Anne's death in 1714, the \"Two Treatises\" were reprinted only once, except in the collected works of Locke. With the rise of American resistance to British taxation, the \"Second Treatise of Government\" gained a new readership. It was frequently cited in the debates in both America and Britain. The first American printing occurred in 1773 in Boston. \nLocke exercised a profound influence on political philosophy, in particular on modern liberalism. Michael Zuckert has argued that Locke launched liberalism by tempering Hobbesian absolutism and clearly separating the realms of Church and State. He had a strong influence on Voltaire, who called him \"\"le sage\" Locke\". His arguments concerning liberty and the social contract later influenced the written works of Thomas Jefferson. One passage from the \"Second Treatise\" is reproduced verbatim in the Declaration of Independence, the reference to a \"long train of abuses\". Of Locke, Jefferson wrote:\nBacon, Locke and Newton ... I consider them as the three greatest men that have ever lived, without any exception, and as having laid the foundation of those superstructures which have been raised in the Physical and Moral sciences.\nLocke's influence may have been even more profound in the realm of epistemology. He redefined subjectivity, or the \"self\", leading intellectual historians such as Charles Taylor and Jerrold Seigel to argue that Locke's \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" (1689/90) marks the beginning of the modern Western conception of the self. Locke's theory of association heavily influenced the subject matter of modern psychology. At the time, Locke's recognition of two types of ideas, \"simple\" and \"complex\"\u2014and, more importantly, their interaction through association\u2014inspired other philosophers, such as David Hume and George Berkeley, to revise and expand this theory and apply it to explain how humans gain knowledge in the physical world. Locke thought the state's borders and the functioning and enforcement of the existence of the state and its constitution were metaphysically tied to \"the natural rights of the individual\", and this inspired future liberal politicians and philosophers.\nReligious tolerance.\nWriting his \"Letters Concerning Toleration\" (1689\u20131692) in the aftermath of the European wars of religion, Locke formulated a classic reasoning for religious tolerance, in which three arguments are central:\nLocke's position on religious tolerance was influenced by Baptist theologians like John Smyth and Thomas Helwys, who had published tracts demanding freedom of conscience in the early 17th century. Baptist theologian Roger Williams founded the colony of Rhode Island in 1636, where he combined a democratic constitution with unlimited religious freedom. His tract \"The Bloudy Tenent of Persecution for Cause of Conscience\" (1644), which was widely read in the mother country, was a passionate plea for absolute religious freedom and total separation of church and state. Freedom of conscience had had high priority on the theological, philosophical, and political agenda, as Martin Luther refused to recant his beliefs before the Diet of Worms in 1521, unless he would be proved false by the Bible.\nSlavery and child labour.\nLocke's views on slavery were multifaceted. Although he wrote against slavery in general, he was an investor and beneficiary of the slave-trading Royal Africa Company. While secretary to the Earl of Shaftesbury, Locke also participated in drafting the \"Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina\", which established a quasi-feudal aristocracy and gave Carolinian planters absolute power over their enslaved chattel property; the constitutions pledged that \"every freeman of Carolina shall have absolute power and authority over his negro slaves\".\nPhilosopher Martin Cohen observes that Locke, as secretary to the Council of Trade and Plantations and a member of the Board of Trade, was \"one of just half a dozen men who created and supervised both the colonies and their iniquitous systems of servitude\". According to American historian James Farr, Locke never expressed any thoughts about his contradictory opinions of slavery, which Farr ascribes to his personal involvement in the Atlantic slave trade. Locke's positions on slavery have been described as hypocritical, and laying the foundation for the Founding Fathers to hold similarly contradictory thoughts regarding freedom and slavery.\nHistorian Holly Brewer argues that Locke's role in the Constitution of Carolina has been exaggerated and that he was merely paid to revise and make copies of a document that had already been partially written before he became involved; she compares Locke's role to a lawyer writing a will. She states that Locke was paid in Royal African Company stock in lieu of money for his work as a secretary for a governmental sub-committee, and that he sold the stock after a few years. Brewer likewise argues that Locke actively worked to undermine slavery in Virginia while heading a Board of Trade created by William of Orange following the Glorious Revolution. He specifically attacked colonial policy granting land to slave owners and encouraged the baptism and Christian education of the children of enslaved Africans to undercut a major justification of slavery\u2014that they were heathens who possessed no rights.\nIn his \"Two Treatises of Government\", Locke provided a justification for slavery that could never be met, thus rendering invalid all forms of slavery that existed. Moreover, because slavery is invalid, there is a moral injunction to try to throw off and escape from it. Locke also supported child labour. In his \"Essay on the Poor Law\", he discusses the education of the poor; he laments that \"the children of labouring people are an ordinary burden to the parish, and are usually maintained in idleness, so that their labour also is generally lost to the public till they are 12 or 14 years old\". Therefore, he suggests the setting up of \"working schools\" for poor children in each parish in England so that they will be \"from infancy [three years old] inured to work\". He goes on to outline the economics of these schools, arguing not only that they will be profitable for the parish, but also that they will instil a good work ethic in the children.\nAnimals.\nLocke rejected the Cartesian view that animals are mere automata without consciousness. In his \"Essay Concerning Human Understanding\", he argued that animals possess some cognitive faculties, particularly perception and memory, though not abstraction or reasoning in the human sense. Locke maintained that perception is present \"in some degree, in all sorts of animals\", including even oysters and cockles, though he described their sensations as \"dull\". He further held that animals are capable of retaining ideas, but he denied them the capacity for forming abstract or general ideas, which he regarded as a defining feature of human cognition.\nLocke used these observations to challenge Descartes's animal machine doctrine and to support the possibility that matter could think, if God so willed. This hypothesis, that God might superadd thought to matter, allowed Locke to argue that mental faculties could be distributed in varying degrees among animals and humans. Locke sometimes used these arguments rhetorically against theological opponents, but was cautious about committing to the immateriality or immortality of animal souls. Instead, he suggested that attributing mental faculties to animals did not necessitate belief in their immortality, thereby avoiding the theological implications Descartes sought to escape by denying animal sentience altogether.\nGovernment.\nLocke's political theory was founded upon that of social contract. Unlike Thomas Hobbes, Locke believed that human nature is characterised by reason and tolerance. Like Hobbes, Locke believed that human nature allows people to be selfish. This is apparent with the introduction of currency. In a natural state, all people were equal and independent, and everyone had a natural right to defend their \"life, health, liberty, or possessions\". Most scholars trace the phrase \"Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness\" in the American Declaration of Independence to Locke's theory of rights, although other origins have been suggested. \nLike Hobbes, Locke assumed that the sole right to defend in the state of nature was not enough, so people established a civil society to resolve conflicts in a civil way with help from government in a state of society. But Locke never refers to Hobbes by name and may instead have been responding to other writers of the day. Locke also advocated governmental separation of powers and believed that revolution is not only a right but an obligation in some circumstances. These ideas had a profound influence on the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States.\nAccumulation of wealth.\nAccording to Locke, unused property is wasteful and an offence against nature, but, with the introduction of \"durable\" goods, men could exchange their excessive perishable goods for those which would last longer and thus not offend the natural law. In his view, the introduction of money marked the culmination of this process, making possible the unlimited accumulation of property without causing waste through spoilage. He includes gold or silver as money because they may be \"hoarded up without injury to anyone\", as they do not spoil or decay in the hands of the possessor. In his view, the introduction of money eliminates limits to accumulation. Locke stresses that inequality has come about by tacit agreement on the use of money, not by the social contract establishing civil society or the law of land regulating property. Locke was aware of a problem posed by unlimited accumulation, but did not consider it his task. He just implies that government would function to moderate the conflict between the unlimited accumulation of property and a more nearly equal distribution of wealth; he does not say which principles government should apply to solve this problem. Not all elements of his thought form a consistent whole. For example, the labour theory of value in the \"Two Treatises of Government\" stands side by side with the demand-and-supply theory of value developed in a letter he wrote titled \"Some Considerations on the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest and the Raising of the Value of Money\". Moreover, Locke anchors property in labour but, in the end, upholds unlimited accumulation of wealth.\nIdeas.\nEconomics.\nOn price theory.\nLocke's general theory of value and price is a supply-and-demand theory, set out in a letter to a member of parliament in 1691, titled \"Some Considerations on the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest and the Raising of the Value of Money\". In it, he refers to supply as \"quantity\" and demand as \"vent\": \"The price of any commodity rises or falls by the proportion of the number of buyers and sellers ... that which regulates the price ... [of goods] is nothing else but their quantity in proportion to their vent.\" The quantity theory of money forms a special case of this general theory. His idea is based on \"money answers all things\" (Ecclesiastes) or \"rent of money is always sufficient, or more than enough\" and \"varies very little\". Locke concludes that, as far as money is concerned, the demand for it is exclusively regulated by its quantity, regardless of whether the demand is unlimited or constant. He also investigates the determinants of demand and supply. For supply, he explains the value of goods as based on their scarcity and ability to be exchanged and consumed. He explains demand for goods as based on their ability to yield a flow of income. Locke develops an early theory of capitalisation, such as of land, which has value because \"by its constant production of saleable commodities it brings in a certain yearly income\". He considers the demand for money as almost the same as demand for goods or land: it depends on whether money is wanted as medium of exchange. As a medium of exchange, he states that \"money is capable by exchange to procure us the necessaries or conveniences of life\", and for loanable funds \"it comes to be of the same nature with land by yielding a certain yearly income ... or interest\".\nMonetary thoughts.\nLocke distinguishes two functions of money: as a \"counter\" to measure value, and as a \"pledge\" to lay claim to goods. He believes that silver and gold, as opposed to paper money, are the appropriate currency for international transactions. Silver and gold, he says, are treated to have equal value by all of humanity and can thus be treated as a pledge by anyone, while the value of paper money is only valid under the government which issues it.\nLocke argues that a country should seek a favourable balance of trade, lest it fall behind other countries and suffer a loss in its trade. Since the world money stock grows constantly, a country must constantly seek to enlarge its own stock. Locke develops his theory of foreign exchanges, by which in addition to commodity movements, there are also movements in country stock of money, and movements of capital determine exchange rates. He considers the latter less significant and less volatile than commodity movements. As for a country's money stock, if it is large relative to that of other countries, he says it will cause the country's exchange to rise above par, as an export balance would do.\nLocke prepares estimates of the cash requirements for different economic groups (landholders, labourers, and brokers). In each group he posits that the cash requirements are closely related to the length of the pay period. He argues the brokers\u2014the middlemen\u2014whose activities enlarge the monetary circuit and whose profits eat into the earnings of labourers and landholders, have a negative influence on both personal and the public economy to which they supposedly contribute.\nTheory of value and property.\nLocke uses the concept of \"property\" in both broad and narrow terms: broadly, it covers a wide range of human interests and aspirations; more particularly, it refers to material goods. He argues that property is a natural right that is derived from labour. In Chapter V of his \"Second Treatise\", Locke argues that the individual ownership of goods and property is justified by the labour exerted to produce such goods\u2014\"at least where there is enough [land], and as good, left in common for others\" (para. 27)\u2014or to use property to produce goods beneficial to human society.\nLocke states in his \"Second Treatise\" that nature on its own provides little of value to society, implying that the labour expended in the creation of goods gives them their value. From this premise, understood as a \"labour theory of value\", Locke developed a \"labour theory of property\", whereby ownership of property is created by the application of labour. In addition, he believed that property precedes government and government cannot \"dispose of the estates of the subjects arbitrarily\". Karl Marx later critiqued Locke's theory of property in his own social theory.\nThe human mind.\nThe self.\nLocke defines \"the self\" as \"that conscious thinking thing, (whatever substance, made up of whether spiritual, or material, simple, or compounded, it matters not) which is sensible, or conscious of pleasure and pain, capable of happiness or misery, and so is concerned for itself, as far as that consciousness extends\". He does not wholly ignore \"substance\", writing that \"the body too goes to the making the man\". In his \"Essay\", Locke explains the gradual unfolding of this conscious mind. Arguing against both the Augustinian view of man as originally sinful and the Cartesian position, which holds that man innately knows basic logical propositions, Locke posits an 'empty mind', a \"tabula rasa\", which is shaped by experience, and reflections being the two sources of all our ideas. He writes in \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\":\nThis source of ideas every man has wholly within himself; and though it be not sense, as having nothing to do with external objects, yet it is very like it, and might properly enough be called 'internal sense.'\nLocke's \"Some Thoughts Concerning Education\" is an outline on how to educate this mind. Drawing on thoughts expressed in letters written to Mary Clarke and her husband about their son, he expresses the belief that education makes the man\u2014or, more fundamentally, that the mind is an \"empty cabinet\":\nI think I may say that of all the men we meet with, nine parts of ten are what they are, good or evil, useful or not, by their education.\nLocke also wrote, \"the little and almost insensible impressions on our tender infancies have very important and lasting consequences\". He argues that the \"associations of ideas\" one makes when young are more important than those made later because they are the foundation of the \"self\"; they are, put differently, what first mark the \"tabula rasa\". In his \"Essay\", in which both these concepts are introduced, Locke warns, for example, against letting \"a foolish maid\" convince a child that \"goblins and sprites\" are associated with the night, for \"darkness shall ever afterwards bring with it those frightful ideas, and they shall be so joined, that he can no more bear the one than the other\".\nThis theory came to be called \"associationism\". It strongly influenced 18th-century thought, particularly educational theory, as nearly every educational writer warned parents not to allow their children to develop negative associations. It also led to the development of psychology and other new disciplines with David Hartley's attempt to discover a biological mechanism for associationism in his \"Observations on Man\" (1749).\nDream argument.\nLocke was critical of Descartes's version of the dream argument, making the counter-argument that people cannot have physical pain in dreams as they do in waking life.\nReligion.\nReligious beliefs.\nSome scholars have seen Locke's political convictions as based on his religious beliefs. Locke's religious trajectory began in Calvinist trinitarianism, but by the time of the \"Reflections\" (1695) Locke was advocating not just Socinian views on tolerance but also Socinian Christology. Wainwright (1987) notes that in the posthumously published \"Paraphrase\" (1707) Locke's interpretation of one verse, Ephesians 1:10, is markedly different from that of Socinians like Biddle, and may indicate that near the end of his life Locke returned nearer to an Arian position, thereby accepting Christ's pre-existence.\nLocke was at times unsure about the subject of original sin, so he was accused of Socinianism, Arianism, or Deism. Locke argued that the idea that \"all \"Adam\"'s Posterity [are] doomed to Eternal Infinite Punishment, for the Transgression of \"Adam\"\" was \"little consistent with the Justice or Goodness of the Great and Infinite God\", leading Eric Nelson to associate him with Pelagian ideas. However, he did not deny the reality of evil. Man was capable of waging unjust wars and committing crimes. Criminals had to be punished, even with the death penalty.\nWith regard to the Bible, Locke was very conservative. He retained the doctrine of the verbal inspiration of the Scriptures. The miracles were proof of the divine nature of the biblical message. Locke was convinced that the entire content of the Bible was in agreement with human reason (\"The Reasonableness of Christianity\", 1695). Although Locke was an advocate of tolerance, he urged the authorities not to tolerate atheism, because he thought denial of God's existence undermined the social order and led to chaos. That excluded all atheistic varieties of philosophy and all attempts to deduce ethics and natural law from purely secular premises. In Locke's opinion the cosmological argument was valid and proved God's existence. His political thought was based on Protestant Christian views. Locke advocated a sense of piety out of gratitude to God for giving reason to men.\nPhilosophy from religion.\nLocke's concept of man started with the belief in creation. Like philosophers Hugo Grotius and Samuel Pufendorf, Locke equated natural law with the biblical revelation. Locke derived the fundamental concepts of his political theory from biblical texts, in particular from Genesis 1 and 2 (creation), the Decalogue, the Golden Rule, the teachings of Jesus, and the letters of Paul the Apostle. The Decalogue puts a person's life, reputation and property under God's protection. Locke's philosophy on freedom is also derived from the Bible. Locke derived from the Bible basic human equality, including equality of the sexes, the starting point of the theological doctrine of Imago Dei. \nTo Locke, one of the consequences of the principle of equality was that all humans were created equally free and therefore governments needed the consent of the governed. Locke compared the English monarchy's rule over the British people to Adam's rule over Eve in Genesis, which was appointed by God. Following Locke's philosophy, the American Declaration of Independence founded human rights partially on the biblical belief in creation. Locke's doctrine that governments need the consent of the governed is also central to the Declaration of Independence.\nLibrary.\nManuscripts, books and treatises.\nLocke was an assiduous book collector and notetaker throughout his life. By his death in 1704, Locke had amassed a library of more than 3,000 books, a significant number in the seventeenth century. Unlike some of his contemporaries, Locke took care to catalogue and preserve his library, and his will made specific provisions for how his library was to be distributed after his death. Locke's will offered Lady Masham the choice of \"any four folios, eight quartos and twenty books of less volume, which she shall choose out of the books in my Library.\" Locke also gave six titles to his \"good friend\" Anthony Collins, but Locke bequeathed the majority of his collection to his cousin Peter King (later Lord King) and to Lady Masham's son, Francis Cudworth Masham.\nFrancis Masham was promised one \"moiety\" (half) of Locke's library when he reached \"the age of one and twenty years.\" The other \"moiety\" of Locke's books, along with his manuscripts, passed to his cousin King. Over the next two centuries, the Masham portion of Locke's library was dispersed. The manuscripts and books left to King remained with King's descendants (later the Earls of Lovelace), until most of the collection was bought by the Bodleian Library, Oxford in 1947. Another portion of the books Locke left to King was discovered by the collector and philanthropist Paul Mellon in 1951. Mellon supplemented this discovery with books from Locke's library which he bought privately, and in 1978, he transferred his collection to the Bodleian. \nThe holdings in the Locke Room at the Bodleian have been a valuable resource for scholars interested in Locke, his philosophy, practices for information management, and the history of the book. Many of the books still contain Locke's signature, which he often made on the pastedowns of his books. Many also include Locke's marginalia. The printed books in Locke's library reflected his various intellectual interests as well as his movements at different stages of his life. Locke travelled extensively in France and the Netherlands during the 1670s and 1680s, and during this time he acquired many books from the continent.\nOnly half of the books in Locke's library were printed in England, while close to 40% came from France and the Netherlands. These books cover a wide range of subjects. According to John Harrison and Peter Laslett, the largest genres in Locke's library were theology (23.8% of books), medicine (11.1%), politics and law (10.7%), and classical literature (10.1%). The Bodleian library currently holds more than 800 of the books from Locke's library. These include Locke's copies of works by several of the most influential figures of the seventeenth century, including:\nIn addition to books owned by Locke, the Bodleian possesses more than 100 manuscripts related to Locke or written in his hand. Like the books in Locke's library, these manuscripts display a range of interests and provide different windows into Locke's activity and relationships. Several of the manuscripts include letters to and from acquaintances like Peter King (MS Locke b. 6) and Nicolas Toinard (MS Locke c. 45). MS Locke f. 1\u201310 contain Locke's journals for most years between 1675 and 1704. \nSome of the most significant manuscripts include early drafts of Locke's writings, such as his \"Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" (MS Locke f. 26). The Bodleian also holds a copy of Robert Boyle's \"General History of the Air\" with corrections and notes Locke made while preparing Boyle's work for posthumous publication (MS Locke c. 37 ). Other manuscripts contain unpublished works. Among others, MS. Locke e. 18 includes some of Locke's thoughts on the Glorious Revolution, which Locke sent to his friend Edward Clarke but never published.\nOne of the largest categories of manuscript at the Bodleian comprises Locke's notebooks and commonplace books. The scholar Richard Yeo calls Locke a \"Master Note-taker\" and explains that \"Locke's methodical note-taking pervaded most areas of his life.\" In an unpublished essay \"Of Study,\" Locke argued that a notebook should work like a \"chest-of-drawers\" for organising information, which would be a \"great help to the memory and means to avoid confusion in our thoughts.\" Locke kept several notebooks and commonplace books, which he organised according to topic. MS Locke c. 43 includes Locke's notes on theology, while MS Locke f. 18\u201324 contain medical notes. Other notebooks, such as MS c. 43, incorporate several topics in the same notebook, but separated into sections.\nThese commonplace books were highly personal and were designed to be used by Locke himself rather than accessible to a wide audience. Locke's notes are often abbreviated and are full of codes which he used to reference material across notebooks. Another way Locke personalised his notebooks was by devising his own method of creating indexes using a grid system and Latin keywords. Instead of recording entire words, his indexes shortened words to their first letter and vowel. Thus, the word \"Epistle\" would be classified as \"Ei\". \nLocke published his method in French in 1686, and it was in 1706. Some of the books in Locke's library at the Bodleian are a combination of manuscript and print. Locke had some of his books interleaved, meaning that they were bound with blank sheets in-between the printed pages to enable annotations. Locke interleaved and annotated his five volumes of the New Testament in French, Greek, and Latin (Bodleian Locke 9.103\u2013107). Locke did the same with his copy of Thomas Hyde's Bodleian Library catalogue (Bodleian Locke 16.17), which Locke used to create a catalogue of his own library.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16146", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16146", "title": "John III Vasa", "text": ""}
{"id": "16147", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16147", "title": "Jewish holidays", "text": "Jewish holidays, also known as Jewish festivals or Yamim Tovim (, or singular , in transliterated Hebrew []), are holidays observed by Jews throughout the Hebrew calendar. They include religious, cultural and national elements, derived from four sources: \"mitzvot\" (\"biblical commandments\"), rabbinic mandates, the history of Judaism, and the State of Israel.\nJewish holidays occur on the same dates every year in the Hebrew calendar, but the dates vary in the Gregorian. This is because the Hebrew calendar is a lunisolar calendar (based on the cycles of both the sun and moon), whereas the Gregorian is a solar calendar. Each holiday can only occur on certain days of the week, four for most, but five for holidays in Tevet and Shevat and six for Hanukkah (see Days of week on Hebrew calendar).\nGeneral concepts.\nGroupings.\nCertain terms are used very commonly for groups of holidays.\nTerminology used to describe holidays.\nCertain terminology is used in referring to different categories of holidays, depending on their source and their nature:\n\"Shabbat\" () (Ashkenazi pron. from Yiddish \"shabbos\"), or Sabbath, is referred to by that name exclusively. Similarly, \"Rosh Chodesh\" () is referred to by that name exclusively.\n\"Work\" on Sabbath and biblical holidays.\nThe most notable common feature of Shabbat and the biblical festivals is the requirement to refrain from the 39 Melakhot on these days. \"Melakha\" is most commonly translated as \"work\"; perhaps a better translation is \"creative-constructive work\". Strictly speaking, melakha is defined in halakha (Jewish law) by 39 categories of labor that were used in constructing the Tabernacle while the Jews wandered in the desert. As understood traditionally and in Orthodox Judaism:\nIn principle, Conservative Judaism understands the requirement to refrain from melakha in the same way as Orthodox Judaism. In practice, Conservative rabbis frequently rule on prohibitions around melakha differently from Orthodox authorities. Still, there are some Conservative/Masorti communities around the world where Shabbat and festival observance fairly closely resembles Orthodox observance.\nHowever, many, if not most, lay members of Conservative congregations in North America do not consider themselves Shabbat observant, even by Conservative standards. At the same time, adherents of Reform Judaism and Reconstructionist Judaism do not accept traditional halakha, and therefore restrictions on melakha, as binding at all. Jews fitting any of these descriptions refrain from melakha in practice only as they see fit.\nShabbat and holiday work restrictions are always put aside in cases of pikuach nefesh, which are actions to save a human life. At the most fundamental level, if there is any possibility whatsoever that action must be taken to save a life, Shabbat restrictions are set aside immediately, and without reservation. Where the danger to life is present but less immediate, there is some preference to minimize violation of Shabbat work restrictions where possible. The laws in this area are complex.\nSecond day of biblical festivals.\nThe Torah specifies a single date on the Jewish calendar for observance of holidays. Nevertheless, festivals of biblical origin other than Shabbat and Yom Kippur are observed for two days outside the land of Israel, and Rosh Hashanah is observed for two days even inside the land of Israel.\nDates for holidays on the Jewish calendar are expressed in the Torah as \"day x of month y\". Accordingly, the beginning of \"month y\" needs to be determined before the proper date of the holiday on \"day x\" can be fixed. Months in the Jewish calendar are lunar, and originally were thought to have been proclaimed by the blowing of a \"shofar\". Later, the Sanhedrin received testimony of witnesses saying they saw the new crescent moon. Then the Sanhedrin would inform Jewish communities away from its meeting place that it had proclaimed a new moon. The practice of observing a second festival day stemmed from delays in disseminating that information.\n For Shavuot, calculated as the fiftieth day from Passover, the above issue did not pertain directly, as the \"correct\" date for Passover would be known by then. Nevertheless, the Talmud applies the same rule to Shavuot, and to the Seventh Day of Passover and Shemini Atzeret, for consistency.\nYom Kippur is not observed for two days anywhere because of the difficulty of maintaining a fast over two days.\n Shabbat is not observed based on a calendar date, but simply at intervals of seven days. Accordingly, there is never a doubt of the date of Shabbat, and it need never be observed for two days.\nAdherents of Reform Judaism and Reconstructionist Judaism generally do not observe the second day of festivals, although some do observe two days of Rosh Hashanah.\nHolidays of biblical and rabbinic (Talmudic) origin.\nShabbat\u2014The Sabbath.\nJewish law \"(halacha)\" accords \"Shabbat\" () the status of a holiday, a day of rest celebrated on the seventh day of each week. Jewish law defines a day as ending at either sundown or nightfall, when the next day then begins. Thus,\nThe fundamental rituals and observances of Shabbat include:\nIn many ways, \"halakha\" (Jewish law) sees \"Shabbat\" as the most important holy day in the Jewish calendar.\nArbah Parshiyot\nThere are four Sabbaths, all during or in proximity to, the month of Adar, which have special significance because of additions which are made during the Torah reading on those days. These include:\nOther Special Sabbaths\nOther Sabbaths throughout the year are considered specially significant because of the time of year or the Torah portion and/or Haftorah being read. \"Shabbat Shuva\" is the \"Shabbat\" preceding \"Yom Kippur\" and \"Shabbat Hagadol\" is the \"Shabbat\" preceding \"Pesach\". On both of these it is customary for the rabbi of the synagogue to give an extended lecture on a topic related to the upcoming holiday. \"Shabbat Bereishit\" is the Shabbos immediately following Simchat Torah, in which the yearly Torah-reading cycle restarts anew. \"Shabbat Shira\" is the Shabbos on which the Shirat Hayam is read as part of Parshat Beshalach; it is customary to leave out breadcrumbs before this Shabbos for wild birds to eat. \"Shabbat Chazon\" is the Shabbos preceding \"Tisha b'Av\", during which the ominous haftorah of Chazon Yishayahu is read (this completes a cycle of three ominous haftoras leading up to \"Tisha b'Av\"). \"Shabbat Nachamu\" is the Shabbos following \"Tisha b'Av\" during which the consolatory haftorah of Nachamu Ami is read (this begins a cycle of seven consolatory haftorahs following Tisha b'Av, known as the \"Shiva d'Nechemta\"). The \"Shabbat\" preceding every \"Rosh Chodesh\" (except \"Rosh Hashana\") is known as \"Shabbat Mevorochim\"; a prayer is added to the liturgy in anticipation of the coming month. \nRosh Chodesh\u2014The New Month.\n\"Rosh Chodesh\" () is a minor holiday or observance occurring on the first day of each month of the Jewish calendar, as well as the last day of the preceding month if it has thirty days.\nBeyond the preceding, current observance is limited to changes in liturgy.\nIn the month of Tishrei, this observance is superseded by the observance of Rosh Hashanah, a major holiday.\n\"Related observances:\"\nRosh Hashanah\u2014The Jewish New Year.\nElul and Selichot.\nThe month of \"Elul\" that precedes \"Rosh Hashanah\" is considered to be a propitious time for repentance. For this reason, additional penitential prayers called Selichot are added to the daily prayers, except on \"Shabbat\". Sephardi Jews add these prayers each weekday during \"Elul\". Ashkenazi Jews recite them from the last Sunday (or Saturday night) preceding \"Rosh Hashanah\" that allows at least four days of recitations.\nThroughout Elul, the shofar is blown at the end of the morning prayers (except for on Erev Rosh Hashana). Psalm 27 is recited at the end of morning prayers and at the end of afternoon or evening prayers (depending on the community's custom) from the first day of Elul through Hoshana Raba (the last day of Sukkot). \nRosh Hashanah.\nAccording to oral tradition, \"Rosh Hashanah\" () (lit., \"Head of the Year\") is the Day of Memorial or Remembrance (, \"Yom HaZikaron\"), and the day of judgment (, \"Yom HaDin\"). God appears in the role of King, remembering and judging each person individually according to his/her deeds, and making a decree for each person for the following year.\nThe holiday is characterized by one specific mitzvah: blowing the \"shofar\". According to the Torah, this is the first day of the seventh month of the calendar year, and marks the beginning of a ten-day period leading up to \"Yom Kippur\". According to one of two Talmudic opinions, the creation of the world was completed on \"Rosh Hashanah\".\nMorning prayer services are lengthy on \"Rosh Hashanah\", and focus on the themes described above: majesty and judgment, remembrance, the birth of the world, and the blowing of the \"shofar\". Most communities recite the brief Tashlikh prayer, a symbolic casting off of the previous year's sins, during the afternoon of \"Rosh Hashanah\".\nThough the Bible specifies \"Rosh Hashanah\" as a one-day holiday, a second day of rabbinic origin is also celebrated. Uniquely among biblical holidays, this additional rabbinic day is observed even within the Land of Israel. (See \"Second day of biblical festivals,\" above.)\nFour New Years.\nThe Torah itself does not use any term like \"New Year\" in reference to \"Rosh Hashanah\". The Mishnah in Rosh Hashanah specifies four different \"New Year's Days\" for different purposes:\n\"Aseret Yemei Teshuva\"\u2014Ten Days of Repentance.\nThe first ten days of \"Tishrei\" (from the beginning of \"Rosh Hashana\" until the end of \"Yom Kippur\") are known as the Ten Days of Repentance (\u05e2\u05e9\u05e8\u05ea \u05d9\u05de\u05d9 \u05ea\u05e9\u05d5\u05d1\u05d4, \"Aseret Yemei Teshuva\"). During this time, in anticipation of \"Yom Kippur\", it is \"exceedingly appropriate\" for Jews to practice repentance, an examination of one's deeds and repentance for sins one has committed against other people and God. This repentance can take the form of additional supplications, confessing one's deeds before God, fasting, self-reflection, and an increase of involvement with, or donations to, tzedakah \"charity\".\n\"Tzom Gedalia\"\u2014Fast of Gedalia.\nThe Fast of Gedalia () is a minor Jewish fast day. It commemorates the assassination of the governor of Yehud province, Gedaliah, which ended any level of Jewish rule following the destruction of Solomon's Temple.\nAccording to the simple reading of the Bible, the assassination occurred on Rosh Hashanah (1 Tishrei), and if so, the fast is postponed to 3 Tishrei in respect for the holiday and it is further postponed to 4 Tishrei if 3 Tishrei is Shabbat. However, the Talmud states explicitly that it took place on 3 Tishrei. \nAs on all minor fast days, fasting from dawn to dusk is required, but other laws of mourning are not normally observed. A Torah reading is included in both the Shaharit and Minha prayers, and a haftarah is also included at \"Mincha\". There are also some additions to the liturgy of both services.\n\"Yom Kippur\"\u2014Day of Atonement.\n\"Yom Kippur\" () is the holiest day of the year for Rabbinic Jews. Its central theme is atonement and reconciliation. This is accomplished through prayer and complete fasting\u2014including abstinence from all food and drink (including water)\u2014by all healthy adults. Bathing, wearing of perfume or cologne, wearing of leather shoes, and sexual relations are some of the other prohibitions on \"Yom Kippur\"\u2014all them designed to ensure one's attention is completely and absolutely focused on the quest for atonement with God. \"Yom Kippur\" is also unique among holidays as having work-related restrictions identical to those of \"Shabbat\". The fast and other prohibitions commence on 10 \"Tishrei\" at sunset\u2014sunset being the \"beginning\" of the day in Jewish tradition.\nA traditional recitation in Aramaic called \"Kol Nidre\" (\"All Vows\") is traditionally performed just before sunset. Although often regarded as the start of the \"Yom Kippur\" evening service\u2014to such a degree that \"Erev Yom Kippur\" (\"Yom Kippur Evening\") is often called \"Kol Nidrei Night\"\u2014it is technically a separate tradition. This is especially so because, being recited before sunset, it is actually recited on 9 \"Tishrei\", which is the day \"before\" Yom Kippur; it is not recited on \"Yom Kippur\" itself (on 10 \"Tishrei\", which begins \"after\" the sun sets).\n The words of Kol Nidre differ slightly between Ashkenazic and Sephardic traditions. In both, the supplicant prays to be released from all personal vows made to God during the year, so that any unfulfilled promises made to God will be annulled and, thus, forgiven. In Ashkenazi tradition, the reference is to the coming year; in Sephardic tradition, the reference is to the year just ended. Only vows between the supplicant and God are relevant. Vows made between the supplicant and other people remain perfectly valid, since they are unaffected by the prayer.\nA \"Tallit\" (four-cornered prayer shawl) is donned for evening and afternoon prayers\u2013the only day of the year in which this is done. In traditional Ashkenazi communities, men wear the \"kittel\" throughout the day's prayers. The prayers on \"Yom Kippur\" evening are lengthier than on any other night of the year. Once services reconvene in the morning, the services (in all traditions) are the longest of the year. In some traditional synagogues prayers run continuously from morning until nightfall, or nearly so. Two highlights of the morning prayers in traditional synagogues are the recitation of \"Yizkor,\" the prayer of remembrance, and of liturgical poems \"(piyyutim)\" describing the temple service of \"Yom Kippur\".\nTwo other highlights happen late in the day. During the \"Minchah\" prayer, the \"haftarah\" reading features the entire Book of Jonah. Finally, the day concludes with \"Ne'ilah,\" a special service recited only on the day of \"Yom Kippur\". Ne'ilah deals with the closing of the holiday, and contains a fervent final plea to God for forgiveness just before the conclusion of the fast. \"Yom Kippur\" comes to an end with the blowing of the \"shofar\", which marks the conclusion of the fast. It is always observed as a one-day holiday, both inside and outside the boundaries of the Land of Israel.\n\"Yom Kippur\" is considered, along with 15th of Av, as the happiest days of the year (Talmud Bavli\u2014Tractate Ta'anit).\nDay Before Yom Kippur\nSome consider the Day Before Yom Kippur, i.e. 9 Tishri, a holiday its own right. The day before Yom Kippur is not Erev Yom Kippur - which is the actual \"evening\" of Yom Kippur on 10 Tishri, immediately after sunset and the recitation of \"Kol Nidre\". It is a mitzva (commandment) to eat on the Day Before Yom Kippur, with the sages saying that one who eats throughout this day and then fasts on \"Yom Kippur\" proper receives merit as though he had fasted twice. Slight liturgical changes are made to Shacharit, while more significant liturgical changes are made to Mincha. Many Ashkenazi Orthodox men traditionally take a mikvah on the day before Yom Kippur.\n\"Sukkot\"\u2014Feast of Booths (or Tabernacles).\n\"Sukkot\" ( or , \"sukk\u014dt\") or \"Succoth\" is a seven-day festival, also known as the Feast of Booths, the Feast of Tabernacles, or just Tabernacles. It is one of the Three Pilgrimage Festivals (\"shalosh regalim\") mentioned in the Bible. Sukkot commemorates the years that the Jews spent in the desert on their way to the Promised Land, and celebrates the way in which God protected them under difficult desert conditions. The word \"sukkot\" is the plural of the Hebrew word \"sukkah\", meaning booth. Jews are commanded to \"dwell\" in booths during the holiday. This generally means taking meals, but some sleep in the \"sukkah\" as well, particularly in Israel. There are specific rules for constructing a \"sukkah\".\nAlong with dwelling in a \"sukkah,\" the principal ritual unique to this holiday is use of the Four Species: \"lulav\" (palm), \"hadass\" (myrtle), \"aravah\" (willow) and \"etrog\" (citron). On each day of the holiday other than Shabbat, these are waved in association with the recitation of Hallel in the synagogue, then walked in a procession around the synagogue called the \"Hoshanot\".\nHoshana Rabbah\nThe seventh day of the Sukkot is called Hoshanah Rabbah, the \"Great \"Hoshanah\"\" (singular of \"Hoshanot\" and the source of the English word hosanna). The climax of the day's prayers includes seven processions of \"Hoshanot\" around the synagogue. This tradition mimics practices from the Temple in Jerusalem. Many aspects of the day's customs also resemble those of Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur. Hoshanah Rabbah is traditionally taken to be the day of the \"delivery\" of the final judgment of Yom Kippur, and offers a last opportunity for pleas of repentance before the holiday season closes.\nShemini Atzeret and Simchat Torah.\nThe holiday of Shemini Atzeret () immediately follows the conclusion of the holiday of Sukkot. The Hebrew word \"shemini\" means \"eighth\", and refers to its position on \"the eighth day\" of Sukkot, actually a seven-day holiday. This name reflects the fact that while in many respects Shemini Atzeret is a separate holiday in its own right, in certain respects its celebration is linked to that of Sukkot. Outside Israel, meals are still taken in the Sukkah on this day.\nThe main notable custom of this holiday is the celebration of \"Simchat Torah\" (), meaning \"rejoicing with the Torah\". This name originally referred to a special \"ceremony\": the last weekly Torah portion is read from Deuteronomy, completing the annual cycle, and is followed immediately by the reading of the first chapter of Genesis, beginning the new annual cycle. Services are especially joyous, and all attendees, young and old, are involved.\nThis ceremony so dominates the holiday that in Israel, where the holiday is one day long, the whole holiday is often referred to as \"Simchat Torah\". Outside Israel, the holiday is two days long; the name \"Shemini Atzeret\" is used for the first day, while the second is normally called \"Simchat Torah\".\nHanukkah\u2014Festival of Lights.\nThe story of Hanukkah () is preserved in the books of the First and Second Maccabees. These books are not part of the Tanakh (Hebrew Bible), they are apocryphal books instead. The miracle of the one-day supply of olive oil miraculously lasting eight days is first described in the Talmud (Shabbat 21b), written about 600 years after the events described in the books of Maccabees.\nHanukkah marks the defeat of Seleucid Empire forces that had tried to prevent the people of Israel from practicing Judaism. Judah Maccabee and his brothers destroyed overwhelming forces, and rededicated the Temple in Jerusalem. The eight-day festival is marked by the kindling of lights\u2014one on the first night, two on the second, and so on\u2014using a special candle holder called a \"Hanukkiah\", or a \"Hanukkah menorah.\"\nReligiously, Hanukkah is a minor holiday. Except on Shabbat, restrictions on work do not apply. Aside from the kindling of lights, formal religious observance is restricted to changes in liturgy. Hanukkah celebration tends to be informal and based on custom rather than law. Three widely practiced customs include:\nTenth of Tevet.\nThe Tenth of Tevet (, \"Asarah B'Tevet\") is a minor fast day, marking the beginning of the siege of Jerusalem as outlined in 2 Kings 25:1\nAnd it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and encamped against it; and they built forts against it round about.\nThis fast's commemoration also includes other events occurring on 8, 9 and 10 Tevet.\nThis fast is observed like other minor fasts (see Tzom Gedalia, above). This is the only minor fast that can fall on a Friday under the current fixed Jewish calendar.\nTu Bishvat\u2014New Year of the Trees.\nTu Bishvat (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d8\"\u05d5 \u05d1\u05e9\u05d1\u05d8\u200e) (lit., \"fifteenth of Shevat\", as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d8\u05f4\u05d5\u200e is the number \"15\" in Hebrew letters), is the new year for trees. It is also known as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d7\u05d2 \u05d4\u05d0\u05d9\u05dc\u05e0\u05d5\u05ea\u200e (\"\u1e24ag ha-Ilanot,\" Festival of Trees), or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e8\u05d0\u05e9 \u05d4\u05e9\u05e0\u05d4 \u05dc\u05d0\u05d9\u05dc\u05e0\u05d5\u05ea\u200e (\"Rosh ha-Shanah la-Ilanot,\" New Year for Trees). According to the Mishnah, it marks the day from which fruit tithes are counted each year. Starting on this date, the biblical prohibition on eating the first three years of fruit (\"orlah\") and the requirement to bring the fourth year fruit \"(neta revai)\" to the Temple in Jerusalem were counted.\nDuring the 17th century, Rabbi Yitzchak Luria of Safed and his disciples created a short seder, called \"Hemdat ha\u2011Yamim,\" reminiscent of the seder that Jews observe on Passover, that explores the holiday's Kabbalistic themes. This Tu Bishvat seder has witnessed a revival in recent years. More generally, Tu Bishvat is celebrated in modern times by eating various fruits and nuts associated with the Land of Israel.\nTraditionally, trees are planted on this day. Many children collect funds leading up to this day to plant trees in Israel. Trees are usually planted locally as well.\nPurim\u2014Festival of Lots.\nPurim Katan.\n\"Purim Katan\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e4\u05d5\u05e8\u05d9\u05dd \u05e7\u05d8\u05df\u200e) (lit., \"small Purim\") is observed on the 14th and 15th of First Adar in leap years. These days are marked by a small increase in festivity, including a prohibition on fasting, and slight changes in the liturgy.\nTa'anit Esther\u2013Fast of Esther.\n\"Ta'anit Esther\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05ea\u05e2\u05e0\u05d9\u05ea \u05d0\u05e1\u05ea\u05e8\u200e), or \"Fast of Esther\", is named in honor of the fast of Esther and her court as Esther prepared to approach the king unbidden to invite him and Haman to a banquet. It commemorates that fast, as well as one alluded to later in the Book of Esther, undertaken as the Jews prepared to battle their enemies.\nThis fast is observed like other minor fasts (see Tzom Gedalia, above). While normally observed on 13 Adar, the eve of Purim, this fast is advanced to Thursday, 11 Adar, when 13 Adar falls on Shabbat.\nPurim and Shushan Purim.\nPurim (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e4\u05d5\u05e8\u05d9\u05dd\u200e) commemorates the events that took place in the Book of Esther. The principal celebrations or commemorations include:\nSeveral customs have evolved from these principal commemorations. One widespread custom to act out the story of Purim. The Purim spiel, or Purim play, has its origins in this, although the \"Purim spiel\" is not limited to that subject. Wearing of costumes and masks is also very common. These may be an outgrowth of Purim plays, but there are several theories as to the origin of the custom, most related in some way to the \"hidden\" nature of the miracles of Purim.\nPurim carnivals of various types have also become customary. In Israel there are festive parades, known as \"Ad-D'lo-Yada\", in the town's main street. The largest and most renowned is in Holon.\nMost Jews celebrate Purim on 14 Adar, the day of celebration after the Jews defeated their enemies. Because Jews in the capital city of Shushan fought with their enemies an extra day, Purim is celebrated a day later there, on the day known as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e9\u05d5\u05e9\u05df \u05e4\u05d5\u05e8\u05d9\u05dd\u200e, Shushan Purim. This observance was expanded to \"walled cities\", which are defined as cities \"walled since the time of Joshua\". In practice, there are no Jews living in Shushan (Shush, Iran), and Shushan Purim is observed fully only in Jerusalem. Cities like Safed and Tiberias also partially observe Shushan Purim. Elsewhere, Shushan Purim is marked only by a small increase in festivity, including a prohibition on fasting, and slight changes in the liturgy.\nPurim Meshulash\nIf 15 Adar falls out on Shabbos, Jews in Jerusalem celebrate a unique 3-day Purim known as Purim Meshulash. The reading of the Megillah and the giving of \"Matanot L'evyonim\" occur on Friday; the Torah Reading for Purim is read on Shabbos and \"Al-Hanisim\" (the liturgical addition for Purim) is said; and the Purim Meal and the giving of \"Mishloach Manot\" occur on Sunday.\nPesach\u2014Passover.\nMonth of Nisan.\nAs a rule, the month of Nisan is considered to be one of extra joy. Traditionally, throughout the entire month, Tahanun is omitted from the prayer service, many public mourning practices (such as delivering a eulogy at a funeral) are eliminated, and voluntary fasting is prohibited. However, practices sometimes vary.\nEve of Passover and Fast of the Firstborn.\nThe day before Passover (\"Erev Pesach,\" lit., \"Passover eve\") is significant for three reasons:\nWhen Passover starts on Sunday, and the eve of Passover is therefore Shabbat, the above schedule is altered. See Eve of Passover on Shabbat for details.\nPassover.\nPassover (\u05e4\u05bc\u05e1\u05d7) \"(Pesach\"), also known liturgically as \u05d7\u05d2 \u05d4\u05de\u05e6\u05d5\u05ea \"(\"\u1e24ag haMatzot\"\", the \"Festival of Unleavened Bread\"), is one of the Three Pilgrimage Festivals (\"shalosh regalim\") mentioned in the Torah. Passover commemorates the Exodus, the liberation of the Israelite slaves from Egypt. No \"chametz\" (leavened food) is eaten, or even owned, during the week of Passover, in commemoration of the biblical narrative in which the Israelites left Egypt so quickly that their bread did not have enough time to rise. Observant Jews go to great lengths to remove all \"chametz\" from their homes and offices in the run-up to Passover.\nAlong with the avoidance of \"chametz\", the principal ritual unique to this holiday is the seder. The \"seder\", meaning \"order\", is an ordered ritual meal eaten on the first night of Passover, and outside Israel also on the second night. This meal is known for its distinctive ritual foods\u2014matzo (unleavened bread), maror (bitter herbs), and four cups of wine\u2014as well as its prayer text/handbook/study guide, the Haggadah. Participation in a Passover seder is one of the most widely observed Jewish rituals, even among less affiliated or less observant Jews.\nPassover lasts seven days in Israel, and eight days outside Israel. The holiday of the last day of Passover (outside Israel, last two days) commemorates the Splitting of the Red Sea; according to tradition this occurred on the seventh day of Passover.\nPesach Sheni.\n\"Pesach Sheni\" (\u05e4\u05e1\u05d7 \u05e9\u05e0\u05d9) (\"Second Passover\") is a day prescribed in the Torah to allow those who did not bring the Paschal Lamb offering \"(Korban Pesach)\" a second chance to do so. Eligibility was limited to those who were distant from Jerusalem on Passover, or those who were ritually impure and ineligible to participate in a sacrificial offering. Today, some have the custom to eat matzo on Pesach Sheni, and some make a small change to the liturgy.\nSefirah\u2014Counting of the Omer.\n\"Sefirah\" (lit. \"Counting\"; more fully, \"Sefirat HaOmer,\" \"Counting of the Omer\") (\u05e1\u05e4\u05d9\u05e8\u05ea \u05d4\u05e2\u05d5\u05de\u05e8), is the 49-day period between the biblical pilgrimage festivals of Passover and Shavuot. The Torah states that this period is to be counted, both in days and in weeks. The first day of this period is the day of the first grain offering of the new year's crop, an omer of barley. The day following the 49th day of the period is the festival of Shavuot; the Torah specifies a grain offering of wheat on that day.\nSymbolically, this period has come to represent the spiritual development of the Israelites from slaves in the polytheistic society of Ancient Egypt to free, monotheistic people worthy of the revelation of the Torah, traditionally said to have occurred on Shavuot. Spiritual development remains a key rabbinic teaching of this period.\nSefirah has long been observed as a period of semi-mourning. The customary explanation cites a plague that killed 24,000 students of Rabbi Akiva (BT \"Yevamot\" 62b). In broad terms, the mourning practices observed include limiting actual celebrations (such as weddings), not listening to music, not wearing new clothing, and not shaving or taking a haircut. There is a wide variety of practice as to the specifics of this observance. See Counting of the Omer (Semi-mourning).\nLag Ba'Omer.\n\"Lag Ba'Omer\" () is the 33rd day in the Omer count ( is the number 33 in Hebrew). By Ashkenazi practice, the semi-mourning observed during the period of Sefirah (see above) is lifted \"on\" Lag Ba'Omer, while Sefardi practice is to lift it \"at the end of\" Lag Ba'Omer. Minor liturgical changes are made on Lag Ba'omer; because mourning practices are suspended, weddings are often conducted on this day.\nLag Ba'Omer is identified as the \"Yom Hillula (yahrzeit)\" of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai, one of the leading \"Tannaim\" (teachers quoted in the Mishna) and ascribed author of the core text of Kabbalah, the Zohar. Customary celebrations include bonfires, picnics, and bow and arrow play by children. Boys sometimes receive their first haircuts on Lag Ba'Omer, while Hasidic rebbes hold \"tishes\" in honor of the day.\nIn Israel, Lag Ba'Omer is associated with the Bar Kokhba revolt against the Roman Empire. In Zionist thought, the plague that decimated Rabbi Akiva's 24,000 disciples is explained as a veiled reference to the revolt; the 33rd day representing the end of the plague is explained as the day of Bar Kokhba's victory. The traditional bonfires and bow-and-arrow play were thus reinterpreted as celebrations of military victory. In this vein, the order originally creating the Israel Defense Forces was issued on Lag Ba'Omer 1948, 13 days after Israel declared independence.\nShavuot\u2014Feast of Weeks\u2014Yom HaBikurim.\n\"Shavuot\" (), the Feast of Weeks, is one of the three pilgrimage festivals (\"Shalosh regalim\") ordained in the Torah. Different from other biblical holidays, the date for Shavuot is not explicitly fixed in the Torah. Instead, it is observed on the day following the 49th and final day in the counting of the Omer. In the current era of the fixed Jewish calendar, this puts the date of Shavuot as 6 Sivan. In Israel and in Reform Judaism, it is a one-day holiday; elsewhere, it is a two-day holiday extending through 7 Sivan.\nAccording to Rabbinic tradition, codified in the Talmud at Shabbat 87b, the Ten Commandments were given on this day. In the era of the Temple, there were certain specific offerings mandated for Shavuot, and Shavuot was the first day for bringing of Bikkurim to the Temple. Other than those, there are no explicit \"mitzvot\" unique to Shavuot given in the Torah (parallel to matzo on Passover or Sukkah on Sukkot).\nNevertheless, there are a number of widespread customs observed on Shavuot. During this holiday the Torah portion containing the Ten Commandments is read in the synagogue, and the biblical Book of Ruth is read as well. It is traditional to eat dairy meals during Shavuot. In observant circles, all night Torah study is common on the first night of Shavuot, while in Reform Judaism, Shavuot is the customary date for Confirmation ceremonies.\nMourning for Jerusalem: Seventeenth of Tammuz and Tisha B'Av.\nThe three-week period starting on 17 Tammuz and concluding after Tisha B'Av has traditionally been observed as a period of mourning for the destruction of Jerusalem and the Holy Temple there.\nFast of the Seventeenth of Tammuz.\nThe Seventeenth of Tamuz (\u05e9\u05d1\u05e2\u05d4 \u05e2\u05e9\u05e8 \u05d1\u05ea\u05de\u05d5\u05d6, \"Shiva Asar B'Tamuz\") traditionally marks the first breach in the walls of the Jerusalem during the Roman conquest in 70 CE, at the end of the Second Temple period. According to tradition, this day has had negative connotations since Moses broke the first set of tablets on this day. The Mishnah cites five negative events that happened on 17 Tammuz.\nThis fast is observed like other minor fasts (see Tzom Gedalia, above). When this fast falls out on Shabbat, its observance is postponed until Sunday.\nThe Three Weeks and the Nine Days.\nThe period between the fasts of 17 Tammuz and 9 Av, known as the \"Three Weeks\" (Hebrew: \u05d1\u05d9\u05df \u05d4\u05de\u05e6\u05e8\u05d9\u05dd, \"between the straits\"), features a steadily increasing level of mourning practices as Tisha B'Av approaches. Ashkenazi Jews refrain from conducting weddings and other joyful events throughout the period unless the date is established by Jewish law (as for a bris or \"pidyon haben)\". They do not cut their hair during this period. Starting on the first of Av and throughout the nine days between the 1st and 9th days of Av, Ashkenazim traditionally refrain from eating meat and drinking wine, except on Shabbat or at a \"Seudat Mitzvah\" (a Mitzvah meal, such as for a bris or \"siyum\"). They also refrain from bathing for pleasure. Sefardic practice varies some from this; the less severe restrictions usually begin on 1 Av, while the more severe restrictions apply during the week of Tisha B'Av itself.\nSubject to the variations described above, Orthodox Judaism continues to maintain the traditional prohibitions. In Conservative Judaism, the Rabbinical Assembly's Committee on Jewish Law and Standards has issued several responsa (legal rulings) which hold that the prohibitions against weddings in this timeframe are deeply held traditions, but should not be construed as binding law. Thus, Conservative Jewish practice would allow weddings during this time, except on the 17th of Tammuz and 9th of Av themselves. Rabbis within Reform Judaism and Reconstructionist Judaism hold that halakha (Jewish law) is no longer binding and follow their individual consciences on such matters. Nevertheless, the rabbinical manual of the Reform movement encourages Reform rabbis not to conduct weddings on Tisha B'Av itself \"out of historical consciousness and respect\" for the Jewish community.\nTisha B'Av\u2014Ninth of Av.\n\"Tisha B'Av\" () is a major fast day and day of mourning. A Midrashic tradition states that the spies' negative report concerning the Land of Israel was delivered on Tisha B'Av. Consequently, the day became auspicious for negative events in Jewish history. Most notably, both the First Temple, originally built by King Solomon, and the Second Temple of Roman times were destroyed on Tisha B'Av. Other calamities throughout Jewish history are said to have taken place on Tisha B'Av, including King Edward I's edict compelling the Jews to leave England (1290) and the Jewish expulsion from Spain in 1492.\nTisha B'Av is a major fast. It is a 25-hour fast, running from sundown to nightfall. As on Yom Kippur, not only are eating and drinking prohibited, but also bathing, anointing, marital relations and the wearing of leather shoes. Work is not prohibited, as on biblical holidays, but is discouraged. In the evening, the Book of Lamentations is read in the synagogue, while in the morning lengthy \"kinot,\" poems of elegy, are recited. From evening until noon mourning rituals resembling those of shiva are observed, including sitting on low stools or the floor; after noon those restrictions are somewhat lightened, in keeping with the tradition that Messiah will be born on Tisha B'Av.\nWhile the fast ends at nightfall of 9\u201310 Av, the restrictions of the Three Weeks and Nine Days continue through noon on 10 Av because the Second Temple continued to burn through most of that day. When 9 Av falls on Shabbat, when fasting is prohibited, the fast is postponed until 10 Av. In that case, the restrictions of the Three Weeks and Nine Days end with the fast, except for the prohibition against eating meat and drinking wine, which extend until the morning of 10 Av.\nTu B'Av.\n\"Tu B'av\" (\u05d8\u05f4\u05d5 \u05d1\u05d0\u05d1), lit. \"15th of Av\", is a day mentioned in the Talmud alongside Yom Kippur as \"happiest of the year\". It was a day celebrating the bringing of wood used for the Temple Service, as well as a day when marriages were arranged. Today, it is marked by a small change in liturgy. In modern Israel, the day has become somewhat of an analog to Valentine's Day.\nOther fasts.\nSeveral other fast days of ancient or medieval origin continue to be observed to some degree in modern times. Such continued observance is usually by Orthodox Jews only, and is not universal today even among Orthodox Jews.\nWhile the specific fasts described in the Mishnah fell into disuse once Jews were exiled from the land of Israel, various Jewish communities have declared fasts over the years, using these as a model. Two examples include a fast among Polish Jews commemorating the massacre of Jews during the Khmelnytsky Uprising and one among Russian Jews during anti-Jewish pogroms of the 1880s. \nSince the establishment of the State of Israel, the Chief Rabbinate of Israel has urged fasting in times of drought. \nIsraeli/Jewish national holidays and days of remembrance.\nAs a general rule, the biblical Jewish holidays (Sabbath, Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, Passover, Shavuot, Sukkot and Purim) are observed as public holidays in Israel. Chanukah is a school holiday, but businesses remain open. On Tisha B'Av, restaurants and places of entertainment are closed. Other Jewish holidays listed above are observed in varying ways and to varying degrees.\nBetween the creation of the State of Israel in 1948 and the aftermath of the Six-Day War, the Knesset, generally in consultation with the Chief Rabbinate of Israel, established four national holidays or days of remembrance:\nThe status of these days as \"religious\" events is not uniform within the Jewish world. Non-Orthodox, Religious Zionist and Modern Orthodox Jewish religious movements accept these days as \"religious\" as well as \"national\" in nature.\nAs a rule, these four days are not accepted as religious observances by most Haredi Jews, including Hasidim. Some \"\u1e25aredim\" are opposed to the existence of the State of Israel altogether on religious grounds; others simply feel that there are not sufficient grounds under Jewish law to justify the establishment of new religious holidays. For details, see Haredim and Zionism.\nObservance of these days in Jewish communities outside Israel is typically more muted than their observance in Israel. Events held in government and public venues within Israel are often held in Jewish communal settings (synagogues and community centers) abroad.\nMore recently, the Knesset established two additional holidays:\nFinally, the Israeli government also recognizes several ethnic Jewish observances with holiday status.\nYom HaShoah\u2014Holocaust Remembrance Day.\n\"Yom HaShoah\" (lit. \"Holocaust Day\") is a day of remembrance for victims of the Holocaust. Its full name is \"Yom Hazikaron LaShoah v'LiGevurah\" (lit. \"Holocaust and Heroism Remembrance Day\") (), and reflects a desire to recognize martyrs who died in active resistance to the Nazis alongside those who died as passive victims. Its date, 27 Nisan, was chosen because it commemorates the Warsaw Ghetto uprising, the best known of the armed Jewish uprisings.\nPlaces of public entertainment are closed throughout Israel in recognition of the day. Public commemoration of Yom HaShoah usually includes religious elements such as the recitation of Psalms, memorial prayers, and kaddish, and the lighting of memorial candles. In Israel, the most notable observances are the State memorial ceremony at Yad Vashem and the sirens marking off a two-minute silence at 10:00 am. Religious Zionist and Modern Orthodox Jews generally participate in such public observances along with secular Jews and Jews who adhere to more liberal religious movements. Outside Israel, Jewish communities observe Yom HaShoah in addition to or instead of their countries' Holocaust Memorial Days. Probably the most notable commemoration is the March of the Living, held at the site of Auschwitz-Birkenau, attended by Jews from all parts of the world.\nOutside Orthodoxy, a liturgy for Yom HaShoah is beginning to develop. The Conservative, Reform and Reconstructionist prayer books all include liturgical elements for Yom HaShoah, to be added to the regular weekday prayers. Conservative Judaism has written a scroll, called \"Megillat HaShoah,\" intended to become a definitive liturgical reading for Yom HaShoah. The Orthodox world\u2013even the segment that participates publicly in Yom HaShoah\u2013has been reluctant to write a liturgy for the day, preferring to compose \"Kinnot\" (prayers of lamentation) for recitation on Tisha B'Av.\nIn order to ensure that public Yom HaShoah ceremonies in Israel do not violate Shabbat prohibitions, the date for Yom HaShoah varies as follows:\nYom Hazikaron\u2014Memorial Day.\n\"Yom Hazikaron\" (lit. \"Memorial Day\") is a day of remembrance of the fallen of Israel's wars. During the first years of Israel's independence, this remembrance was observed on Yom Ha'atzmaut (Independence Day) itself. However, by 1951, the memorial observance was separated from the festive celebration of Independence Day and moved to its current date, the day before Yom Ha'atzmaut. Since 2000, the scope of the memorial has expanded to include civilians slain by acts of hostile terrorism. Its full name is now (\"Day of Remembrance for the Fallen of the Battles of Israel and the Victims of Terror\").\nPlaces of public entertainment are closed throughout Israel in recognition of the day. Many schools, businesses and other institutions conduct memorial services on this day, and it is customary to visit the graves of fallen soldiers and to recite memorial prayers there. The principal public observances are the evening opening ceremony at the Western Wall and the morning services of remembrance at military cemeteries throughout the country, each opened by the sounding of sirens. The public observances conclude with the service at the military cemetery on Mount Herzl that serves as the transition to Yom Ha'atzmaut.\nOutside Israel, Yom HaZikaron observances are often folded into Yom Ha'atzmaut celebrations. Within Israel, Yom Hazikaron is always the day before Yom Ha'atzmaut, but that date moves to prevent violation of Sabbath prohibitions during the ceremonies of either day. See following section for details.\nYom Ha'atzmaut\u2014Israel Independence Day.\n\"Yom Ha'atzmaut\" () is Israel's Independence Day. Observance of this day by Jews inside and outside Israel is widespread, and varies in tone from secular (military parades and barbecues) to religious (recitation of Hallel and new liturgies).\nAlthough Israel's independence was declared on a Friday, the Chief Rabbinate has long been mindful of the possibility of Yom Ha'atzmaut (and Yom Hazikaron) observances leading to violation of Sabbath prohibitions. To prevent such violations, the dates of Yom Hazikaron and Yom Ha'atzmaut vary as follows:\nNearly all non-\"\u1e25aredi\" Jewish religious communities have incorporated changes or enhancements to the liturgy in honor of Yom Ha'atzmaut and suspend the mourning practices of the period of Sefirat Ha'Omer. (See Yom Ha'atzmaut\u2014Religious Customs for details.) Within the Religious Zionist and Modern Orthodox communities, these changes are not without controversy, and customs continue to evolve.\n\"\u1e24aredi\" religious observance of Yom Ha'atzmaut varies widely. A few \"\u1e25aredim\" (especially Sefardic \u1e24aredim) celebrate the day in a reasonably similar way to the way non-\"\u1e25aredim\" do. Most \"\u1e25aredim\" simply treat the day indifferently; \"i.e.,\" as a regular day. And finally others (notably Satmar \u1e24asidim and Neturei Karta) mourn on the day because of their opposition to the enterprise of the State of Israel.\nYom Yerushalayim\u2014Jerusalem Day.\nJerusalem Day () marks the 1967 reunification of Jerusalem under Israeli control during the Six-Day War. This marked the first time in 19 years that the Temple Mount was accessible to Jews, and the first time since the destruction of the Second Temple 1897 years earlier that the Temple Mount was under Jewish political control.\nAs with Yom Ha'atzmaut, celebrations of Yom Yerushalayim range from completely secular (including hikes to Jerusalem and a large parade through downtown Jerusalem) to religious (recitation of Hallel and new liturgies). Although Haredim do not participate in the liturgical changes, they are somewhat more likely to celebrate Yom Yerushalayim than the other modern Israeli holidays because of the importance of the liberation of the Western Wall and the Old City of Jerusalem.\nOutside Israel, observance of Yom Yerushalayim is widespread, especially in Orthodox circles. It has not gained as widespread acceptance as Yom Ha'atzmaut, especially among more politically liberal Jews, because of the continuing conflicts over the future of the city.\nYom Yerushalayim has not traditionally moved to avoid Shabbat desecration, although in 2012 the Chief Rabbinate began some efforts in that direction.\nYom HaAliyah\u2014Aliyah Day.\nAliyah Day () is an Israeli national holiday celebrated annually on the tenth of Nisan. The day was established to acknowledge Aliyah, immigration to the Jewish state, as a core value of the State of Israel, and honor the ongoing contributions of Olim (immigrants) to Israeli society.\nImmigration to Israel is a recognized religious value of Judaism, sometimes referred to as the Gathering of Israel. The date chosen for Yom HaAliyah, 10 Nisan, has religious significance: it is the day on which Joshua and the Israelites crossed the Jordan River at Gilgal into the Promised Land. It was thus the first documented \"mass Aliyah\". The alternative date observed in the school system, 7 Heshvan, falls during the week of the Torah portion in which God instructs Abraham to leave his home and his family and go up to the Land of Israel.\nAt the present time, observance of this day appears to be secular in nature.\nDay to commemorate the expulsion of Jews from Arab lands and Iran.\nThe Knesset established this observance in 2014. The purpose of this observance is to recognize the collective trauma of Mizrahi Jews during the period around the establishment of the State of Israel. Many Mizrachi Jews felt that their own suffering was being ignored, both in comparison to the suffering of European Jewry during the Holocaust and in comparison to the Palestinian Nakba. The Gregorian-calendar date chosen is the day after the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine was adopted, as that date marked the beginning of concentrated pressure and hostility against the community.\nAt the present time, observance of this day appears to be secular in nature.\nNational Remembrance Day for October 7 attack and Gaza war.\nThe Israeli government established this national remembrance day in March 2024. It is designed to be a national remembrance day for those who died in the October 7 attacks and the Gaza war as a whole.\nEthnic holidays.\nThe Israeli government officially recognizes three traditional holidays of ethnic Jewish communities in Israel. These days are also observed by their respective communities outside Israel.\n On the evening concluding Passover, the celebration centers on visiting the homes of friends and neighbors, Jewish and non-Jewish. A variety of traditional foods are served, and symbols which represent good luck and prosperity are prominently displayed. The next day, barbecues and picnics are among the most widespread activities of the celebration.\n Its observance was interrupted after the relocation of this community to Israel in the 1950s. In recent years it has been revived. But because of the already-widespread celebration of Mimouna in Israel, the celebration of the Seharane was moved to \"Chol HaMoed\" Sukkot. \n The Sigd is modeled on a ceremony of fasting, study and prayer described in Nehemiah 8, when the Jews rededicated themselves to religious observance on return to Israel after the Babylonian exile. In Ethiopia, the community would gather on a mountaintop and pray for a return to Jerusalem. The modern Sigd is centered on a promenade overlooking the Old City of Jerusalem. The day's observance ends with a celebratory break fast.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16148", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16148", "title": "John Engler", "text": "Governor of Michigan from 1991 to 2003\nJohn Mathias Engler (born October 12, 1948) is an American politician, lawyer, businessman, and lobbyist who served as the 46th governor of Michigan from 1991 to 2003. Considered one of the country's top lobbyists, he is a member of the Republican Party.\nEngler was serving in the Michigan Senate when he enrolled at Thomas M. Cooley Law School and graduated with a Juris Doctor degree, having served as a Michigan State senator since 1979. He was elected Senate majority leader in 1984 and served there until being elected governor in 1990. He was reelected in 1994 and 1998, and is the last Michigan governor to serve more than two terms. After his governorship, he worked for Business Roundtable.\nEngler served on the board of advisors of the Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal, an educational organization that continues the intellectual legacy of noted conservative and Michigan native Russell Kirk. Engler also served on the board of trustees of the Marguerite Eyer Wilbur Foundation, which funds many Kirk Center programs. Engler was a member of the Annie E. Casey Foundation board of trustees until 2014. As of 2018, he serves on the board of directors of Universal Forest Products. Previous board service included serving as a director of Dow Jones and Delta Air Lines and as a trustee of Munder Funds.\nEarly life and education.\nEngler, a Roman Catholic, was born in Mount Pleasant, Michigan, on October 12, 1948, to Mathias John Engler and his wife, Agnes Marie (n\u00e9e Neyer), but grew up on a cattle farm near Beal City.\nHe attended Michigan State University, graduating with a degree in agricultural economics in 1971, and Thomas M. Cooley Law School, graduating with a Doctor of Jurisprudence degree in 1981.\nHe was elected to the Michigan House of Representatives as a state representative in 1970 at the age of 22. He served in the House from 1971 to 1978. His campaign manager in that first election was a college friend, Dick Posthumus. Engler later became the first Republican youth vice-chair for the Michigan Republican Party, defeating future U.S. Senator Spencer Abraham. Posthumus later went on to be elected a state senator, Senate Majority Leader and Lieutenant Governor. He was Engler's running mate in the 1998 election and served from 1999 to 2003.\nCareer.\nGovernorship.\nEngler's administration was characterized by privatization of state services, income tax reduction, a sales tax increase, educational reform, welfare reform, and major reorganization of executive branch departments.\nIn 1996, he was elected chairman of the Republican Governors Association, and in 2001, he was elected to head the National Governors Association.\nIn 2002, near the end of his final term, Engler and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality attempted to negotiate a consent order with Dow Chemical that would have resulted in a ninefold increase in the allowable levels of dioxins. The consent order would have resulted in Dow not having to pay to clean up high levels of toxins in Midland, Michigan, near its plant there, as well as in the Tittabawassee flood plain, which had been contaminated by dioxins dumped into the river from the facility and from overflow from waste ponds. The consent order fell through in late 2002.\nVice presidential speculation.\n1996.\nDuring the 1996 presidential election, Engler was considered to be a potential vice presidential running mate for Republican nominee Bob Dole. However, Dole instead selected Jack Kemp, a former representative and HUD secretary.\n2000.\nEngler endorsed Texas Governor George W. Bush in the 2000 Republican primary. After Bush secured the GOP nomination, Engler's name was again floated as a possible running mate. In his book \"Decision Points\", Bush says that Engler was someone he was \"close\" with and could \"work well with.\" Ultimately, Engler was passed over for the running mate position in favor of Dick Cheney. After the election, Engler's close political ally Spencer Abraham, who narrowly lost his re-election bid for the Senate to Debbie Stabenow, was chosen as Bush's Secretary of Energy.\n2002 elections.\nEngler's lieutenant governor, Dick Posthumus, sought to succeed Engler in the 2002 gubernatorial race. Posthumus lost the race to the state's attorney general, Democrat Jennifer Granholm.\nElection results.\nIn 1990, Engler, then the state senate majority leader, challenged Governor James Blanchard in his bid for a third term. Political observers viewed his bid as a long shot, and he trailed Blanchard by double digits in the polls the weekend before the election. However, on election day, Engler pulled off the upset, defeating Blanchard by approximately 17,000 votes\u2014a margin of less than one percentage point. In 1994, Engler ran for his second term. The Democrats nominated former Representative Howard Wolpe, who had close ties to the labor movement\u2014a potent force in Democratic politics in Michigan. Engler bested Wolpe 61 to 39 percent, and the state Republican Party made significant gains. Spencer Abraham picked up the Senate seat of retiring Democrat Donald Riegle. Republicans gained a seat to break a tie in the state House of Representatives, taking a 56\u201354 majority, while also picking up a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives. Republican Candice Miller won an upset victory to win the post of Secretary of State.\nMichigan voters re-elected Engler to his third and final term in 1998. He won a landslide victory over lawyer Geoffrey Fieger. Engler took 1,883,005 votes\u201462 percent of the total\u2014to Fieger's 38 percent and 1,143,574 votes. Engler's landslide helped the state Republican Party gain six seats in the state House of Representatives, taking control of the chamber they had lost two years previously with a 58\u201352 margin, as well as picking up an additional seat in the State Senate, for a 23\u201315 majority. Republicans also gained a seat on the technically non-partisan state Supreme Court, holding a 4\u20133 majority over the Democrats."}
{"id": "16149", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16149", "title": "John Engler/Nicknames", "text": ""}
{"id": "16150", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16150", "title": "Jaques Lacan", "text": ""}
{"id": "16152", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16152", "title": "Judaeo-Spanish language", "text": ""}
{"id": "16153", "revid": "49780098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16153", "title": "Jacques Lacan", "text": "French psychoanalyst and writer (1901\u20131981)\nJacques Marie \u00c9mile Lacan (, ; ; 13 April 1901 \u2013 9 September 1981) was a French psychoanalyst and psychiatrist. Described as \"the most controversial psycho-analyst since Freud\", Lacan gave yearly seminars in Paris, from 1953 to 1981, and published papers that were later collected in the book \"\u00c9crits\". Transcriptions of his seminars, given between 1954 and 1976, were also published. His work made a significant impact on continental philosophy and cultural theory in areas such as post-structuralism, critical theory, feminist theory and film theory, as well as on the practice of psychoanalysis itself.\nLacan took up and discussed the whole range of Freudian concepts, emphasizing the philosophical dimension of Freud's thought and applying concepts derived from structuralism in linguistics and anthropology to its development in his own work, which he would further augment by employing formulae from predicate logic and topology. Taking this new direction, and introducing controversial innovations in clinical practice, led to expulsion for Lacan and his followers from the International Psychoanalytic Association. In consequence, Lacan went on to establish new psychoanalytic institutions to promote and develop his work, which he declared to be a \"return to Freud\", in opposition to prevalent trends in psychology and institutional psychoanalysis collusive of adaptation to social norms.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nLacan was born in Paris, the eldest of \u00c9milie and Alfred Lacan's three children. His father was a successful soap and oils salesman. His mother was ardently Catholic \u2013 his younger brother entered a monastery in 1929. Lacan attended the Catholic Coll\u00e8ge Stanislas de Paris between 1907 and 1918. An interest in philosophy led him to a preoccupation with the work of Spinoza, one outcome of which was his abandonment of religious faith for atheism. There were tensions in the family around this issue, and he regretted not persuading his brother to take a different path, but by 1924 his parents had moved to Boulogne and he was living in rooms in Montmartre.\nDuring the early 1920s, Lacan actively engaged with the Parisian literary and artistic avant-garde. Having met James Joyce, he was present at the Parisian bookshop where the first readings of passages from \"Ulysses\" in French and English took place, shortly before it was published in 1922. He also had meetings with Charles Maurras, whom he admired as a literary stylist, and he occasionally attended meetings of Action Fran\u00e7aise (of which Maurras was a leading ideologue), of which he would later be highly critical.\nIn 1920, after being rejected for military service on the grounds that he was too thin, Lacan entered medical school. Between 1927 and 1931, after completing his studies at the faculty of medicine of the University of Paris, he specialised in psychiatry under the direction of Henri Claude at the Sainte-Anne Hospital, the major psychiatric hospital serving central Paris, at the Infirmary for the Insane of the Police Prefecture under Ga\u00ebtan Gatian de Cl\u00e9rambault and also at the Hospital Henri-Rousselle.\n1930s.\nLacan was involved with the Parisian surrealist movement of the 1930s, associating with Andr\u00e9 Breton, Georges Bataille, Salvador Dal\u00ed, and Pablo Picasso. For a time, he served as Picasso's personal therapist. He attended the \"mouvement Psych\u00e9\" that Maryse Choisy founded and published in the Surrealist journal \"Minotaure\". \"[Lacan's] interest in surrealism predated his interest in psychoanalysis,\" former Lacanian analyst and biographer Dylan Evans explains, speculating that \"perhaps Lacan never really abandoned his early surrealist sympathies, its neo-Romantic view of madness as 'convulsive beauty', its celebration of irrationality.\" Translator and historian David Macey writes that \"the importance of surrealism can hardly be over-stated... to the young Lacan... [who] also shared the surrealists' taste for scandal and provocation, and viewed provocation as an important element in psycho-analysis itself\".\nIn 1931, after a second year at the Sainte-Anne Hospital, Lacan was awarded his \"Dipl\u00f4me de m\u00e9decin l\u00e9giste\" (a medical examiner's qualification) and became a licensed forensic psychiatrist. The following year he was awarded his Dipl\u00f4me d'\u00c9tat de docteur en m\u00e9decine (roughly equivalent to an MD degree) for his thesis \"On Paranoiac Psychosis in its Relations to the Personality\" (\"De la Psychose parano\u00efaque dans ses rapports avec la personnalit\u00e9\"). Its publication had little immediate impact on French psychoanalysis but it did meet with acclaim amongst Lacan's circle of surrealist writers and artists. In their only recorded instance of direct communication, Lacan sent a copy of his thesis to Sigmund Freud who acknowledged its receipt with a postcard.\nLacan's thesis was based on observations of several patients with a primary focus on one female patient whom he called Aim\u00e9e. Its exhaustive reconstruction of her family history and social relations, on which he based his analysis of her paranoid state of mind, demonstrated his dissatisfaction with traditional psychiatry and the growing influence of Freud on his ideas. Also in 1932, Lacan published a translation of Freud's 1922 text \"\u00dcber einige neurotische Mechanismen bei Eifersucht, Paranoia und Homosexualit\u00e4t\" (\"Some Neurotic Mechanisms in Jealousy, Paranoia and Homosexuality\") as \"De quelques m\u00e9canismes n\u00e9vrotiques dans la jalousie, la parano\u00efa et l'homosexualit\u00e9\" in the \"Revue fran\u00e7aise de psychanalyse\". In Autumn 1932, Lacan began his training analysis with Rudolph Loewenstein, which was to last until 1938.\nIn 1934 Lacan became a candidate member of the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 psychanalytique de Paris (SPP). He began his private psychoanalytic practice in 1936 whilst still seeing patients at the Sainte-Anne Hospital, and the same year presented his first analytic report at the Congress of the International Psychoanalytical Association (IPA) in Marienbad on the \"Mirror Phase\". The congress chairman, Ernest Jones, terminated the lecture before its conclusion, since he was unwilling to extend Lacan's stated presentation time. Insulted, Lacan left the congress to witness the Berlin Olympic Games. No copy of the original lecture remains, Lacan having decided not to hand in his text for publication in the conference proceedings.\nLacan's attendance at Koj\u00e8ve's lectures on Hegel, given between 1933 and 1939, and which focused on the \"Phenomenology\" and the master-slave dialectic in particular, was formative for his subsequent work, initially in his formulation of his theory of the mirror phase, for which he was also indebted to the experimental work on child development of Henri Wallon.\nIt was Wallon who commissioned from Lacan the last major text of his pre-war period, a contribution to the 1938 \"Encyclop\u00e9die fran\u00e7aise\" entitled \"La Famille\" (reprinted in 1984 as \"Les Complexes familiaux dans la formation de l'individu\", Paris: Navarin). 1938 was also the year of Lacan's accession to full membership (\"membre titulaire\") of the SPP, notwithstanding considerable opposition from many of its senior members who were unimpressed by his recasting of Freudian theory in philosophical terms.\nLacan married Marie-Louise Blondin in January 1934 and in January 1937 they had the first of their three children, a daughter named Caroline. A son, Thibaut, was born in August 1939 and a daughter, Sibylle, in November 1940.\n1940s.\nThe SPP was disbanded due to Nazi Germany's occupation of France in 1940. Lacan was called up for military service which he undertook in periods of duty at the Val-de-Gr\u00e2ce military hospital in Paris, whilst at the same time continuing his private psychoanalytic practice. In 1942 he moved into apartments at 5 rue de Lille, which he would occupy until his death. During the war he did not publish any work, turning instead to a study of Chinese for which he obtained a degree from the \u00c9cole sp\u00e9ciale des langues orientales.\nIn a relationship they formed before the war, Sylvia Bataille (n\u00e9e Makl\u00e8s), the estranged wife of his friend Georges Bataille, became Lacan's mistress and, in 1953, his second wife. During the war their relationship was complicated by the threat of deportation for Sylvia, who was Jewish, since this required her to live in the unoccupied territories. Lacan intervened personally with the authorities to obtain papers detailing her family origins, which he destroyed. In 1941 they had a child, Judith. She kept the name Bataille because Lacan wished to delay the announcement of his divorce until after the war.\nAfter the war, the SPP recommenced their meetings. In 1945 Lacan visited England for a five-week study trip, where he met the British analysts Ernest Jones, Wilfred Bion and John Rickman. Bion's analytic work with groups influenced Lacan, contributing to his own subsequent emphasis on study groups as a structure within which to advance theoretical work in psychoanalysis. He published a report of his visit as 'La Psychiatrique anglaise et la guerre' (\"Evolution psychiatrique\" 1, 1947, pp. \u00a0293\u2013318).\nIn 1949, Lacan presented a new paper on the mirror stage, 'The Mirror-Stage, as Formative of the I, as Revealed in Psychoanalytic Experience', to the sixteenth IPA congress in Zurich. The same year he set out in the \"Doctrine de la Commission de l'Enseignement,\" produced for the Training Commission of the SPP, the protocols for the training of candidates.\n1950s.\nWith the purchase in 1951 of a country mansion at Guitrancourt, Lacan established a base for weekend retreats for work, leisure\u2014including extravagant social occasions\u2014and for the accommodation of his vast library. His art collection included Courbet's L'Origine du monde, which he had concealed in his study by a removable wooden screen on which an abstract representation of the Courbet by the artist Andr\u00e9 Masson was portrayed.\nIn 1951, Lacan started to hold a private weekly seminar in Paris in which he inaugurated what he described as \"a return to Freud,\" whose doctrines were to be re-articulated through a reading of Saussure's linguistics and Levi-Strauss's structuralist anthropology. Becoming public in 1953, Lacan's 27-year-long seminar was highly influential in Parisian cultural life, as well as in psychoanalytic theory and clinical practice.\nIn January 1953 Lacan was elected president of the SPP. When, at a meeting the following June, a formal motion was passed against him criticising his abandonment of the standard analytic training session for the variable-length session, he immediately resigned his presidency. He and a number of colleagues then resigned from the SPP to form the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Fran\u00e7aise de Psychanalyse (SFP). One consequence of this was to eventually deprive the new group of membership of the International Psychoanalytical Association.\nEncouraged by the reception of \"the return to Freud\" and of his report \"The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis,\" Lacan began to re-read Freud's works in relation to contemporary philosophy, linguistics, ethnology, biology, and topology. From 1953 to 1964 at the Sainte-Anne Hospital, he held his Seminars and presented case histories of patients. During this period he wrote the texts that are found in the collection \"\u00c9crits\", which was first published in 1966. In his seventh seminar \"The Ethics of Psychoanalysis\" (1959\u201360), which according to Lewis A. Kirshner \"arguably represents the most far-reaching attempt to derive a comprehensive ethical position from psychoanalysis,\" Lacan defined the ethical foundations of psychoanalysis and presented his \"ethics for our time\"\u2014one that would, in the words of Freud, prove to be equal to the tragedy of modern man and to the \"discontent of civilization.\" At the roots of the ethics is desire: the only promise of analysis is austere, it is the entrance-into-the-I (in French a play on words between \"l'entr\u00e9e en je\" and \"l'entr\u00e9e en jeu\"). \"I must come to the place where the id was,\" where the analysand discovers, in its absolute nakedness, the truth of his desire. The end of psychoanalysis entails \"the purification of desire.\" He defended three assertions: that psychoanalysis must have a scientific status; that Freudian ideas have radically changed the concepts of subject, of knowledge, and of desire; and that the analytic field is the only place from which it is possible to question the insufficiencies of science and philosophy.\n1960s.\nStarting in 1962, a complex negotiation took place to determine the status of the SFP within the IPA. Lacan's practice (with its controversial indeterminate-length sessions) and his critical stance towards psychoanalytic orthodoxy led, in August 1963, to the IPA setting the condition that registration of the SFP was dependent upon the removal of Lacan from the list of SFP analysts. With the SFP's decision to honour this request in November 1963, Lacan had effectively been stripped of the right to conduct training analyses and thus was constrained to form his own institution in order to accommodate the many candidates who desired to continue their analyses with him. This he did, on 21 June 1964, in the \"Founding Act\" of what became known as the \u00c9cole Freudienne de Paris (EFP), taking \"many representatives of the third generation with him: among them were Maud and Octave Mannoni, Serge Leclaire ... and Jean Clavreul\".293\nWith the support of Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss and Louis Althusser, Lacan was appointed lecturer at the \u00c9cole Pratique des Hautes \u00c9tudes. He started with a seminar on \"The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis\" in January 1964 in the Dussane room at the \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure. Lacan began to set forth his own approach to psychoanalysis to an audience of colleagues that had joined him from the SFP. His lectures also attracted many of the \u00c9cole Normale's students. He divided the \u00c9cole Freudienne de Paris into three sections: the section of pure psychoanalysis (training and elaboration of the theory, where members who have been analyzed but have not become analysts can participate); the section for applied psychoanalysis (therapeutic and clinical, physicians who either have not started or have not yet completed analysis are welcome); and the section for taking inventory of the Freudian field (concerning the critique of psychoanalytic literature and the analysis of the theoretical relations with related or affiliated sciences). In 1967 he invented the procedure of the Pass, which was added to the statutes after being voted in by the members of the EFP the following year.\n1966 saw the publication of Lacan's collected writings, the \"\u00c9crits\", compiled with an index of concepts by Jacques-Alain Miller. Printed by the prestigious publishing house \u00c9ditions du Seuil, the \"\u00c9crits\" did much to establish Lacan's reputation to a wider public. The success of the publication led to a subsequent two-volume edition in 1969.\nBy the 1960s, Lacan was associated, at least in the public mind, with the far left in France. In May 1968, Lacan voiced his sympathy for the student protests and as a corollary his followers set up a Department of Psychology at the University of Vincennes (Paris VIII). However, Lacan's unequivocal comments in 1971 on revolutionary ideals in politics draw a sharp line between the actions of some of his followers and his own style of \"revolt\".\nIn 1969, Lacan moved his public seminars to the Facult\u00e9 de Droit (Panth\u00e9on), where he continued to deliver his expositions of analytic theory and practice until the dissolution of his school in 1980.\n1970s.\nThroughout the final decade of his life, Lacan continued his widely followed seminars. During this period, he developed his concepts of masculine and feminine jouissance and placed an increased emphasis on the concept of \"the Real\" as a point of impossible contradiction in the \"symbolic order\". Lacan continued to draw widely on various disciplines, working closely on classical Chinese literature with Fran\u00e7ois Cheng and on the life and work of James Joyce with Jacques Aubert.\nThe growing success of the \"\u00c9crits\", which was translated (in abridged form) into German and English, led to invitations to lecture in Italy, Japan and the United States. He gave lectures in 1975 at Yale, Columbia and MIT.\nLast years.\nLacan's failing health made it difficult for him to meet the demands of the year-long Seminars he had been delivering since the fifties, but his teaching continued into the first year of the eighties. After dissolving his School, the EFP, in January 1980, Lacan travelled to Caracas to found the Freudian Field Institute on 12 July.\nThe Overture to the Caracas Encounter was to be Lacan's final public address. His last texts from the spring of 1981 are brief institutional documents pertaining to the newly formed Freudian Field Institute.\nLacan died on 9 September 1981.\nMajor concepts.\nReturn to Freud.\nLacan's \"return to Freud\" emphasizes a renewed attention to the original texts of Freud, and included a radical critique of ego psychology, whereas \"Lacan's quarrel with Object Relations psychoanalysis\"25 was a more muted affair. Here he attempted \"to restore to the notion of the Object Relation... the capital of experience that legitimately belongs to it\", building upon what he termed \"the hesitant, but controlled work of Melanie Klein... Through her we know the function of the imaginary primordial enclosure formed by the \"imago\" of the mother's body\", as well as upon \"the notion of the transitional object, introduced by D. W. Winnicott... a key-point for the explanation of the genesis of fetishism\". Nevertheless, \"Lacan systematically questioned those psychoanalytic developments from the 1930s to the 1970s, which were increasingly and almost exclusively focused on the child's early relations with the mother... the pre-Oedipal or Kleinian mother\"; and Lacan's rereading of Freud\u2014\"characteristically, Lacan insists that his return to Freud supplies the only valid model\"\u2014formed a basic conceptual starting-point in that oppositional strategy.\nLacan thought that Freud's ideas of \"slips of the tongue\", jokes, and the interpretation of dreams all emphasized the agency of language in subjects' own constitution of themselves. In \"The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious, or Reason Since Freud,\" he proposes that \"the psychoanalytic experience discovers in the unconscious the whole structure of language\". The unconscious is not a primitive or archetypal part of the mind separate from the conscious, linguistic ego, he explained, but rather a formation as complex and structurally sophisticated as consciousness itself. Lacan is associated with the idea that \"the unconscious is structured like a language\", but the first time this sentence occurs in his work, he clarifies that he means that both the unconscious and language are structured, not that they share a single structure; and that the structure of language is such that the subject cannot necessarily be equated with the speaker. This results in the self being denied any point of reference to which to be \"restored\" following trauma or a crisis of identity.\nAndr\u00e9 Green objected that \"when you read Freud, it is obvious that this proposition doesn't work for a minute. Freud very clearly opposes the unconscious (which he says is constituted by thing-presentations and nothing else) to the pre-conscious. What is related to language can only belong to the pre-conscious\".5n Freud certainly contrasted \"the presentation of the \"word\" and the presentation of the \"thing\"... the unconscious presentation is the presentation of the thing alone\" in his metapsychology. Dylan Evans, however, in his \"Dictionary of Lacanian Psychoanalysis,\" \"... takes issue with those who, like Andr\u00e9 Green, question the linguistic aspect of the unconscious, emphasizing Lacan's distinction between \"das Ding\" and \"die Sache\" in Freud's account of thing-presentation\".8n Green's criticism of Lacan also included accusations of intellectual dishonesty, he said, \"[He] cheated everybody... the return to Freud was an excuse, it just meant going to Lacan.\"\nMirror stage.\nLacan's first official contribution to psychoanalysis was the mirror stage, which he described as \"formative of the function of the 'I' as revealed in psychoanalytic experience.\" By the early 1950s, he came to regard the mirror stage as more than a moment in the life of the infant; instead, it formed part of the permanent structure of subjectivity. In the \"imaginary order\", the subject's own image permanently catches and captivates the subject. Lacan explains that \"the mirror stage is a phenomenon to which I assign a twofold value. In the first place, it has historical value as it marks a decisive turning-point in the mental development of the child. In the second place, it typifies an essential libidinal relationship with the body-image\".\nAs this concept developed further, the stress fell less on its historical value and more on its structural value. In his fourth seminar, \"La relation d'objet,\" Lacan states that \"the mirror stage is far from a mere phenomenon which occurs in the development of the child. It illustrates the conflictual nature of the dual relationship. \"\nThe mirror stage describes the formation of the ego via the process of objectification, the ego being the result of a conflict between one's perceived visual appearance and one's emotional experience. This identification is what Lacan called \"alienation\". At six months, the baby still lacks physical co-ordination. The child is able to recognize itself in a mirror prior to the attainment of control over their bodily movements. The child sees its image as a whole and the synthesis of this image produces a sense of contrast with the lack of co-ordination of the body, which is perceived as a fragmented body. The child experiences this contrast initially as a rivalry with its image, because the wholeness of the image threatens the child with fragmentation\u2014thus the mirror stage gives rise to an aggressive tension between the subject and the image. To resolve this aggressive tension, the child identifies with the image: this primary identification with the counterpart forms the ego. Lacan understood this moment of identification as a moment of jubilation, since it leads to an imaginary sense of mastery; yet when the child compares its own precarious sense of mastery with the omnipotence of the mother, a depressive reaction may accompany the jubilation.\nLacan calls the specular image \"orthopaedic,\" since it leads the child to anticipate the overcoming of its \"real specific prematurity of birth.\" The vision of the body as integrated and contained, in opposition to the child's actual experience of motor incapacity and the sense of his or her body as fragmented, induces a movement from \"insufficiency to anticipation.\" In other words, the mirror image initiates and then aids, like a crutch, the process of the formation of an integrated sense of self.\nIn the mirror stage a \"misunderstanding\" (\"m\u00e9connaissance\") constitutes the ego\u2014the \"me\" (\"moi\") becomes alienated from itself through the introduction of an imaginary dimension to the subject. The mirror stage also has a significant symbolic dimension, due to the presence of the figure of the adult who carries the infant. Having jubilantly assumed the image as their own, the child turns their head towards this adult, who represents the big other, as if to call on the adult to ratify this image.\nOther.\nWhile Freud uses the term \"other\", referring to \"der Andere\" (the other person) and \"das Andere\" (otherness), Lacan (influenced by the seminar of Alexandre Koj\u00e8ve) theorizes alterity in a manner more closely resembling Hegel's philosophy.\nLacan often used an algebraic symbology for his concepts: the big other (\"l'Autre\") is designated \"A\", and the little other (\"l'autre\") is designated \"a\". He asserts that an awareness of this distinction is fundamental to analytic practice: \"the analyst must be imbued with the difference between \"A\" and \"a\", so he can situate himself in the place of Other, and not the other\". Dylan Evans explains that:\nFor Lacan \"the Other must first of all be considered a locus in which speech is constituted,\" so that the other as another subject is secondary to the other as symbolic order. We can speak of the other \"as a subject\" in a secondary sense only when a subject occupies this position and thereby embodies the other for another subject.\nIn arguing that speech originates in neither the ego nor in the subject but rather in the other, Lacan stresses that speech and language are beyond the subject's conscious control. They come from another place, outside of consciousness\u2014\"the unconscious is the discourse of the Other\". When conceiving the other as a place, Lacan refers to Freud's concept of psychical locality, in which the unconscious is described as \"the other scene\".\n\"It is the mother who first occupies the position of the big Other for the child\", Dylan Evans explains, \"it is she who receives the child's primitive cries and retroactively sanctions them as a particular message\". The castration complex is formed when the child discovers that this other is not complete because there is a \"lack (manque)\" in the other. This means that there is always a signifier missing from the trove of signifiers constituted by the other. Lacan illustrates this incomplete other graphically by striking a bar through the symbol \"A\"; hence another name for the castrated, incomplete other is the \"barred other\".\nPhallus.\nFeminist thinkers have both utilised and criticised Lacan's concepts of castration and the phallus. Feminists such as Avital Ronell, Jane Gallop, and Elizabeth Grosz, have interpreted Lacan's work as opening up new possibilities for feminist theory.\nSome feminists have argued that Lacan's phallocentric analysis provides a useful means of understanding gender biases and imposed roles, while others, most notably Luce Irigaray, accuse Lacan of maintaining the sexist tradition in psychoanalysis. For Irigaray, the phallus does not define a single axis of gender by its presence or absence; instead, gender has two positive poles. Like Irigaray, French philosopher Jacques Derrida, in criticizing Lacan's concept of castration, discusses the phallus in a chiasmus with the hymen, as both one and other.\nThree orders (plus one).\nLacan considered psychic functions to occur within a universal matrix. The Real, Imaginary and Symbolic are properties of this matrix, which make up part of every psychic function. This is not analogous to Freud's concept of id, ego and superego since in Freud's model certain functions take place within components of the psyche while Lacan thought that all three orders were part of every function. Lacan refined the concept of the orders over decades, resulting in inconsistencies in his writings. He eventually added a fourth component, the sinthome.\nThe Imaginary.\nThe Imaginary is the field of images and imagination. The main illusions of this order are synthesis, autonomy, duality, and resemblance. Lacan thought that the relationship created within the mirror stage between the ego and the reflected image means that the ego and the Imaginary order itself are places of radical alienation: \"alienation is constitutive of the Imaginary order\". This relationship is also narcissistic.\nIn \"The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis\", Lacan argues that the Symbolic order structures the visual field of the Imaginary, which means that it involves a linguistic dimension. If the signifier is the foundation of the symbolic, the signified and signification are part of the Imaginary order. Language has symbolic and Imaginary connotations\u2014in its Imaginary aspect, language is the \"wall of language\" that inverts and distorts the discourse of the Other. The Imaginary, however, is rooted in the subject's relationship with his or her own body (the image of the body). In \"Fetishism: the Symbolic, the Imaginary and the Real\", Lacan argues that in the sexual plane the Imaginary appears as sexual display and courtship love.\nInsofar as identification with the analyst is the objective of analysis, Lacan accused major psychoanalytic schools of reducing the practice of psychoanalysis to the Imaginary order. Instead, Lacan proposes the use of the symbolic to dislodge the disabling fixations of the Imaginary\u2014the analyst transforms the images into words. \"The use of the Symbolic\", he argued, \"is the only way for the analytic process to cross the plane of identification.\"\nThe Symbolic.\nIn his Seminar IV, \"La relation d'objet\", Lacan argues that the concepts of \"Law\" and \"Structure\" are unthinkable without language\u2014thus the Symbolic is a linguistic dimension. This order is not equivalent to language, however, since language involves the Imaginary and the Real as well. The dimension proper to language in the Symbolic is that of the signifier\u2014that is, a dimension in which elements have no positive existence, but which are constituted by virtue of their mutual differences.\nThe Symbolic is also the field of radical alterity\u2014that is, the Other; the unconscious is the discourse of this Other. It is the realm of the Law that regulates desire in the Oedipus complex. The Symbolic is the domain of culture as opposed to the Imaginary order of nature. As important elements in the Symbolic, the concepts of death and lack (\"manque\") connive to make of the pleasure principle the regulator of the distance from the Thing (in German, \"das Ding an sich\") and the death drive that goes \"beyond the pleasure principle by means of repetition\"\u2014\"the death drive is only a mask of the Symbolic order\".\nBy working in the Symbolic order, the analyst is able to produce changes in the subjective position of the person undergoing psychoanalysis. These changes will produce imaginary effects because the Imaginary is structured by the Symbolic.\nThe Real.\nLacan's concept of the Real dates back to 1936 and his doctoral thesis on psychosis. It was a term that was popular at the time, particularly with \u00c9mile Meyerson, who referred to it as \"an ontological absolute, a true being-in-itself\". Lacan returned to the theme of the Real in 1953 and continued to develop it until his death. The Real, for Lacan, is not synonymous with reality. Not only opposed to the Imaginary, the Real is also exterior to the Symbolic. Unlike the latter, which is constituted in terms of oppositions (i.e. presence/absence), \"there is no absence in the Real\". Whereas the Symbolic opposition \"presence/absence\" implies the possibility that something may be missing from the Symbolic, \"the Real is always in its place\". If the Symbolic is a set of differentiated elements (signifiers), the Real in itself is undifferentiated\u2014it bears no fissure. The Symbolic introduces \"a cut in the real\" in the process of signification: \"it is the world of words that creates the world of things\u2014things originally confused in the 'here and now' of the all in the process of coming into being\". The Real is that which is outside language and that resists symbolization absolutely. In Seminar XI Lacan defines the Real as \"the impossible\" because it is impossible to imagine, impossible to integrate into the Symbolic, and impossible to attain. It is this resistance to symbolization that lends the Real its traumatic quality. Finally, the Real is the object of anxiety, insofar as it lacks any possible mediation and is \"the essential object which is not an object any longer, but this something faced with which all words cease and all categories fail, the object of anxiety \"par excellence\".\"\nThe Sinthome.\nThe term \"sinthome\" () was introduced by Jacques Lacan in his seminar \"Le sinthome\" (1975\u201376). According to Lacan, \"sinthome\" is the Latin way (1495 Rabelais, IV,63) of spelling the Greek origin of the French word \"sympt\u00f4me\", meaning symptom. The seminar is a continuing elaboration of his topology, extending the previous seminar's focus (\"RSI\") on the Borromean Knot and an exploration of the writings of James Joyce. Lacan redefines the psychoanalytic symptom in terms of his topology of the subject.\nIn \"Psychoanalysis and its Teachings\" (\"\u00c9crits\") Lacan views the symptom as inscribed in a writing process, not as ciphered message which was the traditional notion. In his seminar \"L'angoisse\" (1962\u201363) he states that the symptom does not call for interpretation: in itself it is not a call to the Other but a pure \"jouissance\" addressed to no-one. This is a shift from the linguistic definition of the symptom\u2014as a signifier\u2014to his assertion that \"the symptom can only be defined as the way in which each subject enjoys (\"jouit\") the unconscious in so far as the unconscious determines the subject\". He goes from conceiving the symptom as a message which can be deciphered by reference to the unconscious structured like a language to seeing it as the trace of the particular modality of the subject's \"jouissance\".\nDesire.\nLacan's concept of desire is related to Hegel's \"Begierde\", a term that implies a continuous force, and therefore somehow differs from Freud's concept of \"Wunsch\". Lacan's desire refers always to unconscious desire because it is unconscious desire that forms the central concern of psychoanalysis.\nThe aim of psychoanalysis is to lead the analysand to recognize his/her desire and by doing so to uncover the truth about his/her desire. However this is possible only if desire is articulated in speech: \"It is only once it is formulated, named in the presence of the other, that desire appears in the full sense of the term.\" And again in \"The Ego in Freud's Theory and in the Technique of Psychoanalysis\": \"what is important is to teach the subject to name, to articulate, to bring desire into existence. The subject should come to recognize and to name her/his desire. But it isn't a question of recognizing something that could be entirely given. In naming it, the subject creates, brings forth, a new presence in the world.\" The truth about desire is somehow present in discourse, although discourse is never able to articulate the entire truth about desire; whenever discourse attempts to articulate desire, there is always a leftover or surplus.\nLacan distinguishes desire from need and from demand. Need is a biological instinct where the subject depends on the Other to satisfy its own needs: in order to get the Other's help, \"need\" must be articulated in \"demand\". But the presence of the Other not only ensures the satisfaction of the \"need\", it also represents the Other's love. Consequently, \"demand\" acquires a double function: on the one hand, it articulates \"need\", and on the other, acts as a \"demand for love\". Even after the \"need\" articulated in demand is satisfied, the \"demand for love\" remains unsatisfied since the Other cannot provide the unconditional love that the subject seeks. \"Desire is neither the appetite for satisfaction, nor the demand for love, but the difference that results from the subtraction of the first from the second.\" Desire is a surplus, a leftover, produced by the articulation of need in demand: \"desire begins to take shape in the margin in which demand becomes separated from need\". Unlike need, which can be satisfied, desire can never be satisfied: it is constant in its pressure and eternal. The attainment of desire does not consist in being fulfilled but in its reproduction as such. As Slavoj \u017di\u017eek puts it, \"desire's \"raison d'\u00eatre\" is not to realize its goal, to find full satisfaction, but to reproduce itself as desire\".\nLacan also distinguishes between desire and the drives: desire is one and drives are many. The drives are the partial manifestations of a single force called desire. Lacan's concept of \"objet petit a\" is the object of desire, although this object is not that towards which desire tends, but rather the cause of desire. Desire is not a relation to an object but a relation to a lack (\"manque\").\nIn \"The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis\" Lacan argues that \"man's desire is the desire of the Other.\" This entails the following:\nLast but not least for Lacan, the first person who occupies the place of the Other is the mother and at first the child is at her mercy. Only when the father articulates desire with the Law by castrating the mother is the subject liberated from desire for the mother.\nDrive.\nLacan maintains Freud's distinction between drive (\"Trieb\") and instinct (\"Instinkt\"). Drives differ from biological needs because they can never be satisfied and do not aim at an object but rather circle perpetually around it. He argues that the purpose of the drive (\"Triebziel\") is not to reach a goal but to follow its aim, meaning \"the way itself\" instead of \"the final destination\"\u2014that is, to circle around the object. The purpose of the drive is to return to its circular path and the true source of \"jouissance\" is the repetitive movement of this closed circuit. Lacan posits drives as both cultural and symbolic constructs: to him, \"the drive is not a given, something archaic, primordial\". He incorporates the four elements of drives as defined by Freud (pressure, end, object and source) to his theory of the drive's circuit: the drive originates in the erogenous zone, circles round the object, and returns to the erogenous zone. Three grammatical voices structure this circuit:\nThe active and reflexive voices are autoerotic\u2014they lack a subject. It is only when the drive completes its circuit with the passive voice that a new subject appears, implying that, prior to that instance, there was no subject. Despite being the \"passive\" voice, the drive is essentially active: \"to make oneself be seen\" rather than \"to be seen\". The circuit of the drive is the only way for the subject to transgress the pleasure principle.\nTo Freud sexuality is composed of partial drives (i.e. the oral or the anal drives) each specified by a different erotogenic zone. At first these partial drives function independently (i.e. the polymorphous perversity of children), it is only in puberty that they become organized under the aegis of the genital organs. Lacan accepts the partial nature of drives, but (1) he rejects the notion that partial drives can ever attain any complete organization\u2014the primacy of the genital zone, if achieved, is always precarious; and (2) he argues that drives are partial in that they represent sexuality only partially and not in the sense that they are a part of the whole. Drives do not represent the reproductive function of sexuality but only the dimension of \"jouissance\".\nLacan identifies four partial drives: the oral drive (the erogenous zones are the lips (the partial object the breast\u2014the verb is \"to suck\"), the anal drive (the anus and the faeces, \"to shit\"), the scopic drive (the eyes and the gaze, \"to see\") and the invocatory drive (the ears and the voice, \"to hear\"). The first two drives relate to demand and the last two to desire.\nThe notion of dualism is maintained throughout Freud's various reformulations of the drive-theory. From the initial opposition between sexual drives and ego-drives (self-preservation) to the final opposition between the life drives (\"Lebenstriebe\") and the death drives (\"Todestriebe\"). Lacan retains Freud's dualism, but in terms of an opposition between the symbolic and the imaginary and not referred to different kinds of drives. For Lacan all drives are sexual drives, and every drive is a death drive (\"pulsion de mort\") since every drive is excessive, repetitive and destructive.\nThe drives are closely related to desire, since both originate in the field of the subject. But they are not to be confused: drives are the partial aspects in which desire is realized\u2014desire is one and undivided, whereas the drives are its partial manifestations. A drive is a demand that is not caught up in the dialectical mediation of desire; drive is a \"mechanical\" insistence that is not ensnared in demand's dialectical mediation.\nOther concepts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLacan on error and knowledge.\nBuilding on Freud's \"The Psychopathology of Everyday Life\", Lacan long argued that \"every unsuccessful act is a successful, not to say 'well-turned', discourse\", highlighting as well \"sudden transformations of errors into truths, which seemed to be due to nothing more than perseverance\". In a late seminar, he generalised more fully the psychoanalytic discovery of \"truth\u2014arising from misunderstanding\", so as to maintain that \"the subject is naturally erring... discourse structures alone give him his moorings and reference points, signs identify and orient him; if he neglects, forgets, or loses them, he is condemned to err anew\".\nBecause of \"the alienation to which speaking beings are subjected due to their being in language\", to survive \"one must let oneself be taken in by signs and become the dupe of a discourse... [of] fictions organized in to a discourse\". For Lacan, with \"masculine knowledge irredeemably an erring\", the individual \"must thus allow himself to be fooled by these signs to have a chance of getting his bearings amidst them; he must place and maintain himself in the wake of a discourse... become the dupe of a discourse... \"les non-dupes errent\"\".\nLacan comes close here to one of the points where \"very occasionally he sounds like Thomas Kuhn (whom he never mentions)\", with Lacan's \"discourse\" resembling Kuhn's \"paradigm\" seen as \"the entire constellation of beliefs, values, techniques, and so on shared by the members of a given community\".\nClinical contributions.\nVariable-length session.\nThe \"variable-length psychoanalytic session\" was one of Lacan's crucial clinical innovations, and a key element in his conflicts with the IPA, to whom his \"innovation of reducing the fifty-minute analytic hour to a Delphic seven or eight minutes (or sometimes even to a single oracular \"parole\" murmured in the waiting-room)\" was unacceptable. Lacan's variable-length sessions lasted anywhere from a few minutes (or even, if deemed appropriate by the analyst, a few seconds) to several hours. This practice replaced the classical Freudian \"fifty minute hour\".\nWith respect to what he called \"the cutting up of the 'timing'\", Lacan asked the question, \"Why make an intervention impossible at this point, which is consequently privileged in this way?\" By allowing the analyst's intervention on timing, the variable-length session removed the patient's former certainty as to the length of time that they would be on the couch. When Lacan adopted the practice, \"the psychoanalytic establishment were scandalized\"\u2014and, given that \"between 1979 and 1980 he saw an average of ten patients an hour\", it is perhaps not hard to see why. Psychoanalysis was \"reduced to zero\",397, though the treatments were no less lucrative.\nAt the time of his original innovation, Lacan described the issue as concerning \"the systematic use of shorter sessions in certain analyses, and in particular in training analyses\"; and in practice it was certainly a shortening of the session around the so-called \"critical moment\" which took place, so that critics wrote that \"everyone is well aware what is meant by the deceptive phrase 'variable length' ... sessions systematically reduced to just a few minutes\". Irrespective of the theoretical merits of breaking up patients' expectations, it was clear that \"the Lacanian analyst never wants to 'shake up' the routine by keeping them for more rather than less time\". Lacan's shorter sessions enabled him to take many more clients than therapists using orthodox Freudian methods, and this growth continued as Lacan's students and followers adopted the same practice.\nAccepting the importance of \"the critical moment when insight arises\", object relations theory would nonetheless suggest that \"if the analyst does not provide the patient with space in which nothing \"needs\" to happen there is no space in which something \"can\" happen\". Julia Kristeva would concur that \"Lacan, alert to the scandal of the timeless intrinsic to the analytic experience, was mistaken in wanting to ritualize it as a technique of scansion (short sessions)\".\nWritings and writing style.\nAccording to Jean-Michel Rabat\u00e9, Lacan in the mid-1950s classed the seminars as commentaries on Freud rather than presentations of his own doctrine (like the writings), while Lacan by 1971 placed the most value on his teaching and \"the interactive space of his seminar\" (in contrast to Sigmund Freud). Rabat\u00e9 also argued that from 1964 onward, the seminars include original ideas. However, Rabat\u00e9 also wrote that the seminars are \"more problematic\" because of the importance of the interactive performances, and because they were partly edited and rewritten.\nMost of Lacan's psychoanalytic writings from the 1940s through to the early 1960s were compiled with an index of concepts by Jacques-Alain Miller in the 1966 collection, titled simply \"\u00c9crits\". Published in French by \u00c9ditions du Seuil, they were later issued as a two-volume set (1970/1) with a new \"Preface\". A selection of the writings (chosen by Lacan himself) were translated by Alan Sheridan and published by Tavistock Press in 1977. The full 35-text volume appeared for the first time in English in Bruce Fink's translation published by Norton &amp; Co. (2006). The \"\u00c9crits\" were included on the list of 100 most influential books of the 20th century compiled and polled by the broadsheet \"Le Monde\".\nLacan's writings from the late sixties and seventies (thus subsequent to the 1966 collection) were collected posthumously, along with some early texts from the nineteen thirties, in the \u00c9ditions du Seuil volume \"Autres \u00e9crits\" (2001).\nAlthough most of the texts in \"\u00c9crits\" and \"Autres \u00e9crits\" are closely related to Lacan's lectures or lessons from his Seminar, more often than not the style is denser than Lacan's oral delivery, and a clear distinction between the writings and the transcriptions of the oral teaching is evident to the reader.\nAn often neglected aspect of Lacan's oral and writing style is his influence from his colleague and personal friend Henry Corbin, who introduced Lacan to the thought of Ibn Arabi. Similarities have been pointed out between the writing styles of Lacan and Ibn Arabi.\nJacques-Alain Miller is the sole editor of Lacan's seminars, which contain the majority of his life's work. \"There has been considerable controversy over the accuracy or otherwise of the transcription and editing\", as well as over \"Miller's refusal to allow any critical or annotated edition to be published\". Despite Lacan's status as a major figure in the history of psychoanalysis, some of his seminars remain unpublished. Since 1984, Miller has been regularly conducting a series of lectures, \"L'orientation lacanienne.\" Miller's teachings have been published in the US by the journal \"Lacanian Ink.\"\nLacan's writing is notoriously difficult, due in part to the repeated Hegelian/Koj\u00e8vean allusions, wide theoretical divergences from other psychoanalytic and philosophical theory, and an obscure prose style. For some, \"the impenetrability of Lacan's prose... [is] too often regarded as profundity precisely because it cannot be understood\". Arguably at least, \"the imitation of his style by other 'Lacanian' commentators\" has resulted in \"an obscurantist antisystematic tradition in Lacanian literature\".\nAlthough Lacan is a major influence on psychoanalysis in France and parts of Latin America, in the English-speaking world his influence on clinical psychology has been far less and his ideas are best known in the arts and humanities. However, there are Lacanian psychoanalytic societies in both North America and the United Kingdom that carry on his work.\nOne example of Lacan's work being practiced in the United States is found in the works of Annie G. Rogers (\"A Shining Affliction\"; \"The Unsayable: The Hidden Language of Trauma\"), which credit Lacanian theory for many therapeutic insights in successfully treating sexually abused young women. Lacan's work has also reached Quebec, where The Interdisciplinary Freudian Group for Research and Clinical and Cultural Interventions (GIFRIC) claims that it has used a modified form of Lacanian psychoanalysis in successfully treating psychosis in many of its patients, a task once thought to be unsuited for psychoanalysis, even by psychoanalysts themselves.\nLegacy.\nIn his introduction to the 1994 Penguin edition of Lacan's \"The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho-Analysis\", translator and historian David Macey describes Lacan as \"the most controversial psycho-analyst since Freud\". His ideas had a significant impact on post-structuralism, critical theory, French philosophy, film theory, and clinical psychoanalysis. Theorists such as Rafael Holmberg have argued that Lacanian psychoanalysis even contributes to a criticism of the idea of Nature.\nIn 2003, Rabat\u00e9 described \"The Freudian Thing\" (1956) as one of his \"most important and programmatic essays\".\nCriticism.\nTheory of psychoanalysis.\nSocial psychologist, psychoanalyst, and humanistic philosopher Erich Fromm rejected Lacan's view on psychonalysis whereby \"true psychoanalysis is founded on the relation between man and talk [\"parole\"],\" and denounced the reduction of analysis to \"a pure and simple exchange of words,\" arguing that the relation is instead about an \"exchange of signs.\" Fromm supports \"clarity and unambiguity\" in the communication with others (\"autrui\") and opposes the Lacanian \"wordplay [that] is associated with the provision of meaning.\" Freudian and Lacanian psychoanalyst \u00c9lisabeth Roudinesco, in her biography of Lacan, writes that she found some writings of her subject \"incomprehensible\", as also recorded by Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss, and Martin Heidegger.\nFormer Lacan student Didier Anzieu, in a 1967 article titled \"Against Lacan,\" described him as a \"danger\" because he kept his students tied to an \"unending dependence on an idol, a logic, or a language,\" by holding out the promise of \"fundamental truths\" to be revealed \"but always at some further point ...and only to those who continued to travel with him.\" According to Sherry Turkle, these attitudes are \"representative of how most members of the Association talk about Lacan.\"\nBy 1977, Lacan was declaring that he was not \"too keen\" (French: \"pas chaud-chaud\") to claim that \"when one practices psychoanalysis, one knows where one goes\", stating that \"psychoanalysis, like every other human activity, undoubtedly participates in abuse. One does as if one knows something.\"\nLacan's charismatic authority has been linked to the many conflicts among his followers and in the analytic schools he was involved with. His intellectual style has also come in for much criticism. Eclectic in his use of sources, Lacan has been seen as concealing his own thought behind the apparent explication of that of others.46 Thus, his \"return to Freud\" was called by Malcolm Bowie \"a complete pattern of dissenting assent to the ideas of Freud . . . Lacan's argument is conducted on Freud's behalf and, at the same time, against him\". Bowie has also suggested that Lacan suffered from both a love of system and a deep-seated opposition to all forms of system.\nTherapeutic practice.\nLacan, in his psychoanalytic practice, came to hold sessions of diminishing duration. Eventually, Lacan's student relates, they often lasted no more than five minutes, held sometimes with Lacan standing in the typically open door of the room. According to Godin, Lacan sometimes struck patients, once literally kicking out a female patient. Author and Lacanian psychoanalyst Jacques-Alain Miller, who also was his son in law, asserts that \"[Lacan]'s morality derives from a superior cynicism.\"\nLacan was criticised for being aggressive with his clients, often physically hitting them, sometimes sleeping with them, and charging \"exorbitant amounts of money\" for each session. Jean Laplanche argued that Lacan could have \"harmed\" some of his clients.\nOthers have been more forceful still, describing him as \"The Shrink from Hell\" and focusing on the many associates\u2013from lovers and family to colleagues, patients, and editors\u2013who were left damaged in his wake.\nFeminist criticism.\nMany feminist thinkers have criticized Lacan's thought. American philosopher Cynthia Willett accuses Lacan for portraying the mother less as a \"loving\", \"nurturing\" presence in the infant's world, than as a \"whore\" who abandons the child to a \"higher bidder for her affections\", while Judith Butler, philosopher and gender studies scholar, reworks these notions as \"gender performativity\".\nPsycholinguist and cultural theorist Luce Irigaray \"ridicules\" through \"mimicry and exaggeration\" these representations of femininity posited as natural and proper by Lacan. Irigaray accuses Lacan of perpetuating phallocentric mastery in philosophical and psychoanalytic discourse.\nOthers have echoed this accusation, seeing Lacan as trapped in the very phallocentric mastery his language ostensibly sought to undermine. The result, Castoriadis would maintain, was to make all thought depend upon Lacan himself, and thus to stifle the capacity for independent thought among all those around him.386\nIn an interview with anthropologist James Hunt, Sylvia Lacan said of her late husband: \"He was a man who worked tremendously hard. Tremendously intelligent. He was...what is called, well, a domestic tyrant... But he was worth the trouble. I have absolutely no reproaches to make against him. Just the contrary. But it was not possible to be a wife, a mother to my children, and an actress at the same time.\"\nMathematics in psychoanalysis.\nIn their work \"Fashionable Nonsense\" (1997), through which their stated intention was to show that \"famous intellectuals\" abuse scientific terminology and concepts,x professors of physics Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont examine Lacan's frequent references to mathematics. They are highly critical of his use of terms from mathematical fields, accusing him of \"superficial erudition\", of abusing scientific concepts that he does not understand, and of producing statements that are \"not even wrong\".21\nIn 1960, the mathematical \"calculations\" he presents in a seminar are assessed as \"pure fantasies\".25-26\nSokal and Bricmont find Lacan to be \"fond\" of topology, in which, though, they see Lacan committing serious errors. He uses technical terms erroneously, e.g. \"space\", \"bounded\", \"closed\", and even \"topology\" itself, and posits claims about a literal and not just symbolic or even metaphorical relation of topological mathematics with neurosis.18-21\nIn the book's preface, the authors state they shall not enter into the debate over the purely psychoanalytic part of Lacan's work.17 Nonetheless, after presenting their case, they comment that \"Lacan never explains the relevance of his mathematical concepts for psychoanalysis\", stating that \"the link with psychoanalysis is not supported by any argument\". Equally meaningless they find his \"famous formulae of sexuation\" offered in support for the maxim \"There are no sexual relations\". Considering the \"cryptic writings\", the \"play on words\" and \"fractured syntax\", as well as the \"reverent exegesis\" accorded to Lacan's work by \"disciples\", they point out a similarity to religiosity.31-37\nIncomprehensibility.\nSeveral critics have dismissed Lacan's work wholesale. French philosopher Fran\u00e7ois Roustang called it an \"incoherent system of pseudo-scientific gibberish\", and quoted linguist Noam Chomsky's opinion that Lacan was an \"amusing and perfectly self-conscious charlatan\". Noam Chomsky, in a 2012 interview on \"Veterans Unplugged\", said: \"[Q]uite frankly I thought [Lacan] was a total charlatan. He was just posturing for the television cameras in the way many Paris intellectuals do. Why this is influential, I haven't the slightest idea. I don't see anything there that should be influential.\"\nAcademic and former Lacanian analyst Dylan Evans came to dismiss Lacanianism as lacking a sound scientific basis and as harming rather than helping patients. He criticized Lacan's followers for treating Lacan's writings as \"holy writ\". Richard Webster decries what he sees as Lacan's obscurity, arrogance, and the resultant \"Cult of Lacan\".\nRoger Scruton included Lacan in his book \"Fools, Frauds and Firebrands: Thinkers of the New Left\", and named him as the only 'fool' included in the book\u2014his other targets merely being misguided or frauds.\nIn \"Les Freudiens h\u00e9r\u00e9tiques\", the 8th tome of his work \"Contre-histoire de la philosophie\" (\"Anti-History of Philosophy\"), philosopher and author Michel Onfray describes Lacan's \"\u00c9crits\" as \"illegible\". According to Onfray, Lacan engages in constant word play, has a taste for the formulaic, and deploys \"incantatory glossolalia\" and unnecessary neologisms. He calls Lacan a \"charlatan\" and a \"dandy figure\" who \"sinks into autism\", eventually becoming senile.\nWorks.\nSelected works published in English listed below. More complete listings can be found at http:// .\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16154", "revid": "2217514", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16154", "title": "Jupiter Ace", "text": "British home computer of the early 1980s\nThe Jupiter Ace was a British home computer by Jupiter Cantab, released in 1982. Like many other home computers of the era, it utilized the Zilog Z80 microprocessor. Known for its distinct white case and visual similarity to the ZX Spectrum, the Ace differed from other microcomputers of the time in that its programming environment used Forth instead of the more popular BASIC. This difference, along with a small selection of commercially available games and software, rudimentary sound generation through an internal speaker, and a comparatively poor character based graphic display limited sales; the machine was not a success in the market.\nHistory.\nJupiter Cantab was formed by Richard Altwasser and Steven Vickers. Both had been on the design team for the ZX Spectrum: Altwasser worked on ZX81 development and hardware design of the Spectrum. Vickers adapted and expanded the 4K ZX80 ROM to the 8K ZX81 ROM and wrote most of the ROM for the Spectrum.\nThe Jupiter Ace was named after an early British computer from 1950: the Pilot ACE. The Jupiter Ace went on sale on 22 September 1982 with a price of \u00a389.95.\nSales to the general public were slow. Initially the computer was only available by mail order, and Jupiter Cantab reported that there were production difficulties, but these had been overcome by January 1983 and that units were arriving in shops. \nThe use of Forth rather than the more usual choice of BASIC, and the availability and success of the ZX Spectrum, as well as limited published software, the poor case and small initial memory all weighed against wider market acceptance. Eventually Jupiter Cantab ceased trading by the end of October 1983. \nThe brand was then acquired by Boldfield Computing Ltd in 1984 that sold the remaining stock by mail order for \u00a326. The brand was again sold to Paul Andrews's company Andrews UK Limited in 2015.\nSales.\nSales of the machine were never very large; the reported number of Aces sold before Jupiter Cantab closed for business was around 5,000. As of the early 2000s, surviving machines are uncommon, often fetching high prices as collector's items.\nForth, while being structured and powerful, was considered difficult to learn, and a knowledge of BASIC acquired from familiarity with other home computers was of no practical help in learning it. A 1982 review stated that \"The success of the Jupiter Ace will depend on the machine-buying public's acceptance of another microcomputer language.\"\nFurther, there was only a very limited range of published software\u00a0\u2013 either commercial programs or type-in programs printed in hobby magazines\u00a0\u2013 for the machine, and these were restricted by the base model's small amount of RAM.\nAttempts to promote the Ace in the educational market also failed; doubts over whether Forth would be relevant for exam syllabuses, and the lack of support for Forth from teaching staff were key issues. Pupils were more interested in learning the widely used BASIC than a language used by only one (uncommon) machine with a peculiar RPN syntax.\nFinally, the tile-based graphics compared poorly to the pixel-based graphics of other machines\u00a0\u2013 which were also colour rather than the Ace's monochrome. This restricted sales largely to a niche market of technical programming enthusiasts.\nDesign.\nThe Jupiter Ace is often compared with ZX81 due to its similar size, low cost, and similar form factor. Internally its design is more similar to the ZX Spectrum although the Ace also had a dedicated video memory of 2KB, partly avoiding the slow down when programs accessed the same bank (same chips) as the video memory. Like the Spectrum, the Ace used black conductive rubber keys although unlike the Spectrum, the keys had a conductive pad that was squashed directly onto tracks on the PCB rather than using a membrane. As a result, the keys would often stop working reliably until they were cleaned or the conductive material was refreshed.\nAudio capabilities were CPU-controlled with programmable frequency and duration. Sound output was through a small built-in speaker.\nAs was common at the time, it used a common tape recorder instead of disk/tape drives. Similarly, a television was needed as a display\u00a0\u2013 but this was in black and white only, rather than the colour supported by competing models such as the Spectrum. A secondary (undocumented) edge connector on the back of the case made some video signals available, presumably for a forthcoming colour video card, but no official product that used this connector was ever released.\nThe Jupiter Ace was based on the Zilog Z80, which the designers had previous experience of from working on the Sinclair ZX81 and ZX Spectrum.\nBoth graphics and text could be displayed at the same time: (1) redefinition of the character tiles provided standard 256\u00d7192 graphics limited to the 128 available (definable) 8\u00d78 chars, concurrent with plotting of 64\u00d748 graphics.\nInternal speaker directly controlled by the CPU in single task mode, with control of sound frequency and duration in milliseconds.\nStorage was through a cassette-tape interface at 1500 baud. Files could be used for either storage of Forth programs (compiled code) or raw dumps of memory.\nMemory.\nThe Ace had an 8 KB ROM containing the Forth kernel and operating system, and the predefined dictionary of Forth words in about 5 KB. The remaining 3 KB of ROM supported several functionalities: floating-point numbers library and character definitions table, tape recorder access, decompiling and redefining newly re-edited 'words' (i.e. routines). Some of the ROM was written in Z80 machine code, but some was also coded in Forth.\nThe next 8 KB was built in RAM that was only partially decoded, with 2 KB of video RAM echoed twice, and 1 KB of user RAM echoed 4 times (with the same memory appearing at several different memory addresses).\nUsing the lower-address mirror of the video RAM would select CPU priority, resulting in some momentary random pixels on the screen when video subsystem and the CPU accessed the video RAM in the same clock cycle. Using the higher-address would briefly pause the CPU on the interference, affecting the program timing and making this mode unsuitable for I/O operations. Since video RAM was partially separated from the main address and data busses, for the most part the video subsystem and the CPU could operate in parallel.\nThe first 16 KB of the memory map was used for ROM, Video and User-available RAM, leaving the second 16 KB of the memory map free for RAM extension and the topmost 32 KB undefined.\nOne 1K bank allowed redefinition of most of its 128 ASCII-based characters in 8\u00d78 pixel bitmap format. The other 1K bank stored the full screen display of 24 rows \u00d7 32 columns of characters in black and white. Colour was intended to be achieved as expansion, but although a colour-graphics board was designed, none was ever produced commercially.\n1 KB RAM with the option of a 16 KB RAM-Pack, and later a 32 KB one. A PCB was also marketed by Boldfield Computing that converted the edge connector to electrical compatibility with a Sinclair ZX81, allowing use of the ZX81 16K RAM pack.\nSpecifications.\nReferences to the Ace RAM sometimes include the separate 2 KB video memory, which was not available for programming, thus leading to some confusion. Similarly, it is sometimes argued that because of Forth's efficiency, the 1\u00a0KB standard RAM was in effect comparable to at least 2\u00a0KB on a BASIC system.\nProgramming.\nIts most distinctive characteristic was the choice of Forth, a structured language. Threaded compilation allowed programs written to run nearly as fast as many native-compiled languages loaded by more expensive computers. Forth was considered well-adapted to microcomputers with their small memory and relatively low-performance processors. Forth programs are memory-efficient; as they become bigger, they reuse more previously defined code. Control structures could be nested to any level, limited only by available memory. This allowed complex programs to be implemented, even allowing recursive programming. The Ace's Forth was stated to be \"ten times faster than Basic\" and used less than half the memory (a significant cost percentage of low end computers of the time) of an equivalent program written in interpreted BASIC. It also allowed easy implementation of machine code routines if needed.\nAce's Forth was based mostly on Forth-79, with some relevant differences, in particular it added syntax checking to control structures and definer constructions and a few extra words were added based on common BASIC sound, video and tape commands. The implementation lacked some less frequently used Forth words, these being easily implemented if needed. Runtime error checking could be turned off to raise speed by 25% to 50%.\nDecompiling.\nIts Forth was adapted to the disk-less tape-using home computer hardware by being able to save/load user \"compiled vocabularies\", instead of the usual numbered programming blocks used by diskette systems.\nDecompiling avoided wasting RAM in simulating an absent Block System, used with both disk and tape drivers (these last not to be confused with tape recorders). As replacement, it included an extra data file, for raw binary data. These solutions were unique to the Jupiter Ace.\nDEFINER vs COMPILER.\nTo allow decompile, it distinguished usual Forth definer and compiler words creation, replacing the codice_1, creation pair with:\nThese two defining pairs, instead of one alone, allowed the Ace to decompile its programs, unlike usual Forth systems. This decompiling ability was a solution to the absence of the more flexible disk system used by Forth. Not storing the source of a Forth program, but compiling the code after editing, it avoided completely the emulation of a disk/tape drive on RAM saving computer memory. It also saved time in reading and writing programs from cassette tape. This tape-friendly and RAM-saving solution was unique to the Jupiter Ace Forth.\nThe names can be equivocal out of a Forth context, as all Words are compiled when declared.\ncodice_6 defines a new Class (as an array) that will build (compile) an array Object. These are active on 'Interpreter'. Pairing this Interaction mode, codice_7 defines a programming structure (usually a pair or a triplet) as codice_8. These 'Structured Programming' are active on 'Compile' mode (which is simply building a new Forth Word). In short, \"Interpreting mode\" means Run stage, while \"Compiling mode\" refers to an Editing stage.\nDevelopment.\nAvoiding sources was compensated by storing comments entered in the code with the compiled output, traditional compilation would discard such comments. The comments were then recovered on decompiling. As a result of \"code is the source\", modified words (edited) would demand actualization of all code using the one newly edited. This was done with the non standard codice_9 command.\nAlthough not explicitly designed for such a purpose, the compiled Forth could be utilised for ROM extensions to the built in system. External ROMs were developed with Ace Forth to be used as control applications.\nAdd-ons.\nThe machine was able to use some ZX81 add-ons due to similar RAM locations, and external expansion slot. Jupiter Cantab made a 16 KB RAM pack, and external companies made similar RAM packs as well as other peripherals and interfaces.\nRAM packs\n#16 KB by Jupiter Cantab.\n#16 KB and 32 KB by Stonechip Electronics.\n#16 KB by Sinclair, with adaptor board from Jupiter Cantab for electrical compatibility.\n#48 KB by Boldfield (new Jupiter Ace owner after Jupiter Cantab).\nKeyboard\n*Memotech Keyboard, by Memotech.\nSound\n*SoundBoard (1983) by Essex Micro Electronics,\nStorage\n#Jet-Disc Disc Drive System (1983) by MPE (control up to four 3\", 5\", or 8\" drives).\n#\"Deep Thought\" Disc interface with a 4K AceDOS in an EPROM (1986) by J Shepherd &amp; S Leask.\nPrinter Adapters\n*ADS Centronics Interface Machine (1983), by Advanced Digital Systems,\n*RS232 &amp; Centronics PrinterCard (1984) by Essex Micro Electronics.\n*It was possible to connect the Sinclair ZX Printer via an adaptor board and software.\nGraphics Card\n#Gray Scale card \u2013 4 shades of gray by S Leask (1986)\nModels.\nJupiter Ace issue 1.\nThe original Jupiter Ace issue 1 was introduced in 1982, and came in a vacuum-drawn case. Reportedly 5000 units were produced.\nJupiter Ace 4000.\nThe Jupiter Ace 4000 was introduced in 1983, and came on stronger injection-moulded case. Reportedly 800 units were produced.\nVideo game.\nThere are 51 known commercially released video games for Jupiter Ace\nSee also.\nOther Forth-based microcomputers:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16156", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16156", "title": "Jacksonville Jaguars", "text": "National Football League franchise in Jacksonville, Florida\nThe Jacksonville Jaguars (colloquially known as the Jags) are a professional American football team based in Jacksonville, Florida. The Jaguars compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the American Football Conference (AFC) South division. The team plays its home games at EverBank Stadium.\nFounded alongside the Carolina Panthers in 1995 as an expansion team, the Jaguars competed in the AFC Central until they were moved to the AFC South in 2002. The franchise is owned by Shahid Khan, who bought the team from its original majority owner Wayne Weaver in 2012.\nThe Jaguars saw early success during their second through fifth seasons, which saw them make the playoff each year, win two division titles, and appear in two AFC Championship Games. They are the youngest NFL expansion team to appear in a conference championship (by their second season in 1996, along with the Panthers) and clinch their conference's top seed (by their fifth season in 1999). The Jaguars have been less successful since, with only four playoff appearances and two division titles since 2000. They are one of four NFL franchises that have never played in the Super Bowl alongside the Cleveland Browns, Detroit Lions, and Houston Texans.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nCreation.\nIn 1989, the prospective ownership group Touchdown Jacksonville! was organized with the intention of bringing an NFL franchise to Jacksonville. In 1991, the NFL announced plans to add two expansion teams. In 1994, Touchdown Jacksonville! announced a bid for a team, and Jacksonville was ultimately chosen as one of five finalists, along with Charlotte, St. Louis, Baltimore, and Memphis. Charlotte was awarded the first franchise, which would become the Carolina Panthers, in October 1993. The decision for selecting the second expansion city was delayed a month. At the time, St. Louis was considered the favorite for the second franchise. However, the NFL owners voted 26\u20132 in favor of awarding the 30th franchise to Jacksonville. For their opening season in 1995, the Jaguars took part in the 1995 NFL expansion draft to help bolster their roster. The Jaguars, along with the Panthers, alternated picks from lists of unprotected players from existing franchises.\nTom Coughlin (1995\u20132002).\nTom Coughlin was hired to be the first head coach of the franchise on February 21, 1994. The Jaguars took part in their first NFL draft in 1995. Their first pick in franchise history was the second overall pick in the first round, which was used on eventual Hall of Fame offensive tackle Tony Boselli out of USC.\nOn September 3, 1995, the Jaguars played in their first regular season game, a 10\u20133 loss to the Houston Oilers. In Week 2, against the Cincinnati Bengals, Randy Jordan caught the first touchdown in franchise history, a 71-yard reception from quarterback Steve Beuerlein. The Jaguars would lose their first four games before breaking through against the Oilers in Week 5 in a 17\u201316 victory. Over the course of the season, they would suffer through a seven-game losing streak before closing the season out with a 24\u201321 win over the Cleveland Browns. The Jaguars went 4\u201312 in their first season. The team saw Mark Brunell and Steve Beuerlein both start games at quarterback.\nPrior to their second season, the Jaguars drafted Kevin Hardy with the second overall pick in the first round of the 1996 NFL draft. The team also got Tony Brackens and Aaron Beasley in the draft. With Brunell leading at quarterback, the team improved in 1996. With the team sitting at 4\u20137, the Jaguars reeled off five straight wins to finish with a 9\u20137 mark, finish second in the AFC Central, and made the postseason for the first time. The team had two wide receivers go over 1,000 yards in Keenan McCardell and Jimmy Smith. The Jaguars won their first postseason game in franchise history with a 30\u201327 victory over the Buffalo Bills in the Wild Card Round. Following a 30\u201327 win over the Denver Broncos in the Divisional Round, the Jaguars saw their run end in the AFC Championship with a 20\u20136 loss to the New England Patriots.\nThe 1997 season saw the team go 11\u20135 and finish second in the AFC Central. McCardell and Smith once again both recorded over 1,000 receiving yards. The Jaguars qualified for the postseason, which was short-lived with a 42\u201317 loss to the Denver Broncos in the Wild Card Round. The 1998 season saw the team win their first divisional title by going 11\u20135. The team had their first ever player rush for over 1,000 yards, Fred Taylor. The team defeated the New England Patriots 25\u201310 in the Wild Card Round before falling to the New York Jets, 34\u201324 in the Divisional Round. The Jaguars reached new heights in the 1999 season with a franchise-best division-winning 14\u20132 season. The team defeated the Miami Dolphins, 62\u20137 in the Divisional Round, which would be Dan Marino's final game. The Jaguars saw their season end in the AFC Championship with a 33\u201314 loss to the Tennessee Titans, who were responsible for all three of their losses that year. Despite Taylor, McCardell, and Smith all putting together successful statistical seasons in 2000, the Jaguars took a step back and missed the postseason. The team slipped further in 2001 with a 6\u201310 record. In the 2002, the team went 6\u201310 once again and Coughlin was fired following the season.\nJack Del Rio (2003\u20132011).\nThe Jaguars hired Jack Del Rio to be the team's second head coach following the 2002 season. The Jaguars drafted quarterback Byron Leftwich with the seventh overall pick in the first round of the 2003 NFL draft. Leftwich would eventually replace Brunell as starting quarterback. The Jaguars went 5\u201311 in the 2003 season. One bright spot on the season was Taylor rushing for over 1,500 yards. The team improved to a 9\u20137 mark in 2004 but missed the postseason. In the 2005 season, Del Rio led the team back into the postseason with a 12\u20134 finish and 2nd-place finish in the AFC South. The return to the postseason was short-lived with a 28\u20133 loss to the New England Patriots in the Wild Card Round. The 2006 season saw the arrival of quarterback David Garrard. The Jaguars went 8\u20138 and missed the postseason. The 2007 season was an improvement to an 11\u20135 record and return to the postseason. The team defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers 31\u201329 in the Wild Card Round before falling to the New England Patriots 31\u201320 in the Divisional Round. The following year saw the team take a major step back with a 5\u201311 mark and last place finish in the division. In 2009, the team improved with a 7\u20139 mark but once again finished last in the division. In 2010, the team finished second in the division with an 8\u20138 mark but missed the postseason. The team used their first round draft pick (#10 overall) on Missouri quarterback Blaine Gabbert prior to the 2011 season. Following a 3\u20138 start, Del Rio was fired and Mel Tucker finished the year with a 2\u20133 mark as interim.\nMike Mularkey (2012).\nMike Mularkey was hired to be the Jaguars' third head coach prior to the 2012 season. The team went 2\u201314, which marked the worst season in franchise history at the time. Mularkey was fired following the season.\nGus Bradley (2013\u20132016).\nPrior to the 2013 season, Gus Bradley was hired to be the team's fourth head coach. Chad Henne was the starting quarterback for the majority of the 2013 season, which saw the team go 4\u201312. Prior to the 2014 season, the Jaguars drafted Central Florida quarterback Blake Bortles with the third overall pick in the first round of the 2014 NFL draft. The change at quarterback did not see instant improvement as the team finished 3\u201313. The 2015 season saw the team finish 5\u201311. One bright spot was quarterback Blake Bortles passing for the most yards and touchdowns in franchise history with 4,428 and 35. Following a 2\u201312 start to the 2016 season, Gus Bradley was fired. Interim coach Doug Marrone split the final two games of the season.\nDoug Marrone (2017\u20132020).\nMarrone was named the full-time head coach prior to the 2017 season. The 2017 season saw the Jaguars win the AFC South with a 10\u20136 mark being led by a strong defensive unit. The season marked the first division title for the team since 1999. The team made the playoffs for the first time since the 2007 season. In the Wild Card Round, the Jaguars defeated the Bills 10\u20133. In the Divisional Round, they defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers 45\u201342. In their first AFC Championship since the 1999 season, they lost to the New England Patriots 24\u201320. The game featured a controversial defensive play where Myles Jack recovered a Patriots fumble and had a path for a touchdown but the play was blown dead.\nThe Jaguars were not able to capitalize on the success of the 2017 season in the following year. The 2018 team went 5\u201311 and featured Bortles getting benched later in the season. The Jaguars signed Super Bowl LII MVP quarterback Nick Foles prior to the 2019 season. However, Foles was lost for most of the season from a broken collarbone suffered in Week 1 against the Chiefs. The team turned to 2019 sixth-round draft pick Gardner Minshew, who filled in for most of the 6\u201310 season. The 2020 season was the worst season in the history of the franchise with a 1\u201315 mark. Minshew suffered multiple injuries to his throwing hand during the season, which forced Mike Glennon and Jake Luton to start at quarterback. Following the end of the 2020 season, Marrone was fired.\nUrban Meyer (2021).\nIn what would become one of the most ill-fated coaching hires in NFL history, the Jaguars hired Urban Meyer to be the next coach of the team prior to the 2021 season. The team drafted Clemson quarterback Trevor Lawrence with the top overall pick in the 2021 NFL draft. Meyer was fired after a 2\u201311 start. He was only the fourth head coach since the AFL-NFL merger to not finish a full season. Darrell Bevell finished the year as interim with a 1\u20133 mark.\nDoug Pederson (2022\u20132024).\nPrior to the 2022 season, the Jaguars hired Super Bowl LII-winning coach Doug Pederson to be their next head coach. The team saw immediate improvement with a 9\u20138 record and a division title. The Jaguars defeated the Los Angeles Chargers 31\u201330 in the Wild Card Round. The game featured the third-largest comeback in NFL postseason history with the Jaguars trailing 27\u20130 at one point. The Jaguars' season ended with a 27\u201320 loss to the Kansas City Chiefs in the Divisional Round.\nIn the 2023 season, the Jaguars finished with a 9\u20138 mark once again but failed to qualify for the playoffs.\nOn January 6, 2025, Pederson was fired after three seasons with the team, during which the team was 22\u201329 (.431), with one playoff appearance.\nLiam Coen (2025\u2013present).\nOn January 24, 2025, the Jaguars hired former Tampa Bay Buccaneers offensive coordinator Liam Coen to be their new head coach.\nLogos and uniforms.\nLogos.\nThe day after the NFL awarded the expansion team to Jacksonville, Jaguars owner Wayne Weaver held up the Jaguars' proposed silver helmet and teal jersey at the NFL owners' meeting in Chicago. The team's colors were to be teal, gold, and silver with black accents. However, this jersey and helmet design, with a gold leaping jaguar, created controversy. Ford Motor Company, then-parent of the automaker Jaguar, believed that the Jaguars' logo bore too much resemblance to the automaker's logo. Though no lawsuit was brought to trial, lawyers from the team and the automaker negotiated an ultimately amicable agreement whereby Jaguar would be named the official car of the Jaguars, and the Jaguars would redesign their uniforms.\nThe new logo was a snarling jaguar head with a teal tongue, which Weaver said was his wife's touch. He also claimed that the teal tongue came from \"feeding Panthers to our Jaguars\" \u2014 an obvious jab at their expansion brethren. During the Jaguars' first-ever preseason game teal-colored candies were handed out to all the fans who attended, turning their tongues a teal color just like on the logo. Additionally, raspberry lollipops were handed out by the \"Candy Man\" in section 142 to also turn the home fans' tongues teal.\nIn 2009, Weaver announced that he wanted to \"clean up\" the team's image. This meant the elimination of the full-body crawling Jaguar logo, the clawing Jaguar, and the two previous wordmarks which bent the text around these logos.\nIn February 2013, Jaguars owner Shahid Khan, who had acquired the team in late 2011, introduced a new brand identity for the team that included a new logo, wordmark, and secondary logo. The new Jaguar head logo was intended to be \"fiercer\" and more realistic. The secondary logo incorporated the new Jaguar head logo along with the first official usage of the team's popular nickname \"Jags\". The two images were encased in a shield-style shape, designed to be a tribute to Jacksonville's military community.\nBeginning in 2013, the Jaguars began to feature gold more prominently than in the past. From 2009 to 2012, gold had only been used in the team logo and as a minor accent color.\nUniforms.\nFor most of their history, the Jaguars have done what many other NFL teams located in subtropical climates traditionally practice: wear their white jerseys at home during the first half of the season \u2014 forcing opponents to wear their dark ones under the sweltering autumns in Jacksonville. The only exceptions were in 2004 and 2008\u20132010, when the Jaguars chose to wear teal for all home games. In the preseason, the Jaguars typically wear teal at home, since these games are played at night when there is very little advantage with the heat.\n1995\u20132001.\nFollowing the logo change, the redesigned uniforms featured an all-black helmet, white pants with teal, black, and gold stripes, and numbers with gold inner trim and black outer trim. The home jersey was teal with white numbers and the away jersey was white with teal numbers. Both jerseys had a black collar and no sleeve stripes.\nA prowling jaguar on each sleeve replaced the leaping jaguar going across both shoulders in the original design. The Jaguars in 1995 were the first NFL team to have two-tone borders on their numbers and lettering, and the first NFL team to show a complex logo (the crawling jaguar) on the sleeve.\nMinor modifications were introduced to the Jaguars uniform during this time, most notably the font of the jersey numbers, replacing the original block numbers with a unique font. Two stripes were also added to the end of the sleeves below the prowling jaguar.\n2002\u20132008.\nThe team introduced a black alternate jersey in 2002. During that same year, the team also introduced alternate black pants, worn with either the white or the teal jersey. After the black pants were introduced, the white pants would only be seen for the first few games of the year, presumably due to the heat. The black pants originally included two teal stripes down each side. The fan reaction to the extra black in the alternate jersey and alternate pants was positive, so in 2004 the Jaguars went through a formal uniform change, which teams are only allowed to do once every five years. These changes were mostly to the away look. Before 2004, the white away jerseys had teal numbers with black and gold trim, but after, the white jerseys had black numbers with teal and gold trim. The black pants were also changed. The teal stripes were replaced with the jaguar logo on each hip. Teal almost disappeared from the away uniform.\nThe stripes on the white pants were altered in 2008 so that the center, thickest stripe was black, and its accents were teal. In the 2008 year, the gold in the uniforms noticeably shifted from a bright yellow metallic appearance to more beige.\n2009\u20132012.\nThe Jaguars unveiled new uniforms for the 2009 season. Team owner Wayne Weaver reportedly wanted to \"clean up\" the look, feeling that the team had too many uniform styles. The new uniforms were introduced in a press conference on April 22.\nAt this press conference, Weaver elaborated that different people had taken different liberties with the Jaguars' image over the years, singling out the \"all black\" look which the team wore for every prime-time home game from 2003 to 2007 as a point of regret. He also said that the team would wear their teal jerseys at home even on hot days, saying that the practice of choosing to wear white on hot days had also diluted the team's image. The new uniform reflected a simpler look overall. The collar and sleeve ends are the same color as the rest of the jersey. The crawling jaguar was removed. The numbers on the jerseys were changed to a simpler, block font with a thicker, single color border. After all of these subtractions, two features were added. The first was a \"Jaguars\" wordmark underneath the NFL insignia on the chest. The second was two thin \"stripes\" of off-color fabric which were added to each midseam of the jersey, curling up to the neckline on the front and below the number on the back. The stripe on the home jersey is a white line next to a black line, matching the color of the numbers, and the stripe on the away jersey is a black line next to a teal line, again matching the numbers. The pants have similar stripes, both for the home and away uniform. The away uniforms were still black pants and numbers on a white jersey, but they now used teal as the only accent color as opposed to using gold in previous years. The Jaguars' identity, in terms of colors, beginning in 2009 is exclusively teal and black, with gold only being used in the logo. The final change made to the Jaguars' uniforms in 2009 was to the helmet. The new helmet and facemask were black just like the old ones, but when light hit the new ones a certain way, both the helmet and face mask sparkled with a shiny teal appearance. These were the first helmets in professional football which changed color with different angles of light. The logo and number decals also incorporated this effect.\nPrior to the 2012 season, new Jaguars owner Shahid Khan announced that the team would once again use a black jersey, something they had not done since 2008. In September of that year, the team announced that it would use the black jersey and black pants as their primary home uniform. The teal jersey was resurrected as an alternate.\n2013\u20132017.\nOn April 23, 2013, the Jaguars unveiled new uniforms designed by Nike. The primary home jersey is black with white numerals outlined in teal and gold. The road jersey is white with teal numerals outlined in black and gold, marking the first time since 2003 that the team has used teal numbers on their road jersey. The alternate jersey is teal with black numerals outlined in white and gold. The team had never before used black numbers on their teal jersey. All three jerseys feature a contrasting stripe that bends around the neck, and semi-glossy patches on the shoulders meant to resemble claw marks. The team added their new shield logo onto a patch just above the player's heart, meant to pay tribute to Jacksonville's military heritage.\nThe helmet, first of its kind in the NFL, featured a glossy gold finish in the back that fades to matte black in the front, via a color gradient.\nThe new uniform set includes black and white pants with the Jaguars logo on the hip and a tri-color pattern down the player's leg.\nIn November 2015, as one of eight teams participating in Nike's \"Color Rush\" initiative for four games of \"Thursday Night Football\" during the 2015 season, Jacksonville introduced an all-gold second alternative uniform. The set features a gold jersey with black sleeves and black trim, as well as all gold pants. The white front and back numbers are lined in the teal accent color and bordered by black. The TV numbers on the shoulders are white with black bordering. The set also features gold undershirts and socks.\n2018\u2013present.\nOn April 19, 2018, the Jaguars again revealed re-designed uniforms. The new design returns to an all-black gloss helmet and removes many of the complicated details from the previous set. For the first time, there are no borders at all on any of the jersey numbers. There are no stripes or team logo on the pants; only an NFL logo and a Nike logo, which is the first and only of its kind in the NFL. Like the 2009 uniform set, the only gold in the uniform set belongs to the jaguar logo itself, and the block number font is not distinct from that used by other teams. The sleeve trim and collar trim are both a different color than the rest of the jersey, that and the solitary jaguar logo are the only distinct markings on the jersey. For the first time, the sock has a teal stripe between the black and white. The black jersey is the primary, as it has been since 2012, and the teal is the alternate. The Jaguars continued to pair the uniforms with either black or white pants, but added alternate teal pants for the first time.\nIn 2019, the Jaguars began wearing either solid black or white socks as part of a new NFL mandate allowing solid-colored hosiery on the field.\nIn Week 3 of the 2020 season against the Miami Dolphins, the Jaguars wore an all-teal ensemble for the first time, complete with solid teal socks.\nOn February 17, 2021, the Jaguars announced that the club would return to wearing teal jerseys as its designated primary home jersey color.\nOn July 18, 2024, the Jaguars unveiled throwback teal \"Prowler\" uniforms based on the style worn from 1995 to 2008. The number style used was similar to the one updated in the 1997 season. On July 25, the Jaguars unveiled a new white alternate helmet that would be worn with the alternate black jersey with white pants. In 2025, the Jaguars wore their \"Prowler\" throwbacks four times, meeting the new NFL minimum regarding the use of alternate or throwback uniforms in a season. As a result, both the white alternate helmet and black alternate uniform were not used that season.\nStadium.\nEverBank Stadium (formerly known as Jacksonville Municipal Stadium, Alltel Stadium, EverBank Field, and TIAA Bank Field) is located on the north bank of the St. Johns River, and has been the home of the Jaguars since the team's first season in 1995. The stadium has a capacity of 67,814, with additional seating added during Florida\u2013Georgia Game and the Gator Bowl.\nThe stadium served as the site of Super Bowl XXXIX in addition to five Jaguar playoff games including the 1999 AFC Championship Game. It also hosted the ACC Championship Game from 2005 to 2007 and the River City Showdown in 2007 and 2008.\nFrom 1995 to 1997 and again from 2006 to 2009, the stadium was named Jacksonville Municipal Stadium. From 1997 to 2006, the stadium was referred to as Alltel Stadium. The naming rights were purchased by EverBank prior to the 2010 season. Prior to the 2018 season the Jaguars announced the stadium would be renamed TIAA Bank Field.\nThe stadium received a substantial upgrade in 2014 with the addition of new scoreboards, pools, cabana seating and premium seating that includes 180 field-level seats. The scoreboards are high and long. The new scoreboards are the world's largest video boards. Two by pools were installed in the north end zone along with the cabana seating. The cost of the stadium upgrades were $63 million, of which owner Shahid Khan helped finance $20 million.\nRivalries.\nThe Jaguars' main rivalries are with the other three teams in the AFC South: the Indianapolis Colts, Houston Texans, and Tennessee Titans. The Jaguars also have geographic rivalries with the two other Florida-based teams: the Miami Dolphins and Tampa Bay Buccaneers. The Jaguars, Dolphins, and Buccaneers frequently play each other during the preseason. During the AFC Central days of the mid-1990s and early 2000s, the Jaguars had a rivalry with the Pittsburgh Steelers as the two teams were consistently in playoff contention. The rivalry would reach new heights in the 2000s and 2010s when the Jaguars and Steelers joined the AFC South and North respectively. Jacksonville also defeated Pittsburgh in the playoffs in 2007 and 2017.\nDivisional.\nIndianapolis Colts.\nThe rivalry between the Jaguars and Indianapolis Colts is arguably one of the most heated in the AFC South. Both have been divisional rivals since the creation of the AFC South in the 2002 season. Despite often struggling to maintain competitive teams, the Jaguars have managed to achieve significant upsets against the Colts, securing more victories over them then over either the Texans or Titans. Since 2015 the Jaguars have maintained a home winning streak against the Colts, including a stretch between 2019 and 2022 where the team compiled a record of 6\u201330, with four of those victories occurring against the Colts.\nHouston Texans.\nThe Jaguars share a divisional rivalry with the Houston Texans. Both franchises are two of the youngest in the league, the two teams clashed particularly during Jacksonville's notorious \"Sacksonville\" era defenses while the Texans often fought hard for control of the division. The Texans currently lead the all-time series versus the Jaguars, 31\u201314.\nTennessee Titans.\nThe Jaguars' rivalry with the Tennessee Titans dates back to the Jaguars inaugural season in the NFL prior to the 1995 season. when the Titans were then-known as the Houston Oilers. During the 1995 season, the Jaguars recorded their first win as a franchise over the Oilers in Houston. The rivalry intensified in the late 1990s as both teams were consistently near the top of the AFC Central standings. In 1999, the Jaguars posted a 14\u20132 record with both losses coming to Tennessee. The two teams met in the AFC Championship Game, with Tennessee beating Jacksonville for a third time that season, 33\u201314. The rivalry continued into the 2000s as both teams were placed in the newly formed AFC South in 2002. The Titans lead the overall series, 34\u201323, having also won the only playoff game in the series.\nConference.\nMiami Dolphins.\nThe Jaguars have taken part in a minor rivalry with the Miami Dolphins as both teams are the only two AFC franchises located in Florida. The two teams first met during the 1998 NFL season on a Monday Night Football matchup. Both teams later met in the 1999 AFC Divisional Round in what would ultimately be the final career game for Dolphins' hall-of-fame quarterback Dan Marino. The Dolphins entered the game as heavy underdogs as they had finished the 1999 season 9\u20137, securing the lowest wild card berth. Meanwhile; the Jaguars had boasted an impressive 14\u20132 campaign under pro-bowl quarterback Mark Brunell; culminating in the Jaguars defeating Miami in a 62\u20137 blowout loss. The Jaguars managed an improbable upset victory during the 2021 season as the team had declined severely under controversial head coach Urban Meyer. Despite this; the Jaguars managed a comeback victory against the Dolphins in London during Week 6. The teams are tied 5\u20135 all time, though the Jaguars lead 1\u20130 in the postseason.\nBuffalo Bills.\nA new rivalry emerged between the Jaguars and the Buffalo Bills after former Bills head coach Doug Marrone, who had quit the team after the 2014 season, was hired as a coaching assistant for Jacksonville and eventually rose to become the Jaguars' head coach. The first game between the Marrone led Jaguars was a London game in of the 2015 season which saw the Jaguars' win 34\u201331. The most important game of this series was an ugly, low-scoring game in 2017 that saw the Jaguars win 10\u20133. This game is notable as it was the first Bills playoff appearance in 17 seasons. Prior to this, Jacksonville had handed Buffalo its first playoff loss in Bills Stadium in 1996. Following the 2017 wild card game the Bills and Jaguars have met two additional times. The first was a \"rematch\" game in of the 2018 season which saw the Bills win 24\u201321. During this game trash talk from former Jaguars players such as Jalen Ramsey resulted in a brawl between the teams. The second time was in of the 2021 season. By now the \"point\" of the rivalry, Marrone's feud with the Bills organization, and the personal drama between Bills and Jaguars players no longer applied as Marrone had been fired and replaced by Urban Meyer and all the players from the 2017 Jaguars team have since moved on to other teams or retired. Regardless, this game was the seventh largest upset at the time in NFL history which saw the 15.5-point favorite Bills lose 9\u20136. The Jaguars currently lead the series 10\u20139.\nStatistics and records.\nSeason-by-season results.\nThis is a partial list of the Jaguars' last five completed seasons. For the full season-by-season franchise results, see List of Jacksonville Jaguars seasons.\n\"Note: The finish, wins, losses, and ties columns list regular season results and exclude any postseason play.\"\nPlayers of note.\nPride of the Jaguars.\nA contest was held in July 2006 to name the club's ring of honor, \"Pride of the Jaguars\" was chosen with 36% of the vote. It was unveiled during the 2006 season during a game against the New York Jets on October 8. Former offensive tackle Tony Boselli was the first player inducted.\nOn January 1, 2012, team owner Wayne Weaver and his wife Delores were added to the Pride of the Jaguars in their final game before the sale of the team to Shahid Khan. On June 7, 2012, the Jaguars announced Fred Taylor would be the next inductee into the Pride of the Jaguars. He was inducted on September 30, 2012. Longtime Jaguars quarterback Mark Brunell was also inducted into the \"Pride of the Jaguars\" on December 15, 2013. Former wide receiver Jimmy Smith was inducted in 2016. On November 9, 2023, it was announced that former head coach Tom Coughlin would be inducted sometime during the 2024 season. During halftime of the Week 5 game against the Indianapolis Colts, Coughlin was officially inducted into the Pride.\nRetired numbers.\nOn October 9, 2022, the Jacksonville Jaguars retired Tony Boselli's number 71, at a halftime ceremony against the division-rival Houston Texans. It is the first number retired by the organization.\nDespite not being formally retired, the Jaguars have not reissued the numbers 8, 28, or\u00a082, worn by Mark Brunell, Fred Taylor, and Jimmy Smith respectively, since they retired or left the team. Additionally, Brunell and Smith are the only players in franchise history to have worn their respective numbers.\nHead coaches and coordinators.\nHead coaches.\nThe Jaguars have had ten head coaches (including two interim coaches) throughout their franchise history. Their first head coach was Tom Coughlin, who compiled a 72\u201364 (.529) overall record with the team from 1995 to 2002. Jack Del Rio was the longest-tenured head coach in Jaguars history, holding the position from 2003 to 2011. Their current head coach is Liam Coen, who was hired on January 24, 2025.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCulture.\nMascot.\nSince his introduction in 1996, Jaxson de Ville has served as the Jaguars' mascot. Jaxson entertains the crowd before and during games with his antics. The mascot has established a reputation for making dramatic entrances including bungee jumping off the stadium lights, sliding down a rope from the scoreboard, and parachuting into the stadium.\nJaxson's antics got him into trouble in 1998 and stemmed the changing of the NFL's mascot rules, and also caused him to calm down. However, Jaxson was still seen, by some, as a mascot that gets in the way during the game. After the October 22, 2007, game against Indianapolis, Colts President Bill Polian complained to the NFL, and Jaxson was reprimanded again.\nJaxson's first appearance was on August 18, 1996, and was played by Curtis Dvorak from his inception until his retirement in June 2015.\nJacksonville Roar.\nThe Jacksonville Roar is the professional cheerleading squad of the Jaguars. The group was established in 1995, the team's inaugural year, and regularly performs choreographed routines during the team's home contests.\nIn addition to performing at games and pep rallies, members function as goodwill ambassadors of the team, participating in corporate, community, and charitable events in the Jacksonville metropolitan area where they sign autographs and pose for pictures. They also join NFL tours to entertain American servicemen and women around the world.\nCommunity work.\nThe Jacksonville Jaguars Foundation was established in 1994, when the franchise deal was first announced. Since then, the Foundation has given over $20 million to area efforts in community improvement. The Foundation focuses on many initiatives, such as Honor Rows, anti-tobacco programs, NFL Play 60, and support for veterans. The Foundation grants over $1 million annually to organizations that assist \"economically and socially disadvantaged youth and families\".\nThe Jaguars' first head coach, Tom Coughlin, established the Tom Coughlin Jay Fund Foundation in 1996 to help young cancer victims and their families with emotional and financial assistance. The charity remained in Jacksonville after Coughlin left to coach the New York Giants.\nBroadcast media.\nRadio.\nFrom their inaugural 1995 season until 2013, the Jaguars' flagship radio station was WOKV, which simulcasts on both AM 690 and on 104.5 FM.\nStarting with the 2014 season, the team moved their broadcast to WJXL and WJXL-FM (1010 AM and 92.5 FM) and simulcast on 99.9 Gator Country\nFrank Frangie is the play-by-play announcer with former Jaguars players Tony Boselli and Jeff Lageman providing color analysis.\nTelevision.\nWJAX-TV or WFOX-TV televises all preseason games and also televises regular season games that are televised nationally on NFL Network and games streaming on Amazon Prime Video, Netflix, or YouTube.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16158", "revid": "37575500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16158", "title": "Jutes", "text": "North Sea Germanic ethnic group from the Jutlandic peninsula\nThe Jutes ( ) were one of the Germanic tribes who settled in Great Britain after the departure of the Romans. According to Bede, they were one of the three most powerful Germanic nations, along with the Angles and the Saxons:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Those who came over were of the three most powerful nations of Germany\u2014Saxons, Angles, and Jutes. From the Jutes are descended the people of Kent, and of the Isle of Wight, and those also in the province of the West Saxons who are to this day called Jutes, seated opposite to the Isle of Wight.\nThere is no consensus amongst historians on the origins of the Jutes. One hypothesis is that they originated from the Jutland Peninsula but after a Danish invasion of that area, migrated to the Frisian coast. From the Frisian coast they went on to settle southern Britain in the later fifth century during the Migration Period, as part of a larger wave of Germanic migration into Britain.\nThey were possibly or probably related to the North Germanic tribe Geats.\nSettlement in southern Britain.\nDuring the period after the Roman occupation and before the Norman conquest, people of Germanic descent arrived in Britain, ultimately forming England. The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" provides what historians regard as foundation legends for Anglo-Saxon settlement.\nThe \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" describes how the brothers Hengist and Horsa in the year 449 were invited to Sub-Roman Britain by Vortigern to help his forces in fighting the Picts. They landed at Wippidsfleet (Ebbsfleet), and went on to defeat the Picts wherever they fought them. Hengist and Horsa sent word home to Germany asking for help. Their request was granted and support came. Afterward, more people came to Britain from \"the three powers of Germany; the Old Saxons, the Angles, and the Jutes\". The Saxons populated Essex, Sussex and Wessex; the Jutes Kent, the Isle of Wight and Hampshire; and the Angles East Anglia, Mercia and Northumbria (leaving their original homeland, Angeln, deserted).\nThe \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" also lists \"Wihtgar\" and \"Stuf\" as founders of the \"Wihtwara\" (Isle of Wight) and a man named \"Port\" and his two sons \"Bieda\" and \"Maeglaof\" as founders of the \"Meonwara\" (southern Hampshire). In 686 Bede tells us that Jutish Hampshire extended to the western edge of the New Forest; however, that seems to include another Jutish people, the Ytene, and it is not certain that these two territories formed a continuous coastal block.\nTowards the end of the Roman occupation of England, raids on the east coast became more intense and the expedient adopted by Romano-British leaders was to enlist the help of mercenaries to whom they ceded territory. It is thought that mercenaries may have started arriving in Sussex as early as the 5th century.\nBefore the 7th century, there is a dearth of contemporary written material about the Anglo-Saxons' arrival. Most material that does exist was written several hundred years after the events. The earlier dates for the beginnings of settlement, provided by the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", have been contested by some findings in archaeology. One alternative hypothesis to the foundation legend suggests, because previously inhabited sites on the Frisian and north German coasts had been rendered uninhabitable by flooding, that the migration was due to displacement. Under this alternative hypothesis, the British provided land for the refugees to settle on in return for peaceful coexistence and military cooperation.\nShip construction in the 2nd or 3rd century adopted the use of iron fastenings, instead of the old sewn fastenings, to hold together the plank built boats of the Jutland peninsula. This enabled them to build stronger sea going vessels. Vessels going from Jutland to Britain probably would have sailed along the coastal regions of Lower Saxony and the Netherlands before crossing the English Channel. This was because navigation techniques of the time required the ship to be moored up overnight. Marine archaeology has suggested that migrating ships would have sheltered in various river estuaries on the route. Artefacts and parts of ships, of the period, have been found that support this theory.\nIt is likely that the Jutes initially inhabited Kent and from there they occupied the Isle of Wight, southern Hampshire and also possibly the area around Hastings in East Sussex (Haestingas). J E A Jolliffe compared agricultural and farming practices across 5th century Sussex to that of 5th century Kent. He suggested that the Kentish system underlaid the 5th century farming practices of Sussex. He hypothesised that Sussex was probably settled by Jutes before the arrival of the Saxons, with Jutish territory stretching from Kent to the New Forest. The north Solent coast had been a trading area since Roman times. The old Roman roads between Sidlesham and Chichester and Chichester to Winchester would have provided access to the Jutish settlements in Hampshire. Therefore, it is possible that the German folk arriving in the 5th century that landed in the Selsey area would have been directed north to Southampton Water. From there into the mouth of the Meon valley and would have been allowed to settle near the existing Romano-British people. The Jutish kingdom in Hampshire that Bede describes has various placenames that identify the locations as Jutish. These include Bishopstoke (\"Ytingstoc\") and the Meon Valley (\"Ytedene\").\nMercian and South Saxon takeover.\nIn Kent, Hlothhere had been ruler since 673/4. He must have come into conflict with Mercia, because in 676 the Mercian king \u00c6thelred invaded Kent and according to Bede:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the year of our Lord's incarnation 676, when Ethelred, king of the Mercians, ravaged Kent with a powerful army, and profaned churches and monasteries, without regard to religion, or the fear of God, he among the rest destroyed the city of Rochester\nIn 681 Wulfhere of Mercia advanced into southern Hampshire and the Isle of Wight. Shortly after he gave the Isle of Wight and Meonwara to \u00c6thelwealh of Sussex.\nIn Kent, Eadric was for a time co-ruler alongside his uncle Hlothhere with a law code being issued in their names. Ultimately, Eadric revolted against his uncle and with help from a South Saxon army in about 685, was able to kill Hlothhere, and replace him as ruler of Kent.\nWest Saxon invasion.\nIn the 680s, the Kingdom of Wessex was in the ascendant, the alliance between the South Saxons and the Mercians and their control of southern England, put the West Saxons under pressure. Their king C\u00e6dwalla, probably concerned about Mercian and South Saxon influence in Southern England, conquered the land of the South Saxons and took over the Jutish areas in Hampshire and the Isle of Wight. Bede describes how C\u00e6dwalla brutally suppressed the South Saxons and attempted to slaughter the Jutes of the Isle of Wight and replace them with people from \"his own province\", but maintained that he was unable to do so, and Jutes remained a majority on the island. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;After C\u00e6dwalla had possessed himself of the kingdom of the Gewissae, he also took the Isle of Wight, which till then was entirely given over to idolatry, and by cruel slaughter endeavoured to destroy all the inhabitants thereof, and to place in their stead people from his own province.\nC\u00e6dwalla killed Aruald, the king of the Isle of Wight. Aruald's two younger brothers, who were heirs to the throne, escaped from the island but were hunted down and found at Stoneham, Hampshire. They were killed on C\u00e6dwalla's orders. The Isle of Wight was then permanently under West Saxon control and the \"Meonwara\" was integrated into Wessex. C\u00e6dwalla also invaded Kent and installed his brother Mul as leader. However, it was not long before Mul and twelve others were burnt to death by the Kentishmen. After C\u00e6dwalla was superseded by Ine of Wessex, Kent agreed to pay compensation to Wessex for the death of Mul, but they retained their independence.\nInfluences and culture.\nWhen the Jutish kingdom of Kent was founded, around the middle of the 5th century, Roman ways and influences must have still had a strong presence. The Roman settlement of \"Durovernum Cantiacorum\" became Canterbury. The people of Kent were described as \"Cantawara\", a Germanised form of the Latin \"Cantiaci\".\nAlthough not all historians accept Bede's scheme for the settlement of Britain into Anglian, Jutish and Saxon areas as perfectly accurate, the archaeological evidence indicates that the peoples of west Kent were culturally distinct from those in the east of Kent, with west Kent sharing the 'Saxon' characteristics of its neighbours in the southeast of England. Brooches and bracteates found in east Kent, the Isle of Wight and southern Hampshire showed a strong Frankish and North Sea influence from the mid-fifth century to the late sixth century compared to north German styles found elsewhere in Anglo-Saxon England. There is discussion about who crafted the jewellery (found in the archaeological sites of Kent). Suggestions include crafts people who had been trained in the Roman workshops of northern Gaul or the Rhineland. It is also possible that those artisans went on to develop their own individual style. By the late 6th century grave goods indicate that west Kent had adopted the distinctive east Kent material culture.\nThe Frankish princess Bertha arrived in Kent around 580 to marry the king \u00c6thelberht of Kent. Bertha was already a Christian and had brought a bishop, Liudhard, with her across the Channel. \u00c6thelberht rebuilt an old Romano-British structure and dedicated it to St Martin allowing Bertha to continue practising her Christian faith. In 597 Pope Gregory I sent Augustine to Kent, on a mission to convert the Anglo-Saxons, There are suggestions that \u00c6thelberht had already been baptised when he \"courteously received\" the pope's mission. \u00c6thelberht was the first of the Anglo-Saxon rulers to be baptised.\nThe simplified Christian burial was introduced at this time. Christian graves were usually aligned East to West, whereas with some exceptions pagan burial sites were not. The lack of archaeological grave evidence in the land of the \"Haestingas\" is seen as supporting the hypothesis that the peoples there would have been Christian Jutes who had migrated from Kent. In contrast to Kent, the Isle of Wight was the last area of Anglo-Saxon England to be evangelised in 686, when C\u00e6dwalla of Wessex invaded the island, killing the local king Arwald and his brothers.\nThe Jutes used a system of partible inheritance known as gavelkind, which was practised in Kent until the 20th century. The custom of gavelkind was also found in other areas of Jutish settlement. In England and Wales, gavelkind was abolished by the Administration of Estates Act 1925. Before abolition in 1925, all land in Kent was presumed to be held by gavelkind until the contrary was proved. The popular reason given for the practice remaining so long is due to the \"Swanscombe Legend\"; according to this, Kent made a deal with William the Conqueror whereby he would allow them to keep local customs in return for peace.\nHomeland and historical accounts.\nAlthough historians are confident of where the Jutes settled in England, they are divided on where they actually came from.\nThe chroniclers, Procopius, Constantius of Lyon, Gildas, Bede, Nennius, and also the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", Alfred the Great and Asser provide the names of tribes who settled Britain during the mid-fifth century, and in their combined testimony, the four tribes mentioned are the \"Angli\", \"Saxones\", \"Iutae\" and \"Frisii\".\nThe Roman historian Tacitus refers to a people called the \"Eudoses,\" a tribe who possibly developed into the Jutes.\nThe Jutes have also been identified with the \"Eotenas\" (\"\u0113otenas\") involved in the Frisian conflict with the Danes as described in the Finnesburg episode in the Old English poem \"Beowulf\". Theudebert, king of the Franks, wrote to the Emperor Justinian and in the letter claimed that he had lordship over a nation called the \"Saxones Eucii\". The Eucii are thought to have been Jutes and may have been the same as a little-documented tribe called the \"Euthiones\". The Euthiones are mentioned in a poem by Venantius Fortunatus (583) as being under the suzerainty of Chilperic I of the Franks. The Euthiones were located somewhere in northern Francia, modern day Flanders, an area of the European mainland opposite to Kent.\nBede inferred that the Jutish homeland was on the Jutland peninsula. However, analysis of grave goods of the time have provided a link between East Kent, south Hampshire and the Isle of Wight, but little evidence of any link with Jutland. There is evidence that the Jutes who migrated to England came from northern Francia or from Frisia. Historians have posited that Jutland was the homeland of the Jutes, but when the Danes invaded the Jutland Peninsula in about AD 200, some of the Jutes would have been absorbed by the Danish culture and others may have migrated to northern Francia and Frisia. In Scandinavian sources from the Middle Ages, the Jutes are only sporadically mentioned, now as subgroup of the Danes.\nThere is a hypothesis, suggested by Pontus Fahlbeck in 1884, that the Geats were Jutes. According to this hypothesis the Geats resided in southern Sweden and also in Jutland (where Beowulf would have lived).\nThe evidence adduced for this hypothesis includes:\nHowever, the tribal names possibly were confused in the above sources in both \"Beowulf\" (8th\u201311th centuries) and \"Widsith\" (late 7th \u2013 10th century). The \"Eoten\" (in the Finn passage) are clearly distinguished from the \"Geatas\".\nThe Finnish surname \"Juutilainen\", which comes from the word \"juutti\", is speculated by some to have had a connection to Jutland or the Jutes.\nPossible synonymy with the Frisians.\nWhile there is no definitive proof that the Frisians and Jutes were the same people, there is compelling evidence suggesting that they were either a single group known by different names or closely related tribes with overlapping territories, cultures, and identities. The fluidity of ethnic designations during the Migration Period makes it plausible that the distinction between \"Frisians\" and \"Jutes\" was more of a practical simplification by later chroniclers than a strict ethnic separation. In several Old English and early medieval sources, such as the Finnsburg Fragment and the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, the terms \"Frisians\" and \"Jutes\" appear to be used interchangeably. This suggests that, at least from the perspective of the authors of these texts, the two groups were not clearly distinguishable culturally or ethnically.\nMoreover, archaeological findings point to strong cultural similarities between the two groups, as burial practices, material goods (such as weapons, pottery, and jewelry), and settlement patterns in Jutland and Frisian territories show remarkable parallels.\nIn the field of linguistics, the linguist Elmar Seebold argued that the relatively sharp linguistic boundary between Frisian and Dutch is attributable to migrants from Jutland, with the Jutes simultaneously leaving behind a sharp linguistic boundary between West Germanic and North Germanic in Denmark.\nLanguage and writing.\nThe runic alphabet is thought to have originated in the Germanic homelands that were in contact with the Roman Empire, and as such was a response to the Latin alphabet. In fact some of the runes emulated their Latin counterpart. The runic alphabet crossed the sea with the Anglo-Saxons and there have been examples, of its use, found in Kent. As the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms were evangelised the script of the Latin alphabet was introduced by Irish Christian missionaries. However, they ran into problems when they were unable to find a Latin equivalent to some of the Anglo-Saxon phonetics. They overcame this by modifying the Latin alphabet to include some runic characters. This became the Old English Latin alphabet. The runic characters were eventually replaced by Latin characters by the end of the 14th century.\nThe language that the Anglo-Saxon settlers spoke is known as Old English. There are four main dialectal forms, namely Mercian, Northumbrian, West Saxon and Kentish. Based on Bede's description of where the Jutes settled, Kentish was spoken in what are now the modern-day counties of Kent, Surrey, southern Hampshire and the Isle of Wight. However, historians are divided on what dialect it would have been and where it originated from. The Jutish peninsula has been seen by historians as a pivotal region between the Northern and the Western Germanic dialects. It has not been possible to prove whether Jutish has always been a Scandinavian dialect which later became heavily influenced by West Germanic dialects, or whether Jutland was originally part of the West Germanic dialectal continuum. An analysis of the Kentish dialect by linguists indicates that there was a similarity between Kentish and Frisian. Whether the two can be classed as the same dialect or whether Kentish was a version of Jutish, heavily influenced by Frisian and other dialects, is open to conjecture.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16161", "revid": "50678324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16161", "title": "Jewish prayer", "text": "Observance of recitation in religious Judaism\nJewish prayer (, ; plural &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05ea\u05b0\u05bc\u05e4\u05b4\u05d9\u05dc\u05bc\u05d5\u05b9\u05ea\u200e ; , plural ; Yinglish: davening from Yiddish 'pray') is the prayer recitation that forms part of the observance of Rabbinic Judaism. These prayers, often with instructions and commentary, are found in the \"Siddur\", the traditional Jewish prayer book.\nPrayer, as a \"service of the heart,\" is in principle a Torah-based commandment. It is mandatory for Jewish women and men. However, the rabbinic requirement to recite a specific prayer text does differentiate between men and women: Jewish men are obligated to recite three prayers each day within specific time ranges (\"zmanim\"), while, according to many approaches, women are only required to pray once or twice a day, and may not be required to recite a specific text.\nTraditionally, three prayer services are recited daily:\nTwo additional services are recited on Shabbat and holidays:\nA distinction is made between individual prayer and communal prayer, which requires a quorum known as a \"minyan\", with communal prayer being preferable as it permits the inclusion of prayers that otherwise would be omitted.\nAccording to tradition, many of the current standard prayers were composed by the sages of the Great Assembly in the early Second Temple period (516 BCE \u2013 70 CE). The language of the prayers, while clearly from this period, often employs biblical idiom. The main structure of the modern prayer service was fixed in the Tannaic era (1st\u20132nd centuries CE), with some additions and the exact text of blessings coming later. Jewish prayerbooks emerged during the early Middle Ages during the period of the Geonim of Babylonia (6th\u201311th centuries CE).\nOver the last 2000 years, traditional variations have emerged among the traditional liturgical customs of different Jewish communities, such as Ashkenazic, Sephardic, Yemenite, Eretz Yisrael and others, or rather recent liturgical inventions such as Nusach Sefard and Nusach Ari. However the differences are minor compared with the commonalities. Much of the Jewish liturgy is sung or chanted with traditional melodies or trope. Synagogues may designate or employ a professional or lay \"hazzan\" (cantor) for the purpose of leading the congregation in prayer, especially on Shabbat or holy holidays.\nOrigin and history.\nBiblical origin.\nAccording to the Babylonian Talmud, prayer is a biblical command:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You shall serve God with your whole heart' \u2013 What service is performed with the heart? This is prayer.\nBased on this passage, Maimonides categorizes daily prayer as one of the 613 commandments. He rules that the commandment is fulfilled by any prayer at any time in the day, not a specific text; and thus is not time-dependent, and is mandatory for both Jewish men and women. In contrast, the requirement to say specific prayers at specific times is based not on biblical law, but rather rabbinic decree.\nThe number of prayers per day.\nAdditional references in the Hebrew Bible have been interpreted to suggest that King David and the prophet Daniel prayed three times a day. In Psalms, David states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Evening, morning, and noontime, I speak and moan, and He hearkened to my voice.\nAnd in the Book of Daniel:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And Daniel, when he knew that a writ had been inscribed, came to his house, where there were open windows in his upper chamber, opposite Jerusalem, and three times a day he kneeled on his knees and prayed and offered thanks before his God just as he had done prior to this.\nThe Talmud gives two reasons why there are three basic prayers each day:\nDevelopment of the prayer text.\nThe earliest parts of Jewish prayer are the \"Shema Yisrael\" and the Priestly Blessing, which are in the Torah.\nMaimonides asserts that until the Babylonian exile, all Jews composed their own prayers. After the exile, however, when the exiles' understanding of Hebrew diminished and they found it difficult to compose prayers in Hebrew, Ezra and his court composed the \"Amidah\" prayer. Modern scholarship dating from the Wissenschaft des Judentums movement of 19th-century Germany, as well as textual analysis influenced by the 20th-century discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls, suggests that dating from the Second Temple period there existed \"liturgical formulations of a communal nature designated for particular occasions and conducted in a centre totally independent of Jerusalem and the Temple, making use of terminology and theological concepts that were later to become dominant in Jewish and, in some cases, Christian prayer.\"\nThe structure of the modern Jewish prayer service was established during the period of the Tannaim, \"from their traditions, later committed to writing, we learn that the generation of rabbis active at the time of the destruction of the Second Temple (70 CE) gave Jewish prayer its structure and, in outline form at least, its contents.\" This liturgy included the twice-daily recitation of the Shema, the Amidah, and the cycle of public Torah reading.\nThe \"Amidah\" (or \"Shemoneh Esreh\") prayer is traditionally ascribed to the Great Assembly (in the time of Ezra, near the end of the biblical period), though other sources suggest it was established by Simeon HaPakoli in the late 1st century. Even in the 1st century, though, the precise wording of the blessings was not yet fixed, and varied from locale to locale. By the Middle Ages the texts of the blessings was nearly fixed, and in the form in which they are still used today.\nReadings from the Torah (five books of Moses) and the Nevi'im (\"Prophets\") are specified in the Mishnah and Talmud, as are the order of blessings surrounding the \"Shema\". Other parts of the service, such as Pesukei dezimra, have little mention in early sources, but became established by custom.\nThe oldest prayer books date from the time of the Geonim of Babylonia; \"some were composed by respected rabbinic scholars at the request of far-flung communities seeking an authoritative text of the required prayers for daily use, Shabbat, and holidays.\" The earliest existing codification of the prayerbook was drawn up by Rav Amram Gaon of Sura, Babylon, about 850 CE. Half a century later Rav Saadia Gaon, also of Sura, composed a siddur, in which the rubrical matter is in Arabic. These were the basis of Simcha ben Samuel's Machzor Vitry (11th-century France), which was based on the ideas of his teacher, Rashi. Another formulation of the prayers was that appended by Maimonides to the laws of prayer in his Mishneh Torah: this forms the basis of the Yemenite liturgy, and has had some influence on other rites. From this point forward, all Jewish prayerbooks had the same basic order and contents.\nThe siddur was printed by Soncino in Italy as early as 1486, though a siddur was first mass-distributed only in 1865. The siddur began appearing in the vernacular as early as 1538. The first English translation, by Gamaliel ben Pedahzur (a pseudonym), appeared in London in 1738; a different translation was released in the United States in 1837.\nOver the last 2000 years, the various branches of Judaism have resulted in small variations in the Rabbinic liturgy customs among different Jewish communities, with each community having a slightly different nusach (customary liturgy). The principal difference is between Ashkenazic and Sephardic customs, although there are other communities (e.g., Yemenite and Italian Jews, and in the past Eretz Yisrael), and rather recent liturgical inventions such as Hassidic, Chabad and other communities also have distinct customs, variations, and special prayers. However, the differences between all these customs are quite minor compared with the commonalities. Reform Judaism also has its own version.\nText and language.\nAccording to halakha, all individual prayers and virtually all communal prayers may be said in any language that the person praying understands. For example, the \"Mishnah\" mentions that the \"Shema\" need not be said in Hebrew. A list of prayers that must be said in Hebrew is given in the Mishna, and among these only the Priestly Blessing is in use today, as the others are prayers that are to be said only in a Temple in Jerusalem, by a priest, or by a reigning King.\nDespite this, the tradition of most Ashkenazi Orthodox synagogues is to use Hebrew for all except a small number of prayers, including Kaddish and Yekum Purkan in Aramaic, and Gott Fun Avraham, which was written in Yiddish. In other streams of Judaism there is considerable variability: Sephardic communities may use Ladino or Portuguese for many prayers, although usually only for added prayers and not for the established prayers; Conservative synagogues tend to use the local language to a varying degree; and at some Reform synagogues almost the whole service may be in the local language.\nThe language of the prayers, while clearly being from the Second Temple period, often employs biblical idiom, and according to some authorities it should not contain rabbinic or Mishnaic idiom apart from in the sections of Mishnah that are featured.\nDenominational variations.\nConservative services generally use the same basic format for services as Orthodox Judaism, with some doctrinal leniencies and some prayers in English. In practice, there is wide variation among Conservative congregations. In traditionalist congregations the liturgy can be almost identical to that of Orthodox Judaism, almost entirely in Hebrew (and Aramaic), with a few minor exceptions, including excision of a study session on Temple sacrifices, and modifications of prayers for the restoration of the sacrificial system. In more liberal Conservative synagogues there are greater changes to the service, with up to a third of the service in English; abbreviation or omission of many of the preparatory prayers; and replacement of some traditional prayers with more contemporary forms. There are some changes for doctrinal reasons, including egalitarian language, fewer references to restoring sacrifices in the Temple in Jerusalem, and an option to eliminate special roles for Kohanim and Levites.\nThe liturgies of Reform and Reconstructionist are based on traditional elements, but contain language more reflective of liberal belief than the traditional liturgy. Doctrinal revisions generally include revising or omitting references to traditional doctrines such as bodily resurrection, a personal Jewish Messiah, and other elements of traditional Jewish eschatology, Divine revelation of the Torah at Mount Sinai, angels, conceptions of reward and punishment, and other personal miraculous and supernatural elements. Services are often from 40% to 90% in the vernacular.\nReform Judaism has made greater alterations to the traditional service in accord with its more liberal theology including dropping references to traditional elements of Jewish eschatology such as a personal Messiah, a bodily resurrection of the dead, and others. The Hebrew portion of the service is substantially abbreviated and modernized and modern prayers substituted for traditional ones. In addition, in keeping with their view that the laws of Shabbat (including a traditional prohibition on playing instruments) are inapplicable to modern circumstances, Reform services often play instrumental or recorded music with prayers on the Jewish Sabbath. All Reform synagogues are Egalitarian with respect to gender roles.\nPhilosophy of prayer.\nIn Jewish philosophy and in Rabbinic literature, it is noted that the Hebrew verb for prayer\u2014 ()\u2014is in fact the reflexive form of (), to judge. Thus, \"to pray\" conveys the notion of \"judging oneself\": ultimately, the purpose of prayer\u2014 ()\u2014is to transform oneself.\nThis etymology is consistent with the Jewish conception of divine simplicity. It is not God that changes through one's prayer\u2014man does not influence God as a defendant influences a human judge who has emotions and is subject to change\u2014rather it is man himself who is changed. It is further consistent with Maimonides' view on Divine Providence. Here, Tefillah is the medium which God gave to man by means of which he can change himself, and thereby establish a new \"relationship\" with God\u2014and thus a new destiny for himself in life; see also under Psalms.\nKabbalistic view.\nKabbalah (esoteric Jewish mysticism) uses a series of \"kavanot\", directions of intent, to specify the path the prayer ascends in the dialogue with God, to increase its chances of being answered favorably. Kabbalism ascribes a higher meaning to the purpose of prayer, which is no less than affecting the very fabric of reality itself, restructuring and repairing the universe in a real fashion. In this view, every word of every prayer, and indeed, even every letter of every word, has a precise meaning and a precise effect. Prayers thus literally affect the mystical forces of the universe, and repair the fabric of creation.\nThis approach has been taken by the Chassidei Ashkenaz (German pietists of the Middle-Ages), the Zohar, the Arizal's Kabbalist tradition, the Ramchal, most of Hassidism, the Vilna Gaon and Jacob Emden.\nHassidism, although incorporating the kabbalistic worldview and its corresponding kavanot, also emphasized straightforward sincerity and depth of emotional engagement in prayer. The Baal Shem Tov's great-grandson, Rebbe Nachman of Breslov, particularly emphasized speaking to God in one's own words, which he called Hitbodedut (self-seclusion) and advised setting aside an hour to do this every day.\nChabad-Lubavitch developed a distinctive approach to prayer that diverged from prevailing Hasidic norms by prioritizing contemplative intellect hitbonenut over spontaneous emotional fervor. Rooted in the teachings of Shneur Zalman of Liadi, this method emphasized sustained meditation on divine unity as a necessary precursor to meaningful supplication. Rather than viewing prayer as primarily expressive, Chabad redefined it as a disciplined internal practice, wherein intellectual grasp of mystical principles evokes authentic emotional response. This innovation is codified in the Tanya and operationalized through the \"Siddur Im Dach\", which interweaves liturgy with Hasidic discourse to structure inner focus. The movement further distinguished itself by articulating dual meditative pathways\u2014the \u201clong way\u201d of rational contemplation and the \u201cshort way\u201d of faith-based intensity\u2014both aimed at producing \"kavanah\" (intention) rooted in cognitive awareness.\nMethodology and terminology.\nTerms for praying.\n\"Daven\" is the originally exclusively Eastern Yiddish verb meaning \"pray\"; it is widely used by Ashkenazic Orthodox Jews. In Yinglish, this has become the Anglicised \"davening\".\nThe origin of the word is obscure, but is thought by some to have come from Arabic (from \"diwan\", a collection of poems or prayers), French (from \"devoner\", 'to devote' or 'dedicate' or possibly from the French 'devant'- 'in front of' with the idea that the person praying is mindful of before whom they stand), Latin (from \"divin\", 'divine') or even English (from \"dawn\"). Others believe that it derives from a Slavic word meaning \"to give\" (). Some claim that it originates from an Aramaic word, \"de'avuhon\" or \"d'avinun\", meaning 'of their/our forefathers', as the three prayers are said to have been invented by Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Another Aramaic derivation, proposed by Avigdor Chaikin, cites the Talmudic phrase, \"ka davai lamizrach\", 'gazing wistfully to the east'. Kevin A. Brook cited Zeiden's suggestion that the word \"daven\" comes from the Turkic root \"tabun-\" meaning 'to pray', and that in Kipchak Turkic, the initial \"t\" morphs into \"d\", but also cited Beider's opinion that Zeiden's etymology is unlikely.\nIn Western Yiddish, the term for \"pray\" is \"oren\", a word with clear roots in Romance languages, similar to Spanish and Portuguese \"orar\" and Latin \"orare\".\nMinyan (quorum).\nIndividual prayer is considered acceptable, but prayer with a quorum of ten Jewish adults\u2014a \"minyan\"\u2014is the most highly recommended form of prayer and is required for some prayers. An adult in this context means over the age of 12 or 13 (\"bat\" or \"bar mitzvah\"). Judaism had originally counted only men in the \"minyan\" for formal prayer, on the basis that one does not count someone who is not obligated to participate. The rabbis had exempted women from almost all time-specific positive mitzvot (commandments), including those parts of the prayer that cannot be recited without a quorum, due to women in the past being bound up in an endless cycle of pregnancy, birthing and nursing from a very early age. Orthodox Judaism still follows this reasoning and excludes women from the minyan.\nSince 1973, Conservative congregations have overwhelmingly become egalitarian and count women in the \"minyan\". A very small number of congregations that identify themselves as Conservative have resisted these changes and continue to exclude women from the minyan. Those Reform and Reconstructionist congregations that consider a \"minyan\" mandatory for communal prayer, count both men and women for a \"minyan\". All denominations of Judaism except for Orthodox Judaism ordain female rabbis and cantors.\nThere is a publicly said prayer, called Birkhat HaGomel, for giving thanks for surviving an illness or danger. which, in addition to needing a \"Minyan\", also needs a Torah scroll taken out for a scheduled Torah reading.\nOther laws and customs.\nIn the event one of the prayers was missed inadvertently, the Amidah prayer is said twice in the next service\u2014a procedure known as \"tefillat tashlumin\".\nMany Jews sway their body back and forth during prayer. This practice, referred to as \"shuckling\" in Yiddish, is not mandatory.\nMany are accustomed to giving charity before, during (especially during Vayivarech David) or after prayer, in the hopes that this will make their prayer more likely to be heard.\nAccording to the Talmud, during prayer one should face toward Jerusalem, and specifically the site of the Temple in Jerusalem. This is based on Solomon's prayer \"...and they will pray to You toward their land, which You gave to their fathers; the city which You have chosen; and the house which I have built for Your name\" ().\nDaily prayers.\nShacharit.\nThe \"Shacharit\" (from \"shachar\", morning light) prayer is recited in the morning. \"Halacha\" limits parts of its recitation to the first three (Shema) or four (Amidah) hours of the day, where \"hours\" are 1/12 of daylight time, making these times dependent on the season.\nShacharit is generally the lengthiest prayer of the day. Its components include Birkot hashachar, Korbanot, Pesukei dezimra, the \"Shema Yisrael\" and its blessings, the Amidah, and Tachanun. Of these, the recitation of Shema Yisrael and the Amidah constitute the core of the Shacharit service. Those Jews who wear tallit and tefillin generally only do so during the Shacharit prayer.\nMincha.\n\"Mincha\" or \"Minha\" may be recited from half an hour after \"halachic\" noontime, until sunset. Sephardim and Italian Jews start the Mincha prayers with Psalm 84 and \"Korbanot\", and usually continue with the \"Pittum hakketoret\". The opening section is concluded with Malachi 3:4.\nAshrei is recited, followed by half-Kaddish, the Amidah (including repetition), \"Tachanun\", and then the full Kaddish. Sephardim insert a Psalm, followed by the Mourner's Kaddish. After this follows, in most modern rites, the \"Aleinu\". Most Ashkenazim then conclude with the Mourner's Kaddish. In Ashkenazic, Italian and Yemenite communities, the service leaders often wears a tallit.\nMa'ariv/Arvit.\nGenerally, the time when \"Maariv\" can first be recited is when the time for reciting \"Mincha\" ends. But there are varying opinions on this. \"Maariv\" should not begin before 1\u00bc hours before sunset. Others delay \"Maariv\" until after sunset or after dusk. If \"Maariv\" is recited prior to dusk, individuals repeat the Shema later in the evening.\nThe main components of Maariv are the recitation of the Shema (with two blessings before it and two after it), followed by the Amidah (which is not repeated, unlike with other recitations of the Amidah). Some communities add a third blessing between the Shema and Amidah. Some additional prayers and biblical verses are recited as well; these vary by community and occasion.\nPrayer on Shabbat.\nOn Shabbat (the Sabbath), prayers are similar in structure to those on weekdays, although almost every part is lengthened. One exception is the \"Amidah\", the main prayer, which is abridged. The first three and last three blessings are recited as usual, but the middle thirteen are replaced with a single blessing known as \"sanctity of the day,\" describing the Sabbath. Atypically, this middle blessing is different for each of the prayers.\nFriday night.\nShabbat services begin on Friday afternoon with the weekday Mincha. Tachnun is omitted. In some Ashkenazic communities, Aleinu is omitted since it will be followed immediately by Kabbalat Shabbat. In recent times, some prefer to daven early mincha on Friday.\nSome communities recite the Song of Songs, and then in most communities followed by the \"Kabbalat Shabbat\", the mystical prelude to Shabbat services composed by 16th-century Kabbalists. Although the service was composed in the 16th century, some communities did not adopt it until much later; for example, it was not recited in the main synagogue in Frankfurt am Main until the mid-19th century, and it was not recited in Worms even later. This Hebrew term literally means \"Receiving the Sabbath\". In recent decades, some communities have adopted the practice to sing the piyut \"Yedid Nefesh\" before (or occasionally after) the Kabbalat Shabbat prayers.\nIn Ashkenazic and some Sephardic communities, Kabbalat Shabbat begins with six Psalms, representing the six weekdays. In Italian Nusach and many Sephardic communinties (including Spanish and Portuguese Jews and many Middle Eastern Sephardic communities) only Psalm 29 is recited (some add Psalm 100). Some then recite Ana BeKoach. After that, the poem \"Lekha Dodi\" is recited. It based on the words of the Talmudic sage Hanina: \"Come, let us go out to meet the Queen Sabbath\". Kabbalat Shabbat is concluded by Psalm 92 (in most communities, the recital of which constitutes acceptance of the current Shabbat with all its obligations) and Psalm 93. Many add a study section here, including \"Bameh Madlikin\" and \"Amar rabbi El'azar\" and the concluding \"Kaddish deRabbanan\" (in the Western Ashkenazic rite, a mourners kaddish is instead recited after \"Bameh Madlikin\") and is then followed by the Maariv service; other communities delay the study session until after Maariv. According to Nusach Sefard, a passage from the Zohar, entitled \"Kegavna\" is recited instead of \"Bameh Madlikin\". In modern times the Kabbalat Shabbat has been set to music by many composers including: Robert Strassburg and Samuel Adler\nThe Shema section of the Friday night service varies in some details from the weekday services\u2014mainly in the different ending of the \"Hashkivenu\" prayer and the omission of Baruch HaShem Le'Olam prayer in those traditions where this section is otherwise recited. In the Italian rite, there are also different versions of the \"Ma'ariv aravim\" prayer (beginning \"asher killah\") and the \"Emet Ve-Emunah\" prayer.\nMost commemorate the Shabbat at this point with \"VeShameru\". The custom to recite these verses appears in many early sources such as Siddur Rav Saadya Gaon (who recited the blessing Yiru Eineinu after these verses) and is found in the vast majority of old prayer books of a variety of rites. However, it is absent from the Yemenite \"Baladi\" tradition (although has been added in most Baladi communities in the last few hundred years), and it is not recited according to the traditions of the Vilna Gaon or Chabad who are opposed to adding additional readings to the siddur which are not mentioned in the Talmud.\nOn Friday night, the middle blessing of the \"Amidah\" discusses the conclusion of creation, quoting the relevant verses from Genesis. The Amidah is then followed by the Seven-Faceted Blessing, the hazzan's mini-repetition of the Amidah. In some Ashkenazi Orthodox synagogues the second chapter of Mishnah tractate Shabbat, \"Bameh Madlikin\", is read at this point, instead of earlier. Kiddush is recited in the synagogue in many Ashkenazic Italian communities. Some communities recite Psalm 23 and the service then follows with Aleinu. Most Sephardic and many Ashkenazic synagogues end with the singing of \"Yigdal\", a poetic adaptation of Maimonides' 13 principles of Jewish faith. Other Ashkenazic synagogues end with \"Adon Olam\" instead, and some do not recite either poem.\nShacharit.\nShabbat morning prayers differ from weekday morning prayers in several ways: an expanded version of Pesukei dezimra, a longer version of the Yotzer ohr blessing (in most communities), the seven-blessing Shabbat version of the Amidah, no Tachanun, a longer Torah reading including the reading of the Haftarah, and some additional prayers after the Torah reading. In many communities, the rabbi (or a learned member of the congregation) delivers a sermon at the very end of Shacharit and before Mussaf, usually on the topic of the Torah reading.\nMussaf.\nThe \"Musaf\" service starts with the silent recitation of the \"Amidah\". The middle blessing includes the \"Tikanta Shabbat\" reading on the holiness of Shabbat (in Yemenite communities, as well as some Sephardic communities \"Le-Mosheh Tsivita\" is recited instead of \"Tikanta Shabbat\"), and then by a reading from the biblical Book of Numbers about the sacrifices that used to be performed in the Temple in Jerusalem. Next comes \"Yismechu\", \"They shall rejoice in Your sovereignty\", and \"Eloheynu\", \"Our God and God of our Ancestors, may you be pleased with our rest\" (which is recited during all \"Amidah\"s of the Sabbath). After the silent prayer, the leader repeats the prayer, adding an expanded version of Kedushah. In some Sephardic and Yemenite communities, rather than the silent prayer and repetition, the leader recited his own prayer aloud and the congregation prays along with him.\nAfter the \"Amidah\" comes the full Kaddish, followed by \"Ein keloheinu\". In Orthodox Judaism this is followed by a reading from the Talmud on the incense offering called \"Pittum Haketoreth\" and daily psalms that used to be recited in the Temple in Jerusalem. These readings are usually omitted by Conservative Jews, and are always omitted by Reform Jews.\nThe \"Musaf\" service culminates with the Rabbi's Kaddish (in the Western Ashkenazic rite, the Mourners Kaddish is recited instead), the \"Aleinu\", followed in many communities by the Mourner's Kaddish. Some synagogues conclude with the reading of Shir Hayichud, Anim Zemirot (sometimes followed by a Mourner's Kaddish), the Psalm of the Day (sometimes followed by a Mourner's Kaddish) - in some communities, these are recited before the Torah reading or at the beginning of services instead. Many communities conclude with either Adon Olam or Yigdal.\nMincha.\nMincha commences with Ashrei and the prayer Uva letzion, after which the first section of the next weekly portion is read from the Torah scroll. The \"Amidah\" follows the same pattern as the other Shabbat \"Amidah\" prayers, with the middle blessing starting \"Attah Echad\". The short prayer Tzidkatcha is recited after the \"Amidah\", followed by Kaddish and Aleinu.\nMa'ariv.\nAt the conclusion of the Sabbath, the weekday Ma'ariv is recited. Some communities recite (sometimes sing) Psalm 144 and Psalm 67. In the amidah, ata chonantanu is added in the fourth blessing. After the conclusion of the Amidah, \"Vihi No'am\", \"Veyiten Lecha\", and \"Havdalah\" are recited, followed by Aleinu; some delay the recitation of Ve-Yitten lekha until after the recitation of Havdalah at home.\nSpecial observances and circumstances.\nRosh Hashana and Yom Kippur.\nThe services for the Days of Awe, Rosh Hashana and Yom Kippur, take on a solemn tone as befits these days. Traditional solemn tunes are used in the prayers.\nThe musaf service on Rosh Hashana has nine blessings; the three middle blessings include biblical verses attesting to sovereignty, remembrance and the \"shofar\", which is sounded during the service.\nYom Kippur is the only day in the year when there are five prayer services. The evening service, containing the Ma'ariv prayer, is widely known as \"Kol Nidrei\", the opening declaration made preceding the prayer. During the daytime, shacharit, musaf (which is recited on Shabbat and all festivals) and mincha are followed, as the sun begins to set, by Ne'ila, which is recited just this once a year.\nPesach, Shavuot and Sukkot.\nThe services for the three festivals of Pesach (\"Passover\"), Shavuot (\"Feast of Weeks\" or \"Pentecost\"), and Sukkot (\"Feast of Tabernacles\") are alike, except for interpolated piyyutim and readings for each individual festival. The preliminaries and conclusions of the prayers are the same as on Shabbat. The Amidah on these festivals only contains seven benedictions, with \"Attah Bechartanu\" as the main one. After the Shacharit Amidah, Hallel (communal recitation of Psalms 113\u2013118) follows; on the last six days of Passover, Hallal is recited in its abbreviated form and customs vary as to whether a blessing is recited.\nThe Musaf service includes Umi-Penei Hata'enu, with reference to the special festival and Temple sacrifices on the occasion.\nThe Priestly Blessing (\"dukhening\") is pronounced during the repetition of the Amidah. While this occurs daily in Israel and most Sephardic congregations, it occurs only on Pesach, Shavuot, Sukkot, Rosh Hashanah, and Yom Kippur in Ashkenazic (and some Sephardic communities) congregations of the Jewish diaspora. Even when it is omitted, or when there are no kohanim present, a special prayer is instead recited by the \"hazzan\" after the \"Modim\" (\"Thanksgiving\") prayer) in commemoration of the priestly blessing. (American Reform Jews omit the Musaf service.)\nRole of women.\nNumber of obligatory prayers.\nAccording to halakha, Jewish men are obligated to perform public prayer three times a day, within specific time ranges (zmanim), plus additional services on Jewish holidays.\nAccording to the Talmud, women are generally exempted from obligations that have to be performed at a certain time. (This has interpreted as being due to the need to constantly care for small children, or due to women's alleged higher spiritual level which makes it unnecessary for them to connect to God at specific times, since they are always connected to God.) In accordance with the general exemption from time-bound obligations, women are not required to recite the morning and evening Shema (though \"Mishnah Berurah\" suggests that they say it anyway), and most Orthodox authorities have exempted women from reciting Maariv.\nAuthorities have disagreed on whether this exemption applies to additional prayers. According to (Ashkenazi) Magen Avraham and more recently (Sephardi) Rabbi Ovadia Yosef, women are only required to pray once a day, in any form they choose, so long as the prayer contains praise of (brakhot), requests to (bakashot), and thanks of (hodot) God. However, most Orthodox authorities agree that women are not completely exempt from time-bound prayer. The \"Mishnah Berurah\", an important code of Ashkenazic Jewish law, holds that the Men of the Great Assembly obligated women to recite \"Shacharit\" and \"Minchah\" each day, \"just like men\". Nonetheless, even the most liberal Orthodox authorities hold that women cannot count in a minyan for purposes of public prayer.\nTraditionally, women were also reciting individual tkhine prayers in Yiddish.\nConservative Judaism regards the \"halakhic\" system of multiple daily services as mandatory. Since 2002, Jewish women from Conservative congregations have been regarded as having undertaken a communal obligation to pray the same prayers at the same times as men, with traditional communities and individual women permitted to opt out. Reform and Reconstructionist congregations do not regard \"halakha\" as binding and hence regard appropriate prayer times as matters of personal spiritual decision rather than a matter of religious requirement.\nSeating.\nThroughout Orthodox Judaism, including its most liberal forms, men and women are required to sit in separate sections with a mechitza (partition) separating them. Historically, a learned woman in the \"weibershul\" (women's section or annex) of a synagogue took on the informal role of precentress or firzogerin for the women praying in parallel to the main service led in the men's section. Conservative/Masorti Judaism permits mixed seating (almost universally in the United States, but not in all countries). All Reform and Reconstructionist congregations have mixed seating.\nPrayer leaders.\nHaredi and the vast majority of Modern Orthodox Judaism has a blanket prohibition on women leading public congregational prayers. Conservative Judaism has developed a blanket justification for women leading all or virtually all such prayers, holding that although only obligated individuals can lead prayers and women were not traditionally obligated, Conservative Jewish women in modern times have as a collective whole voluntarily undertaken such an obligation. Reform and Reconstructionist congregations permit women to perform all prayer roles because they do not regard halakha as binding.\nA small liberal wing within Modern Orthodox Judaism, particularly rabbis friendly to the Jewish Orthodox Feminist Alliance (JOFA), has begun re-examining the role of women in prayers based on an individual, case-by-case look at the historical role of specific prayers and services, doing so within classical \"halakhic\" interpretation. Accepting that where obligation exists only the obligated can lead, this small group has typically made three general arguments for expanded women's roles:\nA very small number of Modern Orthodox congregations accept some such arguments, but very few Orthodox congregations or authorities accept all or even most of them. Many of those who do not accept this reasoning point to \"kol isha\", the tradition that prohibits a man from hearing a woman other than his wife or close blood relative sing. JOFA refers to congregations generally accepting such arguments as Partnership Minyanim. On Shabbat in a Partnership Minyan, women can typically lead \"Kabbalat Shabbat\", the \"P'seukei D'Zimrah\", the services for removing the Torah from and replacing it to the Ark, and Torah reading, as well as give a \"D'Var Torah\" or sermon.\nThe first Orthodox Jewish women's prayer group was created on the holiday of Simhat Torah at Lincoln Square Synagogue in Manhattan in the late 1960s.\nEphraim Mirvis, an Orthodox rabbi who serves as the Chief Rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations of the Commonwealth, supports Shabbat prayer groups for Orthodox women, saying, \"Some of our congregations have women prayer groups for Friday night, some Saturday mornings. This is without women reading from the Torah. But for women to come together as a group to pray, this is a good thing.\"\nHowever, many Modern Orthodox rabbis, including Rabbi Hershel Schachter, Rabbi Mordechai Willig, Rabbi Nisson Alpert and others have ruled that this practice is not permitted. These practices are also unheard of in the Hareidi world\nRole of minors.\nIn most divisions of Judaism boys prior to bar mitzvah cannot act as a Chazzen for prayer services that contain \"devarim sheb'kidusha\", i.e. Kaddish, Barechu, the amida, etc., or receive an \"aliya\" or chant the Torah for the congregation. Since \"Kabbalat Shabbat\" and \"Pesukei D'zimra\" do not technically require a chazzan at all, it is possible for a boy prior to bar mitzvah to lead these services. The conclusion of the service on Shabbat and \"chagim\" may also be led by children. Under the Moroccan, Yemenite, and Mizrachi customs, a boy prior to bar mitzvah may lead certain prayers, read the Torah, and have an aliyah. It is customary among many Ashkenazim to have children sing \"Adon 'Olam\" after Mussaf and \"Yigdal\" after Shabbat and Holiday Maariv. Among Sefardim, Mizrachim, Yemenites, and some Askenazim, a child leads the congregation in Kiryat Shema.\nDenominational variations.\nConservative services generally use the same basic format for services as in Orthodox Judaism, with some doctrinal leniencies and some prayers in English. In practice, there is wide variation among Conservative congregations. In traditionalist congregations the liturgy can be almost identical to that of Orthodox Judaism, almost entirely in Hebrew (and Aramaic), with a few minor exceptions, including excision of a study session on Temple sacrifices, and modifications of prayers for the restoration of the sacrificial system. In more liberal Conservative synagogues there are greater changes to the service, with up to a third of the service in English; abbreviation or omission of many of the preparatory prayers; and replacement of some traditional prayers with more contemporary forms. There are some changes for doctrinal reasons, including egalitarian language, fewer references to restoring sacrifices in the Temple in Jerusalem, and an option to eliminate special roles for Kohanim and Levites.\nThe liturgies of Reform and Reconstructionist are based on traditional elements, but contains language more reflective of liberal belief than the traditional liturgy. Doctrinal revisions generally include revising or omitting references to traditional doctrines such as bodily resurrection, a personal Jewish Messiah, and other elements of traditional Jewish eschatology, Divine revelation of the Torah at Mount Sinai, angels, conceptions of reward and punishment, and other personal miraculous and supernatural elements. Services are often from 40% to 90% in the vernacular.\nReform Judaism has made greater alterations to the traditional service in accord with its more liberal theology including dropping references to traditional elements of Jewish eschatology such as a personal Messiah, a bodily resurrection of the dead, and others. The Hebrew portion of the service is substantially abbreviated and modernized and modern prayers substituted for traditional ones. In addition, in keeping with their view that the laws of Shabbat (including a traditional prohibition on playing instruments) are inapplicable to modern circumstances, Reform services often play instrumental or recorded music with prayers on the Jewish Sabbath. All Reform synagogues are egalitarian with respect to gender roles.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16162", "revid": "50919269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16162", "title": "Jewish eschatology", "text": "Area of Jewish theology\nJewish eschatology is the area of Jewish theology concerned with events that will happen in the end of days and related concepts. This includes the ingathering of the exiled diaspora, the coming of the Jewish Messiah, the afterlife, and the resurrection of the dead. In Judaism, the end times are usually called the \"end of days\" (\"a\u1e25arit ha-yamim\", \u05d0\u05d7\u05e8\u05d9\u05ea \u05d4\u05d9\u05de\u05d9\u05dd), a phrase that appears several times in the Tanakh.\nThese beliefs have evolved over time, and according to some authors there is evidence of Jewish belief in a personal afterlife with reward or punishment referenced in the Torah.\nSources.\nIn Judaism, the main textual source for the belief in the end of days and accompanying events is the Tanakh or Hebrew Bible. The roots of Jewish eschatology are to be found in the pre-exile prophets, including Isaiah and Jeremiah, and the exilic prophets Ezekiel and Deutero-Isaiah. The main tenets of Jewish eschatology are the following, in no particular order, elaborated in the Book of Isaiah, the Book of Jeremiah, and the Book of Ezekiel.\nThe End of Days.\nWar of Gog and Magog.\nAccording to Ezekiel 38, the \"war of Gog and Magog\" is a climactic war that will happen at the end of the Jewish exile. According to biblical commentator and rabbi David Kimhi, this war will take place in Jerusalem.\nBiblical Sheol.\nThe Hebrew Bible reflects the belief of the Israelites in an arguably Hades-like afterworld, where both the righteous (see Samuel) and the unrighteous continue to exist in a miserable manner.\nWorld to come.\nThe afterlife is known as \"olam ha-ba\" (), being related to the concepts of \"Gan Eden\"\u2014 heavenly \"Garden in Eden\", or Paradise\u2014and \"Gehinnom\". The phrase \"olam ha-ba\" itself does not occur in the Hebrew Bible. In Jewish theology, the widely accepted halakha is that it is impossible for living human beings to know what the world to come is like.\nSecond Temple period.\nIn the late Second Temple period, beliefs about the ultimate fate of individuals were diverse. The Pharisees and Essenes believed in the immortality of the soul, but the Sadducees did not. The Dead Sea Scrolls, Jewish pseudepigrapha, and Jewish magical papyri all reflect this variety of opinions.\nMedieval rabbinical views.\nWhile classical rabbinic sources discuss the afterlife, medieval scholars disputed the nature of individuals' continued existence after the Messianic Age. While Maimonides describes an entirely spiritual existence for souls, which he calls \"disembodied intellects\", Nachmanides proposed a spiritual existence on Earth wherein spirituality and physicality are merged. Both agree that life after death is, as Maimonides describes, the \"End of Days\". This existence entails a heightened understanding of and connection to the Shekhinah. All classical rabbinic scholars share this latter view.\nAccording to Maimonides, any non-Jew who lives according to the Seven Laws of Noah is regarded as a righteous gentile and assured a place in the world to come (the final reward of the righteous).\nThere is a great deal of surviving rabbinic material concerning the fate of the soul after death, its experiences, and where it goes. At various points in the afterlife journey, the soul may encounter: \"hibbut ha-kever\", the pains and other experiences of physico-spiritual dissolution or reconfiguration within the grave; \"Dumah\", the angel in charge of funerary matters; Satan, as the angel of death or another equally grim figure; the \"Kaf ha-Kela\", the ensnarement or confinement of the stripped-down soul within ghostly material reallocations, described in chapter 8 of the Tanya, Chabad's primary philosophical text, as devised for the cleansing of souls needing punishment not severe enough to warrant \"Gehinnom\"; \"Gehinnom\"; and \"Gan Eden\" (a place of heavenly respite or paradise characterized by spiritual purity). Classical rabbinic scholars agree that these concepts are beyond typical human understanding, so these ideas are expressed throughout rabbinic literature as parables and analogies.\n\"Gehenna\" is fairly well defined in the rabbinic literature. It is sometimes translated as \"hell\" but is more similar to Nicene Christianity's purgatory than to its Hell. Rabbinic thought maintains that souls are not tortured in \"Gehenna\" forever; the longest that one can be there is said to be eleven months, with the exception of heretics and the exceedingly sinful. This is why Jews mourning for near relatives will not recite mourner's kaddish for more than eleven months after death. \"Gehinnom\" is considered a spiritual forge whereby the soul is purified for its eventual ascent to \"Gan Eden\" (Garden of Eden).\nRabbinic legends.\nThe rabbinic literature includes many legends about the world to come and the two Gardens of Eden. As compiled by Louis Ginzberg in the book \"Legends of the Jews\", these include the world to come, called Paradise and said to have a double gate made of carbuncle that is guarded by 600,000 shining angels. Seven clouds of glory overshadow Paradise, and under them, in the center of Paradise, stands the Tree of Life. The Tree of Life overshadows Paradise, too; it has fifteen thousand different tastes and aromas, blown by wind throughout. Under the Tree of Life are many pairs of canopies, one of the stars and the other of sun and moon, while a \"cloud of glory\" separates the two. In each pair of canopies sits a rabbinic scholar who explains the Torah to the soul. When one enters Paradise, one is proffered by Michael the archangel to God on the altar of the Temple in the heavenly Jerusalem. The soul is transfigured into an angel, with the ugliest person becoming as beautiful and shining as \"the grains of a silver pomegranate upon which fall the rays of the sun\". The angels that guard Paradise's gate adorn the soul in seven clouds of glory, crown it with gems, pearls, and gold, place eight myrtles in its hand, and praise it for being righteous before leading it to a garden of eight hundred roses and myrtles watered by many rivers. In the Garden is one's own canopy, its beauty according to one's merit, but each canopy has four rivers\u2014milk, honey, wine, and balsam\u2014flowing out from it, and has a golden vine and thirty shining pearls hanging from it. Under each canopy is a table of gems and pearls attended to by sixty angels. The light of Paradise is the light of the righteous souls therein. Each day in Paradise, one wakes up as a child and goes to bed as an elder, enjoying the pleasures of childhood, youth, adulthood, and old age. In each corner of Paradise is a forest of 800,000 trees, the least among these greater than the best herbs and spices, attended to by 800,000 sweetly singing angels. Paradise is divided into seven sub-paradises, each 120,000 miles long and wide. Depending on its merit, a soul is assigned to one of these sections of Paradise: the first is made of glass and cedar and is for converts to Judaism; the second is of silver and cedar and is for penitents; the third is of silver, gold, gems, and pearls, and is for the Patriarchs, Moses and Aaron, the Israelites who fled Egypt and lived in the wilderness, and the kings of Israel; the fourth is of rubies and olive wood and is for the holy and steadfast of faith; the fifth is like the third, except a river flows through it and its bed was woven by Eve and the angels and is for the Messiah and Elijah; and the sixth and seventh divisions are not described, except that they are respectively for those who died doing pious acts and those who died from illness in expiation for Israel's sins.\nAbove this Paradise is the higher \"Gan Eden\", where God is enthroned and explains the Torah to its inhabitants. The higher \"Gan Eden\" contains 310 worlds and is divided into seven compartments. The compartments are not described, though it is implied that each compartment is greater than the previous one and is made open to a soul based on its merit. The first compartment is for Jewish martyrs, the second for those who drowned, the third for \"Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai and his disciples\", the fourth for those whom the \"cloud of glory\" carried off, the fifth for penitents, the sixth for youths who never sinned, and the seventh for the poor who lived decently and studied the Torah.\nResurrection of the dead.\nAn early explicit mention of resurrection in Hebrew texts is the Vision of the Valley of Dry Bones in the Book of Ezekiel, dated c.\u2009539 B.C.. Alan Segal argues that this narrative was intended as a metaphor for national rebirth, promising the Jews' return to Israel and reconstruction of the Temple, not as a description of personal resurrection.\nThe Book of Daniel promised literal resurrection to the Jews in concrete detail. Alan Segal interprets Daniel as writing that with the coming of the archangel Michael, misery would beset the world, and only those whose names were written a divine book would be resurrected. Moreover, Daniel's promise of resurrection was intended only for the most righteous and the most sinful: the afterlife was a place for righteous individuals to be rewarded and unrighteous individuals to receive eternal punishment.\nGreek and Persian culture influenced early Jewish beliefs of an afterlife between the 6th and 4th centuries B.C., as well. The Hebrew Bible, at least its rabbinic interpretation in tractate Sanhedrin, contains frequent references to the resurrection of the dead. The Mishnah lists belief in the resurrection of the dead as one of three essential beliefs of Judaism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All Israel have a portion in the world to come, for it is written: 'Thy people are all righteous; they shall inherit the land forever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified.' But the following have no portion therein: one who maintains that resurrection is not a biblical doctrine, the Torah was not divinely revealed, and an \"Apikoros\" ('heretic').\nIn the late Second Temple period, the Pharisees and Essenes believed in resurrection, while Sadducees did not. During the period of \"Chazal\", signaling the adoption of resurrection into the Jewish canon.\nJewish liturgy, most notably the \"Amidah\", contains references to the bodily resurrection of the dead. In contemporary Judaism, both Orthodox Judaism and Conservative Judaism maintain the traditional references to it in their liturgy. However, Conservative Jewish leadership has officially acknowledged metaphorical rather than literal interpretations, too. Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism have altered traditional references to the resurrection of the dead in the liturgy, revising \"who gives life to the dead\" to \"who gives life to all\" in the second blessing of the \"Amidah\".\nThe last judgment.\nIn Judaism, the day of judgment happens every year on Rosh Hashanah; therefore, a future \"last day\" of judgment for all humankind is disputed. Some hold that there will be such a day following the resurrection of the dead. Others maintain that there is no need for that because of Rosh Hashanah. Yet others hold that this accounting and judgment happens when one dies. Others contend that the last judgment only applies to the gentile nations and not the Jewish people.\nIn contemporary Judaism.\nIrving Greenberg, representing an Open Orthodox viewpoint, describes the afterlife as a central Jewish teaching deriving from the belief in reward and punishment. According to Greenberg, suffering medieval Jews emphasized the world to come as a counterpoint to the difficulties of this life, while early Jewish modernizers portrayed Judaism as interested only in this world as a counterpoint to \"otherworldly\" Christianity. Greenberg sees each of these views as leading to an undesired extreme\u2014overemphasizing the afterlife leads to asceticism while devaluing the afterlife deprives Jews of the consolation of eternal life and justice\u2014and calls for a synthesis, in which Jews can work to perfect this world, while also recognizing the immortality of the soul.\nConservative Judaism both affirms belief in the world beyond (as referenced in the \"Amidah\" and Maimonides's principles of faith) while recognizing that human understanding is limited and we cannot know exactly what the world beyond consists of. Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism affirm belief in the afterlife, though they downplay the theological implications in favor of emphasizing the importance of the \"here and now\" as opposed to reward and punishment. The Union for Reform Judaism believes the righteous of any faith have a place in heaven but does not believe in a concept of hell.\nJewish messianism.\nThe Hebrew word \"mashiach\" (or \"moshiach\") refers to the Jewish idea of the messiah. In biblical times the title \"mashiach\" was awarded to someone in a high position of nobility and greatness. For example, \"Cohen ha-Ma\u0161\u00eda\u1e25\" means High Priest. While the name of the Jewish Messiah is considered to be one of the things that precede creation, he is not considered divine, in contrast to Christianity where Jesus is both divine and the Messiah.\nIn the Talmudic era the title \"Mashiach\" or \u05de\u05dc\u05da \u05d4\u05de\u05e9\u05d9\u05d7, \"M\u00e9le\u1e35 ha-Ma\u0161\u00eda\u1e25\" literally means \"the anointed King\". The Messiah is to be a human leader, physically descended from the Davidic line, who will rule and unite the people of Israel and will usher in the Messianic Age of global and universal peace.\nEarly Second Temple period (516 BCE \u2013 c.220 BCE).\nEarly in the Second Temple period hopes for a better future are described in the Jewish scriptures. After the return from the Babylonian exile, Cyrus the Great was called \"messiah\" in Isaiah, due to his role in the return of the Jews exiles.\nLater Second Temple period (c.220 BCE \u2013 70 CE).\nA number of messianic ideas developed during the later Second Temple Period, ranging from this-worldy, political expectations, to apocalyptic expectations of an endtime in which the dead would be resurrected and the Kingdom of Heaven would be established on earth. The Messiah might be a kingly \"son of David\" or a more heavenly \"son of man\", but \"Messianism became increasingly eschatological, and eschatology was decisively influenced by apocalypticism,\" while messianic expectations became increasingly focused on the figure of an individual savior. According to Zwi Werblowsky, \"the Messiah no longer symbolized the coming of the new age, but he was somehow supposed to bring it about. The \"Lord's anointed\" thus became the \"savior and redeemer\" and the focus of more intense expectations and doctrines.\" Messianic ideas developed both by new interpretations (\"pesher\", \"midrash\") of the Jewish scriptures, but also by visionary revelations.\nTalmud.\nThe Babylonian Talmud (200\u2013500 CE), tractate Sanhedrin, contains a long discussion of the events leading to the coming of the Messiah. Throughout their history Jews have compared these passages (and others) to contemporary events in search of signs of the Messiah's imminent arrival, continuing into present times.\nThe Talmud tells many stories about the Messiah, some of which represent famous Talmudic rabbis as receiving personal visitations from Elijah the Prophet and the Messiah.\nRabbinic commentaries.\nIn rabbinic literature, the rabbis elaborated and explained the prophecies that were found in the Hebrew Bible along with the oral law and rabbinic traditions about its meaning.\nMaimonides' commentary to tractate Sanhedrin stresses a relatively naturalistic interpretation of the Messiah, de-emphasizing miraculous elements. His commentary became widely (although not universally) accepted in the non- or less-mystical branches of Orthodox Judaism.\nContemporary views.\nOrthodox Judaism.\nThe belief in a human Messiah of the Davidic line is a universal tenet of faith among Orthodox Jews and one of Maimonides' thirteen principles of faith.\nSome authorities in Orthodox Judaism believe that this era will lead to supernatural events culminating in a bodily resurrection of the dead. Maimonides, on the other hand, holds that the events of the Messianic Era are not specifically connected with the resurrection.\nConservative Judaism.\nConservative Judaism varies in its teachings. While it retains traditional references to a personal redeemer and prayers for the restoration of the Davidic line in the liturgy, Conservative Jews are more inclined to accept the idea of a Messianic Era:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We do not know when the Messiah will come, nor whether he will be a charismatic human figure or is a symbol of the redemption of mankind from the evils of the world. Through the doctrine of a Messianic figure, Judaism teaches us that every individual human being must live as if he or she, individually, has the responsibility to bring about the messianic age. Beyond that, we echo the words of Maimonides based on the prophet Habakkuk (2:3) that though he may tarry, yet do we wait for him each day... (\"Emet ve-Emunah: Statement of Principles of Conservative Judaism\")\nReform Judaism.\nReform Judaism generally concurs with the more liberal Conservative perspective of a future Messianic Era rather than a human Messiah.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16163", "revid": "47205554", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16163", "title": "Judah", "text": "Judah or Yehuda is the name of a biblical patriarch, Judah (son of Jacob). It may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16164", "revid": "2927383", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16164", "title": "John Macleod (physiologist)", "text": "Scottish biochemist and physiologist (1876\u20131935)\nJohn James Rickard Macleod, (6 September 1876\u00a0\u2013 16 March 1935), was a Scottish biochemist and physiologist. He devoted his career to diverse topics in physiology and biochemistry, but was chiefly interested in carbohydrate metabolism. He is noted for his role in the discovery and isolation of insulin during his tenure as a lecturer at the University of Toronto, for which he and Frederick Banting received the 1923 Nobel prize in Physiology or Medicine. Awarding the prize to Macleod was controversial at the time, because according to Banting's version of events, Macleod's role in the discovery was negligible. It was not until decades after the events that an independent review acknowledged a far greater role than was attributed to him at first.\nBiography.\nMacleod was born in Clunie, near Dunkeld in Perthshire. Soon after he was born, his father Robert Macleod, a minister of the Free Church, was transferred to Aberdeen, where John attended Aberdeen Grammar School and enrolled in the study of medicine at the University of Aberdeen. At the University of Aberdeen, one of MacLeod's principal teachers was the young professor John Alexander MacWilliam. He was awarded his medical degree with honours in 1898 and then spent a year studying biochemistry at the University of Leipzig, Germany, on a travelling scholarship. He became a demonstrator at the London Hospital Medical School, where in 1902 he was appointed lecturer in biochemistry. In the same year, he was awarded a doctorate in public health from Cambridge University. Around that time he published his first research article, a paper on phosphorus content in muscles.\nIn 1903, Macleod became a lecturer in physiology at the Western Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio, where he remained for 15 years. This was the period when he developed an interest in carbohydrate metabolism that was to last for the rest of his career.\nIn 1910, he delivered a lecture on various forms of experimental diabetes and their significance for diabetes mellitus at the joint meeting of the section on Pharmacology and Therapeutics and the section on Pathology and Physiology of the American Medical Association.\nIn 1916, he was a Professor of Physiology at McGill University in Montreal, Canada. After the First World War, he went on to teach physiology at the University of Toronto, where he became director of the physiology lab and an assistant to the dean of the medical faculty. He researched various topics in physiology and biochemistry, among which were the chemism of \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\", electroshocks, creatinine metabolism and blood circulation in the brain. \nIn 1905 he became interested in carbohydrate metabolism and diabetes, publishing a series of scientific papers and several monographs on the subject from then on. Additionally, Macleod was a popular lecturer and an influential contributor to the development of the six-year course in medicine at the University of Toronto.\nFrederick Banting and the discovery of insulin.\nAt the end of 1920, Macleod was approached by Frederick Banting, a young Canadian physician who had the idea of curing diabetes using an extract from a pancreas whose functioning had been disrupted. Macleod was not enthusiastic, because (unlike Banting) he knew about unsuccessful experiments in this direction by other researchers. He thought it more likely that the nervous system had a crucial role in regulating blood glucose concentration. Even though Banting had virtually no experience of physiology, he managed to convince Macleod to lend him laboratory space during a holiday in Scotland that summer. In addition to the laboratory, Macleod provided experimental animals and his student Charles Best, who worked as a demonstrator. Macleod also advised on project planning and the use of analytical techniques, and assisted with the operation on the first dog. While Macleod was away, Banting and Best achieved a breakthrough: they isolated an internal secretion of the pancreas and succeeded in reducing the blood sugar level of another dog, whose pancreas had been surgically removed.\nOn his return, Macleod was surprised and expressed doubt about the results. Banting took this as an attack on his integrity. They argued bitterly, but Banting finally accepted Macleod's instruction that further experiments were needed, and he even convinced Macleod to provide better working conditions and to give him and Best a salary. Further experiments were successful and the three started to present their work at meetings. Macleod was a far better orator, and Banting came to believe that he wanted to take all the credit. This was exemplified by a December 1921 presentation to the American Physiological Society at Yale, which took a toll on Banting's nerves due to the \"prestige of the audience\" causing him to freeze up, and as a result the \"audience was highly critical of the findings presented\". Macleod who was \"desperate to snatch victory from the jaws of defeat\" stepped in and finished the presentation. From Banting's viewpoint, \"this was a brazen coup by Macleod to rob him of the credit for having discovered insulin \u2013 and to rub salt into the wound, it had been done in front of the most eminent doctors in the field\".\nTheir discovery was first published in the February 1922 issue of \"The Journal of Laboratory and Clinical Medicine\". Macleod declined co-authorship because he considered it Banting's and Best's work. Despite their success, there remained the issue of how to get enough pancreas extract to continue the experiments. Together, the three researchers developed alcohol extraction, which proved to be far more efficient than other methods. This convinced Macleod to divert the whole laboratory to insulin research and to bring in the biochemist James Collip to help with purifying the extract.\nThe first human clinical trial was unsuccessful. Banting was insufficiently qualified to participate and felt sidelined. By the winter of 1922, he was certain that all Macleod's colleagues were conspiring against him. There was a reported physical altercation between Banting and Collip, as Banting saw Collip's breakthrough on alcohol purification as a threat, while Collip was reluctant to share the details. Collip threatened to leave because of the strained atmosphere but the encouragement of others who saw the potential of their research prevented escalation of the conflict. In January 1922, the team performed the first successful clinical trial, on 13-year-old Leonard Thompson, and it was soon followed by others.\nAlthough all the team members were listed as co-authors of their publications, Banting still felt overlooked, because Macleod took over the coordination of clinical trials and the acquisition of larger amounts of extract. Macleod's presentation at a meeting of the Association of American Physicians in Washington, D.C., on 3 May 1922 received a standing ovation, but Banting and Best refused to participate in protest. At that time, demonstrations of the method's efficiency drew huge public interest, because the effect on patients, especially children, who until then were bound to die, seemed almost miraculous. The pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly &amp; Co. took over mass production, but without an exclusive license, as the patent was transferred to the Medical Research Council to prevent exploitation.\nIn the summer of 1923 Macleod resumed other research. He took interest in teleost fish, which have separate regions of islet and acinar tissue in their pancreas. Working at the Marine Biological Station in St. Andrews, New Brunswick, he made extracts from each of those parts separately and proved that insulin is derived from the insular and not the acinar tissue of the pancreas. Meanwhile, Banting remained in Toronto and relationships soon deteriorated again because of conflicting press accounts. Banting eventually started to claim that he deserved all the credit and that Macleod had only hindered him the whole time and had made no contribution other than to leave the keys to the laboratory when he went on vacation. MacLeod wrote a report on the discovery in 1922 to explain his side of the story, but otherwise refrained from active involvement in controversy about credit. Banting hated him passionately, and the two never spoke again. When Macleod left the University of Toronto in 1928, Banting harbored such enmity that he refused to attend the farewell dinner for Macleod.\nLater years.\nMacleod returned to Scotland in 1928 to become Regius Professor of Physiology at the University of Aberdeen (in succession to his former teacher, John Alexander MacWilliam who retired in 1927) and later Dean of the University of Aberdeen Medical Faculty. Between 1929 and 1933 he was also a member of the Medical Research Council.\nMacleod did not continue to work on insulin, but he remained active as a researcher, lecturer and author. His last major contribution was a proof that the central nervous system does have an important role in maintaining carbohydrate metabolism balance, as was his original hypothesis. His theory about conversion of fats into carbohydrates remained unproven, despite his provision of several indirect proofs. He devoted his spare time to golf, motorcycling and painting. \nHe married Mary Watson McWalter (1876\u20131940) in 1903, but they never had children. He died in 1935 in Aberdeen after several years of suffering from arthritis, despite which he remained active almost until his death. In 1933 he made a lecture tour of the US, and in 1934 he published the 7th edition of his book \"Physiology and Biochemistry in Modern Medicine\".\nWorks.\nMacleod was a prolific writer. His first academic article was a paper on phosphorus content in muscles published in 1899. During his career he authored or co-authored over 200 papers and eleven books. Among them are:\nAwards and honours.\nJohn Macleod was a distinguished physiologist even before the discovery of insulin. He was elected a member of the Royal Society of Canada in 1919 and president of American Physiological Society in 1921. In 1923, Macleod was awarded the Cameron Prize for Therapeutics of the University of Edinburgh. Among the recognitions he received after 1923 were memberships of the Royal Society and the Royal Society of Edinburgh, corresponding membership of the German Academy of Sciences Leopoldina and honorary membership of the Regia Accademia Medica.\nAfter Banting's death in a plane crash in 1941, Best, with the help of his friends, continued to spread Banting's account of the discovery and tried to \"write out\" Macleod and Collip from the history books. Only in 1950 was the first independent revision of all sides of the story made, and it gave credit to all four members of the team. However, Macleod's public image remained tainted for decades after that. The 1976 ITV television drama \"Comets Among the Stars\", with Ralph Richardson in the Macleod role, portrayed him as dark and repulsive. The second dramatization of the discovery, \"Glory Enough for All\" (1988), at last portrayed him more objectively. By then it was commonly accepted that Banting's and Best's story was distorted, since more documentation had been made publicly available, and it made a precise reconstruction of the events possible. Until Best died, this documentation had been kept secret for over 50 years by the University of Toronto, whose administration wanted to avoid fueling the controversy.\nMacleod's reputation in Canada remained under the influence of Banting and Best's story for decades, so Macleod was not esteemed there. His contribution to science is now recognized by the broad public, even in Canada. The auditorium of the Toronto University Medical Research Centre was named in his honour, as was Diabetes UK's award for patients who survive for 70 years with diabetes. In 2012, he was inducted into the Canadian Medical Hall of Fame.\nNobel Prize.\nThe Nobel Committee reacted almost immediately to the first successful clinical trials. In the autumn of 1923, Banting and Macleod received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, even though the long-term importance of the discovery was not yet apparent. They were nominated by the Danish physiologist and Nobel laureate August Krogh, who had a diabetic wife and had visited Macleod's laboratory and taken the method back to Denmark. Banting \"had well-placed friends in Toronto\" and \"knowing that a Nobel Prize might well be awarded for insulin, they worked very hard to have Banting honoured, at home and abroad, as the discoverer of insulin\". However, \"among experienced scientists there was more support for the view that Banting and Best\u2019s somewhat fumbling researches would not have reached the goal without the contributions of both Macleod and Collip\". The committee judged that Macleod's work in interpreting the data, managing the clinical trials and providing a high level of public presentation were crucial for success, and \"concluded that Banting would not have found the way to insulin without the guidance of Macleod\", so they awarded the Nobel prize to both. Banting was furious, as he was convinced that Best should have received the other half, and he even thought of rejecting the prize. He was finally persuaded to accept it but gave half of his prize money to Best. Macleod in turn gave half of his to Collip. In 1972 the Nobel Foundation officially conceded that omitting Best was a mistake.\nA second controversial aspect of the award was that eight months before Banting's and Best's paper, the Romanian physiologist Nicolae Paulescu had reported the discovery of a pancreas extract that he dubbed \"pancrein\", which lowered blood glucose concentration. Banting and Best even cited him in their paper, but misinterpreted his findings, purportedly because of an error in translation from French. Best publicly apologized for that mistake many years later.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16167", "revid": "50999894", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16167", "title": "Jackson, Mississippi", "text": "Capital and largest city of Mississippi, United States\nJackson is the capital and most populous city of the U.S. state of Mississippi. The city sits on the Pearl River and is located in the greater Jackson Prairie region of Mississippi. Along with Raymond, Jackson is one of two county seats for Hinds County. The city had a population of 153,701 at the 2020 census, a decline of 11.42% from 173,514 since the 2010 census, representing the largest decline in population during the decade of any major U.S. city. The Jackson metropolitan area is the largest metropolitan area located entirely in the state and the tenth-largest urban area in the Deep South, with 592,000 residents in 2020.\nThe city is located in the Deep South halfway between Memphis and New Orleans on Interstate 55 and Dallas and Atlanta on Interstate 20. Founded in 1821 as the new state capital for Mississippi, Jackson is named after General Andrew Jackson, a war hero in the Battle of New Orleans during the War of 1812 and subsequently the seventh U.S. president. Following the Battle of Vicksburg, which was fought 45 miles west of Jackson during the American Civil War in 1863, Union forces commanded by General William Tecumseh Sherman launched the siege of Jackson and set the city on fire. During the 1920s, Jackson surpassed Meridian to become the most populous city in the state following a speculative natural gas boom in the region.\nThe slogan for Jackson is \"The City with Soul\". It has had numerous musicians prominent in blues, gospel, folk, and jazz. The city has a number of museums and cultural institutions, including the Mississippi Children's Museum, Mississippi Museum of Natural Science, Mississippi Civil Rights Museum, Mississippi Museum of Art, Old Capital Museum, Museum of Mississippi History. Other notable locations are the Mississippi Coliseum and the Mississippi Veterans Memorial Stadium, home of the Jackson State Tigers football team. In 2020, the Jackson metropolitan area held a GDP of $30 billion, accounting for 29% of the state's total GDP.\nHistory.\nFounding and antebellum period (to 1860).\nThe Jackson area was historically populated by the Choctaw, the majority of whom were forcibly removed to Oklahoma following Andrew Jackson's signing of the Indian Removal Act in 1830. However, per the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek, Choctaws could remain in Mississippi where they would be granted citizenship.\nLocated on the historic Natchez Trace trade route, the Choctaw town that stood where Jackson is today was called , meaning \"Among the post oaks.\" The city's first European American settler was Louis LeFleur, a French-Canadian trader. The village became known as LeFleur's Bluff. During the late 18th century and early 19th century, this site had a trading post. It was connected to markets in Tennessee. Soldiers returning to Tennessee from the military campaigns near New Orleans in 1815 built a public road that connected Lake Pontchartrain in Louisiana to this district. A United States treaty with the Choctaw, the Treaty of Doak's Stand in 1820, formally opened the area for non-Native American settlers.\nLeFleur's Bluff was developed when it was chosen as the site for the new state's capital city. The Mississippi General Assembly decided in 1821 that the state needed a centrally located capital (the legislature was then located in Natchez). They commissioned Thomas Hinds, James Patton, and William Lattimore to look for a suitable site. The absolute center of the state was a swamp, so the group had to widen their search.\nAfter surveying areas north and east of Jackson, they proceeded southwest along the Pearl River until they reached LeFleur's Bluff in today's Hinds County. Their report to the General Assembly stated that this location had beautiful and healthful surroundings, good water, abundant timber, navigable waters, and proximity to the Natchez Trace. The Assembly passed an act on November 28, 1821, authorizing the site as the permanent seat of the government of the state of Mississippi. On the same day, it passed a resolution to instruct the Washington delegation to press Congress for a donation of public lands on the river for improved navigation to the Gulf of Mexico. One Whig politician lamented the new capital as a \"serious violation of principle\" because it was not at the absolute center of the state.\nThe capital was named for General Andrew Jackson, to honor his January 1815 victory at the Battle of New Orleans during the War of 1812. He was later elected as the seventh president of the United States.\nThe city of Jackson was originally planned, in April 1822, by Peter Aaron Van Dorn in a \"checkerboard\" pattern advocated by Thomas Jefferson. City blocks alternated with parks and other open spaces. Over time, many of the park squares have been developed rather than maintained as green space. The state legislature first met in Jackson on December 23, 1822. In 1839, the Mississippi Legislature passed the first state law in the U.S. to permit married women to own and administer their own property.\nJackson was connected by public road to Vicksburg and Clinton in 1826. Jackson was first connected by railroad to other cities in 1840. An 1844 map shows Jackson linked by an east\u2013west rail line running between Vicksburg, Raymond, and Brandon. Unlike Vicksburg, Greenville, and Natchez, Jackson is not located on the Mississippi River, and it did not develop during the antebellum era as those cities did from major river commerce. The construction of railroad lines to the city sparked its growth in the decades following the American Civil War.\nAmerican Civil War.\nDespite its small population, during the Civil War, Jackson became a strategic center of manufacturing for the Confederacy. In 1863, during the military campaign which ended in the capture of Vicksburg, Union forces captured Jackson during two battles\u2014once before the fall of Vicksburg and once after the fall of Vicksburg.\nOn May 14, 1863, Union forces won the first Battle of Jackson, forcing Confederate forces to flee northward towards Canton. On May 14, Union troops under the command of William Tecumseh Sherman burned and looted key facilities in Jackson, a strategic manufacturing and railroad center for the Confederacy. After driving the Confederate forces out of Jackson, Union forces turned west and engaged the Vicksburg defenders at the Battle of Champion Hill in nearby Edwards. The Union forces began their siege of Vicksburg soon after their victory at Champion Hill. Confederate forces began to reassemble in Jackson in preparation for an attempt to break through the Union lines surrounding Vicksburg and end the siege. The Confederate forces in Jackson built defensive fortifications encircling the city while preparing to march west to Vicksburg.\nConfederate forces marched out of Jackson in early July 1863 to break the siege of Vicksburg. But, unknown to them, Vicksburg had already surrendered on July 4, 1863. General Ulysses S. Grant dispatched General Sherman to meet the Confederate forces heading west from Jackson. Upon learning that Vicksburg had already surrendered, the Confederates retreated into Jackson. Union forces began the siege of Jackson, which lasted for approximately one week. Union forces encircled the city and began an artillery bombardment. One of the Union artillery emplacements has been preserved on the grounds of the University of Mississippi Medical Center in Jackson. John C. Breckinridge, former United States vice president, served as one of the Confederate generals defending Jackson. On July 16, 1863, Confederate forces slipped out of Jackson during the night and retreated across the Pearl River.\nUnion forces completely burned the city after its capture this second time. The city was called \"Chimneyville\" because only the chimneys of houses were left standing. The northern line of Confederate defenses in Jackson during the siege was located along a road near downtown Jackson, now known as Fortification Street.\nBecause of the siege and following destruction, few antebellum structures have survived in Jackson. The Governor's Mansion, built in 1842, served as Sherman's headquarters and has been preserved. Another is the Old Capitol building, which served as the home of the Mississippi state legislature from 1839 to 1903. The Mississippi legislature passed the ordinance of secession from the Union there on January 9, 1861, becoming the second state to secede from the United States. The Jackson City Hall, built in 1846 for less than $8,000, also survived. It is said that Sherman, a Mason, spared it because it housed a Masonic Lodge, though a more likely reason is that it housed an army hospital. Additionally, the Manship House (Ca. 1857) survives.\nReconstruction.\nDuring Reconstruction, African Americans were granted civil rights. Schools were established and African Americans held political offices. Eugene Welborne, Charles Reese, Weldon Hicks, and George Caldwell Granberry were among the legislators who represented Hinds County in the legislature. African Americans also served in local offices, as judges, and as marshalls.\nMississippi had considerable insurgent action, as whites struggled to maintain white supremacy. Jackson's appointed mayor Joseph G. Crane was stabbed to death in 1869. The assailant, Edward M. Yerger, was arrested by military authorities but, after a U.S. Supreme Court case (Ex parte Yerger), he was bonded out, moved to Baltimore and was never tried.\nThe economic recovery from the Civil War was slow through the start of the 20th century, but there were some developments in transportation. In 1871, the city introduced mule-drawn streetcars which ran on State Street, which were replaced by electric ones in 1899. In 1875, the Red Shirts were formed, one of the second waves of insurgent paramilitary organizations that essentially operated as \"the military arm of the Democratic Party\" to take back political power from the Republicans and to drive black people from the polls (Mississippi Plan).\nPost-Reconstruction.\nDemocrats regained control of the state legislature in 1876. The constitutional convention of 1890, which produced Mississippi's Constitution of 1890, was held at the capitol. This was the first of new constitutions or amendments ratified in each Southern state through 1908 that effectively disenfranchised most African Americans and many poor whites, through provisions making voter registration more difficult: such as poll taxes, residency requirements, and literacy tests. These provisions survived a Supreme Court challenge in 1898. As 20th-century Supreme Court decisions later ruled such provisions were unconstitutional, Mississippi and other Southern states rapidly devised new methods to continue disfranchisement of most black people, who comprised a majority in the state until the 1930s. Their exclusion from politics was maintained into the late 1960s.\nThe so-called New Capitol replaced the older structure upon its completion in 1903. Today the Old Capitol is operated as a historical museum.\nEarly 20th century (1901\u20131960).\nAuthor Eudora Welty was born in Jackson in 1909, lived most of her life in the Belhaven section of the city, and died there in 2001. Her memoir of development as a writer, \"One Writer's Beginnings\" (1984), presented a picture of the city in the early 20th century. She won the Pulitzer Prize in 1973 for her novel, \"The Optimist's Daughter,\" and is best known for her novels and short stories. The main library of the Jackson/Hinds Library System was named in her honor, and her home has been designated as a National Historic Landmark.\nRichard Wright, a highly acclaimed African-American author, lived in Jackson as an adolescent and young man in the 1910s and 1920s. He related his experience in his memoir \"Black Boy\" (1945). He described the harsh and largely terror-filled life most African Americans experienced in the South and Northern ghettos such as Chicago under segregation in the early 20th century.\nJackson had significant growth in the early 20th century, which produced dramatic changes in the city's skyline. Jackson's new Union Station downtown reflected the city's service by multiple rail lines, including the Illinois Central.\nAcross the street, the new, luxurious King Edward Hotel opened its doors in 1923, having been built according to a design by New Orleans architect William T. Nolan. It became a center for prestigious events held by Jackson society and Mississippi politicians. Nearby, the 18-story Standard Life Building, designed in 1929 by Claude Lindsley, was the largest reinforced concrete structure in the world upon its completion.\nJackson's economic growth was further stimulated in the 1930s by the discovery of natural gas fields nearby. Speculators had begun searching for oil and natural gas in Jackson beginning in 1920. The initial drilling attempts came up empty. This failure did not stop Ella Render from obtaining a lease from the state's insane asylum to begin a well on its grounds in 1924, where he found natural gas. (Render eventually lost the rights when courts determined that the asylum did not have the right to lease the state's property.) Businessmen jumped on the opportunity and dug wells in the Jackson area. The continued success of these ventures attracted further investment. By 1930, there were 14 derricks in the Jackson skyline.\nMississippi Governor Theodore Bilbo stated:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is no idle dream to prophesy that the state's share [of the oil and natural gas profits] properly safe-guarded would soon pay the state's entire bonded indebtedness and even be great enough to defray all the state's expenses and make our state tax free so long as obligations are concerned.\nThis enthusiasm was subdued when the first wells failed to produce oil of a sufficiently high gravity for commercial success. The barrels of oil had considerable amounts of saltwater, which lessened the quality. The governor's prediction was wrong in hindsight, but the oil and natural gas industry did provide an economic boost for the city and state. The effects of the Great Depression were mitigated by the industry's success. At its height in 1934, there were 113 producing wells in the state. The overwhelming majority were closed by 1955.\nDue to provisions in the federal Rivers and Harbors Act, on October 25, 1930, city leaders met with U.S. Army engineers to ask for federal help to alleviate Jackson flooding. J.J. Halbert, city engineer, proposed a straightening and dredging of the Pearl River below Jackson.\nJackson's Gold Coast.\nDuring Mississippi's extended Prohibition period, from the 1920s until the 1960s, illegal drinking and gambling casinos flourished on the east side of the Pearl River, in Flowood along with the original U.S. Route 80 just across from the city of Jackson. Those illegal casinos, bootleg liquor stores, and nightclubs made up the Gold Coast, a strip of mostly black-market businesses that operated for decades along Flowood Road. Although outside the law, the Gold Coast was a thriving center of nightlife and music, with many local blues musicians appearing regularly in the clubs.\nThe Gold Coast declined and businesses disappeared after Mississippi's prohibition laws were repealed in 1966, allowing Hinds County, including Jackson, to go \"wet\". In addition, integration drew off business from establishments that earlier had catered to African Americans, such as the Summers Hotel. When it opened in 1943 on Pearl Street, it was one of two hotels in the city that served black clients. For years its Subway Lounge was a prime performance spot for black musicians playing jazz and blues.\nIn another major change, in 1990 the state-approved gaming on riverboats. Numerous casinos have been developed on riverboats, mostly in Mississippi Delta towns such as Tunica Resorts, Greenville, and Vicksburg, as well as Biloxi on the Gulf Coast. Before the damage and losses due to Hurricane Katrina in 2005, the state ranked second nationally in gambling revenues.\nWorld War II and later development.\nDuring World War II, Hawkins Field (at that time, also known as the Jackson Army Airbase) the American 21st, 309th, and 310th Bomber Groups that were stationed at the base were re-deployed for combat. Following the German invasion of the Netherlands and the Japanese invasion of the Dutch East Indies, between 688 and 800 members of the Dutch Airforce escaped to the UK or Australia for training and, out of necessity, were eventually given permission by the United States to make use of Hawkins Field.\nFrom May 1942 until the end of the war, all Dutch military aircrews trained at the base and went on to serve in either the British or Australian Air Forces.\nIn 1949, the poet Margaret Walker began teaching at Jackson State University, a historically black college. She taught there until 1979 and founded the university's Center for African-American Studies. Her poetry collection won a Yale Younger Poets Prize. Her second novel, \"Jubilee\" (1966), is considered a major work of African-American literature. She has influenced many younger writers.\nCivil rights movement in Jackson.\nThe civil rights movement had been active for decades, particularly mounting legal challenges to Mississippi's constitution and laws that disfranchised black people. Beginning in 1960, Jackson as the state capital became the site for dramatic non-violent protests in a new phase of activism that brought in a wide variety of participants in the performance of mass demonstrations.\nIn 1960, the U.S. Census Bureau reported Jackson's population as 64.3% white and 35.7% black. At the time, public facilities were segregated and Jim Crow was in effect. Efforts to desegregate Jackson facilities began when nine Tougaloo College students tried to read books in the \"white only\" public library and were arrested. Founded as a historically black college (HBCU) by the American Missionary Association after the Civil War, Tougaloo College helped organize both black and white students of the region to work together for civil rights. It created partnerships with the neighboring mostly white Millsaps College to work with student activists. It has been recognized as a site on the \"Civil Rights Trail\" by the National Park Service.\nThe mass demonstrations of the 1960s were initiated with the arrival of more than 300 Freedom Riders on May 24, 1961. They were arrested in Jackson for disturbing the peace after they disembarked from their interstate buses. The interracial teams rode the buses from Washington, D.C., and sat together to demonstrate against segregation on public transportation, as the Constitution provides for unrestricted public transportation. Although the Freedom Riders had intended New Orleans as their final destination, Jackson was the farthest that any managed to travel. New participants kept joining the movement, as they intended to fill the jails in Jackson with their protest. The riders had encountered extreme violence along the way, including a bus burning and physical assaults. They attracted national media attention to the struggle for constitutional rights.\nAfter the Freedom Rides, students and activists of the Freedom Movement launched a series of merchant boycotts, sit-ins and protest marches, from 1961 to 1963. Businesses discriminated against black customers. For instance, at the time, department stores did not hire black salesclerks or allow black customers to use their fitting rooms to try on clothes, or lunch counters for meals while in the store, but they wanted them to shop in their stores.\nIn Jackson, shortly after midnight on June 12, 1963, Medgar Evers, civil rights activist and leader of the Mississippi chapter of the NAACP, was assassinated by Byron De La Beckwith, a white supremacist associated with the White Citizens' Council. Thousands marched in Evers' funeral procession to protest the killing. Two trials at the time both resulted in hung juries. A portion of U.S. Highway 49, all of Delta Drive, a library, the central post office for the city, and Jackson\u2013Evers International Airport were named in honor of Medgar Evers. In 1994, prosecutors Ed Peters and Bobby DeLaughter finally obtained a murder conviction in a state trial of De La Beckwith based on new evidence.\nDuring 1963 and 1964, civil rights organizers gathered residents for voter education and voter registration. Black people had been essentially disfranchised since 1890. In a pilot project in 1963, activists rapidly registered 80,000 voters across the state, demonstrating the desire of African Americans to vote. In 1964 they created the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party as an alternative to the all-white state Democratic Party, and sent an alternate slate of candidates to the national Democratic Party convention in Atlantic City, New Jersey, that year.\nSegregation and the disfranchisement of African Americans gradually ended after the Civil Rights Movement gained Congressional passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965. In June 1966, Jackson was the terminus of the James Meredith March, organized by James Meredith, the first African American to enroll at the University of Mississippi. The march, which began in Memphis, Tennessee, was an attempt to garner support for full implementation of civil rights in practice, following the legislation. It was accompanied by a new drive to register African Americans to vote in Mississippi. In this latter goal, it succeeded in registering between 2,500 and 3,000 black Mississippians to vote. The march ended on June 26 after Meredith, who had been wounded by a sniper's bullet earlier on the march, addressed a large rally of some 15,000 people in Jackson.\nIn September 1967 a Ku Klux Klan chapter bombed the synagogue of the Beth Israel Congregation in Jackson, and in November bombed the house of its rabbi, Dr. Perry Nussbaum. He and his congregation had supported civil rights.\nGradually the old barriers came down. Since that period, both whites and Black Americans in the state have had a consistently high rate of voter registration and turnout. Following the decades of the Great Migration, when more than one million black people left the rural South, since the 1930s the state has been majority white in total population. African Americans are a majority in the city of Jackson, although the metropolitan area is majority white. African Americans are also a majority in several cities and counties of the Mississippi Delta, which are included in the 2nd congressional district. The other three congressional districts are majority white.\nMid-1960s to present.\nThe first successful cadaveric lung transplant was performed at the University of Mississippi Medical Center in Jackson in June 1963 by Dr. James Hardy. Hardy transplanted the cadaveric lung into a patient suffering from lung cancer. The patient survived for eighteen days before dying of kidney failure.\nIn 1966 it was estimated that recurring flood damage at Jackson from the Pearl River averaged nearly a million dollars per year. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers spent $6.8 million on levees and a new channel in 1966 before the project completion to prevent a flood equal to the December 1961 event plus an additional foot.\nSince 1968, Jackson has been the home of Malaco Records, one of the leading record companies for gospel, blues, and soul music in the United States. In January 1973, Paul Simon recorded the songs \"Learn How to Fall\" and \"Take Me to the Mardi Gras\", found on the album \"There Goes Rhymin' Simon\", in Jackson at the Malaco Recording Studios. Many well-known Southern artists recorded on the album, including the Muscle Shoals Rhythm Section (David Hood, Jimmy Johnson, Roger Hawkins, Barry Beckett), Carson Whitsett, the Onward Brass Band from New Orleans, and others. The label has recorded many leading soul and blues artists, including Bobby Bland, ZZ Hill, Latimore, Shirley Brown, Denise LaSalle, and Tyrone Davis.\nOn May 15, 1970, Jackson police killed two students and wounded twelve at Jackson State College after a protest of the Vietnam War included students' overturning and burning some cars. These killings occurred eleven days after the National Guard killed four students in an anti-war protest at Kent State University in Ohio, and were part of national social unrest. \"Newsweek\" cited the Jackson State killings in its issue of May 18 when it suggested that U.S. President Richard Nixon faced a new home front.\nThe influx of illegal drugs occurred nationally as smugglers used the highways, seaports, and airports of the Gulf region. The 1980s in Jackson were dominated by Mayor Dale Danks Jr. until he was unseated by lawyer and legislator J. Kane Ditto, who criticized the deficit funding and the politicized police department of the city. Federal investigations of drug trafficking at Jackson's Hawkins Field airport were a part of the \"Kerry Report,\" the 1986 U.S. Senate investigation of public corruption and foreign relations.\nAs Jackson has become the medical and legal center of the state, it has attracted Jewish professionals in both fields. Since the late 20th century, it has developed the largest Jewish community in the state.\nIn 1997, Harvey Johnson, Jr. was elected as Jackson's first African-American mayor. During his term, he proposed the development of a convention center to attract more business to the city. In 2004, during his second term, 66 percent of the voters passed a referendum for a tax to build the Convention Center.\nMayor Johnson was replaced by Frank Melton on July 4, 2005. Melton generated controversy through his unconventional behavior, which included acting as a law enforcement officer. A dramatic spike in crime ensued during his term, despite Melton's efforts to reduce crime. The lack of jobs contributed to climb. In 2006 a young African-American businessman, Starsky Darnell Redd, was convicted of money laundering in federal court along with his mother, other associates, and Billy Tucker, the former airport security chief.\nIn 2007, Hinds County sheriff Malcolm McMillin was appointed as the new police chief in Jackson, setting a historic precedent. McMillin was both the county sheriff and city police chief until 2009, when he stepped down due to disagreements with the mayor. Mayor Frank Melton died in May 2009, and City Councilman Leslie McLemore served as acting mayor of Jackson until July 2009, when former Mayor Harvey Johnson was elected and assumed the position.\nOn June 26, 2011, 49-year-old James Craig Anderson was killed in Jackson after being beaten, robbed, and run over by a group of white teenagers. The district attorney described it as a \"hate crime\", and the FBI investigated it as a civil rights violation.\nOn March 18, 2013, a severe hailstorm hit the Jackson metro area. The hail caused major damage to roofs, vehicles, and building siding. Hail ranged in size from golfball to softball. There were more than 40,000 hailstorm claims of homeowner and automobile damage.\nIn 2013, Jackson was named as one of the top 10 friendliest cities in the United States by \"CN Traveler\". The capital city was tied with Natchez as Number 7. The city was noticed for friendly people, great food, and green and pretty public places.\nOn July 1, 2013, Chokwe Lumumba was sworn into office as mayor of the city. After eight months in office, Lumumba died on February 25, 2014. Lumumba was a popular yet controversial figure due to his prior membership in the Republic of New Afrika, as well as being a co-founder of the National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America.\nLumumba's son, Chokwe Antar Lumumba, ran for the mayoral seat following his father's death, but lost to Councillor Tony Yarber on April 22, 2014. In 2017, however, Chokwe Antar Lumumba ran for mayor again, and won. Following his victory, on June 26 he was interviewed by Amy Goodman on \"Democracy Now!\", at which time he declared a commitment to make Jackson the \"Most Radical City on the Planet\".\nFor several years, the city water supply failed to meet federal drinking water standards and was subject to many boil water orders in 2021 and 2022. Due to deteriorating water infrastructure, some parts of the city experienced low water pressure, and in some neighborhoods residents reported untreated sewage flowing in city streets. In August 2022, Jackson lost access to water when its largest water treatment plant failed, leaving tap water untreated.\nGeography.\nThe city of Jackson is located primarily in northeastern Hinds County. Jackson also includes around 3,000 acres (12.1\u00a0km2) in Rankin County comprising Jackson-Medgar Evers International Airport and a small portion of Madison County. The Pearl River forms most of the eastern border of the city. A small portion of the city containing Tougaloo College is the portion of Jackson that lies in Madison County, bounded on the west by Interstate 220 and on the east by the U.S. Route 51 and Interstate 55. In the 2010 census, only 622 of the city's residents lived in Madison County, and only 1 lived within the city limits in Rankin County. The city is bordered to the north by Ridgeland in Madison County, to the northeast by Ross Barnett Reservoir on the Pearl River, to the east by Flowood and Richland in Rankin County, to the south by Byram in Hinds County, and to the west by Clinton in Hinds County.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which are land and , or 1.94% of the total, are water.\nCityscape.\nDowntown Jackson is situated directly on the banks of the Pearl River. The downtown district has direct connections to both Interstate 55 via Pearl Street and Pasagoula Street and Interstate 20 via State Street (US 51). Much of the downtown was constructed before the 1980s and only small additions to the skyline have been made since then.\nGeology.\nFor the most part, Jackson is built on acidic, variably drained silt loam soil. Loess forms the topsoil in western sections, where the Loring soil series is common. The Tippo series, also a silt loam, is found in the central flood plain. Farther east, common soil series include Guyton silt loam, Providence silt loam and Smithdale fine sandy loam.\nJackson sits atop the extinct Jackson Volcano, located underground. It is the only capital city in the United States to have this feature. The buried peak of the volcano is located directly below the Mississippi Coliseum. The municipality is drained on the west by tributaries of the Big Black River and on the east by the Pearl River, which is higher than the Big Black near Canton. The artesian groundwater flow is not as extensive in Jackson for this reason. The first large-scale well was drilled in the city in 1896, and the city water supply has relied on surface water resources.\nClimate.\nJackson is located in the humid subtropical climate zone (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfa\"). Rain occurs throughout the year, though the winter and spring are the wettest seasons, while September and October are usually the driest months. Snow is rare, and accumulation very seldom lasts more than a day. Average annual precipitation is , see climate table. Much of Jackson's rainfall occurs during thunderstorms. Thunder is heard on roughly 70 days each year. Jackson lies in a region prone to severe thunderstorms which can produce large hail, damaging winds, and tornadoes. Among the most notable tornado events was the F5 Candlestick Park tornado on March 3, 1966, which destroyed the shopping center of the same name and surrounding businesses and residential areas, killing 19 in South Jackson.\nThe record low temperature is , set on January 27, 1940, and the record high is , recorded on September 6\u20137, 1925, July 29, 1930, and August 30, 2000.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJackson remained a small town for much of the 19th century. Before the American Civil War, Jackson's population remained small, particularly in contrast to the river towns along the commerce-laden Mississippi River. Despite the city's status as the state capital, the 1850 census only counted 1,881 residents, excluding slaves, which were not separately enumerated.\nBy 1900, the population of Jackson was still less than 8,000. Although it expanded rapidly, during this period Meridian became Mississippi's largest city, based on trade, manufacturing, and access to transportation via railroad and highway.\nIn the early 20th century, Jackson had its largest rates of growth but ranked second to Meridian in Mississippi. By 1944, Jackson's population had risen to some 70,000 inhabitants, and it became the largest city in the state. For several decades, Jackson had the most thriving business districts and the largest public school system in Mississippi. It achieved its peak population in the 1980 census of more than 200,000 residents in the city. Since 1980, Jackson has declined in population due to several factors while its surrounding suburban population has increased.\nRace and ethnicity.\nAccording to the 2010 census, the racial and ethnic makeup of the city was predominantly Black and African American, and non-Hispanic white; in 2020, they remained the largest racial and ethnic composition for the city. This Hispanic or Latino population is the fastest growing racial and ethnic group in the city.\nIncome.\nAccording to census statistics in 2000, the median income for a household in the city was $30,414, and the median income for a family was $36,003. Males had a median income of $29,166 versus $23,328 for females. The per capita income for the city was $17,116. About 19.6% of families and 23.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 33.7% of those under age 18 and 15.7% of those age 65 or over. At the publication of the 2020 American Community Survey, the city's median household income increased to $35,070; families had a median income of $44,348, married-couple families $74,893, and non-families $22,061.\nCrime.\nHigh criminal activity, particularly the homicide rate, is a major reoccurring issue in the city. Crime has had a negative impact on the city's economy and population. Most parts of Jackson are considered a food desert because important grocery stores and restaurants have closed down or left the city as theft and other crimes have worsened since 2000.\nIn 2020, the city's homicide rate reached its highest in history with 79.69 homicides per 100,000 residents, with a total of 128 homicides. Of major U.S. cities, only St. Louis surpassed Jackson's homicide rate. The homicide rate in 2020 represented a significant spike after years of declining homicide rates in the early 2000s. Property crime remains much lower than in the 1990s and overall violent crime has not increased as significantly as homicide in recent years and is below the peak in 1994 as of 2020.\nIn 2021, a record number of homicides (160) were recorded, and at a rate of 104 per 100,000 was the highest in the United States. In late 2020, Police Chief James Davis along with the Mayor and other city leaders unveiled the virtual policing concept. After months of struggling to move the concept forward, Chief Davis began discussions with Eric B. Fox, a veteran Jackson Police Officer to return to the department. Fox returned officially in January 2022, and launched a new concept, the Real Time Command Center.\nAlso in 2021, the Jackson Police Department stated that the city had a serious street gang problem which is a major contributor to violent crimes. The city has had a gang presence since the 1980s but it has seemingly grown over the years. Several gangs from Chicago have settled in the city and are heavily involved in drug-selling territory wars and many other crimes.\nIn 2022, for the second year in a row Jackson had the highest homicide rate per capita in the United States, with the city reporting a total of 138 murders giving the city a slightly lower homicide rate of 89.8 per 100,000.\nIn 2023, Jackson murders dropped by 15% with 118 homicides being reported but the city still had the nation's highest homicide rate per capita with 78.8 per 100,000 residents. In 2023, Mayor Lumumba announced the opening of the Jackson Crime Center which is a facility that houses monitoring cameras strategically placed around the city to better identify criminals so they can be held accountable for their actions. The Jackson Police Department is short-staffed so the center will help the department as they work to increase recruitment and retention.\n2024 saw a third consecutive decrease in murders with 111 being reported in the year, a 5.9% decrease but still the highest homicide rate in the United States with a homicide rate of 77.2 per 100,000 residents. In February 2024, Governor Reeves announced a new and tougher plan to lower rampant crime in the city and protect innocent residents.\nEconomy.\nJackson is home to several major industries; these include electrical equipment and machinery, processed food, and primary and fabricated metal products. The surrounding area supports the agricultural development of livestock, soybeans, cotton, and poultry.\nAccording to the city's government, Jackson's top three employers are the University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson Public Schools, and Nissan North America as of 2020. Other notable corporations with a large presence in the city and area include C Spire and Amazon in nearby Madison County.\nThe city is home to Cooperation Jackson, which is an economic development vehicle for worker-owned cooperative business. The organization has led to the creation of several businesses including lawn care provider The Green Team, organic farm Freedom Farms, print shop The Center for Community Production, and The Balagoon Center, which is a cooperative business incubator.\nArts and culture.\nJackson is home to a number of cultural and artistic attractions, including the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSports teams.\nThe city of Jackson and its metropolitan area are home to professional and collegiate sports teams. The Frontier League baseball team Mississippi Mud Monsters plays in neighboring Pearl, Mississippi, and the Mississippi Brilla soccer team of USL League Two also operates in Clinton, Mississippi.\nGovernment.\nMunicipal government.\nIn 1985, Jackson voters opted to replace the three-person mayor-commissioner system with a city council and mayor. This electoral system enables a wider representation of residents on the city council. City council members are elected from each of the city's seven wards, considered single-member districts. The mayor is elected at-large citywide.\nVarious powers rest according to the City charter and the Mayor-Council Form of government outline directed by Mississippi law to the city of Jackson. The mayor can appoint heads of city municipal agencies, with approval from the city council, create new agencies if their orders are not vetoed or overturned by the city council, and can hire and fire city contractors.\nJackson's current mayor is John Horhn of the Democratic Party, who was elected on June 3, 2025.\nJackson's City Council members are:\nState government.\nThe Mississippi Department of Corrections (MDOC) operates the Jackson Probation &amp; Parole Office in Jackson. The MDOC Central Mississippi Correctional Facility, in unincorporated Rankin County, is located in proximity to Jackson.\nFederal representation.\nThe larger portion of Jackson is part of Mississippi's 2nd congressional district. U.S. Representative Bennie Gordon Thompson, a Democrat, has served since 1993. Until 2011 he was Chairman of the Committee on Homeland Security and has been the ranking member since 2011.[1]\nThe United States Postal Service operates the Jackson Main Post Office and several smaller post offices.\nEducation.\nHigher education.\nJackson is home to the most collegiate institutions in Mississippi. Jackson State University is the largest collegiate institution in the city, fourth largest in the state, and the only doctoral-granting research institution based in its region.\nColleges and universities.\nSource:\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nPublic schools.\nJackson Public School District (JPS) operates 36 public schools. It is one of the largest school districts in the state with about 17,000 students in twenty-two elementary schools, seven middle schools, and six high schools. Jackson Public Schools is the only urban school district in the state.\nAs of 2017[ [update]] the public schools have few children who are middle or upper class, as 99% of the students in JPS qualify for free or reduced school lunches. In 2017 Susan Womack, president of the Parents for Public Schools Jackson (PPSJ) from 2000 to 2012, stated that middle to upper-class families in Jackson tended to leave public school after elementary school, with parents who remained in Jackson enrolling their children in private school, and those who wished to continue enrolling their children in public schools moving to Madison County. The PPSJ decided circa the mid-2000s that it was not feasible to encourage middle and upper-class parents to put their children in JPS schools.\nThe district's high schools include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWhile most of Jackson is in Jackson PSD, there are parts in Hinds County that are instead in Hinds County School District and in the Clinton Public School District. The Hinds County part is zoned to Terry High School in Terry. The portion of Jackson in Madison County is within the Madison County School District.\nThere are state-operated K-12 public schools for special purposes;\nPrivate schools.\nPrivate secondary schools include:\nSome schools are in nearby municipalities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrivate primary schools include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPublic libraries.\nJackson/Hinds Library System is the library system of Jackson.\nInfrastructure.\nOn March 27, 2015, Jackson Mayor Tony Yarber issued a state of emergency for transportation (potholes) and water infrastructure (breaks in water mains). The quality of Jackson's water infrastructure system decreased after the severe winter weather of 2014\u20132015. Jackson's office estimated the cost to fix the roads and water pipes at $750 million to $1 billion.\nAfter issuing the state of emergency, the City of Jackson filed a letter of intent to Department of Health to borrow $2.5 million to repair broken water pipes. The Jackson City Council must approve the mayor's proposal. Additionally, Mayor Yarber asked for help from both FEMA and the state Governor's office.\nCalling for a state of emergency increases the likelihood that the U.S. Department of Transportation would give the city money from a \"quick release\" funding account.\nIn late August 2022, the Pearl River overflowed, flooding much of the city and contaminating the water supply. Mayor Lumumba declared a state of emergency and shut down all businesses and schools.\nTransportation.\nIn 2015, 11 percent of the city of Jackson households lacked a car, which decreased to 7.6 percent in 2016. The national average was 8.7 percent in 2016. Jackson averaged 1.68 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8.\nJackson has an increasing number of bicycle lanes.\nJackson\u2013Medgar Wiley Evers International Airport, the busiest commercial airport in Mississippi, is located east of city in Rankin County between Flowood and Pearl.\nJackson's Union Station serves Amtrak's daily overnight train, the \"City of New Orleans\" from Chicago to New Orleans. The intermodal station also serves Greyhound Lines intercity buses and is the primary station for Jackson's municipal buses.\nThe city is at the intersection of major Interstate and Federal Highways: north-south I-55, US 49, US 51, east\u2013west I-20 and US 80.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 2011, the United States Navy named the USS \"Jackson\" (LCS-6) in honor of the city.\nIn 2002, the Subway Lounge (of the Summers Hotel on the Gold Coast) was featured as the subject of the film documentary entitled \"Last of the Mississippi Jukes.\"\nThe popular film \"The Help\" (2011), based on the bestselling novel by the same name by Kathryn Stockett, was filmed in Jackson. The city has a two-part, self-guided tour of areas featured in the film and the book.\nIn the song \"Uptown Funk\" by Mark Ronson and featuring Bruno Mars Jackson is mentioned in the lines \"Julio! Get the Stretch! Ride to Harlem, Hollywood, Jackson, Mississippi.\"\n\"Get on Up\", a movie released in August 2014, had some scenes filmed in Jackson, and nearby Natchez. The movie is based on the life of James Brown.\nThe movie \"Speech &amp; Debate\", an adaptation of the stage play of the same name of Broadway theatre, was filmed entirely in Jackson.\nThe Charlie Daniels song \"Uneasy Rider\" is set in Jackson.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16168", "revid": "14596827", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16168", "title": "Jackson County, Michigan", "text": "County in Michigan, United States\nJackson County is located in the U.S. state of Michigan. The population of the county was 160,366 as of the 2020 census. Its seat of government is the city of Jackson. The county was set off in 1829 and organized in 1832. It is named for U.S. President Andrew Jackson and considered to be one of Michigan's \"Cabinet counties\", named for members of Jackson's Cabinet. Jackson County comprises the Jackson, MI Metropolitan Statistical Area. The Jackson County Courthouse was designed by Claire Allen, a prominent southern Michigan architect. Jackson County is also home to the Michigan Whitetail Hall of Fame.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (3.0%) is water.\nRivers.\nGrand River.\nThe Grand River is Michigan's longest river. It starts in Somerset Township in Hillsdale County and Liberty Township in Jackson County. It then flows through a small part of Columbia Township, into Summit township, and then right through the Jackson city limits. It then flows through Blackman Charter Township and then Rives Township and Tompkins Township before entering Ingham County, Eaton County, Clinton County, Ionia County, Kent County, Ottawa County and into the city of Grand Haven where it empties into Lake Michigan. The river is long; its watershed drains an area of including 18 counties and 158 townships.\nKalamazoo River.\nThe Kalamazoo River is made up of the north and south branches.\nThe north branch starts in Jackson County in Hanover Township. It starts in Pine Hills Lake and Farwell Lake and flows through a small part of Liberty Township and then back into Hanover Township. It then flows into Spring Arbor Township and Concord Township. It then flows out of Jackson County and into Calhoun County before it goes through the town of Albion where the north branch connects with the south branch and they form to be one river.\nThe south branch starts in the wetlands near the town North Adams in Hillsdale County and flows through the rest of Hillsdale County. It enters Jackson County and goes through a small part of Hanover Township before reentering Hillsdale County and then reentering Jackson County where it goes through Pulaski Township. It then enters Calhoun County and connects with the northern branch when it reaches the town of Albion.\nWhen the south branch and north branch connect to form just the Kalamazoo River, it then flows through the rest of Calhoun County. It then enters Kalamazoo County and then Allegan County. When it reaches the towns of Saugatuck and Douglas it stops and enters Lake Michigan. In total the Kalamazoo River is long, and its watershed drains a total of and drains into eight counties.\nGovernment.\nThe county government operates the county jail, maintains township roads, operates the major local courts, keeps files of deeds and mortgages, maintains vital records, administers public health regulations, and participates with the state in the provision of welfare and other social services. The county board of commissioners controls the budget but has only limited authority to make laws or ordinances. In Michigan, most local government functions \u2013 police and fire, building and zoning, tax assessment, street maintenance, etc. \u2013 are the responsibility of individual cities and townships.\nPolitics.\nJackson County is rather conservative for an urban county. With the exceptions of 1964 and 2008 (by less than 2.5%), Jackson County has voted for the Republican nominee in every presidential election since 1940, and is thus considered a reliable Republican stronghold.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 158,422 people, 58,168 households, and 40,833 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 62,906 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 88.54% White, 7.92% Black or African American, 0.40% Native American, 0.53% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.83% from other races, and 1.74% from two or more races. 2.20% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 24.3% were of English, 21.7% of German, 11.5% American, 9.9% Irish and 8.1% Polish ancestry according to the 2012 American Community Survey. 95.9% spoke only English at home, while 2.1% spoke Spanish.\nThere were 58,168 households, out of which 33.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.80% were married couples living together, 12.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.80% were non-families. 24.60% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.60% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.55 and the average family size was 3.03.\nIn the county, 25.60% of the population was under the age of 18, 8.10% was from 18 to 24, 30.40% from 25 to 44, 23.00% from 45 to 64, and 12.90% was 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 104.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 103.70 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $43,171, and the median income for a family was $50,970. Males had a median income of $38,919 versus $26,448 for females. The per capita income for the county was $20,171. About 6.50% of families and 9.00% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.40% of those under age 18 and 6.10% of those age 65 or over.\nCommunities.\nCivil townships.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther unincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nSchool districts include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16175", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16175", "title": "Jennifer Lopez", "text": "American singer and actress (born 1969)\nJennifer Lynn Lopez (born July 24, 1969) is an American singer, songwriter, actress, dancer and businesswoman. Lopez is regarded as one of the most influential entertainers of her time, credited with breaking barriers for Latino Americans in Hollywood and helping propel the Latin pop movement in music. She is also known for her cultural impact through fashion, branding, and shifting mainstream beauty standards.\nAfter appearing as a Fly Girl dancer on the sketch comedy series \"In Living Color\" (1991\u20131993), Lopez rose to wider fame as an actress with leading film roles in \"Selena\" (1997), \"Anaconda\" (1997), \"Out of Sight\" (1998), and \"The Cell\" (2000). She successfully ventured into music with her debut album, \"On the 6\" (1999), which spawned the US \"Billboard\" Hot 100 number-one single \"If You Had My Love\". With her second album \"J.Lo\" and the romantic comedy \"The Wedding Planner\" (both 2001), she became the first woman to simultaneously have the number-one album and film in the United States. Her musical success continued with \"J to tha L\u2013O! The Remixes\"\u2014the first remix album to top the US \"Billboard\" 200\u2014and \"This Is Me... Then\" (both 2002). These projects included the US number-one singles \"I'm Real\", \"Ain't It Funny (Murder Remix)\", and \"All I Have\". \nLopez established herself as one of Hollywood's highest-paid actresses with her roles in romantic comedies, including \"Maid in Manhattan\" (2002), \"Shall We Dance?\" (2004), and \"Monster-in-Law\" (2005). Subsequent albums included \"Como Ama una Mujer\" (2007), which broke first-week sales records for a debut Spanish album. After a career decline, Lopez returned to prominence as a judge on \"American Idol\" (2011\u20132016) and released her comeback single, \"On the Floor\", from the album \"Love?\" (2011). She later starred in the police drama series \"Shades of Blue\" (2016\u20132018) and served as a judge on \"World of Dance\" (2017\u20132020). Her film career saw an upturn with her critically praised performance in the crime drama \"Hustlers\" (2019). She has since starred in \"Marry Me\" (2022), \"The Mother\" (2023), \"\" and \"Atlas\" (both 2024), while receiving praise for her supporting roles in \"Unstoppable\" (2024) and \"Kiss of the Spider Woman\" (2025). \nLopez has sold over 80 million records worldwide, while her films have cumulatively grossed over US$3.1 billion. Her accolades include a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, the \"Billboard\" Icon Award, three American Music Awards, four MTV Video Music Awards (including the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award), and six \"Guinness World Records\". She has been ranked among the 100 most influential people in the world by \"Time\" (2018) and the World's 100 Most Powerful Women by \"Forbes\" (2012). Lopez has a large social media following, being one of the most-followed individuals on Instagram. Her other ventures include a lifestyle brand, beauty and fashion lines, fragrances, a production company, and a charitable foundation.\nEarly life.\nJennifer Lynn Lopez was born on July 24, 1969, in the Bronx, one of the boroughs of New York City, and raised in its Castle Hill neighborhood. Her parents, Guadalupe Rodr\u00edguez and David Lopez, were born in Puerto Rico and met in New York City. After serving in the Army, David worked as a computer technician at Guardian Insurance Company. Guadalupe was a homemaker for the first ten years of Lopez's life, later working as a Tupperware salesperson and a kindergarten and gym teacher. They divorced in the 1990s after 33 years of marriage.\nLopez is a middle child; she has an older sister, Leslie, and a younger sister, Lynda. The three shared a bed. Lopez has described her upbringing as \"strict\". She was raised in a Catholic family; she attended Mass every Sunday and received a Catholic education, attending Holy Family School and the all-girls Preston High School, a private school. In school, Lopez ran track on a national level, participated in gymnastics, and was on the softball team. She danced in school musicals and played a lead role in a production of \"Godspell\". She described herself as a \"tomboy\" and \"very athletic\".\nThere was \"lots of music\" in the typically Puerto Rican household, and Lopez and her sisters were encouraged to sing, dance, and create their own plays for family events. \"West Side Story\" made a particular impression on the young Lopez, who wanted to be an entertainer from an early age. As a teenager, Lopez became \"obsessive\" about dance, stating that \"I practiced until my legs and feet ached\". She learned flamenco, jazz, and ballet at the Kips Bay Boys &amp; Girls Club and taught dance to younger students, including Kerry Washington. After graduating from high school, she had a part-time secretarial job at a law firm and studied business at New York's Baruch College for one semester. At age 18, she enrolled as a full-time student at Manhattan's Phil Black Dance Studio, where she had already taken night classes in jazz and tap dance. Her parents were unhappy with her decision to leave college to pursue a dance career. According to Lopez, her parents felt it was \"foolish\" because \"no Latinas did that\". Her mother asked her to move out of the family home, and they stopped speaking for eight months. Lopez moved to Manhattan, sleeping in the dance studio's office for the first few months.\nCareer.\n1989\u20131996: Professional dancing and early acting roles.\nLopez's first professional job came in 1989 when she spent five months touring Europe with the musical revue show \"Golden Musicals of Broadway\". She was upset at being the only member of the chorus not to have a solo, and later characterized it as a pivotal moment where she had to \"try harder and become that much more committed\". In 1990, she danced alongside MC Hammer in an episode of \"Yo! MTV Raps\", and traveled around Japan for four months as a chorus member in \"Synchronicity\". When she returned to the United States, she was hired as a backup dancer for New Kids on the Block's performance of \"Games\" at the 1991 American Music Awards. She also traveled around America with regional productions of the musicals \"Jesus Christ Superstar\" and \"Oklahoma!\". During this period, Lopez also danced in music videos including Doug E. Fresh's \"Summertime\", Richard Rogers' \"Can't Stop Loving You\", EPMD's \"Rampage\", and Samantha Fox's \"(Hurt Me! Hurt Me!) But the Pants Stay On\". Lopez stated: \"I'd dance in a piece-of-garbage rap or pop video for 50 bucks and make the money last a whole month.\"\nHer most high-profile job as a professional dancer was as a Fly Girl jazz-funk dancer on the sketch comedy television series \"In Living Color\". The show's choreographer, Rosie Perez said she chose Lopez because \"she had that look that I knew the audience would tune in to\". Lopez moved to Los Angeles in late 1991 for the job; she filmed \"In Living Color\" during the day and attended acting classes taught by Aaron Speiser at night. Lopez felt ostracized by the other Fly Girls because of her \"voluptuous figure\", and also clashed with Perez. The head of Virgin Records considered signing The Fly Girls as a girl group to rival the Spice Girls, but the deal fell apart. After appearing as a Fly Girl in seasons three and four of \"In Living Color\", Lopez left to work as a backup dancer for Janet Jackson, and appeared in the music video for \"That's the Way Love Goes\". She was scheduled to tour with Jackson on her Janet World Tour in late 1993 but opted to pursue an acting career instead. Music industry executives expressed interest in giving Lopez a record deal, but she chose to focus on acting. She hired \"In Living Color\" producer Eric Gold as her manager. He advised Lopez to lose weight if she wanted to succeed as an actress.\nLopez's first professional acting job was a small recurring role on the television show \"South Central\" (1994). She was invited to audition for the pilot by a casting director who had seen her speak to camera during a behind-the-scenes \"In Living Color\" segment. She then acquired an agent and was cast in the CBS show \"Second Chances\"; the series was quickly cancelled, but her popularity with viewers led to her being cast in its spin-off \"Hotel Malibu\". She subsequently appeared in the television film \"Lost in the Wild\" (1993). For her first major movie role, in Gregory Nava's 1995 drama \"Mi Familia\", Lopez received a nomination for the Independent Spirit Award for Best Supporting Actress. She then starred in the action comedy \"Money Train\" (1995). The film was not a box office success, though her performance was reviewed positively, which led to her being further noticed in Hollywood. In 1996, Lopez had a supporting role opposite Robin Williams in the comedy \"Jack\", which director Francis Ford Coppola cast her in after seeing her performance in \"Mi Familia\". She next starred opposite Jack Nicholson as a \"calculating Cuban maid\" in the neo-noir thriller \"Blood and Wine\" (1996), where David Rooney of \"Variety\" felt she delivered in \"juggling\" the \"smoldering and soulful sides\" of the character.\n1997\u20131999: Breakthrough with \"Selena\" and \"On the 6\".\nWith her casting as the singer Selena Quintanilla-P\u00e9rez in the biopic \"Selena\" (1997), Lopez became the first Latina actress to earn $1 million. She described her salary for the film as a \"statement to the world\", but expressed disappointment that other Latina actors were not being afforded the same opportunities. Despite having previously worked with the film's director Gregory Nava on \"Mi Familia\", Lopez participated in an intense auditioning process and spent time with the late singer's family in Corpus Christi, Texas before filming began. \"Selena\" was a box office hit, and Lopez's performance received critical acclaim. Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" described it as \"a star-making performance\" and wrote: \"She has the star presence to look convincing in front of 100,000 fans.\" Lopez received her first Golden Globe nomination for the performance. Nava asked the heads of Warner Bros. to fund an Academy Award campaign for Lopez but was told the Academy would \"never nominate a Latina.\" Later in 1997, Lopez starred opposite Ice Cube in the horror film \"Anaconda\", which received negative reviews from critics but was a box office success. Joe Leydon of \"Variety\" found the film \"silly\" but said it deserved \"a little credit\" for being \"the first movie of its kind to have a Latina and an African-American\" as its stars. In the crime film \"U Turn\" (1997), Lopez appeared topless in a sex scene that was added by director Oliver Stone during filming. Speaking in 2003, Lopez said it was not something \"I would have chosen to do\" and that she and Stone fought over it: \"It's hard being the only woman on a set.\"\nLopez starred opposite George Clooney in the crime caper \"Out of Sight\" (1998), Steven Soderbergh's adaptation of the Elmore Leonard 1996 novel. Cast as a deputy federal marshal who falls for a charming criminal, she won rave reviews for her performance. Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" described it as her \"best movie role thus far, and she brings it both seductiveness and grit; if it was hard to imagine a hard-working, pistol-packing bombshell on the page, it couldn't be easier here.\" Turan of the \"Los Angeles Times\" described Lopez as \"an actress who can be convincingly tough and devastatingly erotic\" and said the film solidified \"her position as a woman you can confidently build a film around.\" In 2021, Peter Bradshaw of \"The Guardian\" named Lopez and Clooney's partnership as one of the best examples of on-screen chemistry in cinema history. Also in 1998, Lopez provided the voice of Azteca in the animated film \"Antz\". \nLopez decided to pursue a music career after working on \"Selena\", realizing that she had missed \"the excitement of the stage\". Her new manager Benny Medina sought to position her as \"a brand name that will cross over into all media.\" Lopez, who was \"really feeling [her] Latin roots\", recorded a Spanish-language demo for circulation among prospective labels. With Lopez being a high-profile personality, a bidding war ensued. Tommy Mottola, the head of Sony Music's Work Group, signed her but suggested that she sing in English instead. Her record deal with Sony was described as \"lucrative\", having outbid other offers from Capitol Records and EMI Latin. While Lopez worked on her debut album, Sony \"began a major push\" to feature her with other high-profile entertainers, leading her to appear in the Sean Combs music video \"Been Around the World\" (1997).\nHer debut album, \"On the 6\" (1999), named after the 6 Subway line which connected her childhood home in the Bronx to Manhattan, was met with positive reviews and further propelled her public profile. The album was a success and Lopez's debut single, \"If You Had My Love\", topped the U.S. \"Billboard\" Hot 100 for five consecutive weeks, with another single, \"Waiting for Tonight\", reaching number eight and becoming a celebratory anthem for the new millennium. Other singles from the album included \"Let's Get Loud\", which became one of Lopez's signature songs, and \"No Me Ames\", a duet with future husband Marc Anthony. In July 1999, she performed \"If You Had My Love\" and \"Let's Get Loud\" at the 1999 FIFA Women's World Cup closing ceremony. It was watched by over one billion viewers worldwide, exposing Lopez's music career to a larger international audience.\n2000\u20132002: Box office success, \"J.Lo\" and \"This Is Me... Then\".\nIn February 2000, Lopez and then-boyfriend Sean Combs attended the Grammy Awards, with Lopez wearing a plunging green Versace silk chiffon dress. The dress generated worldwide attention and became the most popular search query in Google's history, leading to the creation of Google Images, while boosting Lopez's album and movie ticket sales. Later that year, Lopez starred in the psychological thriller \"The Cell\", for which she received a $4 million salary. The film, where Lopez played a psychologist who uses radical experimental therapy to enter the mind of a killer, received mixed reviews but was a box office success. David Edelstein of \"Slate\" remarked that the \"imperious\" Lopez was \"trying to look waifishly expectant\" while Amy Taubin of \"The Village Voice\" noted that she appeared to be engaged \"in some kind of pouting competition\" \"in lieu of acting.\"\nIn January 2001, Lopez became the first woman to have a number-one film and album simultaneously in the United States, with the release of her second album, \"J.Lo\", and her first romantic comedy \"The Wedding Planner\", which co-starred Matthew McConaughey. Lopez had been searching for a romantic comedy role for several years; she wanted to show that she could be \"every girl\", stating: \"I felt like all the women in romantic comedies always looked the same way, they were always white.\" Despite negative reviews, the film opened at number one at the box office and solidified her place in Hollywood. At the same time, \"J.Lo\" debuted at number one on the US \"Billboard\" 200; she was the first female solo recording artist under Epic Records to do so since the label's inception in 1953. \"J.Lo\" was titled after the nickname she had been given by her fans, with Lopez also adopting J.Lo as her stagename. The album received mixed critical reviews but became the most successful of her career, selling 12 million copies worldwide. It produced four singles: \"Love Don't Cost a Thing\", which reached number one in various countries, \"Play\", \"I'm Real\", and \"Ain't It Funny\". A remix of \"I'm Real\" featuring rapper Ja Rule propelled that song to number one on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. \nIn September 2001, Lopez performed a two-concert residency in Puerto Rico, which marked her first concerts. It was broadcast that November as an NBC special, \"Jennifer Lopez in Concert\", and became one of the most-watched concert specials of the year, with a US audience of almost 12 million. Also in 2001, Lopez founded her production company, Nuyorican Productions, with manager Benny Medina, and starred in the romantic drama, \"Angel Eyes\", opposite Jim Caviezel. Lopez's performance was well-reviewed, though the film was a critical and commercial disappointment. She was slated to star alongside Ricky Martin in a remake of Elvis Presley's \"Viva Las Vegas\", but this did not eventuate.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThere was a time when I was very overworked and I was doing music and movies and so many things. I was suffering from a lack of sleep ... I was like \u2014 I don't want to move, I don't want to talk, I don't want to do anything. It was on that movie, \"Enough\" ... I had a nervous breakdown.\n\u2014Lopez, discussing the \"height of her fame\"\nLopez released two albums in 2002. The first was \"J to tha L\u2013O! The Remixes\", which became the first remix album in history to debut at number one on the \"Billboard\" 200. Its singles included \"Ain't It Funny (Murder Remix)\" and \"I'm Gonna Be Alright\", which reached number one and ten on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, respectively. Lopez's third studio album, \"This Is Me... Then\", was released in late 2002, and was heavily influenced by her relationship with then-fianc\u00e9 Ben Affleck. It received mixed critical reviews; \"Billboard\"'s Michael Paoletta noted the \"considerable growth she reveals as a performer and tunesmith\" on the album, while Jon Caramanica called it \"the least interesting music on the pop charts today.\" The album became a commercial success, achieving the highest opening sales week of her career. The album's lead single, \"Jenny from the Block\", which peaked at number three on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, was viewed as a response to the notion that Lopez had alienated her \"core fan base: the black and Hispanic hip-hop community.\" The album also spawned the US number-one single \"All I Have\".\nLopez starred as an abused wife who fights back in the thriller \"Enough\" (2002), a role which required her to learn Krav Maga. An overworked Lopez suffered a nervous breakdown in 2001 while filming it. The film received negative reviews; Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" felt it was \"tacky material\" and was surprised to see \"an actress like Jennifer Lopez\" involved with the project. Her next film was the romantic comedy, \"Maid in Manhattan\" (2002), in which Lopez starred opposite Ralph Fiennes as a maid and single mother from the Bronx. It became the highest-grossing film of her career at the time. Reviewing \"Maid in Manhattan\", A. O. Scott of \"The New York Times\" enjoyed Lopez as a romantic lead and said \"her greatest skill as an actress\" was \"her ability to melt without cracking the hard shell of composure she wears.\" Lopez was ranked among the top ten highest-paid actresses in Hollywood in 2002, earning $8 million per feature.\n2003\u20132006: Media scrutiny.\nLopez became the subject of widespread media criticism in 2003 due to her public relationship with Ben Affleck and the tabloid depiction of her as a demanding diva. She fired both her personal manager Benny Medina and her publicist in mid-2003; \"The New York Times\" reported that movie executives had become frustrated by having their communications with Lopez \"largely filtered\" through Medina. That year, Lopez starred opposite Affleck in the romantic comedy \"Gigli\", which was a box-office bomb and is considered one of the worst films of all time. Rex Reed of \"The Observer\" criticized the lead actors, calling them \"pathetically incompetent\" in both \"craft and talent\". Roger Ebert agreed that the movie \"doesn't quite work\", but found Lopez and Affleck \"appealing in their performances\" and noted the couple's chemistry. \nLopez had a minor role opposite Affleck in the film \"Jersey Girl\" (2004). Following test audiences' negative reactions to the onscreen couple, her screen time was halved. While she remained one of the highest-paid actresses in Hollywood during this period, Lopez later described this as the lowest point of her career and admitted she felt \"eviscerated\" by the media coverage surrounding \"Gigli\": \"I lost my sense of self, questioned if I belonged in this business, thought maybe I did suck at everything. And my relationship self-destructed in front of the entire world. It was a two-year thing for me until I picked myself up again.\" Months later, she starred opposite Richard Gere in the romantic comedy-drama \"Shall We Dance?\", which was a box-office success.\nShe released her fourth studio album, \"Rebirth\", in early 2005. Its title was symbolic of Lopez's hopes for \"a new professional beginning\". It was recorded during a period where Lopez felt \"a little bit lost, trying to get my footing in a new life\", \"I had just gotten married [to singer Marc Anthony] ... I wasn't with Benny [Medina].\" In a review of \"Rebirth\", journalist Alexis Petridis remarked that the title \"suggests even Lopez has realised that something is amiss with her career ... Despite the highlights, you're still left pondering the question: what happened to Jennifer Lopez?\" The album reached number two on the \"Billboard\" 200, but failed to replicate the sales of her previous albums. Its lead single, \"Get Right\", however, reached number twelve on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, becoming one of her most successful songs. \nThe marketing for the romantic comedy \"Monster-in-Law\" (2005), in which Lopez starred opposite Jane Fonda, played up her \"\"Gigli\"-and-tabloid tarnished image\", and it became a box office success. She next starred alongside Robert Redford and Morgan Freeman in the drama \"An Unfinished Life\" (2005), which received mixed reviews. Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" predicted that the typical review would be unkind: \"It will have no respect for Jennifer Lopez, because she is going through a period right now when nobody is satisfied with anything she does ... Give Lopez your permission to be good again; she is the same actress now as when we thought her so new and fine.\" \nThe next year, she returned to the top five of the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 as a featured artist on \"Control Myself\", the lead single from LL Cool J's twelfth studio album. In 2006, she reunited with director Gregory Nava to star in the crime drama \"Bordertown\" as a journalist investigating female homicides in Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez, Mexico. The film was negatively reviewed and received a direct-to-video release. David D'Arcy of \"Screen Daily\" found Lopez \"unconvincing\" as a journalist. \n2007\u20132010: Career downturn.\nBy the late 2000s, Lopez's commercial success had declined. Her music career \"entered a plateau\", while \"her film career entered a period of some disappointing-to-middling successes\". In 2007, she starred opposite her then-husband Marc Anthony in the music biopic \"El Cantante\", which told the story of Puerto Rican salsa singer H\u00e9ctor Lavoe and his wife Puchi. It did not perform well at the box office and received mixed reviews from film critics; Lopez's performance, which she expressed pride in, drew both praise and criticism.\nLopez released two studio albums in 2007. Her fifth album, \"Como Ama una Mujer\", was her first to be recorded entirely in Spanish. Chris Willman of \"Entertainment Weekly\" acknowledged that the album offered \"fairly persuasive proof\" that Lopez can sing, but was unimpressed by the \"flaccid torch songs.\" It became the fifth Spanish album to debut in the top ten of the \"Billboard\" 200, and achieved the highest first-week sales for an artist's debut Spanish album at the time. The lead single, \"Qu\u00e9 Hiciste\", reached number 86 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 while the second single, \"Me Haces Falta\", failed to chart. Lopez's sixth studio album, \"Brave\", released later that year, was her lowest-charting album worldwide. Jonathan Bernstein of \"Entertainment Weekly\" was disappointed that Lopez had returned to \"listless vocals\" for her \"back-to-the-dance-floor album.\" The album debuted at number 12 on the \"Billboard\" 200 and produced two singles, \"Do It Well\" and \"Hold It Don't Drop It\". The first peaked at number 31 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart, while the latter failed to chart. While pregnant with twins, Lopez embarked upon her first ever concert tour, a show co-headlined by Anthony, in September 2007; the tour was well received. She also created, produced and was featured in the MTV show \"DanceLife\", which she described as a \"passion project\".\nAfter giving birth to twins in February 2008, Lopez took a career break. She described the next few years as a \"strange time\" as she primarily focused on family and travelling with Anthony while he toured. After rehiring former manager Medina, Lopez released two songs in late 2009, \"Louboutins\" and \"Fresh Out of the Oven\". The songs were intended for her seventh studio album but failed to make an appearance on the \"Billboard\" charts, leading to her departure from Sony Music and Epic Records. Lopez's first theatrical role in three years was in the romantic comedy \"The Back-up Plan\" (2010). Manohla Dargis of \"The New York Times\" was unimpressed by the movie and described Lopez as \"an appealing screen presence with a disappointing big-screen track record. That's probably not all her fault: romantic roles for women often are the provenance of the bland or the blonde.\"\n2011\u20132015: \"American Idol\" and career revival.\nA \"big turning point\" in Lopez's career came when she joined the judging panel of the singing competition series \"American Idol\" for its tenth season, replacing Simon Cowell. Despite being advised that it was a \"huge gamble\", she accepted the job, as she was \"not getting offered a whole bunch of movies\". Lopez's appearance on \"American Idol\" in 2011 returned her to prominence. Hannah Elliot of \"Forbes\" described it as \"a remarkable comeback\", writing: \"\"Idol\" humanized her. Viewers who knew only an attention-grabbing siren met a hardworking, self-made, empathetic single mother, who got emotional when contestants did well and when they failed.\"\nLopez's exposure on \"American Idol\" resulted in what \"Billboard\" called \"the most impressive reality-TV-based rejuvenation of a music career ever.\" After signing a new recording contract with Island Records, her seventh studio album, \"Love?\", was released in early 2011. While the album itself was a moderate commercial success, the single \"On the Floor\" was the year's highest-selling single by a female artist, and ultimately became the best-selling single of her career. It reached number three on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, becoming her highest-charting song as a lead artist since \"All I Have\". The album produced two more singles, \"I'm Into You\" and \"Papi\", which did not achieve similar success. By the end of 2011, Lopez was deemed the \"world's greatest musical comeback act\", based on a study which analysed over one billion Google searches since 2004. \nLopez returned as a judge for \"American Idol\"'s eleventh season in 2012, earning a reported $20 million. That year, she released her greatest hits album, \"Dance Again... the Hits\", to fulfil her contractual obligations with her former label Epic Records. Lopez, who was divorcing Anthony and navigating the \"breakup of a family\", felt as if the album's sole single, \"Dance Again\", had come to her at the \"perfect moment\". \"Dance Again\" reached number 17 on the U.S. \"Billboard\" Hot 100. Lopez launched the Dance Again World Tour, her first headlining concert tour, in mid-2012. It grossed over $1 million per show. \nLopez returned to the big screen in 2012, starring alongside an ensemble cast in the film \"What to Expect When You're Expecting\", which is based on the 1984 book \"What to Expect When You're Expecting\". Lopez voiced Shira, a saber tooth tiger, in the animated film, \"\", the fourth film in the \"Ice Age\" franchise. Also in 2012, a talent show, \"\u00a1Q'Viva! The Chosen\" followed Lopez, Anthony, and director-choreographer Jamie King as they travelled across 21 countries in Latin America to find new talent for a Las Vegas show. In 2013, Lopez starred alongside Jason Statham in the crime thriller \"Parker\", in which she played Leslie. Her performance earned positive reviews, with the \"Chicago Tribune\" commending the role for giving Lopez \"an opportunity to be dramatic, romantic, funny, depressed, euphoric and violent. The audience stays with her all the way\". That year, Lopez released the single \"Live It Up\", and was named chief creative officer of NuvoTV. She also served as an executive producer of the television series \"The Fosters\" (2013\u20132018), a show about a lesbian couple raising a family. Lopez's desire to work on the series was driven by her late aunt, who was gay.\nAfter a one-season absence, Lopez returned to \"American Idol\" for its thirteenth season, earning a reported $17.5 million. Her eighth studio album, \"A.K.A.\", was released in mid-2014 through Capitol Records, experiencing lacklustre sales, becoming her lowest-selling album in the U.S. The album produced three singles: \"I Luh Ya Papi\", featuring French Montana, \"First Love\", and \"Booty\", featuring Iggy Azalea. They reached 77, 87 and 18 respectively on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. Also that year, Lopez released \"We Are One (Ole Ola)\", the official song for the 2014 FIFA World Cup along with Pitbull and Claudia Leitte. Lopez released a book, \"True Love\", which became a \"New York Times\" best-seller.\n2015 saw the release of \"The Boy Next Door\", an erotic thriller that Lopez both co-produced and starred in as a high school teacher who becomes involved with a student, which eventually leads to his dangerous obsession with her. The film received negative reviews from critics. Despite this, it became her most successful opening at the box office for a live action film since \"Monster-in-Law\". Lopez had a voice role in the animated feature \"Home\" and contributed the single \"Feel the Light\" to the film's official soundtrack. She also starred in the independent drama film \"Lila &amp; Eve\", alongside Viola Davis.\n2016\u20132021: Television work, \"Hustlers\" and Super Bowl LIV.\nIn January 2016, Lopez commenced a concert residency show, All I Have, at Planet Hollywood's Zappos Theater in Las Vegas. She performed 120 shows during the three-year run, grossing over $100 million in ticket sales. At the beginning of the residency, Lopez signed a multi-album deal with her former label Epic Records\u2014though she would depart the label before releasing any albums\u2014and released \"Ain't Your Mama\", one of her most successful singles during the 2010s. Also in 2016, she began starring in NBC's crime drama series \"Shades of Blue\", which she also executive produced. She played Harlee Santos, a single mother and police detective who goes undercover for the FBI to investigate her own squad. The series' premiere brought NBC its most-watched Thursday debut in seven years. Starring alongside Ray Liotta, Lopez's performance received critical praise. That year, she reprised her voice role as Shira in the animated film \"\" (2016). \nLopez was executive producer and judge on NBC's dance competition series \"World of Dance\", which was a ratings success upon its May 2017 premiere. That year, Lopez released the singles \"Ni T\u00fa Ni Yo\" and \"Amor, Amor, Amor\", which were intended to be included on her second Spanish-language album, \"Por Primera Vez\", which was ultimately shelved. \nIn 2018, Lopez released a string of Spanish and Spanglish singles: \"Se Acab\u00f3 el Amor\", \"El Anillo\", \"Dinero\" featuring DJ Khaled and Cardi B, and \"Te Guste\" with Bad Bunny. \"Forbes\" noted that the songs were unable to \"completely connect on a crossover, mainstream level\", but were more successful on US-based Latin charts, nearly all of them reaching number one on the \"Billboard\" Latin Airplay chart. She later starred in and executive produced the comedy film \"Second Act\" (2018), directed by Peter Segal; she also recorded the single \"Limitless\" for its soundtrack. \"Second Act\" earned mixed reviews from critics, but performed well at the box office, grossing over $72 million on a $16 million budget.\nIn the first half of 2019, Lopez embarked on an international concert tour, It's My Party, to celebrate her 50th birthday. The tour grossed an estimated $54.7 million from thirty-eight shows. \"Variety\" reported that most shows were sold out. She also signed with new label Hitco Entertainment and released the single \"Medicine\" featuring French Montana. She also became executive producer of two television series, \"Good Trouble\" and \"Thanks a Million\".\nLopez executive produced and starred in the crime drama film \"Hustlers\" (2019). Directed by Lorene Scafaria, the film is inspired by a true story, following a group of Manhattan strippers who con wealthy male Wall Street clientele. Lopez's portrayal of a veteran stripper in \"Hustlers\" garnered acclaim from critics, with some deeming it the best performance of her acting career. The film also gave Lopez her highest opening weekend at the box office for a live action film, grossing $33.2 million. Her performance received nominations for Best Supporting Actress at the Golden Globe Awards, Screen Actors Guild Awards, Critics' Choice Movie Awards and Independent Spirit Awards. The success of \"Hustlers\" was regarded by various media outlets as a comeback as an actress for Lopez. Her perceived Academy Award snub for \"Hustlers\" (2019) was referenced by Los Angeles mayor Eric Garcetti when announcing a new initiative for Latino representation in Hollywood.\nIn February 2020, Lopez co-headlined the Super Bowl LIV halftime show in Miami, Florida alongside Shakira; the performance included an appearance by her child Emme Mu\u00f1iz. The performance was widely praised and became the most-watched Super Bowl halftime show to date. Later that year, Lopez released the singles \"Pa' Ti\" with Maluma\u2015which became her most successful song since 2017\u2015and \"In the Morning\", before headlining the 2021 \"Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve with Ryan Seacrest\" special live from Times Square on ABC.\nIn January 2021, she performed at the 2021 inauguration of President Joe Biden in Washington, D.C. In mid-2021, she signed a multi-year deal with Netflix to produce a range of films and television shows through her own Nuyorican Productions, and released the reggaeton Spanish single \"Cambia el Paso\" with Rauw Alejandro.\n2022\u2013present: Focus on film and \"This Is Me... Now\".\nIn January 2022, Lopez appeared as a guest on the fourteenth season of \"RuPaul's Drag Race\" in the episode titled \"She's a Super Tease\". She co-produced and starred opposite Owen Wilson and Maluma in the romantic comedy \"Marry Me\" (2022). The film grossed over $50 million at the box office while becoming the most-streamed day-and-date film on Peacock, and received generally mixed reviews from critics. Lopez and Maluma released a soundtrack for the film, which generated the singles \"On My Way\" and \"Marry Me\". Her next project was the documentary \"\" (2022), which focuses on her life following the release of \"Hustlers\" and in preparation for her Super Bowl performance. Released on Netflix following its premiere at the Tribeca Film Festival, it garnered positive reviews from film critics. The following month, Jimmy Fallon and Lopez released a children's book, \"Con Pollo: A Bilingual Playtime Adventure\", which became a \"New York Times\" best-seller.\nLopez co-produced and starred opposite Josh Duhamel and Jennifer Coolidge in the action-comedy \"Shotgun Wedding\" (2023). It became one of the top-streamed films on Amazon Prime Video that year. She also led and co-produced the action thriller film \"The Mother\" (2023). The film received mixed reviews, but became the most-watched film on Netflix in 2023, and at one point, was one of the most-watched original films of all time on the platform. \nAfter marrying Ben Affleck and entering a publishing partnership with BMG Rights Management, Lopez released her ninth studio album, \"This Is Me... Now\", in February 2024. A sequel to \"This Is Me... Then\" (2002), the album spawned two singles: \"Can't Get Enough\", and \"Rebound\" featuring rapper Anuel AA. Lopez promoted the album with an exclusive concert at the Orpheum Theatre in Los Angeles, which was recorded as a concert film and released by Apple TV+ on February 21, 2024. \n\"This Is Me... Now\" formed part of a \"three-part multimedia project\" which included a companion musical film, \"\" directed by Dave Meyers, and a documentary, \"The Greatest Love Story Never Told\". Lopez plays a fictionalized version of herself in \"A Love Story\", which was described as an \"autobiographical musical rom-com action sci-fi\" inspired by her own \"tumultuous dating history\". After potential partners backed out, Lopez financed the film herself for $20 million before it was purchased by Amazon. While \"A Love Story\" received positive reviews from critics and became a success on Prime Video, the film and its accompanying documentary also divided audiences, due in part to the overexposure of her relationship with Affleck. Lopez was set to embark on the This Is Me... Live North American tour, but cancelled it in order to spend more time with her family. Shortly after, it was announced that she and Affleck were divorcing. She would later state that \"it was like my whole f***ing world exploded\" amid the public scrutiny surrounding her personal and professional life in 2024.\nDespite facing public scrutiny throughout 2024, Lopez's films continued to achieve success; \"Collider\" and \"Deadline Hollywood\" noted her to be among the most successful actors of the streaming era. She co-produced and starred in the sci-fi thriller \"Atlas\" (2024), the third project under her Netflix deal. \"Atlas\" received negative reviews from critics but became a success on the platform. In a positive review of the film, \"The New York Times\" praised Lopez's performance and called the film \"an intriguing concept.\" Her next role was in the biographical sports drama \"Unstoppable\" (2024), in which she plays the mother of wrestler Anthony Robles. The film premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival and received limited theatrical release before debuting on Prime Video. Lopez received praise for her work in the film, which Owen Gleiberman of \"Variety\" called \"the fullest screen performance she has ever given\". She was presented with \"Variety\"'s \"Legend &amp; Groundbreaker Award\" at the 2025 Palm Springs International Film Festival in honor of \"Unstoppable\" and her overall career. \nLopez returned to touring with , which consisted of twenty dates across Africa, Asia and Europe. On July 24, 2025, Lopez's 56th birthday, she released the single \"Birthday\". She co-executive produced and starred in the Bill Condon-directed musical drama \"Kiss of the Spider Woman\" (2025), a film adaption of the Broadway 1993 musical of the same name. Her first role in a full-fledged musical, Condon wrote the part with Lopez in mind. The film premiered at the 2025 Sundance Film Festival, where Lopez's performance received positive reviews.\nUpcoming projects.\nIn late 2025/early 2026, she will play a multi-night residency at the Colosseum at Caesars Palace. Lopez will co-produce and star opposite Brett Goldstein in Netflix's \"Office Romance\". She will also co-produce a series adaptation of Emily Henry's 2023 novel \"Happy Place\" for Netflix. She has also committed to lead and co-produce Netflix's film adaptation of the bestselling novel, \"The Cipher\". Lopez has several projects in the works as a producer. Through her continued partnership with Netflix, she will also star in an adaption of the novel \"The Last Mrs. Parrish\", directed by Robert Zemeckis.\nPersonal life.\nLopez was in a nearly decade-long relationship with David Cruz, her high-school boyfriend, until the mid-1990s. They were engaged at one point, and Cruz relocated to Los Angeles to be with her when she began pursuing her career. She later said of Cruz, \"You get lucky, you have a first love like that.\" She was married to Cuban waiter Ojani Noa from February 1997 to January 1998. In subsequent court cases, Noa was prevented from publishing a book about their marriage and from using private honeymoon footage of Lopez in a documentary.\nLopez was in an on-again, off-again relationship with record producer and rapper Sean Combs (then known as \"Puff Daddy\") from 1999 to early 2001. On the night of December 27, 1999, Lopez, Combs and rapper Shyne were arrested and charged with criminal possession of a weapon and possession of stolen property, after leaving the scene of a shooting at a Times Square nightclub. Charges against Lopez were dropped within an hour while Combs was acquitted of all charges at trial in March 2001. They broke up shortly thereafter. Shyne was sentenced to ten years in prison. Lopez later said that, while she had \"cared very much\" about Combs, their \"crazy, tumultuous\" relationship \"was always something I knew would end.\" She was married to Cris Judd, her former backup dancer, from September 2001 to January 2003.\nBefore her divorce with Judd was finalized, Lopez was in a relationship with actor and filmmaker Ben Affleck from mid-2002 to early 2004. Although they had crossed paths several times before (including at the 70th Academy Awards and at the premiere of \"Armageddon\", both in 1998), their first major meeting was on the set of \"Gigli\" (2003) in December 2001. They later worked together on the music video for \"Jenny from the Block\" and the film \"Jersey Girl\" (2004). Her album \"This Is Me... Then\" was dedicated to and inspired by Affleck. Their relationship was extensively publicized. Tabloids referred to the couple as \"Bennifer\", a portmanteau \"Vanity Fair\" described as \"the first of that sort of tabloid branding\". They became engaged in November 2002, but their planned wedding on September 14, 2003, was postponed with four days' notice because of \"excessive media attention\". They ended their engagement in January 2004. Years later, Lopez said Affleck's discomfort with media scrutiny was one reason for their split and described it as her \"first real heartbreak\": \"I think different time, different thing, who knows what could've happened, but there was a genuine love there.\"\nAfter her relationship with Affleck, Lopez stopped discussing her personal life in interviews. She was married to singer Marc Anthony from June 2004 to June 2014; they had previously worked together and dated for a few months in the late 1990s. Their wedding took place five months after the end of her relationship with Affleck. During their marriage, they collaborated on music and performed together, as well as co-starring in \"El Cantante\" (2006). Lopez gave birth to fraternal twins, a boy and a girl, on Long Island in February 2008. \"People\" magazine paid a reported US$6 million for the first photographs of the twins, making them the most expensive celebrity pictures ever taken at the time. In 2009, Anthony and Lopez purchased a stake in the Miami Dolphins. They announced their separation in July 2011. Anthony filed for divorce in April 2012 and it was finalized in June 2014. Lopez retained primary physical custody of the two children. Lopez occasionally performs with her daughter.\nLopez had an on-again, off-again relationship with her former backup dancer Casper Smart from October 2011 to August 2016. She dated New York Yankees baseball player Alex Rodriguez from February 2017 to early 2021. They became engaged in March 2019 but postponed their wedding twice due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In response to tabloid speculation about the state of their relationship, they released a statement in March 2021, saying they were \"working through some things\". They announced the end of their relationship in April 2021.\nIn April 2021, Lopez and Affleck were reported to be dating again, with Lopez publicly confirming their rekindled relationship that July. In April 2022, Lopez announced their second engagement, 20 years after the first proposal. They were married in Las Vegas on July 16, 2022, and held a wedding celebration for family and friends the following month. On August 20, 2024, Lopez filed for divorce from Affleck, citing April 26, 2024, as the date of their separation. She also requested that her legal name be changed back to Jennifer Lynn Lopez. On January 6, 2025, the divorce was finalized.\nOther activities.\nBusiness ventures and endorsements.\nLopez first ventured into product endorsement in 1998, becoming a national spokesperson for Coca-Cola and L'Or\u00e9al. In 2001, Lopez launched her first business venture, the lifestyle brand J.Lo by Jennifer Lopez. It included a clothing line which catered to women of all sizes, as Lopez felt \"the voluptuous woman [was] almost ignored\" in the fashion industry. The following year, she opened Madre's, a Los Angeles restaurant serving Latin cuisine, and released her first fragrance, Glow by JLo, through a partnership with Coty, Inc.; it became the top-selling fragrance in the U.S. In 2003, she released a second fragrance, Still Jennifer Lopez, and became the face of Louis Vuitton's fall advertising campaign. Lopez has since released 30 fragrances as of 2020. Her clothing lines and two fragrances generated over $300 million in revenue throughout 2004.\nIn 2005, Lopez launched her second fashion label, Sweetface, which was geared towards \"high fashion\" in comparison to her previous fashion line. She also appeared in a \"\"-inspired Pepsi commercial with Beyonc\u00e9 and David Beckham. In the late 2000s, her restaurant Madre's closed permanently, as did her two fashion lines. In 2011, in the midst of her career resurgence, Lopez became brand ambassador for various brands including L'Or\u00e9al, Gilette Venus, Tous and Fiat. She also launched the Jennifer Lopez Collection, a clothing and homeware line with Tommy Hilfiger for Kohl's; the collection generated an estimated $3 billion in sales during its first year. The following year, she launched Teeology, a luxury T-shirt brand. In 2013, she founded the phone retail brand Viva M\u00f3vil, which caters specifically to Latinos.\nIn 2014, Lopez released a range of jewelry, designed in partnership with Endless Jewelry. In 2016, she designed a capsule collection of shoes and jewelry in collaboration with Giuseppe Zanotti. The following year, she was announced as the new face of clothing company Guess, becoming the oldest spokeswoman in the company's history. In collaboration with Inglot Cosmetics, Lopez launched a limited-edition makeup collection in 2018. In 2019, she became the global face of the Coach brand, and launched a collection of sunglasses with the brand Quay Australia. In 2020, after modelling an updated version of her iconic Green Versace \"jungle\" dress at Milan Fashion Week the previous year, Lopez was the face of the brand's Spring/Summer 2020 campaign, which featured other pieces based on the same jungle print.\nThroughout 2021, Lopez focused on investments and creating her own brands. She launched her skin care company, JLo Beauty, released a shoe collection in partnership with DSW, and invested in companies including Hims &amp; Hers Health, Bodyarmor SuperDrink, Goli nutritional supplements and meal delivery service Wonder. In March 2022, she was appointed as the chief \"entertainment and lifestyle\" officer of the cruise line, Virgin Voyages. That September, she became the global ambassador of Italian lingerie label Intimissimi. In 2023, Lopez launched a spritz brand named Delola in collaboration with mixologist Lynnette Marrero. That year, she partnered with fashion retailer Revolve to design a footwear line, JLO Jennifer Lopez, which was released as three collections in March, May, and June. In 2024, she released a lingerie collection with Intimissimi inspired by her album \"This Is Me... Now\".\nPhilanthropy.\nLopez was heavily involved in charitable activities following the September 11 attacks. Joining other artists, she was featured on charitable singles such as \"What's Going On\" and \"El Ultimo Adios (The Last Goodbye)\", which benefited people affected by the tragedy. In February 2007, Lopez was honored with the Artists for Amnesty prize by Amnesty International for her work in \"Bordertown\", which shed light on the hundreds of feminicides in Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez. Lopez described it as \"one of the world's most shocking and disturbing, underreported crimes against humanity\". That year, part of the proceeds from Lopez and Anthony's co-headlining North American concert tour was donated to the Run for Something Better program, which fights childhood obesity.\nLopez has been a long-time supporter of the Children's Hospital Los Angeles. Her album \"Rebirth\" (2005) is dedicated to Paige Peterson, an eleven-year-old cancer patient she befriended at the hospital who died in 2004. Lopez stated that \"[she doesn't] like to do [her] charity work in public. That's not what you do it for.\" In 2009, Lopez launched the Lopez Family Foundation alongside her sister, Lynda. The organization works to increase healthcare access for underprivileged women and children, including through a telemedicine program in partnership with the Children's Hospital Los Angeles. The foundation has facilitated the expansion of medical facilities in Panama and Puerto Rico, and created the Center for a Healthy Childhood at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.\nIn December 2012, Lopez held a charity drive to benefit her three favorite charities: the Gloria Wise Boys and Girls Club, the Children's Hospital Los Angeles and the American Red Cross, mainly benefiting victims of Hurricane Sandy. In 2015, she became the first celebrity spokesperson for the Children's Miracle Network Hospitals and the BC Children's Hospital Foundation (BCCHF). She also became the first Global Advocate for Girls and Women at the United Nations Foundation, working on issues including maternal health care, education, and violence.\nIn September 2017, following Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Maria, Lopez donated $1 million from the proceeds of her Las Vegas residency to humanitarian aid for Puerto Rico. Along with Marc Anthony, she launched a humanitarian relief campaign entitled Somos Una Voz (English: We Are One Voice), an effort to rush supplies to areas affected by Hurricane Maria. Lopez and Anthony presented a concert and telethon for disaster relief, \"One Voice: Somos Live!\", which raised over $35 million. She was also among various artists featured on Lin-Manuel Miranda's charity single \"Almost Like Praying\", which benefits Puerto Rico.\nAs of 2021, Lopez continues to regularly donate to and support charities. In September 2021, she launched a philanthropic organization, Limitless Labs, which supports and empowers Latina entrepreneurs and business owners. Limitless Labs has entered partnerships with the 10,000 Small Businesses initiative and Grameen America, the latter being an effort to empower Latina businesses with $14 million in business loans and \"6 million hours of financial education and training by 2030.\" Lopez headlined the Los Angeles Dodgers Foundation's Blue Diamond Gala in 2022, which raised $3.6 million for education, health care, homelessness and social justice causes.\nPolitical views and activism.\nA supporter of the Democratic Party, Lopez has a long history of backing Democratic candidates for public office. She endorsed President Barack Obama in his 2012 presidential campaign, speaking in television advertisements and attending fundraising events for Obama. She endorsed Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton in 2016, headlining a free concert in Florida in support of her that October.\nLopez has been critical of President Donald Trump. During her Super Bowl halftime show performance in 2020, she performed her song \"Let's Get Loud\" while cloaked in a large Puerto Rican flag, with children in metal cages displayed on the field. It was interpreted as a statement about the Mexico\u2013United States border crisis and Trump's immigration policy. The NFL attempted to remove the cages from the performance but Lopez refused. She endorsed President Joe Biden in his 2020 presidential campaign. She later performed at Biden's 2021 inauguration, where she sang \"This Land Is Your Land\" and \"America the Beautiful\", while reciting the last phrase of the Pledge of Allegiance in Spanish. She also worked \"Let's Get Loud\" into the performance as a \"reprise\" to her political message at the Super Bowl. Lopez endorsed Kamala Harris during her 2024 presidential campaign. She spoke at a Las Vegas rally for Harris that November, pushing back on remarks made at Trump's rally at Madison Square Garden which were deemed offensive to Puerto Ricans.\nLopez is an avid supporter of LGBTQ rights, and has raised millions of dollars for HIV/AIDS research. In June 2013, amfAR presented her with its humanitarian award for her philanthropic work. That September, she was awarded the Ally for Equality award presented by the Human Rights Campaign, for her support of the LGBTQ community. The following year, she received the GLAAD Vanguard Award. In July 2016, Lopez released a single entitled \"Love Make the World Go Round\", a collaboration with Lin-Manuel Miranda, which benefits victims of the Orlando nightclub shooting. She was also featured on the song \"Hands\" along with numerous other artists, also benefiting those affected by the Orlando shooting. Lopez signed an open letter from \"Billboard\" magazine to the United States Congress in 2016, which demanded action on gun control.\nIn June 2020, Lopez attended a Black Lives Matter movement protest in Los Angeles, in connection with the broader George Floyd protests. Lopez has also been an active advocate for the Time's Up movement. In January 2022, she became one of the co-chairs for Michelle Obama's When We All Vote. She expressed solidarity with the people of the Gaza Strip during the Gaza war. As part of a group called Artists4Ceasefire, she signed a letter urging President Joe Biden to call for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza.\nArtistry.\nInfluences.\nLopez credited Puerto Rican actress Rita Moreno's performance in the musical film \"West Side Story\" (1961) as the major influence on her career path and artistry. Moreno was the only performer Lopez was able to identify with, at a time when Latinos were rarely on television. She was also inspired by Barbara Streisand's career as a singer, director and actress. Growing up, she was influenced by Latin music styles ranging from salsa to bachata, and artists including Celia Cruz and Tito Puente, though it was the hip hop song \"Rapper's Delight\" (1979) by The Sugarhill Gang that she said changed her life. \nLopez has cited Madonna as her \"first big musical influence\", explaining \"It was all about Madonna for me. She inspired me to want to sing, to dance, to work hard.\" Her other major influences include Tina Turner, James Brown, and Michael Jackson. Lopez has cited Janet Jackson as a major inspiration for her own dance and music videos, stating that she \"probably started dancing\" because of Jackson's music video for \"The Pleasure Principle\". She also looked to the careers of Cher, Bette Middler and Diana Ross, and has been inspired by younger artists such as Lady Gaga.\nMusical style.\nMusically, Lopez is described as a \"chameleon\" by outlets like \"Variety\" and \"Forbes\", having been known to experiment and jump between genres. Her music strongly identifies with hip hop while exploring the \"romantic innocence\" of Latin music. \"Billboard\" observed that she has \"never been one to downplay her Latinidad, and always makes sure to display it\" in her music, \"regardless of genre\". \"On the 6\" and \"J.Lo\", described by Lopez as Latin soul, fuse a wide range of Latin genres with R&amp;B and hip hop, while also containing dance-pop. While mostly English, the albums include some Spanish and bilingual songs such as \"Cari\u00f1o\", with Lopez also speaking in Spanish and asserting her Latin identity on songs like \"Let's Get Loud\". A departure from her previous work, \"This Is Me... Then\" blends 1970s soul with \"streetwise\" hip hop. \"Rebirth\" was noted for its \"relaxing\" atmosphere, while \"Como Ama una Mujer\" was characterized as \"silkily sedate Spanish Sade worship\". \"Brave\" and \"Love?\" delved further into dance-pop, while \"A.K.A.\" and \"This Is Me... Now\" saw her return to her R&amp;B roots, though the latter eschews Latin influences.\nDescribed as autobiographical, most of Lopez's music has centered around the \"ups and downs\" of love, often inspired by her own love life. Lyrically, \"This Is Me... Then\" is largely focused on her relationship with Ben Affleck; the song \"Dear Ben\" was described as the album's \"glowing centerpiece\". Its sequel album, \"This Is Me... Now\", was informed by her marriage to Affleck, and Lopez's \"psychological journey of the past two decade\". \"Como Ama una Mujer\" features introspective lyrics about romance, heartache and self-loathing. Regarding \"Love?\", Lopez stated: \"There's still so much to learn and that's why the question mark.\" Other recurrent themes in Lopez's music have included her upbringing in the Bronx, social class and women's empowerment. \nLopez has received mixed reviews for her \"light\" soubrette voice, which critics have described as thin, and overshadowed by her music's production. With \"On the 6\", critics described Lopez's voice as a \"sultry purr\" and \"breathy\"; Rob Sheffield remarked: \"Lopez sticks to the understated R&amp;B murmur of a round-the-way superstar who doesn't need to belt because she knows you're already paying attention ... She makes a little va-va and a whole lot of voom go a long way.\" Lopez, who often worried about her singing \"not being as strong\" as her other attributes, would later credit ex-husband Marc Anthony for helping her find her \"best singing voice\". \"Pitchfork\" described her voice as being \"stronger than ever\" on \"This Is Me... Now\", while opining that \"the thinness of the voice has often been beside the point, if not a boon to her early career\", which was marked by \"Bronx regularness\". \nLopez has been criticized for her use of background vocals from demo singers, prompting rumors of ghost singers' vocals being used in place of her own. The rumors have been debunked by writers and background singers who worked with Lopez, including Christina Milian (\"Play\"), who called the controversy \"funny\" and said: \"It's no different than Michael Jackson having background singers on songs or Britney Spears. This is what music is made of.\"\nDance, videos and stage.\nConsidered one of dance's \"greatest success stories\", Lopez has received praise for her highly choreographed dancing, and is noted for her technical skill. She has been trained in a range of dance styles, including ballet, jazz, flamenco, ballroom, pole dancing, breakdancing, street dance, and hip hop. Her signature movements include \"clock-wise pivoting with salsa hip circles and sequential torso undulations\". Described by MTV's Madeline Roth as \"some of the most memorable visuals of the 21st century\", Lopez's music videos made her a dominant figure on MTV, and helped influence 2000s fashion trends. Her music videos are known for showcasing her ability as a dancer, which CNN's Holly Thomas said gave her a \"captivating, commanding presence\", as well as themes of surveillance and fame. Her videography and dancing have also been criticized for their provocative nature, with Lopez being described as one of the Latin performers whose work \"racialized and sexualized their bodies\". \nOn stage, Lopez is recognized for her showmanship, sex appeal, and glamorous costumes, which often include bodysuits. Journalists have described her as the \"ultimate showgirl\". While being noted to lip sync in the early stages of career, Lopez's Dance Again World Tour was praised for showcasing live vocals and choreography synchronously. In a review of her Las Vegas residency All I Have, \"Los Angeles Times\" writer Nolan Feeney remarked that her dancing is \"undoubtedly the centerpiece of the show\".\nHer provocative stage performances and costumes have also drawn scrutiny. Robin Givhan of \"The Daily Beast\" criticized the nude bodysuit Lopez wore during her performance at the 2011 American Music Awards, calling it \"banal exhibitionism\" which \"cried out for attention in all the wrong ways\". A number of her performances have been deemed inappropriate for television, including her controversial appearance at the Moroccan musical festival, Mawazine, in 2015. Moroccan Prime Minister Abdelilah Benkirane called it \"disgraceful\" and demanded that legal measures be taken, while an education group claimed that she \"disturbed public order and tarnished women's honor and respect\". \nActing and screen.\nLopez's films often see her playing \"relatable everywomen\", with Cady Lang of \"Time\" writing: \"A longtime hallmark of Lopez's filmography is her penchant for stories about survivors. Her characters are never shrinking violets.\" Discussing the roles she is drawn to, Lopez said in 1998: \"I don't think of them as strong women ... I like characters that are really part of the story as opposed to window dressing, but I think the interesting thing is that they are real people. Nobody walks around being strong all the time.\" Like her music, a number of her film roles explore class consciousness, including \"Maid in Manhattan\" (2002) and \"Second Act\" (2018). \nFilm critic Stephanie Zacharek described Lopez as \"one of the most gifted and appealing performers of the past two decades ... and yet the movies have rarely known what to do with her and her significant gifts as an actor.\" While Lopez received acclaim for her early film work, \"The New York Times\" writer Kyle Buchanan noted that her tendency to star in romantic comedies, and her pop music career, \"lowered her critical bona fides\". Taylor Hackford, who directed Lopez in \"Parker\", said she \"can really act\": \"She knows how to transmit nuances, to make the subtlest of shifts. Does she have humor? Yes. But at the same time she can get into the deepest dramatic areas.\" Lopez, who identifies the romantic comedy as her favorite film genre, has been referred to as the \"Patron Saint of Romantic Comedies\" and the \"Queen of Romantic Comedies\".\nIn her early films, Lopez played stereotypical roles which signified her as a \"racialized, exoticized\" other. In films such as \"Blood and Wine\" and \"U Turn\", her body is fetishized \"through extreme close-ups\" and \"framed as animalistic, primitive, and irresistibly dangerous to the Anglo American male characters.\" This shifted with her role in \"Selena\", which \"affirmed her Latinx identity, and won her the loyalty of that significant section of the U.S. and global audience.\" She has also been criticized for playing ethnically ambiguous parts and tapping into \"the ability to perform a panethnic other\" to commodify herself. Her role as an Italian woman in \"The Wedding Planner\" has been described as \"a case of classic Hollywood whitewashing.\"\nPublic image.\nLopez has been a polarizing figure in popular culture. Andrew Barker of \"Variety\" writes that she \"exhibits a plethora of contradictions\", observing: \"Despite a carefully cultivated image as an imperious pop empress in ludicrously expensive outfits, her signature hits bear the titles 'I'm Real' and 'Jenny From the Block'.\" In 2002, Lynette Holloway of \"The New York Times\" described Lopez's image as including \"a dash of \"ghetto fabulousness\"\" and \"middle-class respectability\" for mass appeal. The media discerned a shift in her public image upon joining \"American Idol\" in 2011, with \"Entertainment Weekly\" writing: \"Gone was her old cut-a-bitch swagger; J. Lo 2.0 is an all-embracing, Oprahfied earth \"madre\".\" \"People\" editor Peter Castro said \"American Idol\" made Lopez \"a celebrity of the people\" whereas before, \"there was a huge distance with the American public.\"\nLopez is widely celebrated for her curvaceous hourglass figure, which earned her the nickname \"La Guitarra\" (the guitar). \"Vanity Fair\" described her buttocks as \"in and of themselves, a cultural icon\". Recounting her experience on early films, Lopez stated: \"I've always had costume people looking at me a little weary and immediately fitting me out with things to hide my bottom.\" She often wears revealing outfits to accentuate her curves. Author Mary Beltr\u00e1n opined that for Lopez to \"unashamedly display her well-endowed posterior during this time period\" could be viewed as \"a revolutionary act with respect to Anglo beauty ideals\". However, she was also criticized for perceived changes in her image upon launching her music career, which included \"weight loss and lightening her hair\".\nConsidered a fashion icon, Lopez is known for her sense of style and \"breaking fashion rules\". She is recognized for both her \"bold\" red carpet fashion, including fourteen appearances at the haute couture Met Gala in New York City, and her everyday street style, which is \"discussed ad infinitum by the fashion press.\" \"British Vogue\" said she \"added megawatt glamour to every outfit she wore\", with \"Billboard\" describing her style as \"scantily clad\". Lopez's style has been influenced by \"women who epitomize old Hollywood glamour like Rita Hayworth\", as well as her Bronx upbringing and Nuyorican identity. Described as the \"ultimate sex symbol\" of the early 21st century, various publications have ranked her as the most beautiful or sexiest woman in the world, including \"People\", \"People en Espa\u00f1ol\", \"Vibe\", \"Details\", and \"FHM\", with Lopez topping the latter's 100 Sexiest Women list twice. Lopez has criticized \"this funny notion in America that you can't be a mom and be sexy\", stating: \"The truth is that women can be sexy until the day they die.\" \nShe has a large following on social media, being the 14th most-followed individual on Instagram and having one of the 50 most-followed accounts on Twitter. On the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA)'s \"Music Fuels\" ranking, Lopez is the eighth-most-followed musician across Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook. She is the richest Latin actress, with an estimated net worth of US$400million.\nDescribed as \"one of the most photographed women in the world\", Lopez has long been a tabloid fixture, and admits to having a \"less-than-perfect\" public image. Frances Negr\u00f3n-Muntaner wrote that by 1999, \"Internet chat rooms exploded with anti-Lopez babble\" and she became \"one of the easiest moving targets for cheap laughs as well as anxieties about working-class 'loud' sexuality and specifically Latino visibility.\" Much of the media coverage surrounding Lopez in the 2000s \"focused on her dramatic private life\", with several writers describing her as overexposed at the time, despite her continued success. Media outlets often liken her to actress Elizabeth Taylor, due to her numerous failed relationships and glamorous public persona. Her high-profile relationship with Combs was described as having \"defined an age\", with \"Vanity Fair\" writing that they entered \"the pantheon of slightly notorious celebrity couples: Liz and Dick, Frank and Ava.\"\nThroughout her career, she has also received a bad reputation as being a demanding and outspoken \"diva\", something which she denies, stating: \"I've always been fascinated by how much more well-behaved we have to be than men.\" Some of the backlash and fabricated tabloid stories surrounding Lopez have been attributed to her 1998 interview with \"Movieline\", in which she was quoted as criticizing various actors and directors. Lopez, who \"cried for hours\" after the article was published, said the comments were made in jest and she was \"so misquoted and so taken out of context\". In 2003, Lawrence Donegan of \"The Guardian\" posited that \"indefensible\" misogyny and racism were to blame for her position as \"the most vilified woman in modern popular culture\". In 2021, Ben Affleck said: \"People were so fucking mean about her; sexist, racist, ugly vicious shit was written about her in ways that if you wrote it now, you would literally be fired for saying some of the things you said.\"\nLegacy and cultural impact.\nEntertainment industry.\nRegarded as one of the most influential performers of her time, Lopez is often cited by journalists and academics as the most influential entertainer of Latin descent, credited with breaking racial barriers in the entertainment industry. She was described as \"the first Latina superstar\" by writer Ned Zeman, and the \"embodiment of the American Dream\" by Robert C. Cottrell in \"Icons of American Popular Culture\" (2009). Maer Roshan, editor-in-chief of \"The Hollywood Reporter\", said \"Lopez has broken barriers and redefined what\u2019s possible for women and Latinos in entertainment.\" Often dubbed the \"Queen of Dance\" by media outlets, she is considered a triple threat performer, and was one of few actors to successfully cross over into music. Rachel Sklar of \"The Huffington Post\" called Lopez a trailblazer, writing: \"Beyonc\u00e9, Miley, Gaga, any actress who's ever released an album \u2014 they are all standing on the shoulders of J.Lo. She was a true triple threat \u2014 actress, singer, dancer ... and packaged it sometimes outrageously but always sexily.\" Lopez is considered a pop icon, with VH1 ranking her at number 15 on their list of 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons, number 16 on 100 Greatest Women In Music, and number 21 on 50 Greatest Women of the Video Era. \nThe highest-paid Latina actress in history, Lopez's film career has been credited with paving the way for greater representation of Latino Americans in Hollywood, a historically white space. Biographer Kathleen Tracy opined that \"Lopez blazed a trail no openly Latin actress had gone before\", noting that previous Latina stars cosmetically downplayed their ethnicity and changed their names. Lopez, who achieved \"ethnic 'blind' casting\" with \"Out of Sight\" (1998), is noted by biographer James Robert Parish to have \"helped minimize racial boundaries in show business\" by deliberately avoiding stereotypical roles. \nWith her musical debut, Lopez helped influence the Latin pop movement in American music, often dubbed the \"Latin explosion\" of the 1990s. The Recording Academy called her the \"breakout female star\" of the Latin pop movement, with historian Roger Bruns describing her as \"an influential force in driving a growing Latin cultural influence in popular music\" at the time. Ella Cer\u00f3n of \"Teen Vogue\" wrote: \"In an era of blonde, bubblegum pop, there was only one J.Lo.\" She has been credited with paving the way for U.S.-born Latina artists including Selena Gomez, Becky G, and Cardi B, and for Latin American artists to venture into English pop music, including Shakira, Thal\u00eda and Paulina Rubio. Along with Ricky Martin, she helped increase the visibility of Latin music in international markets including East Asia and Canada. Due to her \"multi-tasking career\", she has been described as \"the next-generation Madonna\", and \"the first woman to demonstrate that a Madonna could be a Latina\".\nLopez's music has been credited with helping influence the trajectory of 2000s music, including dance music, Latin music, R&amp;B, and pop rap collaborations. \"Billboard\" magazine described her as having \"helped define an era where hip-hop, R&amp;B and pop all got more cuddly together than ever before\". Scholar Miriam Jim\u00e9nez Rom\u00e1n suggested that Lopez, who represents the \"often-suppressed\" history of Puerto Ricans in hip hop culture, was \"able to traverse the difficult racial boundaries\". In July 2023, Madame Tussauds New York unveiled a wax figure of Lopez inspired by her performance at the Super Bowl LIV halftime show.\nCultural influence.\nIn 2012, \"Forbes\" ranked Lopez as the world's most powerful celebrity and the 38th most powerful woman. She was named one of \"Time\"'s 100 most influential people in the world in 2018. Lopez's influence has been attributed to her bicultural identity and ability to code-switch. According to \"Latina\" magazine founder Christy Haubegger, Lopez was \"the first icon that generationally fits\" young Latino Americans who followed celebrity culture. Lopez was featured on the first cover of \"Latina\" in 1996, with editor Galina Espinoza writing in 2011 that there is \"no recounting of modern Latina history without Jennifer\". She has been credited with empowering Puerto Ricans, a group \"which has been subdued to different forms of discrimination\" since Puerto Rico was annexed by the U.S.\nJonathan Van Meter of \"Vogue\" described Lopez as having \"changed the face of modern celebrity.\" Her ability to start trends has prompted the usage of the phrase \"the J.Lo effect\" in popular culture, which has been used in various different contexts, including the trend of networks hiring \"big name\" judges for reality competition programs after Lopez's successful casting on \"American Idol\". With her moniker J.Lo, Lopez started a trend of celebrities being given abbreviated nicknames, while \"Bennifer\" began the convention of celebrity couple name blending.\nDescribed by scholar Helene A. Shugart of the University of Utah as \"arguably the most visible Latina in contemporary mainstream popular culture\", Lopez has been the subject of considerable academic analysis, including in relation to ethnicity, class, \"body politics\", race, Latin culture, and gender. While credited with opening \"the door to [Latino culture having a] broader appeal\", Lopez has also been a polarizing figure, generating \"often vehement disagreement about what is and isn't Latino.\" According to journalist Jes\u00fas Trivi\u00f1o Alarc\u00f3n, Lopez \"widened the scope of what it means to be Latina by simply being her. You don\u2019t have to speak perfect Spanish, or Spanish at all, to be proud of your roots.\"\nAs a result of the public emphasis on her curvaceous figure, Lopez has been credited with influencing a shift in cultural beauty standards. The surge in popularity of buttock augmentation surgery in the early 2000s was attributed to Lopez. In \"Latin Sensations\" (2001), Her\u00f3n Marquez wrote: \"Because she wasn't rail thin, Lopez had broken the mold ... Suddenly, it was okay for women to have hips, curves, and a big backside.\" This has been considered a sign of Lopez's social power in \"changing cultural standards within the mainstream media as a whole\".\nIn 2014, scientists named a species of aquatic mite found in Puerto Rico, \"Litarachna lopezae\", after Lopez. In Tok Pisin, a language spoken in Papua New Guinea, the term \"palopa\" is used to describe non-heteronormative people whose identities may correlate with those who, in Western contexts, identify as part of the LGBTQ+ community. In 2019, she was presented with keys to the city of Miami Beach, where July 24 was declared \"Jennifer Lopez Day\".\nFashion and branding.\nThe Council of Fashion Designers of America presented Lopez with its Fashion Icon Award in 2019 for her \"long-standing and global impact on fashion\". Her green Versace \"Jungle Dress\" was voted the fifth most iconic red carpet dress of all time in a poll run by \"The Daily Telegraph\". The dress had a significant impact on the fashion industry, celebrity endorsements, and the evolution of red carpet fashion. The images of Lopez wearing the dress became the most popular search query of all time at that point, and subsequently led to the creation of Google's image search. Lopez has been credited with popularizing various fashion and beauty trends throughout her career. In 2003, she inspired a trend of curvier mannequins being designed, which fuelled a rise in sales for manufacturers and retailers. Lopez's personal style and brand deals have had a considerable effect on sales in the fashion industry. The success of Louis Vuitton's fall 2003 campaign, for which Lopez was the brand's model, led to more Hollywood stars \"becoming image models of fashion and cosmetic labels\". In 2021, \"The Daily Telegraph\" reported that she was among ten celebrities whose personal style choices drove the greatest spikes in searches and news coverage for brands. Her appearance at Milan Fashion Week in 2019 generated over $31.8 million in total media impact value.\nDescribed as a \"branding pioneer\", Lopez has been credited with ushering in a new era of celebrity branding. Her first fragrance, Glow by JLo, influenced the rise of celebrity fragrances in the 2000s. Her fragrance line became the most successful celebrity line in the world, with sales exceeding $2 billion as of 2012[ [update]]. Lopez's clothing brand was one of the first celebrity fashion lines; scholars have credited her with redefining \"how fashion is produced and entwined with other artistic endeavors\", and popularizing a trend of utilizing racial ambiguity for branding purposes in fashion and cosmetics. As of 2022, her business ventures have cumulatively earned over US$5\u00a0billion in sales globally.\nAchievements.\nAs of 2022[ [update]], Lopez has sold more than 80 million records worldwide and amassed over 15 billion streams; her films have grossed a cumulative total of US$ while her business ventures have cumulatively made over US$ in consumer sales. She remains the only female entertainer to have a number-one album and film simultaneously in the United States. The \"Guinness World Records\" acknowledged \"J to tha L\u2013O! The Remixes\" (2002) as the first number-one remix album on the U.S. \"Billboard\" 200, and recognized \"On the Floor\" as the \"Highest Viewed Female Music Video of All Time\" in 2012. \"Billboard\" named Lopez the top Hot 100 female artist and the Greatest Pop Star of 2001. \"Billboard\" ranked her as the ninth-greatest dance club artist of all time in 2016, having scored 18 number-one songs on its Dance Club Songs chart. The magazine also ranked her at number 22 on its \"Top 100 Women Artists of the 21st Century\" list (2025). She was named the top Latin touring artist of the decade by \"Pollstar\" in 2021. \nFor her contributions to the music industry, Lopez was honored by the World Music Awards with the Legend Award in 2010, and was presented with the prestigious landmark 2,500th star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2013. At the 2014 \"Billboard\" Music Awards, she became the first female recipient of the \"Billboard\" Icon Award. In 2017, she was awarded the Telemundo Star Award at the \"Billboard\" Latin Music Awards. Lopez received the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award during the 2018 MTV Video Music Awards, making her the first Latin performer to receive the honor. She later received the Icon Award at the iHeart Radio Music Awards in 2022. Outside of music, Univision presented her with the World Icon Award in its Premios Juventud in 2013. She received the Generation Award at the MTV Movie &amp; TV Awards for her contributions to film and television in 2022. \nFilmography.\nFilms starred\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBibliography.\nLopez has written a memoir and co-written a children's book.\nTours and residencies.\nHeadlining tours\nCo-headlining tours\nResidencies\nCancelled tours\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16176", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16176", "title": "Jorge Borges", "text": ""}
{"id": "16177", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16177", "title": "James Tiptree Junior Award", "text": ""}
{"id": "16178", "revid": "680693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16178", "title": "Jesse Jackson, Sr.", "text": ""}
{"id": "16179", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16179", "title": "July 21", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJuly 21 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16181", "revid": "50022150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16181", "title": "July 23", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJuly 23 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16182", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16182", "title": "Jock Taylor", "text": "British sidecar racer\nJock Taylor (9 March 1954 \u2013 15 August 1982) was a Scottish World Champion motorcycle sidecar racer.\nJohn Robert (Jock) Taylor was born in Pencaitland, East Lothian, and entered his first sidecar race at the age of 19, as the passenger to Kenny Andrews (1974). The following year, he took part in his first race as a driver. Taylor died in Finland in a racing incident in 1982.\nRacing career.\nTaylor was the Scottish Sidecar Champion with passenger Lewis Ward in 1977. He won races at East Fortune near Haddington, Beveridge Park in Kirkcaldy and at Knockhill near Dunfermline as well as events in England with some success. In 1978, he decided to tackle the odd Grand Prix race and the British Championships and parted company with Ward and teamed up with a new passenger from nearby Haddington called Jimmy Neil. It took some time for the new partnership to gel, but by the end of the season they were regularly winning races in England. In 1979, Taylor acquired a Seymaz hub steering type outfit. He found it not to his liking after two accidents that left Jimmy Neil with a fractured wrist and caused the death of stand-in passenger Dave Powell at Oulton Park in a high-speed crash. With Neil still injured, Taylor used veteran passenger Jimmy Law for the German GP at Hockenheim on his old Windle framed Yamaha, where they finished fifth. Although Neil returned to Assen in Holland, it was when he teamed up with Swedish former125 cc rider Benga Johansson that Taylor took his first Grand Prix victory at the Swedish TT at Karlskoga shortly after. There were further successes towards the end of 1979 in Britain, where he finished runner-up in the British Championship behind Dick Greasley. In 1980, Taylor and Benga Johansson won 4 Grand Prix races, and finished on the podium in all seven events they finished. He won the British Championship and won the Isle of Man Sidecar B race to win the Sidecar TT overall. In 1981, he retained his British title and went on to become a four-time TT race winner. In 1982 Taylor and Johansson raised the sidecar lap record at the Isle of Man TT to 108.29 mph (174.27 km/h), a lap record which stood for 7 years.\nDeath.\nIn the 1982 Finnish Grand Prix, held in Imatra under very wet conditions, Taylor and Johansson's bike began to aquaplane and slid off the road, colliding with a telephone pole. Emergency services attempted to remove him from the wreckage until a second sidecar team slid off into them. Taylor died in hospital later that evening. He was buried in the local cemetery at Pencaitland, and a memorial to him was erected in the village in December 2006. A memorial also stands in Beveridge Park, Kirkcaldy, overlooking Railway Bend on the old motorcycle racing circuit. Jock Taylor also has a memorial in Imatra, near the paddock of Finnish championship racetrack.\nRestoration.\nJock's World championship, and TT 108.29 mph (174.27 km/h) lap record-winning sidecar was bought by friend and fellow competitor Jack Muldoon from Jock's sponsor Dennis Trollope. Jack rescued Jock's outfit from the 5-man consortium who were supposed to restore the bike to its original condition and display it in a museum in Alford, Aberdeenshire. That never happened in the four years that it lay up in Alford in bits in a shed.\nJack Muldoon and family bought Jock's bike in March 2012 and started the restoration work immediately. The sidecar was completely stripped to a bare chassis, with months spent with emery cleaning and polishing the chassis. Due to the 26 years it lay at Donington in the museum and then 4 years up in Aberdeen, the chassis and all components were covered in rust and everything was seized: every component on the bike had to be stripped and cleaned, all bearings in all parts of the chassis were replaced, and the engine was completely rebuilt. It was done with the help of Bill Howarth and Dennis Trollope for all the Yamaha TZ700 parts required in the engine rebuild; Terry Windle, Stuart Mellor, Lockheed, HEL Performance Brake Pipes, Paul Drake Koni Shockers, Yolst Silkoline Oils. By August the restoration was 90% complete \u2013 it was the first time in 30 years that the TZ700 engine had run, and it was paraded at the Jock Taylor Memorial race weekend at East Fortune near Edinburgh in August 2012, a few miles from where Jock was born and brought up.\nAnnual Jock Taylor Memorial Race.\nIn the year following his death, an annual end of season race was established at Knockhill called the Jock Taylor Trophy, and it has always attracted the very best crews. Every year, sidecar racers travel from all over the UK to race in what has become a prestigious race. In 2012, the race was held at East Fortune, where Taylor started his racing career nearly 40 years ago.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16185", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16185", "title": "JHK", "text": ""}
{"id": "16186", "revid": "39253661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16186", "title": "Jewish views on homosexuality", "text": "The subject of homosexuality and Judaism dates back to the Torah. The book of Vayikra (Leviticus) is traditionally regarded as classifying sexual intercourse between males as a (something abhorred or detested) that could be subject to capital punishment by the contemporary Sanhedrin under halakha (Jewish law).\nThe issue has been a subject of contention within modern Jewish denominations, and has led to debate and division. Traditionally, Judaism has seen homosexual male intercourse as contrary to Judaism, not homosexuality in-and-of-itself. This opinion is often still maintained by Orthodox Judaism.\nConservative Judaism's Committee on Jewish Law and Standards, which until December 2006 held the same position as Orthodoxy, has since issued multiple opinions under its philosophy of pluralism; one opinion continues to follow the Orthodox position while another opinion substantially liberalizes the view of homosexual sex and relationships (while continuing to regard certain sexual acts as prohibited).\nTheologically liberal branches such as Reconstructionist, Humanistic, and Reform Judaism have all openly accepted homosexuality, homosexual intercourse, and same-sex marriage.\nHomosexuality in the Torah.\nThe Book of Leviticus refers to male homosexual sexual practices twice (JPS translation):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nSeveral commentators believe that the verses specifically condemn the practice of sodomy (i.e. anal intercourse between two males). Rabbinic thought supports this view, condemning homosexuality as an example of \"unnatural intercourse\" compared to the \"natural intercourse\" between non-related men and women. Intercourse in both scenarios only occur if penetration exists.\nDeuteronomy 23:17 tells followers: \"None of the daughters of Israel shall be a kedeshah, nor shall any of the sons of Israel be a Kadesh.\" This has been interpreted as prohibiting the \"sons of Israel\" from serving as a homosexual temple prostitute in a pagan cult.\nRabbinic Jewish application and interpretation of these verses.\nProhibitions for homosocial interaction.\nThe laws of prohibit affectionate touch between an unmarried man and woman (except close relatives), because this touch is considered \"approaching\" a forbidden relationship. As gay male sex is included in the category of along with other sexual prohibitions, the prohibition of would seem to also apply between two gay men. Nevertheless, some sources raise the possibility that the law may be more lenient for two men than for a man and a woman. The consensus seems to be that touch between gay men which involves sexual desire is rabbinically forbidden, while touch which does not involve sexual desire is permitted.\nAnother issue is the prohibition of (seclusion of two individuals together in a manner that would allow them to have sex). The Talmud records a debate over whether applies to any two men. Maimonides, Tur, and Shulchan Aruch rule leniently that of two men is permitted, because \"Jews are not suspected of homosexual sex\". Nevertheless, the Shulchan Aruch recommended to avoid such , \"in these generations where promiscuous people are common\" (possibly a reference to the use of K\u00f6\u00e7ek dancer-prostitutes in the Ottoman Empire at the time). However, this recommendation was not repeated by later authorities.\nBased on the precedents that can apply to two men in a circumstance where homosexual behavior is a concern, a modern halakhic authority rules that two men cannot be alone together if both of them are homosexual. Opinions also exist that the prohibition only applies to two men who are in a relationship with each other, or that there is no technical prohibition at all if they are confident they can avoid forbidden touch (but they should still avoid sharing a bedroom).\nApplicability of Biblical death penalty.\nLike many similar commandments, the stated punishment for willful violation was the death penalty, though minors under 13 years of age were exempt from this, as from any other penalty. However, even in Biblical times, it was very difficult to get a conviction that would lead to this prescribed punishment. The Jewish Oral Law states that capital punishment would be applicable only if two men were caught in the act of anal sex, if there were two witnesses to the act, if the men involved were warned that they committed a capital offense, and the two men\u2014or the willing party, in case of rape\u2014subsequently acknowledged the warning but continued to engage in the prohibited act anyway. In fact, there is no account of capital punishment, in regards to this law, in Jewish history.\nRabbinic tradition understands the Torah's system of capital punishment to not be in effect for the past approximately 2,000 years, in the absence of a Sanhedrin and Temple. The relative absence of anti-homosexual prosecutions is also linked to the Jewish belief that homosexuality did not exist in the community.\nClassical rabbinic Jewish sources do not specifically mention that homosexual attraction is inherently sinful. In fact, the mental and emotional feelings two men experience when they engage in intimate relations are not condemned. However, they are condemned if intercourse, commonly interpreted as penetrative sex, occurs. If the man caught does (repentance), i.e., he ceases his forbidden actions, regrets what he has done, apologizes to God, and makes a binding resolution never to repeat those actions, he is seen to be forgiven by God.\nLesbian sexual activity.\nAlthough lesbianism is not explicitly prohibited in the Hebrew Bible, sexual liaisons between women are forbidden by Orthodox rabbinical literature. The Talmud discusses tribadism (women rubbing genitals together, or ) without explicitly prohibiting it; the main concern was whether or not this activity removed their status as a virgin, making them ineligible to marry a member of the priesthood. However, the Sifra condemned marriage between two women, considering it within the category of licentious foreign behavior which is forbidden to Jews. Following this lead, later halakhic codes prohibited tribadism on the same grounds. Maimonides recommended flagellation as a penalty for lesbian acts, rather than the death penalty. Lesbianism was considered a less serious offense than male homosexuality for a few reasons; most notably, lesbian sexual acts were not explicitly prohibited in the Torah and rabbinic scholars did not consider tribadism \"true\" intercourse. Since there is not necessarily penetration involved in lesbian sex, the sages did not believe that lesbianism impacted a woman's virginity or marriageability, and therefore lesbian activity was regarded as only a minor offense.\nSame-sex marriage in Midrash.\nSifra states: \"'Like the deeds of the land of Egypt where you dwelt, you shall not do'\u2014What would they do? A man would marry a man, a woman would marry a woman...\"\nNonetheless, some contemporary scholars believe that same-sex marriage is theoretically permissible because sanctifies the relationship between the spouses rather than the \"sexual intimacies\" they commit. The permissibility of same-sex marriage is also compared to the permissibility of marriage between a divorcee and a male descendant of a (priest). The latter is accepted by adherents of Conservative Judaism because they believe the ethical components of Judaism, exemplified by justice and compassion, trump the legal components.\nReasons for the prohibition.\nReasons suggested by the rabbis for the prohibition on gay male sex include the following:\nOrthodox Jewish views.\nWhile a variety of views regarding homosexuality exist within the Orthodox Jewish community, Orthodox Judaism generally prohibits homosexual conduct. While there is some disagreement about which male homosexual acts violate core prohibitions, the majority of Orthodox Judaism puts male\u2013male anal sex in the category of (lit. \"die rather than transgress\"). This is a small category of biblically-prohibited acts which an Orthodox Jew is obligated to die rather than do. While almost any Jewish law may be broken to save a life under the principle of pikuach nefesh, the sages determined that Jews must observe these laws, even at the cost of their own lives. According to the Talmud, homosexual acts are not necessarily forbidden between non-Jews, though same-sex marriage is forbidden. There are numerous references in the Torah to non-Jews engaging in homosexuality, including the Egyptians and the Canaanites. Traditionally, Judaism only accepts heterosexual intercourse within marriage; some scholars have described adultery, celibacy, homosexuality, incest and bestiality as existing on a spectrum of wrongdoing.\nIn a speech given in 1986, the Lubavitcher Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, discussed \"individuals who express an inclination towards a particular form of physical relationship in which the libidinal gratification is sought with members of one's own gender.\" He wrote that homosexuality should not be accepted as immutable, but rather treated medically.\nIn a 2008 open letter distributed to Orthodox community leaders, the Hod organization appealed to the Orthodox community to recognize them as part of the religious society. Up to 2013, 163 Orthodox rabbis from Israel and abroad signed this statement, including Yuval Cherlow, Binyamin Lau, Haim Navon, Daniel Sperber, Eliezer Melamed, Shai Piron, and Yehuda Gilad. In 2010, TorahWeb.org published a brief position statement entitled \"Torah View on Homosexuality\", co-authored by Ravs Hershel Schachter, Mordechai Willig, Michael Rosensweig, and Mayer Twersky, which reaffirmed their view of homosexuality as an abomination.\nOn July 22, 2010, a \"Statement of Principles on the Place of Jews with a Homosexual Orientation in Our Community\" was released. It was written primarily by Nathaniel Helfgot, Aryeh Klapper, and Yitzchak Blau. Signatories include more than a hundred rabbis and laypeople. This statement again reaffirms that homosexual activity is forbidden under halacha, but is sympathetic to \"Jews with a homosexual orientation.\" It does not promote conversion therapy or opposite-sex marriage for gay Jews, urges communities not to ostracize gay Jews and their families, and in regard to gay marriage, states that \"each synagogue together with its rabbi must establish its own standard with regard to membership for open violators of halakha.\"\nAn edict signed by dozens of Israeli Orthodox rabbis and published in 2016 by the Israeli Modern Orthodox rabbinic group Beit Hillel, a group which promotes inclusiveness in Orthodox Judaism, stated, in part, \"According to the Torah and halacha, the [same-sex sexual] acts are forbidden, but not the proclivities, and therefore, people with same-sex tendencies, men and women, have no invalidation in halacha or tradition. They are obligated by the commandments of the Torah, they can fulfill a [ritual] obligation on behalf of the public, and carry out all of the community functions just like any member.\" It also stated, in part, \"Just as it [is] inconceivable to mock someone for being physically, behaviorally, or mentally different, so too those with same-sex tendencies should not be mocked. On the contrary, those around them\u2014family and community\u2014should show special feeling for them, and apply to them the Torah commandment of 'Love thy neighbor as thyself' and to be diligent in avoiding the prohibition of insulting another.\"\nRabbi Dr. Immanuel Jakobovits describes the traditional opinion on homosexuality as follows: \"Jewish law[...] rejects the view that homosexuality is to be regarded merely as a disease or as morally neutral... Jewish law holds that no hedonistic ethic, even if called \"love\", can justify the morality of homosexuality any more than it can legitimize adultery or incest, however genuinely such acts may be performed out of love and by mutual consent.\" Rabbi Norman Lamm argued that some (although not all) homosexuals should be viewed as diseased and in need of compassion and treatment, rather than willful rebels who should be ostracized. He distinguishes between six varieties of homosexuals, including \"genuine homosexuals\" who have \"strong preferential erotic feelings for members of the same sex\", \"transitory\" and \"situational\" homosexuals who would prefer heterosexual intercourse but are denied it or seek gain in homosexuality, and heterosexuals who are merely curious.\nProminent Gay Orthodox Jews.\nAmerican Orthodox rabbi Steven Greenberg came out as gay in 1999 to a significant response from rabbis of all denominations. Rabbi Moshe Tendler, a leading rabbi at Yeshiva University, stated, \"It is very sad that an individual who attended our yeshiva sunk to the depths of what we consider a depraved society.\" As Greenberg has a rabbinic ordination from the Orthodox rabbinical seminary of Yeshiva University (RIETS), he is often described as the first openly gay Orthodox Jewish rabbi. Greenberg faced backlash in 2011 for officiating a same-sex wedding. The civil ceremony was not a kiddushin, which is not permitted for same-sex couples, and therefore not recognized under Jewish law. In response, a group of Orthodox Rabbis issued an open letter denouncing the ceremony and Greenberg's ordination. Greenberg's ordination remains valid.\nOrthodox Israeli rabbi Ron Yosef became in 2009 the first Israeli Orthodox Rabbi to come out, by appearing in Uvda (\"Fact\"), Israel's leading investigative television program, in an episode regarding conversion therapies in Israel. Yosef remains in his position as a pulpit Rabbi. Yosef testified that his Yemenite congregation did not accept him being a homosexual very easily and it took them a while to accept it. Yosef received death threats in the year leading up to the 2009 Tel Aviv gay centre shooting. In 2013, he stated he was in a relationship with a man. Yosef has stated his approach to the issue of homosexuality in Judaism as follows: \"It is clear to me that lying with another man is forbidden, and our starting point is commitment to halacha and Torah. The goal is not to seek permission. But you need to give us a shoulder and support.\"\nIn 2019 Daniel Atwood became the first openly gay Orthodox person to be ordained as a rabbi; he was ordained by the rabbi Daniel Landes, in Jerusalem. In October 2023, \"The Forward\" reported about Shua Brick, \"experts say that Brick is the first openly gay rabbi to serve on the clergy of an Orthodox synagogue in the U.S.\", explaining that Brick \"runs the youth program, leads Torah study for adults, and fills in when the senior rabbi is out of town\" at Beth Jacob Congregation in Oakland, California, where he started coming out as gay to members of the congregation over a year prior to October 2023. He was ordained by Yeshiva University. Yeshivat Chovevei Torah ordained Tadhg Cleary in June 2025, making him the first openly gay rabbi ordained by an American Orthodox institution.\nEx-gay organizations.\nJONAH was a Jewish ex-gay organization that focused on \"prevention, intervention, and healing of the underlying issues causing same-sex attractions\". In 2012, four former clients of JONAH sued the organization for fraud, claiming that it sold them therapies that were ineffective and counterproductive. Soon after in that same year, the Rabbinical Council of America (RCA), a professional association of more than 1,000 Orthodox rabbis around the world, sent an open email to its members that it no longer supported conversion therapy generally, or JONAH specifically. In 2015, a New Jersey jury found JONAH guilty of consumer fraud for promising to be able to change its clients' sexual urges and determined its commercial practices to be unconscionable. As part of the sentence, JONAH was required to cease all operations, but continued to operate under the name JIFGA until 2019, when it was found in violation of the previous order and shut down permanently. This final ruling also barred the executives of JIFGA from serving on the board of any nonprofit organization in the future.\nOther viewpoints.\nJi\u0159\u00ed Mordechai Langer, who studied in the Hasidic community of Belz, arrived in Palestine in 1940. \"His reconciliation of homosexuality and Judaism involved[...] a homosexual Jewish theology;[...] a sociology of Jewish homosexuality in Hasidism\".\nHaredi Rabbi Avigdor Miller defended the assassination of Harvey Milk, saying, \"A decent gentile got up and shot him because of his spreading homosexuality\".\nThe late UK Chief Rabbi Jonathan Sacks wrote the foreword to Rabbi Chaim Rapoport's book \"Judaism and Homosexuality: An Authentic Orthodox View\". In the foreword, Rabbi Sacks has written: \"Compassion, sympathy, empathy, understanding\u2014these are essential elements of Judaism. They are what homosexual Jews who care about Judaism need from us today.\"\nModern Orthodox leader Rabbi Aharon Lichtenstein is reported to have said that the intensity of the Orthodox community's condemnation of homosexuality goes beyond what its status as a religious transgression warrants, and that he feels toward homosexual people \"criticism, disapproval, but tempered with an element of sympathy\". Rabbi Steven Greenberg, for example, argues that there are many sins considered to be abominations in the Torah, homosexual men are disproportionately censured. While some Modern Orthodox congregations may still invite a person up for an aliyah who is known not to keep kosher, the same is not always true of a man known to engage in same-sex sexual activity.\nIn both the United States and in Israel, several groups have sprung up in the last few years that seek to support those who identify as both Orthodox and homosexual; support Orthodox parents of LGBTQ children; and promote understanding of homosexuality within Orthodox communities and among Orthodox rabbis. These include an umbrella organization called Eshel, the Gay and Lesbian Yeshiva Day School Alumni Association, the women's group OrthoDykes, the youth group JQYouth, the American-Israeli group headquartered in Jerusalem Bat Kol and the Israeli group Hod (\"Majesty\"). In 2012, Hod held an advertising campaign against conversion therapies and for self-acceptance of the religious homosexual community in Israel. Online blogs and support groups have enabled many to find other Orthodox LGBTQ people with whom to share the conflict between Orthodox religious and social norms and LGBT self-identification.\nOrthodox Rabbis Shmuley Boteach and Zev Farber have questioned the opposition of Orthodox groups to government recognition of same-sex civil marriages (or in Boteach's case, to state-sanctioned civil unions), arguing that although Judaism does not condone homosexuality, governments should not enforce any particular religion's view of marriage, and that conferring civil benefits to committed homosexual couples should be viewed as promoting family values.\nIn October 2010, Boteach wrote an op-ed column in \"The Wall Street Journal\" on homosexuality, arguing that he does not deny that there is a biblical prohibition on male same-sex relationships and a commandment for men and women to marry and have children. Still, he understands those in context. \"There are 613 commandments in the Torah... So when Jewish gay couples tell me they have never been attracted to members of the opposite sex and are desperate alone, I tell them \"You have 611 commandments left. That should keep you busy. Now, go create a kosher home[...] you are His beloved children.\" Five years later he wrote that he believed in the equality of all of God's children, and has seen too much homophobia in his life. He believes that the biggest threat to marriage does not come from gay marriage, but heterosexual divorce, which he says afflicts half of marriages. He opposes government involvement at all in recognizing marriage, but supports state-sanctioned \"civil unions\" for all. Open Orthodox Rabbi Shmuly Yanklowitz declared that the Jewish values of justice, equality, and dignity lead him to support the cause of gay rights and advocate for same-sex civil marriage.\nIn November 2016, dozens of LGBT activists protested in Jerusalem against comments reportedly made by the city's chief rabbi Rabbi Shlomo Amar, who reportedly told an Israeli newspaper that gay people were an \"abomination\", and homosexuality a \"cult\".\nIn 2017, the Senior Rabbi of the Spanish &amp; Portuguese Sephardi Community Joseph Dweck gave a class describing \"the entire revolution of feminism and even homosexuality in our society[...] is a fantastic development for humanity\". These words were condemned by Rabbi Aaron Bassous as \"false and misguided[...] corrupt from beginning to end\". This affair caused Dweck to step down from the Sephardic Beth Din but not as a communal leader.\nIn 2019, Rabbi Daniel Landes wrote, \"Leviticus 18:22[...] has not been erased from the Torah. But that biblical commandment does not give us license to ignore or abuse the significant number of carefully observant Jews who are LGBTQ.\"\nFilm documentaries made about Orthodox homosexuals in recent years include \"Trembling Before G-d\", \"Keep Not Silent\", and \"Say Amen\".\nConservative Judaism.\nAs a matter of both Jewish law and institutional policy, Conservative (\"Masorti\") Judaism has wrestled with homosexuality issues since the 1980s.\nConservative Jewish writer Herschell Matt initially argued that homosexuals may be excused because Judaism does recognise 'constraint' as a valid excuse to disobey the law. However, Matt later shifted to outright support for homosexuality, viewing it as part of the natural order. Conservative Rabbi Robert Kirshchner states that Jews have historically adapted their laws to new circumstances, indicating accommodation for homosexuality.\nIn Conservative Judaism, the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards (CJLS) of the Rabbinical Assembly makes the movement's decisions concerning Jewish law. In 1992, the CJLS action reaffirmed its traditional prohibition on homosexual conduct, blessing same-sex unions, and ordaining openly gay/lesbian/bisexual clergy. However, these prohibitions grew increasingly controversial within the Conservative movement.\nIn 2006, the CJLS shifted its position and paved the way for significant changes regarding the Conservative movement's policies toward homosexuality. On December 6, 2006, The CJLS adopted three distinct responsa reflecting very different approaches to the subject. One responsum substantially liberalized Conservative Judaism's approach including lifting most (but not all) classical prohibitions on homosexual conduct and permitted the blessing of homosexual unions and the ordination of openly gay/lesbian/bisexual clergy. Two others completely retained traditional prohibitions. Under the rules of the Conservative movement, the adoption of multiple opinions permits individual Conservative rabbis, congregations, and rabbinical schools to select which opinion to accept, and hence to choose individually whether to maintain a traditional prohibition on homosexual conduct or to permit openly gay/lesbian/bisexual unions and clergy.\nThe liberalizing responsum, adopted as a majority opinion by 13 of 25 votes, was authored by Rabbis Elliot N. Dorff, Daniel Nevins, and Avram Reisner. It lifted most restrictions on homosexual conduct and opened the way to the ordination of openly gay/lesbian/bisexual rabbis and cantors and acceptance of homosexual unions, but stopped short of religiously recognizing same-sex marriage. The responsum invoked the Talmudic principle of \"kavod habriyot\", which the authors translated as \"human dignity\", as authority for this approach. The responsum maintained a prohibition on male\u2013male anal sex, which it described as the sole Biblically prohibited homosexual act. This act remains a \"yehareg ve'al ya'avor\" (\"die rather than transgress\" offense) under the decision.\nTwo traditionalist responsa were adopted. A responsum by Rabbi Joel Roth, adopted as a majority opinion by 13 votes, reaffirmed a general complete prohibition on homosexual conduct. A second responsum by Rabbi Leonard Levy, adopted as a minority opinion by 6 votes, delineated ways in which to ensure that gays and lesbians would be accorded human dignity and a respected place in Conservative communities and institutions while maintaining the authority of the traditional prohibitions against same-sex sexual activity.\nThe Committee rejected the third paper by Gordon Tucker which would have lifted all restrictions on homosexual sexual practices.\nThe consequences of the decision have been mixed. On the one hand, four members of the Committee\u2014Rabbis Joel Roth, Leonard Levy, Mayer Rabinowitz, and Joseph Prouser\u2014resigned from the CJLS following adoption of the change. On the other hand, the Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies of the American Jewish University in Los Angeles had previously stated that it will immediately begin admitting gay/lesbian/bisexual students as soon as the law committee passes a policy that sanctions such ordination. On March 26, 2007, the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York followed suit and began accepting openly gay/lesbian/bisexual candidates for admission for their Rabbinical program.\nIn June 2012, the American branch of Conservative Judaism formally approved same-sex marriage ceremonies in a 13\u20130 vote. In 2021, two Conservative Rabbis became the first known example of two Rabbis of the same sex marrying each other.\nAlthough the American example was initially an outlier in the global Conservative movement, it is now the case that \"all Masorti seminaries, except for the one in Argentina, now accept openly gay students\". Since 2014 in the United Kingdom the Masorti movement offers a \"Shutafut\" (\"partnership\") ceremony to same-gender couples wishing to marry in a Conservative religious ceremony. The \"Shutafut\" contains many of the iconic elements of a traditional Jewish wedding service\u2014the \"chupah\", the seven blessings, the wine, the glass breaking, but without the symbolic act of acquisition in a traditional Jewish wedding.\nIn Israel, the head of the Masorti's Vaad Halakha (equivalent to the CJLS), Rabbi David Golinkin, wrote to the CJLS protesting its reconsideration of the traditional ban on homosexual conduct. Despite the contention within the Israeli movement however in the same year, Israel's Schechter Rabbinical Seminary sanctioned the training of openly gay Rabbis.\nHungary's Neolog movement\u2014distinct from but seen as a fraternal counterpart and in some ways spiritual ancestor of the modern Masorti movement\u2014has been more divided. Although not embracing and providing for same-gender marriage or full inclusion in Jewish life, Mazsihisz, the main representative umbrella body for Neolog Judaism, has affirmed its opposition to exclusion by homophobia and in 2013 dismissed the director of its youth movement for making comments about excluding gay people from all religious life for their sexual orientation. In 2021 the President of Mazsihisz was made to apologise for signing a \"Joint Declaration of the Churches on the Holiness of Marriage\" that held \"the sanctification of the woman-man relationship by marriage is the foundation of human dignity\". His critics included Mazsihisz's Chief Rabbi and earlier that same year the movement made a statement widely seen as condemning new Hungarian laws limiting the exposure of children to content referencing homosexuality.\nRabbi Bradley Artson, Dean of the Rabbinic School at American Jewish University, claims to have studied every reference he could find to homosexual activity mentioned in ancient Greek and Latin writers. Every citation he found described an encounter between males where one party, the master, physically abused another, the slave. Rabbi Artson could not find a single example where one partner was not subservient to the other. \"Homosexual relationships today\", Rabbi Artson says, \"should not be compared to the ancient world. I know too many homosexual individuals, including close friends and relatives, who are committed to one another in loving long-term monogamous relationships. I know too many same-sex couples that are loving parents raising good descent [\"sic\"] ethical children. Who's to say their family relationships are less sanctified in the eyes of God than mine is with my wife and our children?\"\nRecent reports have highlighted a significant increase in the enrollment of LGBTQ students in Jewish seminaries across the United States, a trend described by observers as an \u201castounding shift\u201d in the makeup of the future American rabbinate. According to multiple Jewish media outlets, several seminaries affiliated with non-Orthodox denominations have seen LGBTQ students comprise a growing proportion of new cohorts, reflecting broader institutional changes in rabbinical training and leadership pathways within American Judaism.\nReform Judaism.\nThe Reform Judaism movement, the largest branch of Judaism in North America, has rejected the traditional view of Jewish Law on homosexuality and bisexuality. As such, they do not prohibit the ordination of openly gay, lesbian, and bisexual people as rabbis and cantors. They view Levitical laws as sometimes seen to be referring to prostitution, making it a stand against Jews adopting the idolatrous fertility cults and practices of the neighbouring Canaanite nations, rather than a blanket condemnation of same-sex intercourse, homosexuality, or bisexuality. Reform authorities consider that, in light of what is seen as current scientific evidence about the nature of homosexuality and bisexuality as inborn sexual orientations, a new interpretation of the law is required.\nIn 1972, Beth Chayim Chadashim, the world's first explicitly-gay-and-lesbian-centered synagogue recognized by the Reform Jewish community, was established in West Los Angeles, resulting in a slew of non-Orthodox congregations being established along similar lines. Beth Chayim Chadashim now focuses on the entire LGBT community, rather than just gays and lesbians.\nIn 1977, the Central Conference of American Rabbis (CCAR), which is the Union for Reform Judaism's principal body, adopted a resolution calling for legislation decriminalizing homosexual acts between consenting adults, and calling for an end to discrimination against gays and lesbians. The resolution called on Reform Jewish organizations to develop programs to implement this stand.\nReform rabbi Lionel Blue was the first British rabbi to publicly declare himself as gay, which he did in 1980.\nIn the late 1980s, the primary seminary of the Reform movement, Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion, changed its admission requirements to allow openly gay and lesbian people to join the student body.\nIn 1990, the Union for Reform Judaism announced a national policy declaring lesbian and gay Jews to be full and equal members of the religious community. Also in 1990, the CCAR officially endorsed a report of their own Ad Hoc Committee on Homosexuality and the Rabbinate. This position paper urged that \"all rabbis, regardless of sexual orientation, be accorded the opportunity to fulfill the sacred vocation that they have chosen\". The committee endorsed the view that \"all Jews are religiously equal, regardless of their sexual orientation\".\nIn 1995, Reform Rabbi Margaret Wenig's essay \"Truly Welcoming Lesbian and Gay Jews\" was published in \"The Jewish Condition: Essays on Contemporary Judaism Honoring [Reform] Rabbi Alexander M. Schindler\"; it was the first published argument to the Jewish community on behalf of civil marriage for gay couples.\nIn 1996, the CCAR passed a resolution approving the same-sex civil marriage. However, this same resolution made a distinction between civil marriages and religious marriages; this resolution thus stated:\nHowever we may understand homosexuality, whether as an illness, as a genetically based dysfunction or as a sexual preference and lifestyle\u2014we cannot accommodate the relationship of two homosexuals as a \"marriage\" within the context of Judaism, for none of the elements of qiddushin (sanctification) normally associated with marriage can be invoked for this relationship.\nThe Central Conference of American Rabbis support the right of gay and lesbian couples to share fully and equally in the rights of civil marriage, and\nThat the CCAR oppose governmental efforts to ban gay and lesbian marriage.\nThat this is a matter of civil law, and is separate from the question of rabbinic officiation at such marriages.\nIn 1998, an ad hoc CCAR committee on Human Sexuality issued its majority report (11 to 1, 1 abstention) which stated that the holiness within a Jewish marriage \"may be present in committed same-gender relationships between two Jews and that these relationships can serve as the foundation of stable Jewish families, thus adding strength to the Jewish community\". The report called for the CCAR to support rabbis in officiating at same-sex marriages. Also in 1998, the Responsa Committee of the CCAR issued a lengthy \"teshuvah\" (rabbinical opinion) that offered detailed argumentation in support of both sides of the question whether a rabbi may officiate at a commitment ceremony for a same-sex couple.\nIn March 2000, the CCAR issued a new resolution stating that \"We do hereby resolve that the relationship of a Jewish, same-gender couple is worthy of affirmation through appropriate Jewish ritual and further resolve, that we recognize the diversity of opinions within our ranks on this issue. We support the decision of those who choose to officiate at rituals of union for same-sex couples, and we support the decision of those who do not.\"\nAlso in 2000, Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion established the Institute for Judaism, Sexual Orientation &amp; Gender Identity to \"educate HUC-JIR students on lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender issues to help them challenge and eliminate homophobia and heterosexism; and to learn tools to be able to transform the communities they encounter into ones that are inclusive and welcoming of LGBT Jews\". It is the first and only institute of its kind in the Jewish world.\nIn 2003, the Union for Reform Judaism retroactively applied its pro-rights policy on gays and lesbians to the bisexual and transgender communities, issuing a resolution titled, \"Support for the Inclusion and Acceptance of the Transgender and Bisexual Communities\".\nAlso in 2003, Women of Reform Judaism issued a statement describing their support for human and civil rights and the struggles of the bisexual and transgender communities, and saying, \"Women of Reform Judaism accordingly: Calls for civil rights protections from all forms of discrimination against bisexual and transgender individuals; Urges that such legislation allows transgender individuals to be seen under the law as the gender by which they identify; and\nCalls upon sisterhoods to hold informative programs about the transgender and bisexual communities.\"\nIn 2009, \"Siddur Sha'ar Zahav\", a prayer book written to address the lives and needs of LGBTQ as well as heterosexual and cisgender Jews, was published.\nIn 2014, the CCAR joined a lawsuit challenging North Carolina's ban on same-sex marriage, which is America's first faith-based challenge to same-sex marriage bans.\nIn 2015, Rabbi Denise Eger became the first openly gay president of the CCAR.\nAlso in 2015, the High Holy Days Reform Jewish prayer book Mishkan HaNefesh was released; it is intended as a companion to Mishkan T'filah. Mishkan HaNefesh can be translated as \"sanctuary of the soul\". It replaces a line from the Reform movement's earlier prayerbook, \"Gates of Repentance\", that mentioned the joy of a bride and groom specifically, with the line \"rejoicing with couples under the chuppah [wedding canopy]\", and adds a third, non-gendered option to the way worshippers are called to the Torah, offering \"mibeit\", Hebrew for \"from the house of\", in addition to the traditional \"son of\" or \"daughter of\". The Mishkan HaNefesh includes several sets of translations for the traditional prayers. Psalm 23 includes the familiar \"traditional\" translation, an adaptation that is considered \"gender-sensitive\" but remains faithful to the traditional version, a feminist adaption from Phyllis Appell Bass, and the fourth was published in 1978 by a contemporary rabbi.\nReconstructionist Judaism.\nThe Reconstructionist movement sees homosexuality and bisexuality as normal expressions of sexuality and welcomes gays, bisexuals, and lesbians into Reconstructionist communities to participate fully in every aspect of community life. Since 1985, the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College has admitted openly gay, bisexual, and lesbian candidates to their rabbinical and cantorial programs. In 1993, a movement Commission issued: \"Homosexuality and Judaism: The Reconstructionist Position\". The Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association (RRA) encourages its members to officiate at same-sex marriages/commitment ceremonies, though the RRA does not require its members to officiate at them. In 2007, the Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association elected as president Rabbi Toba Spitzer, the first openly LGBT person chosen to head a rabbinical association in the United States. In 2011 Sandra Lawson became the first openly homosexual African-American and first African-American admitted to the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College; she was ordained in June 2018, which made her the first openly homosexual, female, black rabbi in the world. In 2013, the Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association elected as president Rabbi Jason Klein, the first openly gay man chosen to head a national rabbinical association of one of the major Jewish denominations in the United States. Also in 2013, Rabbi Deborah Waxman was elected as the president of the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College. As the President, she is believed to be the first woman and first lesbian to lead a Jewish congregational union, and the first female rabbi and first lesbian to lead a Jewish seminary; the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College is both a congregational union and a seminary.\nJewish Renewal.\nJewish Renewal is a recent movement in Judaism which endeavors to reinvigorate modern Judaism with Kabbalistic, Hasidic, musical and meditative practices; it describes itself as \"a worldwide, transdenominational movement grounded in Judaism's prophetic and mystical traditions\". The Jewish Renewal movement ordains people of all sexual orientations as rabbis and cantors. In 2005, Eli Cohen became the first openly gay rabbi ordained by the Jewish Renewal Movement, followed by Chaya Gusfield and Rabbi Lori Klein in 2006, who became the two first openly lesbian rabbis ordained by the Jewish Renewal movement. In 2007, Jalda Rebling, born in Amsterdam and now living in Germany, became the first openly lesbian cantor ordained by the Jewish Renewal movement. In 2011, the bisexual rights activist Debra Kolodny was ordained as a rabbi by the Jewish Renewal movement and hired as the rabbi for congregation P'nai Or of Portland. The Statement of Principles of ALEPH: Alliance for Jewish Renewal (and OHALAH and the Rabbinic Pastors Association) states in part, \"We welcome and recognize the sanctity of every individual regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity. We recognize respectful and mutual expressions of adult human sexuality as potentially sacred expressions of love, and therefore, we strive to welcome a variety of constellations of intimate relationships and family forms including gay, lesbian, and heterosexual relationships as well as people choosing to be single.\"\nHumanistic Judaism.\nHumanistic Judaism is a movement in Judaism that offers a non-theistic alternative in contemporary Jewish life. In 2004, the Society for Humanistic Judaism issued a resolution supporting \"the legal recognition of marriage and divorce between adults of the same sex\", and affirming \"the value of marriage between any two committed adults with the sense of obligations, responsibilities, and consequences thereof\". In 2010 they pledged to speak out against homophobic bullying. The Association of Humanistic Rabbis has also issued a pro-LGBT statement titled \"In Support of Diverse Sexualities and Gender Identities\". It was adopted in 2003 and issued in 2004.\nLGBT-affirmative activities.\nJewish LGBT rights advocates and sympathetic clergy have created various institutions within Jewish life to accommodate gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender parishioners. Beth Chayim Chadashim, established in 1972 in West Los Angeles, was the world's first explicitly-gay-and-lesbian-centered synagogue recognized by the Reform Jewish community, resulting in a slew of non-Orthodox congregations being established along similar lines, including Congregation Beit Simchat Torah in New York City, Bet Mishpachah in Washington, D.C., and Congregation Or Chadash in Chicago. Beth Chayim Chadashim now focuses on the entire LGBT community, rather than just gays and lesbians.\nLGBT-inclusive services and ceremonies specific to Jewish religious culture have also been created, ranging from LGBT-affirmative haggadot for Passover to a \"Stonewall Shabbat Seder\".\nIn October 2012 Rainbow Jews, an oral history project showcasing the lives of Jewish bisexual, lesbian, gay, and transgender people in the United Kingdom from the 1950s until the present, was launched. It is the United Kingdom's first archive of Jewish bisexual, lesbian, gay, and transgender history.\nThe ONE National Gay and Lesbian Archives has, among other things, the Twice Blessed Collection, circa 1966-2000; this collection \"consists of materials documenting the Jewish lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender experience, circa 1966-2000, collected by the Jewish Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgender Archives, founded and operated by Johnny Abush\".\nRecent research by the sociocultural psychologist, Chana Etengoff, has highlighted the therapeutic benefits of LGBTQ petitions to religious leaders, including meaning-making, social action, agency and empowerment.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nResearch References:"}
{"id": "16187", "revid": "37852915", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16187", "title": "John Dewey", "text": "American philosopher, psychologist, and educational reformer (1859\u20131952)\nJohn Dewey (; October 20, 1859 \u2013 June 1, 1952) was an American philosopher, psychologist, and educational reformer. He was one of the most prominent American scholars in the first half of the twentieth century.\nThe overriding theme of Dewey's works was his profound belief in democracy, be it in politics, education, or communication and journalism. As Dewey himself stated in 1888, while still at the University of Michigan, \"Democracy and the one, ultimate, ethical ideal of humanity are to my mind synonymous.\" Dewey considered two fundamental elements\u2014schools and civil society\u2014to be major topics needing attention and reconstruction to encourage experimental intelligence and plurality. He asserted that complete democracy was to be obtained not just by extending voting rights but also by ensuring that there exists a fully formed public opinion, accomplished by communication among citizens, experts, and politicians.\nDewey was one of the primary figures associated with the philosophy of pragmatism and is considered one of the founding thinkers of functional psychology. His paper \"The Reflex Arc Concept in Psychology\", published in 1896, is regarded as the first major work in the (Chicago) functionalist school of psychology. A \"Review of General Psychology\" survey, published in 2002, ranked Dewey as the 93rd-most-cited psychologist of the 20th century.\nDewey was also a major educational reformer for the 20th century. A well-known public intellectual, he was a major voice of progressive education and liberalism. While a professor at the University of Chicago, he founded the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, where he was able to apply and test his progressive ideas on pedagogical method. Although Dewey is known best for his publications about education, he also wrote about many other topics, including epistemology, metaphysics, aesthetics, art, logic, social theory, and ethics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLife.\nEarly life and education.\nJohn Dewey was born in Burlington, Vermont, to a family of modest means. He was one of four boys born to Archibald Sprague Dewey and Lucina Artemisia Rich Dewey. Their first son was also named John, but he died in an accident on January 17, 1859. The second John Dewey was born October 20, 1859, forty weeks after the death of his older brother. Like his older, surviving brother, Davis Rich Dewey, he attended the University of Vermont, where he was initiated into Delta Psi, and graduated Phi Beta Kappa in 1879.\nA significant professor of Dewey's at the University of Vermont was Henry Augustus Pearson Torrey (H.A.P. Torrey), the son-in-law and nephew of former University of Vermont president Joseph Torrey. Dewey studied privately with Torrey between his graduation from Vermont and his enrollment at Johns Hopkins University.\nCareer.\nAfter two years as a high-school teacher in Oil City, Pennsylvania, and one year as an elementary school teacher in the small town of Charlotte, Vermont, Dewey decided that he was unsuited for teaching primary or secondary school. After studying with George Sylvester Morris, Charles Sanders Peirce, Herbert Baxter Adams, and G. Stanley Hall, Dewey received his Ph.D. from the School of Arts &amp; Sciences at Johns Hopkins University in 1884. His unpublished and now lost dissertation (criticizing Immanuel Kant from an idealist position) was titled \"The Psychology of Kant\". In the same year, he accepted a faculty position at the University of Michigan (1884\u201388 and 1889\u201394) with the help of George Sylvester Morris.\nIn 1894, Dewey joined the newly founded University of Chicago (1894\u20131904) where he developed his belief in Rational Empiricism, becoming associated with the newly emerging Pragmatic philosophy. His time at the University of Chicago resulted in four essays collectively entitled \"Thought and its Subject-Matter\", which was published with collected works from his colleagues at Chicago under the collective title \"Studies in Logical Theory\" (1904).\nDuring that time, Dewey also initiated the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, where he was able to actualize the pedagogical beliefs that provided material for his first major work on education, \"The School and Society\" (1899). Disagreements with the administration ultimately caused his resignation from the university, and soon thereafter he relocated near the East Coast. In 1899, Dewey was elected president of the American Psychological Association (A.P.A.). From 1904 until his retirement in 1930 he was professor of philosophy at Teachers College at Columbia University and influenced Carl Rogers.\nIn 1905, he became president of the American Philosophical Association. He was a longtime member of the American Federation of Teachers. Along with the historians Charles A. Beard and James Harvey Robinson, and the economist Thorstein Veblen, Dewey is one of the founders of The New School.\nDewey published more than 700 articles in 140 journals and approximately 40 books. His most significant writings were \"The Reflex Arc Concept in Psychology\" (1896), a critique of a standard psychological concept and the basis of all his further work; \"Democracy and Education\" (1916), his celebrated work on progressive education; \"Human Nature and Conduct\" (1922), a study of the function of habit in human behavior; \"The Public and its Problems\" (1927), a defense of democracy written in response to Walter Lippmann's \"The Phantom Public\" (1925); \"Experience and Nature\" (1925), Dewey's most \"metaphysical\" statement; \"Impressions of Soviet Russia and the Revolutionary World\" (1929), a glowing travelogue from the nascent USSR.\n\"Art as Experience\" (1934), was Dewey's major work on aesthetics; \"A Common Faith\" (1934), a humanistic study of religion originally delivered as the Dwight H. Terry Lectureship at Yale; \"Logic: The Theory of Inquiry\" (1938), a statement of Dewey's unusual conception of logic; \"Freedom and Culture\" (1939), a political work examining the roots of fascism; and \"Knowing and the Known\" (1949), a book written in conjunction with Arthur F. Bentley that systematically outlines the concept of trans-action, which is central to his other works (see Transactionalism).\nWhile each of these works focuses on one particular philosophical theme, Dewey included his major themes in \"Experience and Nature\". However, dissatisfied with the response to the first (1925) edition, for the second (1929) edition he rewrote the first chapter and added a Preface in which he stated that the book presented what was later called a new (Kuhnian) paradigm:\u00a0\"'I have not striven in this volume for a reconciliation between the new and the old' [E&amp;N:4]\" \".\" and he asserts Kuhnian incommensurability:\n\"'To many the associating of the two words ['experience' and 'nature'] will seem like talking of a round square' but 'I know of no route by which dialectical argument can answer such objections. They arise from association with words and cannot be dealt with argumentatively'.\" The following can be interpreted now as describing a Kuhnian conversion process: \"'One can only hope in the course of the whole discussion to disclose the [new] meanings which are attached to \"experience\" and \"nature,\" and thus insensibly produce, if one is fortunate, a change in the significations previously attached to them' [all E&amp;N:10].\"\nReflecting his immense influence on 20th-century thought, Hilda Neatby wrote \"Dewey has been to our age what Aristotle was to the later Middle Ages, not a philosopher, but \"the\" philosopher.\"\nVisits to China and Japan.\nIn 1919, Dewey and his wife traveled to Japan on sabbatical leave. Though Dewey and his wife were well received by the people of Japan during this trip, Dewey was also critical of the nation's governing system and claimed that the nation's path towards democracy was \"ambitious but weak in many respects in which her competitors are strong\". He also warned that \"the real test has not yet come. But if the nominally democratic world should go back on the professions so profusely uttered during war days, the shock will be enormous, and bureaucracy and militarism might come back.\"\nDuring his trip to Japan, Dewey was invited by Peking University to visit China, probably at the behest of his former students, Hu Shih and Chiang Monlin. Dewey and his wife Alice arrived in Shanghai on April 30, 1919, just days before student demonstrators took to the streets of Peking to protest the decision of the Allies in Paris to cede the German-held territories in Shandong province to Japan. Their demonstrations on May Fourth excited and energized Dewey, and he ended up staying in China for two years, leaving in July 1921.\nIn these two years, Dewey gave nearly 200 lectures to Chinese audiences and wrote nearly monthly articles for Americans in \"The New Republic\" and other magazines. Well aware of both Japanese expansionism into China and the attraction of Bolshevism to some Chinese, Dewey advocated that Americans support China's transformation and that Chinese base this transformation in education and social reforms, not revolution. Hundreds and sometimes thousands of people attended the lectures, which were interpreted by Hu Shih. For these audiences, Dewey represented \"Mr. Democracy\" and \"Mr. Science,\" the two personifications which they thought of representing modern values and hailed him as \"the American Confucius\". His lectures were lost at the time but have been rediscovered and were published in 2015. Dewey's lecture on \"Three Contemporary Philosophers: Bertrand Russell, Henri Bergson and William James\" at Peking University in 1919 was attended by a young Mao Zedong.\nZhixin Su states:\nDewey was, for those Chinese educators who had studied under him, the great apostle of philosophic liberalism and experimental methodology, the advocate of complete freedom of thought, and the man who, above all other teachers, equated education to the practical problems of civic cooperation and useful living.\nDewey urged the Chinese to not import any Western educational model. He recommended to educators such as Tao Xingzhi, that they use pragmatism to devise their own model school system at the national level. However, the national government was weak, and the provinces largely controlled by warlords, so his suggestions were praised at the national level but not implemented. However, there were a few implementations locally. Dewey's ideas did have influence in Hong Kong, and in Taiwan after the nationalist government fled there. In most of China, Confucian scholars controlled the local educational system before 1949 and they simply ignored Dewey and Western ideas. In Marxist and Maoist China, Dewey's ideas were systematically denounced.\nVisit to Southern Africa.\nDewey and his daughter Jane went to South Africa in July 1934, at the invitation of the World Conference of New Education Fellowship in Cape Town and Johannesburg, where he delivered several talks. The conference was opened by the South African Minister of Education Jan Hofmeyr, and Deputy Prime Minister Jan Smuts. Other speakers at the conference included Max Eiselen and Hendrik Verwoerd, who later became prime minister of the Nationalist government that introduced apartheid.\nDewey's expenses were paid by the Carnegie Foundation. He also traveled to Durban, Pretoria and Victoria Falls in what was then Southern Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) and looked at schools, talked to pupils, and gave lectures to the administrators and teachers. In August 1934, Dewey accepted an honorary degree from the University of the Witwatersrand. The white-only governments rejected Dewey's ideas as too secular. However black people and their white supporters were more receptive.\nPersonal life.\nDewey married Alice Chipman in 1886 shortly after Chipman graduated with her Ph.D. from the University of Michigan. The two had six children: Frederick Archibald Dewey, Evelyn Riggs Dewey, Morris (who died young), Gordon Chipman Dewey, Lucy Alice Chipman Dewey, and Jane Mary Dewey. Alice Chipman died in 1927 at the age of 68; weakened by a case of malaria contracted during a trip to Turkey in 1924 and a heart attack during a trip to Mexico City in 1926, she died from cerebral thrombosis on July 13, 1927. Dewey married Estelle Roberta Lowitz Grant, \"a longtime friend and companion for several years before their marriage\" on December 11, 1946. At Roberta's behest, the couple adopted two siblings, Lewis (changed to John Jr.) and Shirley.\nDewey's interests and writings included many topics, and according to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, \"a substantial part of his published output consisted of commentary on current domestic and international politics, and public statements on behalf of many causes. (He is probably the only philosopher in this encyclopedia to have published both on the Treaty of Versailles and on the value of displaying art in post offices.)\"\nIn 1917, Dewey met F.M. Alexander in New York City and later wrote introductions to Alexander's \"Man's Supreme Inheritance\" (1918), \"Constructive Conscious Control of the Individual\" (1923) and \"The Use of the Self\" (1932). Alexander's influence is referenced in \"Human Nature and Conduct\" and \"Experience and Nature.\" As well as his contacts with people mentioned elsewhere in the article, he also maintained correspondence with Henri Bergson, William M. Brown, Martin Buber, George S. Counts, William Rainey Harper, Sidney Hook, and George Santayana.\nDeath.\nDewey died of pneumonia on June 1, 1952, at his home in New York City after years of ill-health and was cremated the next day.\nFunctional psychology.\nAt the University of Michigan, Dewey published his first two books, \"Psychology\" (1887), and \"Leibniz's New Essays Concerning the Human Understanding\" (1888), both of which expressed Dewey's early commitment to British neo-Hegelianism. In \"Psychology\", Dewey attempted a synthesis between idealism and experimental science.\nWhile still professor of philosophy at Michigan, Dewey and his junior colleagues, James Hayden Tufts and George Herbert Mead, together with his student James Rowland Angell, all influenced strongly by the recent publication of William James' \"Principles of Psychology\" (1890), began to reformulate psychology, emphasizing the social environment on the activity of mind and behavior rather than the physiological psychology of Wilhelm Wundt and his followers.\nBy 1894, Dewey had joined Tufts, with whom he later wrote \"Ethics\" (1908) at the recently founded University of Chicago and invited Mead and Angell to follow him, the four men forming the basis of the so-called \"Chicago group\" of psychology.\nTheir new style of psychology, later dubbed functional psychology, had a practical emphasis on action and application. In Dewey's article \"The Reflex Arc Concept in Psychology\" which appeared in \"Psychological Review\" in 1896, he reasons against the traditional stimulus-response understanding of the reflex arc in favor of a \"circular\" account in which what serves as \"stimulus\" and what as \"response\" depends on how one considers the situation and defends the unitary nature of the sensory motor circuit. While he does not deny the existence of stimulus, sensation, and response, he disagreed that they were separate, juxtaposed events happening like links in a chain. He developed the idea that there is a coordination by which the stimulation is enriched by the results of previous experiences. The response is modulated by sensorial experience.\nDewey was elected president of the American Psychological Association in 1899.\nDewey also expressed interest in work in the psychology of visual perception performed by Dartmouth research professor Adelbert Ames Jr. He had great trouble with listening, however, because it is known Dewey could not distinguish musical pitches\u2014in other words was an amusic.\nViews.\nEducation and teacher education.\nDewey's educational theories were presented in \"My Pedagogic Creed\" (1897), \"The Primary-Education Fetich\" (1898), \"The School and Society\" (1900), \"The Child and the Curriculum\" (1902), \"Democracy and Education\" (1916), https:// (1915) with Evelyn Dewey, and \"Experience and Education\" (1938). Several themes recur throughout these writings. Dewey continually argues that education and learning are social and interactive processes, and thus the school itself is a social institution through which social reform can and should take place. In addition, he believed that students thrive in an environment where they are allowed to experience and interact with the curriculum, and all students should have the opportunity to take part in their own learning.\nThe ideas of democracy and social reform are continually discussed in Dewey's writings on education. Dewey makes a strong case for the importance of education not only as a place to gain content knowledge, but also as a place to learn how to live. In his eyes, the purpose of education should not revolve around the acquisition of a pre-determined set of skills, but rather the realization of one's full potential and the ability to use those skills for the greater good. He notes that \"to prepare him for the future life means to give him command of himself; it means so to train him that he will have the full and ready use of all his capacities\" (\"My Pedagogic Creed\", Dewey, 1897).\nIn addition to helping students realize their full potential, Dewey goes on to acknowledge that education and schooling are instrumental in creating social change and reform. He notes that \"education is a regulation of the process of coming to share in the social consciousness; and that the adjustment of individual activity on the basis of this social consciousness is the only sure method of social reconstruction\".\nIn addition to his ideas regarding what education is and what effect it should have on society, Dewey also had specific notions regarding how education should take place within the classroom. In \"The Child and the Curriculum\" (1902), Dewey discusses two major conflicting schools of thought regarding educational pedagogy. The first is centered on the curriculum and focuses almost solely on the subject matter to be taught. Dewey argues that the major flaw in this methodology is the inactivity of the student; within this particular framework, \"the child is simply the immature being who is to be matured; he is the superficial being who is to be deepened\" (1902, p.\u00a013). He argues that in order for education to be most effective, content must be presented in a way that allows the student to relate the information to prior experiences, thus deepening the connection with this new knowledge.\nAt the same time, Dewey was alarmed by many of the \"child-centered\" excesses of educational-school pedagogues who claimed to be his followers, and he argued that too much reliance on the child could be equally detrimental to the learning process. In this second school of thought, \"we must take our stand with the child and our departure from him. It is he and not the subject-matter which determines both quality and quantity of learning\" (Dewey, 1902, pp.\u00a013\u201314). According to Dewey, the potential flaw in this line of thinking is that it minimizes the importance of the content as well as the role of the teacher.\nIn order to rectify this dilemma, Dewey advocated an educational structure that strikes a balance between delivering knowledge while also taking into account the interests and experiences of the student. He notes that \"the child and the curriculum are simply two limits which define a single process. Just as two points define a straight line, so the present standpoint of the child and the facts and truths of studies define instruction\" (Dewey, 1902, p.\u00a016).\nIt is through this reasoning that Dewey became one of the most famous proponents of hands-on learning or experiential education, which is related to, but not synonymous with experiential learning. He argued that \"if knowledge comes from the impressions made upon us by natural objects, it is impossible to procure knowledge without the use of objects which impress the mind\" (Dewey, 1916/2009, pp.\u00a0217\u201318). Dewey's ideas went on to influence many other influential experiential models and advocates. Problem-Based Learning (PBL), for example, a method used widely in education today, incorporates Dewey's ideas pertaining to learning through active inquiry.\nDewey not only re-imagined the way that the learning process should take place, but also the role that the teacher should play within that process. Throughout the history of American schooling, education's purpose has been to train students for work by providing the student with a limited set of skills and information to do a particular job. The works of John Dewey provide the most prolific examples of how this limited vocational view of education has been applied to both the K\u201312 public education system and to the teacher training schools that attempted to quickly produce proficient and practical teachers with a limited set of instructional and discipline-specific skills needed to meet the needs of the employer and demands of the workforce.\nIn \"The School and Society\" (Dewey, 1899) and \"Democracy of Education\" (Dewey, 1916), Dewey claims that rather than preparing citizens for ethical participation in society, schools cultivate passive pupils via insistence upon mastery of facts and disciplining of bodies. Rather than preparing students to be reflective, autonomous and ethical beings capable of arriving at social truths through critical and intersubjective discourse, schools prepare students for docile compliance with authoritarian work and political structures, discourage the pursuit of individual and communal inquiry, and perceive higher learning as a monopoly of the institution of education (Dewey, 1899; 1916).\nFor Dewey and his philosophical followers, education stifles individual autonomy when learners are taught that knowledge is transmitted in one direction, from the expert to the learner. Dewey not only re-imagined the way that the learning process should take place, but also the role that the teacher should play within that process. For Dewey, \"The thing needful is improvement of education, not simply by turning out teachers who can do better the things that are not necessary to do, but rather by changing the conception of what constitutes education\" (Dewey, 1904, p.\u00a018).\nDewey's qualifications for teaching\u2014a natural love for working with young children, a natural propensity to inquire about the subjects, methods and other social issues related to the profession, and a desire to share this acquired knowledge with others\u2014are not a set of outwardly displayed mechanical skills. Rather, they may be viewed as internalized principles or habits which \"work automatically, unconsciously\" (Dewey, 1904, p.\u00a015). Turning to Dewey's essays and public addresses regarding the teaching profession, followed by his analysis of the teacher as a person and a professional, as well as his beliefs regarding the responsibilities of teacher education programs to cultivate the attributes addressed, teacher educators can begin to reimagine the successful classroom teacher Dewey envisioned.\nProfessionalization of teaching as a social service.\nFor many, education's purpose is to train students for work by providing the student with a limited set of skills and information to do a particular job. As Dewey notes, this limited vocational view is also applied to teacher training schools who attempt to quickly produce proficient and practical teachers with a limited set of instructional and discipline skills needed to meet the needs of the employer and demands of the workforce (Dewey, 1904). For Dewey, the school and the classroom teacher, as a workforce and provider of social service, have a unique responsibility to produce psychological and social goods that will lead to both present and future social progress.\nAs Dewey notes, \"The business of the teacher is to produce a higher standard of intelligence in the community, and the object of the public school system is to make as large as possible the number of those who possess this intelligence. Skill, the ability to act wisely and effectively in a great variety of occupations and situations, is a sign and a criterion of the degree of civilization that a society has reached. It is the business of teachers to help in producing the many kinds of skills needed in contemporary life. If teachers are up to their work, they also aid in the production of character.\" (Dewey, TAP, 2010, pp.\u00a0241\u201342).\nAccording to Dewey, the emphasis is placed on producing these attributes in children for use in their contemporary life because it is \"impossible to foretell definitely just what civilization will be twenty years from now\" (Dewey, MPC, 2010, p.\u00a025). However, although Dewey is steadfast in his beliefs that education serves an immediate purpose (Dewey, DRT, 2010; Dewey, MPC, 2010; Dewey, TTP, 2010), he is not ignorant of the impact imparting these qualities of intelligence, skill, and character on young children in their present life will have on the future society. While addressing the state of educative and economic affairs during a 1935 radio broadcast, Dewey linked the ensuing economic depression to a \"lack of sufficient production of intelligence, skill, and character\" (Dewey, TAP, 2010, p.\u00a0242) of the nation's workforce.\nAs Dewey notes, there is a lack of these goods in the present society and teachers have a responsibility to create them in their students, who, we can assume, will grow into the adults who will ultimately go on to participate in whatever industrial or economic civilization awaits them. According to Dewey, the profession of the classroom teacher is to produce the intelligence, skill, and character within each student so that the democratic community is composed of citizens who can think, do and act intelligently and morally.\nA teacher's knowledge.\nDewey believed that successful classroom teachers possess a passion for knowledge and intellectual curiosity in the materials and methods they teach. For Dewey, this propensity is an inherent curiosity and love for learning that differs from one's ability to acquire, recite and reproduce textbook knowledge. \"No one,\" according to Dewey, \"can be really successful in performing the duties and meeting these demands [of teaching] who does not retain [their] intellectual curiosity intact throughout [their] entire career\" (Dewey, APT, 2010, p.\u00a034).\nAccording to Dewey, it is not that the \"teacher ought to strive to be a high-class scholar in all the subjects he or she has to teach,\" rather, \"a teacher ought to have an unusual love and aptitude in some one subject: history, mathematics, literature, science, a fine art, or whatever\" (Dewey, APT, 2010, p.\u00a035). The classroom teacher does not have to be a scholar in all subjects; rather, genuine love in one will elicit a feel for genuine information and insight in all subjects taught.\nIn addition to this propensity for study into the subjects taught, the classroom teacher \"is possessed by a recognition of the responsibility for the constant study of school room work, the constant study of children, of methods, of subject matter in its various adaptations to pupils\" (Dewey, PST, 2010, p.\u00a037). For Dewey, this desire for the lifelong pursuit of learning is inherent in other professions (e.g., the architectural, legal and medical fields; Dewey, 1904 &amp; Dewey, PST, 2010), and has particular importance for the field of teaching. As Dewey notes, \"this further study is not a sideline but something which fits directly into the demands and opportunities of the vocation\" (Dewey, APT, 2010, p.\u00a034).\nAccording to Dewey, this propensity and passion for intellectual growth in the profession must be accompanied by a natural desire to communicate one's knowledge with others. \"There are scholars who have [the knowledge] in a marked degree but who lack enthusiasm for imparting it. To the 'natural born' teacher learning is incomplete unless it is shared\" (Dewey, APT, 2010, p.\u00a035). For Dewey, it is not enough for the classroom teacher to be a lifelong learner of the techniques and subject-matter of education; she must aspire to share what she knows with others in her learning community.\nA teacher's skill.\nThe best indicator of teacher quality, according to Dewey, is the ability to watch and respond to the movement of the mind with keen awareness of the signs and quality of the responses his or her students exhibit with regard to the subject-matter presented (Dewey, APT, 2010; Dewey, 1904). As Dewey notes, \"I have often been asked how it was that some teachers who have never studied the art of teaching are still extraordinarily good teachers. The explanation is simple. They have a quick, sure and unflagging sympathy with the operations and process of the minds they are in contact with. Their own minds move in harmony with those of others, appreciating their difficulties, entering into their problems, sharing their intellectual victories\" (Dewey, APT, 2010, p.\u00a036).\nSuch a teacher is genuinely aware of the complexities of this mind-to-mind transfer, and she has the intellectual fortitude to identify the successes and failures of this process, as well as how to appropriately reproduce or correct it in the future.\nA teacher's disposition.\nAs a result of the direct influence teachers have in shaping the mental, moral and spiritual lives of children during their most formative years, Dewey holds the profession of teaching in high esteem, often equating its social value to that of the ministry and to parenting (Dewey, APT, 2010; Dewey, DRT, 2010; Dewey, MPC, 2010; Dewey, PST, 2010; Dewey, TTC, 2010; Dewey, TTP, 2010). Perhaps the most important attributes, according to Dewey, are those personal inherent qualities that the teacher brings to the classroom. As Dewey notes, \"no amount of learning or even of acquired pedagogical skill makes up for the deficiency\" (Dewey, TLS, p.\u00a025) of the personal traits needed to be most successful in the profession.\nAccording to Dewey, the successful classroom teacher occupies an indispensable passion for promoting the intellectual growth of young children. In addition, they know that their career, in comparison to other professions, entails stressful situations, long hours, and limited financial reward; all of which have the potential to overcome their genuine love and sympathy for their students.\nFor Dewey, \"One of the most depressing phases of the vocation is the number of careworn teachers one sees, with anxiety depicted on the lines of their faces, reflected in their strained high pitched voices and sharp manners. While contact with the young is a privilege for some temperaments, it is a tax on others and a tax which they do not bear up under very well. And in some schools, there are too many pupils to a teacher, too many subjects to teach, and adjustments to pupils are made in a mechanical rather than a human way. Human nature reacts against such unnatural conditions\" (Dewey, APT, 2010, p.\u00a035).\nIt is essential, according to Dewey, that the classroom teacher has the mental propensity to overcome the demands and stressors placed on them because the students can sense when their teacher is not genuinely invested in promoting their learning (Dewey, PST, 2010). Such negative demeanors, according to Dewey, prevent children from pursuing their own propensities for learning and intellectual growth. It can therefore be assumed that if teachers want their students to engage with the educational process and employ their natural curiosities for knowledge, teachers must be aware of how their reactions to young children and the stresses of teaching influence this process.\nThe role of teacher education to cultivate the professional classroom teacher.\nDewey's passions for teaching\u2014a natural love for working with young children, a natural propensity to inquire about the subjects, methods and other social issues related to the profession, and a desire to share this acquired knowledge with others\u2014are not a set of outwardly displayed mechanical skills. Rather, they may be viewed as internalized principles or habits which \"work automatically, unconsciously\" (Dewey, 1904, p.\u00a015). According to Dewey, teacher-education programs must turn away from focusing on producing proficient practitioners because such practical skills related to instruction and discipline (e.g., creating and delivering lesson plans, classroom management, implementation of an assortment of content-specific methods) can be learned over time during their everyday schoolwork with their students (Dewey, PST, 2010).\nAs Dewey notes, \"The teacher who leaves the professional school with power in managing a class of children may appear to superior advantage the first day, the first week, the first month, or even the first year, as compared with some other teacher who has a much more vital command of the psychology, logic and ethics of development. But later 'progress' may consist only in perfecting and refining skill already possessed. Such persons seem to know how to teach, but they are not students of teaching. Even though they go on studying books of pedagogy, reading teachers' journals, attending teachers' institutes, etc., yet the root of the matter is not in them, unless they continue to be students of subject-matter, and students of mind-activity. Unless a teacher is such a student, he may continue to improve in the mechanics of school management, but he cannot grow as a teacher, an inspirer and director of soul-life\" (Dewey, 1904, p.\u00a015).\nFor Dewey, teacher education should focus not on producing persons who know how to teach as soon as they leave the program; rather, teacher education should be concerned with producing professional students of education who have the propensity to inquire about the subjects they teach, the methods used, and the activity of the mind as it gives and receives knowledge. According to Dewey, such a student is not superficially engaging with these materials, rather, the professional student of education has a genuine passion to inquire about the subjects of education, knowing that doing so ultimately leads to acquisitions of the skills related to teaching. Such students of education aspire for the intellectual growth within the profession that can only be achieved by immersing oneself in the lifelong pursuit of the intelligence, skills and character Dewey linked to the profession.\nAs Dewey notes, other professional fields, such as law and medicine cultivate a professional spirit in their fields to constantly study their work, their methods of their work, and a perpetual need for intellectual growth and concern for issues related to their profession. Teacher education, as a profession, has these same obligations (Dewey, 1904; Dewey, PST, 2010).\nAs Dewey notes, \"An intellectual responsibility has got to be distributed to every human being who is concerned in carrying out the work in question, and to attempt to concentrate intellectual responsibility for a work that has to be done, with their brains and their hearts, by hundreds or thousands of people in a dozen or so at the top, no matter how wise and skillful they are, is not to concentrate responsibility\u2014it is to diffuse irresponsibility\" (Dewey, PST, 2010, p.\u00a039). For Dewey, the professional spirit of teacher education requires of its students a constant study of school room work, constant study of children, of methods, of subject matter in its various adaptations to pupils. Such study will lead to professional enlightenment with regard to the daily operations of classroom teaching.\nAs well as his very active and direct involvement in setting up educational institutions such as the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools (1896) and The New School for Social Research (1919), many of Dewey's ideas influenced the founding of Bennington College and Goddard College in Vermont, where he served on the board of trustees. Dewey's works and philosophy also held great influence in the creation of the short-lived Black Mountain College in North Carolina, an experimental college focused on interdisciplinary study, and whose faculty included Buckminster Fuller, Willem de Kooning, Charles Olson, Franz Kline, Robert Duncan, Robert Creeley, and Paul Goodman, among others. Black Mountain College was the locus of the \"Black Mountain Poets\" a group of avant-garde poets closely linked with the Beat Generation and the San Francisco Renaissance.\nJournalism.\nDewey's definition of \"public,\" as described in \"The Public and its Problems\", has profound implications for the significance of journalism in society. As suggested by the title of the book, his concern was of the transactional relationship between publics and problems. Also implicit in its name, public journalism seeks to orient communication away from elite, corporate hegemony toward a civic public sphere. \"The 'public' of public journalists is Dewey's public.\" \nDewey gives a concrete definition to the formation of a public. Publics are spontaneous groups of citizens who share the indirect effects of a particular action. Anyone affected by the indirect consequences of a specific action will automatically share a common interest in controlling those consequences, i.e., solving a common problem.Since every action generates unintended consequences, publics continuously emerge, overlap, and disintegrate.\nIn \"The Public and its Problems\", Dewey presents a rebuttal to Walter Lippmann's treatise on the role of journalism in democracy. Lippmann's model was a basic transmission model in which journalists took information given to them by experts and elites, repackaged that information in simple terms, and transmitted the information to the public, whose role was to react emotionally to the news. In his model, Lippmann supposed that the public was incapable of thought or action, and that all thought and action should be left to the experts and elites.\nDewey refutes this model by assuming that politics is the work and duty of each individual in the course of his daily routine. The knowledge needed to be involved in politics, in this model, was to be generated by the interaction of citizens, elites, experts, through the mediation and facilitation of journalism. In this model, not just the government is accountable, but the citizens, experts, and other actors as well.\nDewey also said that journalism should conform to this ideal by changing its emphasis from actions or happenings (choosing a winner of a given situation) to alternatives, choices, consequences, and conditions, in order to foster conversation and improve the generation of knowledge. Journalism would not just produce a static product that told what had already happened, but the news would be in a constant state of evolution as the public added value by generating knowledge. The \"audience\" would end, to be replaced by citizens and collaborators who would essentially be users, doing more with the news than simply reading it. Concerning his effort to change journalism, he wrote in \"The Public and Its Problems\": \"Till the Great Society is converted in to a Great Community, the Public will remain in eclipse. Communication can alone create a great community\" (Dewey, p.\u00a0142).\nDewey believed that communication creates a great community, and citizens who participate actively with public life contribute to that community. \"The clear consciousness of a communal life, in all its implications, constitutes the idea of democracy.\" (\"The Public and its Problems\", p.\u00a0149). This Great Community can only occur with \"free and full intercommunication.\" (p.\u00a0211) Communication can be understood as journalism.\nLogic and method.\nDewey sees paradox in contemporary logical theory. Proximate subject matter garners general agreement and advancement, while the ultimate subject matter of logic generates unremitting controversy. In other words, he challenges confident logicians to answer the question of the truth of logical operators. Do they function merely as abstractions (e.g., pure mathematics) or do they connect in some essential way with their objects, and therefore alter or bring them to light?\nLogical positivism also figured in Dewey's thought. About the movement he wrote that it \"eschews the use of 'propositions' and 'terms', substituting 'sentences' and 'words'.\" (\"General Theory of Propositions\", in \"Logic: The Theory of Inquiry\") He welcomes this changing of referents \"in as far as it fixes attention upon the symbolic structure and content of propositions.\" However, he registers a small complaint against the use of \"sentence\" and \"words\" in that without careful interpretation the act or process of transposition \"narrows unduly the scope of symbols and language, since it is not customary to treat gestures and diagrams (maps, blueprints, etc.) as words or sentences.\" In other words, sentences and words, considered in isolation, do not disclose intent, which may be inferred or \"adjudged only by means of context.\"\nYet Dewey was not entirely opposed to modern logical trends; indeed, the deficiencies in traditional logic he expressed hope for the trends to solve occupies the whole first part of same book. Concerning traditional logic, he states there:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Aristotelian logic, which still passes current nominally, is a logic based upon the idea that qualitative objects are existential in the fullest sense. To retain logical principles based on this conception along with the acceptance of theories of existence and knowledge based on an opposite conception is not, to say the least, conductive to clearness\u2014a consideration that has a good deal to do with existing dualism between traditional and the newer relational logics.\nCritical thinking.\nDewey was pivotal in advancing the philosophy of education by emphasizing the role of experience and active problem-solving in cultivating critical thinking. In \"How We Think\", Dewey describes reflective thinking as an \"active, persistent, and careful consideration of any belief or supposed form of knowledge in the light of the grounds that support it and the further conclusions to which it tends.\" (Processes of Thought diagram). Thinking is not merely the passive absorption of facts but an active, dynamic process that involves questioning, analyzing, and transforming experiences into meaningful conclusions. Dewey's approach transformed traditional education by advocating for an interactive classroom environment. His contributions laid the groundwork for modern pedagogical methods that not only focus on the acquisition of factual knowledge but also foster the development of independent thought, creativity, and a deeper understanding of how to apply learning in everyday life.\nMany authors thus regard Dewey as a key figure in affirming the importance of critical thinking in education. Dewey used the term \"critical thinking\" in the first edition of his book \"How We Think\", but the term did not originate with Dewey.\nIn \"How We Think\", Dewey also delved further into the design of learning experiences to encourage reflective thinking. Moreover, Dewey described his vision for the design of poorly executed thinking and well executed thinking processes \u2013the difference being the exclusion or inclusion of reflective thought, respectively. He also detailed the design of sub-processes within reflective thought, which consist of skepticism and investigation to either find facts and evidence to support or nullify suggested beliefs.\nAesthetics.\n\"Art as Experience\" (1934) is Dewey's major writing on aesthetics.\nIt is, in accordance with his place in the Pragmatist tradition that emphasizes community, a study of the individual art object as embedded in (and inextricable from) the experiences of a local culture. In the original illustrated edition, Dewey drew on the modern art and world cultures collection assembled by Albert C. Barnes at the Barnes Foundation, whose own ideas on the application of art to one's way of life was influenced by Dewey's writing. Dewey made art through writing poetry, but he considered himself deeply unmusical: one of his students described Dewey as \"allergic to music.\" Barnes was particularly influenced by \"Democracy and Education\" (1916) and then attended Dewey's seminar on political philosophy at Columbia University in the fall semester of 1918.\nPhilanthropy, women and democracy.\nDewey founded the University of Chicago laboratory school, supported educational organizations, and supported settlement houses especially Jane Addams' Hull House. John Dewey and Jane Addams influenced each other's expansive theory of democracy.\nThrough his work at the Hull House serving on its first board of trustees, Dewey was not only an activist for the cause but also a partner working to serve the large immigrant community of Chicago and women's suffrage. Dewey experienced the lack of children's education while contributing in the classroom at the Hull House. There he also experienced the lack of education and skills of immigrant women. Stengel argues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHis leading views on democracy included:\nFirst, Dewey believed that democracy is an ethical ideal rather than merely a political arrangement. Second, he considered participation, not representation, the essence of democracy. Third, he insisted on the harmony between democracy and the scientific method: ever-expanding and self-critical communities of inquiry, operating on pragmatic principles and constantly revising their beliefs in light of new evidence, provided Dewey with a model for democratic decision making ... Finally, Dewey called for extending democracy, conceived as an ethical project, from politics to industry and society.\nThis helped to shape his understanding of human action and the unity of human experience.\nDewey believed that a woman's place in society was determined by her environment and not just her biology. On women he says, \"You think too much of women in terms of sex. Think of them as human individuals for a while, dropping out the sex qualification, and you won't be so sure of some of your generalizations about what they should and shouldn't do\". John Dewey's support helped to increase the support and popularity of Jane Addams' Hull House and other settlement houses as well. With growing support, involvement of the community grew as well as the support for the women's suffrage movement.\nAs commonly argued by Dewey's greatest critics, he was not able to come up with strategies in order to fulfill his ideas that would lead to a successful democracy, educational system, and a successful women's suffrage movement. While knowing that traditional beliefs, customs, and practices needed to be examined in order to find out what worked and what needed improved upon, it was never done in a systematic way. \"Dewey became increasingly aware of the obstacles presented by entrenched power and alert to the intricacy of the problems facing modern cultures\". With the complex of society at the time, Dewey was criticized for his lack of effort in fixing the problems.\nWith respect to technological developments in a democracy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Persons do not become a society by living in physical proximity any more than a man ceases to be socially influenced by being so many feet or miles removed from others.\nHis work on democracy influenced B. R. Ambedkar, one of his students, who later served as a Law and Justice Minister of India.\nReligion.\nHistorians have examined his religious beliefs. Biographer Steven Clark Rockefeller traced Dewey's democratic convictions to his childhood attendance at the Congregational Church, with its strong proclamation of social ideals and the Social Gospel. Historian Edward A. White suggested in \"Science and Religion in American Thought\" (1952) that Dewey's work led to the 20th-century rift between religion and science.\nDewey went through an \"evangelical\" development as a child. As an adult he was negative, or at most neutral, about theology in education. He instead took a meliorist position with the goal of scientific humanism and educational and social reform without recourse to religion.\nAs an atheist and a secular humanist in his later life, Dewey participated with a variety of humanistic activities from the 1930s into the 1950s, which included sitting on the advisory board of Charles Francis Potter's First Humanist Society of New York (1929); being one of the original 34 signatories of the first \"Humanist Manifesto\" (1933) and being elected an honorary member of the Humanist Press Association (1936).\nHis opinion of humanism is summarized in his own words from an article titled \"What Humanism Means to Me\", published in the June 1930 edition of \"Thinker 2\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What Humanism means to me is an expansion, not a contraction, of human life, \"an expansion in which nature and the science of nature are made the willing servants of human good\".\nPragmatism, instrumentalism, consequentialism.\nDewey sometimes referred to his philosophy as instrumentalism rather than pragmatism and would have recognized the similarity of these two schools to the newer school named consequentialism. In some phrases introducing a book he wrote later in life meant to help forestay a wandering kind of criticism of the work based on the controversies due to the differences in the schools that he sometimes invoked, he defined at the same time with precise brevity the criterion of validity common to these three schools, which lack agreed-upon definitions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But in the proper interpretation of \"pragmatic,\" namely the function of consequences as necessary tests of the validity of propositions, \"provided\" these consequences are operationally instituted and are such as to resolve the specific problem evoking the operations, the text that follows is thoroughly pragmatic.\nHis concern for precise definition led him to detailed analysis of careless word usage, reported in \"Knowing and the Known\" in 1949.\nDewey also regularly refers and discusses the definitions of pragmatism used by other philosophers within the movement such as Charles Pierce and William James when trying to pin down his own definitions in his \"Essays in Experimental Logic\". Regarding Pierce he writes \"Mr. Pierce explained that he took the term 'pragmatic' from Kant, in order to denote empirical consequences.\" Following this statement he also introduces James' usage of the term pragmatism when he writes \"what is important is that the consequences should be specific... When he [James] said that general notions must 'cash in', he meant of course that they must be translatable into verifiable specific things.\nEpistemology.\nThe terminology problem in the fields of epistemology and logic is partially due, according to Dewey and Bentley, to inefficient and imprecise use of words and concepts that reflect three historic levels of organization and presentation. In the order of chronological appearance, these are:\nA series of characterizations of Transactions indicate the wide range of considerations involved.\nSocial and political activism.\n1894 Pullman Strike.\nWhile Dewey was at the University of Chicago, his letters to his wife Alice and his colleague Jane Addams reveal that he closely followed the 1894 Pullman Strike, in which the employees of the Pullman Palace Car Factory in Chicago decided to go on strike after industrialist George Pullman refused to lower rents in his company town after cutting his workers' wages by nearly 30 percent. On May 11, 1894, the strike became official, later gaining the support of the members of the American Railway Union, whose leader Eugene V. Debs called for a nationwide boycott of all trains including Pullman sleeping cars.\nConsidering most trains had Pullman cars, the main 24 lines out of Chicago were halted and the mail was stopped as the workers destroyed trains all over the United States. President Grover Cleveland used the mail as a justification to send in the National Guard, and ARU leader Eugene Debs was arrested.\nDewey wrote to Alice: \"The only wonder is that when the 'higher classes' \u2013 damn them \u2013 take such views there aren't more downright socialists. [...] [T]hat a representative journal of the upper classes \u2013 damn them again \u2013 can take the attitude of that harper's weekly\", referring to headlines such as \"Monopoly\" and \"Repress the Rebellion\", which claimed, in Dewey's words, to support the sensational belief that Debs was a \"criminal\" inspiring hate and violence in the equally \"criminal\" working classes. He concluded: \"It shows what it is to be a higher class. And I fear Chicago Univ. is a capitalistic institution \u2013 that is, it too belongs to the higher classes.\"\nPro-war stance in First World War.\nDewey was an advocate of US participation in the First World War. For this he was criticised by Randolph Bourne, a former student whose essay \"Twilight of Idols\", was published in the literary journal \"Seven Arts\" in October 1917. Bourne criticised Dewey's instrumental pragmatist philosophy.\nInternational League for Academic Freedom.\nAs a major advocate of academic freedom, in 1935 Dewey, together with Albert Einstein and Alvin Johnson, became a member of the United States section of the International League for Academic Freedom, and in 1940, together with Horace Kallen, edited a series of articles related to the Bertrand Russell Case.\nDewey Commission.\nHe directed the famous Dewey Commission held in Mexico in 1937, which cleared Leon Trotsky of the charges made against him by Joseph Stalin, and marched for women's rights, among many other causes.\nLeague for Industrial Democracy.\nIn 1939, Dewey was elected President of the League for Industrial Democracy, an organization with the goal of educating college students about the labor movement. The Student Branch of the L.I.D. later became the Students for a Democratic Society.\nAs well as defending the independence of teachers and opposing a communist takeover of the New York Teachers' Union, Dewey was involved in the organization that eventually became the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, sitting as an executive on the NAACP's early executive board.\nHe was an avid supporter of Henry George's proposal for taxing land values. Of George, he wrote, \"No man, no graduate of a higher educational institution, has a right to regard himself as an educated man in social thought unless he has some first-hand acquaintance with the theoretical contribution of this great American thinker.\" As honorary president of the Henry George School of Social Science, he wrote a letter to Henry Ford urging him to support the school.\nPublications.\nBesides publishing prolifically himself, Dewey also sat on the boards of scientific publications such as \"Sociometry\" (advisory board, 1942) and \"The Journal of Social Psychology\" (editorial board, 1942), as well as having posts at other publications such as \"The New Leader\" (contributing editor, 1949).\nThe following publications by John Dewey are referenced or mentioned in this article. A more complete list of his publications may be found at John Dewey bibliography.\nSee also\nDewey's Complete Writings is available in four multi-volume sets (38 volumes in all) from Southern Illinois University Press:\n\"http:// \", \"http:// \", and \"http:// \" are available online via monographic purchase to academic institutions and via subscription to individuals, and also in TEI format for university servers in the http:// . (The CD-ROM has been discontinued.)\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16188", "revid": "36346441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16188", "title": "Jackal", "text": "Several species of canines\nJackals are canids native to Africa and Eurasia. While the word has historically been used for many canines of the subtribe canina, in modern use it most commonly refers to three species: the closely related black-backed jackal (\"Lupulella mesomelas\") and side-striped jackal (\"Lupulella adusta\") of Central and Southern Africa, and the golden jackal (\"Canis aureus\") of south-central Europe and Asia. The African golden wolf (\"Canis lupaster\") was also formerly considered a jackal.\nWhile they do not form a monophyletic clade, all jackals are opportunistic omnivores, predators of small to medium-sized animals and proficient scavengers. Their long legs and curved canine teeth are adapted for hunting small mammals, birds, and reptiles, and their large feet and fused leg bones give them a physique well-suited for long-distance running, capable of maintaining speeds of for extended periods of time. Jackals are crepuscular, most active at dawn and dusk.\nTheir most common social unit is a monogamous pair, which defends its territory from other pairs by vigorously chasing intruders and marking landmarks around the territory with their urine and feces. The territory may be large enough to hold some young adults, which stay with their parents until they establish their own territories. Jackals may occasionally assemble in small packs, for example, to scavenge a carcass, but they normally hunt either alone or in pairs.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"jackal\" dates back to 1600 and derives from French , itself from Ottoman Turkish (), itself from Persian ('), from or cognate with Sanskrit ('), meaning 'the howler'.\nTaxonomy and relationships.\nSimilarities between jackals and coyotes led Lorenz Oken, in the third volume of his \"Lehrbuch der Naturgeschichte\" (1815), to place these species into a new separate genus, \"Thos\", named after the classical Greek word \"jackal\", but his theory had little immediate impact on taxonomy at the time. Angel Cabrera, in his 1932 monograph on the mammals of Morocco, questioned whether or not the presence of a cingulum on the upper molars of the jackals and its corresponding absence in the rest of \"Canis\" could justify a subdivision of that genus. In practice, Cabrera chose the undivided-genus alternative and referred to the jackals as \"Canis\" instead of \"Thos\".\nOken's \"Thos\" theory was revived in 1914 by Edmund Heller, who embraced the separate genus theory. Heller's names and the designations he gave to various jackal species and subspecies live on in current taxonomy, although the genus has been changed from \"Thos\" to \"Canis\".\nThe wolf-like canids are a group of large carnivores that are genetically closely related. They all have 78 chromosomes. The group includes genus \"Canis\", \"Cuon\", and \"Lycaon\". The members are the dog \"(C. lupus familiaris)\", gray wolf (\"C. lupus\"), coyote (\"C. latrans\"), golden jackal (\"C. aureus\"), Ethiopian wolf (\"C. simensis\"), black-backed jackal (\"C. mesomelas\"), side-striped jackal (\"C. adustus\"), dhole (\"Cuon alpinus\"), and African wild dog (\"Lycaon pictus\"). The latest recognized member is the African wolf (\"C. lupaster\"), which was once thought to be an African branch of the golden jackal. As they possess 78 chromosomes, all members of the genus \"Canis\" are karyologically indistinguishable from each other, and from the dhole and the African hunting dog. The two African jackals are shown to be the most basal members of this clade, indicating the clade's origin from Africa. \"Canis arnensis\" arrived in Mediterranean Europe 1.9 million years ago and is probably the ancestor of modern jackals.\nThe paraphyletic nature of \"Canis\" with respect to \"Lycaon\" and \"Cuon\" has led to suggestions that the two African jackals should be assigned to different genera, \"Schaeffia\" for the side-striped jackal and \"Lupulella\" for the black-backed jackal or \"Lupulella\" for both.\nThe intermediate size and shape of the Ethiopian wolf has at times led it to be regarded as a jackal, thus it has also been called the \"red jackal\" or the \"Simien jackal\".\nFolklore and literature.\nLike foxes and coyotes, jackals are often depicted as clever sorcerers in the myths and legends of their regions. They are mentioned roughly 14 times in the Bible. It is frequently used as a literary device to illustrate desolation, loneliness, and abandonment, with reference to its habit of living in the ruins of former cities and other areas abandoned by humans. It is called \"wild dog\" in several translations of the Bible. In the King James Bible, Isaiah 13:21 refers to 'doleful creatures', which some commentators suggest are either jackals or hyenas.\nIn the Indian \"Panchatantra\" stories, the jackal is mentioned as wily and wise. In Bengali tantrik tradition, they represent the goddess Kali. It is said she appears as jackals when meat is offered to her.\nThe canid which Anubis was modeled upon has frequently been stated to have been the golden jackal, though the African variant of this animal present in Egypt was reclassified in 2015 as a separate species now known as the African wolf, which was found to be more closely related to wolves and coyotes than to the jackal. Some authors have opined that Anubis is more probably modeled after a fox or Ethiopian wolf. Nevertheless, ancient Greek texts about Anubis consistently refer to the deity as having the head of a dog rather than that of any wild canid, and there is still uncertainty as to what species represents Anubis.\nThe Serer religion and creation myth posits jackals were among the first animals created by Roog, the supreme deity of the Serer people.\nIn Nonviolent Communication (NVC) the Jackal is used to represent one\u2019s inner judgmental voice. The Jackal represents inner thoughts and stories about others and ourselves. Marshall Rosenberg, the father of NVC, said that he came up with the metaphor of the Jackal when traveling in Europe and one of his workshop participants were complaining about her husband when Marshall asked \"are you still dealing with that old jackal?\". Since then he routinely used the Jackal to present the counterpart to the nonviolent giraffe in NVC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16190", "revid": "46993269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16190", "title": "Jumping the broom", "text": "Wedding custom in some cultures\nJumping the broom (or jumping the besom) is a phrase and custom relating to a wedding ceremony in which the couple jumps over a broom. It is most widespread among African Americans and Black Canadians, popularized during the 1970s by the novel and miniseries \"\", and originated in mid-19th-century antebellum slavery in the United States. The custom is also attested in Irish weddings.\nPossibly based on an 18th-century idiomatic synonym for a sham marriage (a marriage of doubtful validity), it was popularized with the introduction of civil marriage in Britain by the Marriage Act 1836. The expression may also derive from the custom of jumping over a besom (\"broom\" refers to the plant from which the household implement is made) associated with the Romanichal Travellers of the United Kingdom, especially those in Wales.\nEuphemism for irregular marriage.\nReferences to \"broomstick marriages\" emerged in England during the mid-to-late 18th century to describe a wedding ceremony of doubtful validity. The earliest use of the phrase is in the 1764 English edition of a French work. The French text, describing an elopement, refers to the runaway couple hastily embarking on \"un mariage sur la croix de l'\u00e9p\u00e9e\" (literally \"marriage on the cross of the sword\"); this was freely translated as \"performed the marriage ceremony by leaping over a broomstick\".\nA 1774 use in the \"Westminster Magazine\" also describes an elopement. A man brought his underage fianc\u00e9e to France and discovered that it was as difficult to arrange a legal marriage there as in England, but declined a suggestion that a French sexton might simply read the marriage service before the couple because \"He had no inclination for a Broomstick-marriage\". In 1789, the rumoured clandestine marriage between the Prince Regent and Maria Fitzherbert is cited in a satirical song in \"The Times\": \"Their way to consummation was by hopping o'er a broom, sir\".\nDespite these allusions, research by legal historian Rebecca Probert of Warwick University has failed to find evidence of an actual contemporary practice of jumping over a broomstick as a sign of informal union. Probert says that the word \"broomstick\" was used in the mid-18th century in several contexts to mean \"something ersatz, or lacking the authority its true equivalent might possess\"; because the expression \"broomstick marriage\" (a sham marriage) was in circulation, folk etymology led to a belief that people once signified an irregular marriage by jumping over a broom. American historian Tyler D. Parry, however, contests the claim that no part of the British custom involved jumping. In his book, \"Jumping the Broom: The Surprising Multicultural Origins of a Black Wedding Ritual\", Parry writes that African Americans and British Americans had a number of cultural exchanges during the 18th and 19th centuries. He describes correlations between the ceremonies of enslaved African Americans and those of the rural British, saying that it is not coincidental that two groups separated by an ocean used similar matrimonial forms revolving around a broomstick. If British practitioners never used a physical leap, Parry wonders how European-Americans and enslaved African Americans in the American South and rural North America learned about the custom.\nLater examples of the term \"broomstick marriage\" were used in Britain, with the similar implication that the ceremony did not create a legally-binding union. This meaning survived into the early 19th century; during an 1824 case in London about the legal validity of a marriage ceremony consisting of the groom placing a ring on the bride's finger before witnesses, a court official said that the ceremony \"amounted to nothing more than a broomstick marriage, which the parties had it in their power to dissolve at will.\"\nThe Marriage Act 1836, which introduced civil marriage, was contemptuously called the \"Broomstick Marriage Act\" by those who felt that a marriage outside the Anglican church did not deserve legal recognition. The phrase began to refer to non-marital unions; a man interviewed in Mayhew's \"London Labour and the London Poor\" said, \"I never had a wife, but I have had two or three broomstick matches, though they never turned out happy.\" Tinkers reportedly had a similar marriage custom, \"jumping the budget\", with the bride and groom jumping over a string or other symbolic obstacle.\nCharles Dickens' novel, \"Great Expectations\" (first published in serial form in \"All the Year Round\" from 1 December 1860 to August 1861), contains a reference in chapter 48 to a couple's marriage \"over the broomstick.\" The ceremony is not described, but the reference indicates that readers would have recognized this as an informal (not legally valid) agreement.\nAlthough it has been assumed that \"jumping (or, sometimes, 'walking') over the broom\" always indicated an irregular or non-church union in England (as in the expressions \"Married over the besom\" and \"living over the brush\"), examples of the phrase exist in the context of legal religious and civil weddings. Other sources cite stepping over a broom as a test of chastity, and putting out a broom was said to be a sign \"that the housewife's place is vacant\" as a way of advertising for a wife. The phrase was also used colloquially in the US and Canada as a synonym for getting married legally.\nBritish Romani customs.\nRomani couples in Wales would elope, when they would \"jump the broom\", or jump over a branch of flowering common broom or a besom made of broom. Welsh Kale and Romanichals in England and Scotland practiced the ritual into the 1900s. According to Alan Dundes (1996), the custom originated among the Welsh Kale and English Romanichals.\nC.W. Sullivan III (1997) replied to Dundes that the custom originated among the Welsh people, and was known as a \"priodas coes ysgub\" (\"besom wedding\"). Sullivan's source is Welsh folklorist Gwenith Gwynn (also known as W. Rhys Jones), who assumed that the custom had existed on the basis of conversations with elderly Welsh people during the 1920s (none of whom, however, had seen it). One said, \"It must have disappeared before I was born, and I am seventy-three\".\nGwynn's dating of the custom to the 18th century rested on the assumption that it must have disappeared before the elderly interviewees were born, and on his misreading of the Llansantffraid Glyn Ceiriog parish baptismal register.\nLocal variations of the custom developed in portions of England and Wales. Instead of placing the broom on the ground and jumping together, the broom was placed at an angle by the doorway; the groom jumped first, followed by the bride. In southwest England, Wales and the border areas between Scotland and England, \"[while some] couples\u00a0... agreed to marry verbally, without exchanging legal contracts[,]\u00a0... [o]thers jumped over broomsticks placed across their thresholds to officialize their union and create new households\"; this indicated that contract-less weddings and jumping a broomstick were different kinds of marriage.\nAfrican-American and Black-Canadian custom.\nIn some African-American and Black-Canadian communities, couples end their wedding ceremony by jumping over a broomstick together or separately. The practice is documented as a marriage ceremony for enslaved people in the Southern United States during the 1840s and 1850s, who were often not permitted to marry legally. Its revival in 20th-century African-American and Black-Canadian culture is due to the novel and miniseries \"\" (1976, 1977). Alan Dundes (1996) notes how \"a custom which slaves were \"forced\" to observe by their white masters has been revived a century later by African Americans as a treasured tradition\".\nIt has been speculated that the custom may have originated in West Africa. Although there is no direct evidence of this, Dundes cites a Ghanaian custom of waving brooms over the heads of newlyweds and their parents. Among southern Africans\u00a0\u2013 who were largely not a part of the Atlantic slave trade\u00a0\u2013 it represented a wife's commitment (or willingness) to clean the courtyard of her new home. Historian Tyler D. Parry, in \"Jumping the Broom: The Surprising Multicultural Origins of a Black Wedding Ritual\", considers the Ghanaian connection weak; the ritual used by enslaved people has many more similarities to the custom in the British Isles. Parry writes that despite the racial animus which characterized the US South during the nineteenth century, poor white Southerners (many of whom were descendants of people who had irregular forms of matrimony in Britain) and enslaved African Americans had more cultural exchange than is commonly acknowledged.\nSlaveholders had a dilemma about committed relationships between enslaved people. Although family stability might be desirable to keep enslaved people tractable and pacified, legal marriage was not; marriage gave a couple rights over each other which conflicted with slaveholder claims. Most marriages between enslaved black people were not legally recognized during the American slavery era; marriage was a legal civil contract, and civil contracts required the consent of free persons. In the absence of legal recognition, the enslaved community developed its own methods of distinguishing committed unions from casual ones. The ceremonial jumping of the broom was an open declaration of settling down in a marriage relationship. Jumping the broom was done before witnesses as a public, ceremonial announcement that a couple chose to become as nearly married as was then allowed. There are records of African Americans jumping the broom in slave narratives. An ex-slave from Georgia, George Eason, said how enslaved people jumped the broom to get married.\nJumping the broom fell out of practice when Black people were free to marry legally. The practice survived in some communities, and the phrase \"jumping the broom\" was synonymous with \"getting married\" even if the couple did not literally do so. After its smaller-scale continuity in rural areas of the United States (in Black and white communities), the custom was revived among African Americans after the publication of Alex Haley's \".\" Danita Rountree Green describes the African-American custom during the early 1990s in her book, \"Broom Jumping: A Celebration of Love\" (1992).\nIn popular culture.\nAmerican singer-songwriter Brenda Lee released the rockabilly song \"Let's Jump the Broomstick\" on Decca Records in 1959. Via its association with Wales and the association of the broom with witches, the custom has been adopted by some Wiccans. \"Jumping the Broom\", a film starring Paula Patton and Laz Alonso and directed by Salim Akil, was released on 6 May 2011.\nIn the 1977 TV miniseries \"Roots\", Kunta Kinte/\"Toby\" (John Amos as the adult Kunta Kinte) had a marriage ceremony in which he and Belle (Madge Sinclair) jumped the broom. It also appears in episode two of the 2016 miniseries remake, when Kunta Kinte questions its African origins. An engaged couple jumps a broom in the 2016 film, \"The Birth of a Nation\". Lance (Morris Chestnut) and Mia (Monica Calhoun) jump over the broom after they get married in \"The Best Man\" (1999).\nIn \"R &amp; B\", an episode of \"This Is Us\", Randal and Beth jump the broom while walking down the aisle after their wedding ceremony in a flashback. In \"Things We Said Today\", an episode of \"Grey's Anatomy\", Miranda Bailey and Ben Warren jump over a broom at the end of their wedding ceremony. In \"Someone Saved My Life Tonight\", another episode of \"Grey's Anatomy\", Maggie Pierce and Winston Ndugu jump over a broom, finishing their wedding ceremony. Amani and Woody jump the broom at the end of their wedding in a 2020 episode of \"Married at First Sight\". In the first act of August Wilson's play, \"The Piano Lesson\", Doaker says: \"See that? That's when him and Mama Berniece got married. They called it jumping the broom. That's how you got married in them days.\" Jarette and Iyanna jump the broom at the end of their wedding in a 2022 episode of \"Love Is Blind\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16191", "revid": "754658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16191", "title": "January 13", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJanuary 13 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16192", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16192", "title": "January 14", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJanuary 14 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nNotes.\nIn the 20th and 21st centuries the Julian calendar is 13 days behind the Gregorian calendar, thus January 14 is sometimes celebrated as New Year's Day (Old New Year) by religious groups who use the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16193", "revid": "6689490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16193", "title": "Jackie Robinson", "text": "American baseball player (1919\u20131972)\nJack Roosevelt Robinson (January 31, 1919 \u2013 October 24, 1972) was an American professional baseball player who was the first African American to play in Major League Baseball (MLB) in the modern era. Robinson broke the color line when he started at first base for the Brooklyn Dodgers on April 15, 1947. The Dodgers signing Robinson heralded the end of racial segregation in professional baseball, which had relegated black players to the Negro leagues since the 1880s.\nBorn in Cairo, Georgia, Robinson was raised in Pasadena, California. A four-sport student athlete at Pasadena Junior College and the University of California, Los Angeles, he was better known for football than he was for baseball, becoming a star with the UCLA Bruins football team. Following his college career, Robinson was drafted for service during World War II, but was court-martialed for refusing to sit at the back of a segregated Army bus, eventually being honorably discharged. Afterwards, he signed with the Kansas City Monarchs of the Negro leagues, where he caught the eye of Branch Rickey, general manager of the Brooklyn Dodgers, who thought he would be the perfect candidate for breaking the MLB color line.\nDuring his 10-year MLB career, Robinson won the inaugural Rookie of the Year Award in 1947, was an All-Star for six consecutive seasons from 1949 through 1954, and won the National League (NL) Most Valuable Player Award in 1949\u2014the first Black player so honored. Robinson played in six World Series and contributed to the Dodgers' 1955 World Series championship. He was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1962 in his first year of eligibility.\nRobinson's character, his use of nonviolence, and his talent challenged the traditional basis of segregation that had then marked many other aspects of American life. He influenced the culture of and contributed significantly to the civil rights movement. Robinson also was the first Black television analyst in MLB and the first Black vice president of a major American corporation, Chock full o'Nuts. In the 1960s, he helped establish the Freedom National Bank, a Black American-owned financial institution based in Harlem, New York. After his death in 1972, Robinson was posthumously awarded the Congressional Gold Medal and Presidential Medal of Freedom in recognition of his achievements on and off the field. In 1997, MLB retired his uniform number, 42, across all Major League teams; he was the first professional athlete in any sport to be so honored. MLB also adopted a new annual tradition, \"Jackie Robinson Day\", for the first time on April 15, 2004, on which every player on every team wears the number 42.\nEarly life.\nFamily and personal life.\nJack Roosevelt Robinson was born on January 31, 1919, into a family of sharecroppers in Cairo, Georgia. He was the youngest of five children born to Mallie (n\u00e9e McGriff) and Jerry Robinson, after siblings Edgar, Frank, Matthew (nicknamed \"Mack\"), and Willa Mae. His middle name honored former President Theodore Roosevelt, who died 25 days before Robinson was born. After Robinson's father left the family in 1920, they moved to Pasadena, California.\nThe extended Robinson family established itself on a residential plot containing two small houses at 121 Pepper Street in Pasadena. Robinson's mother worked various odd jobs to support the family. Growing up in relative poverty in an otherwise affluent community, Robinson and his minority friends were excluded from many recreational opportunities. As a result, Robinson joined a neighborhood gang, but his friend Carl Anderson persuaded him to abandon it.\nJohn Muir High School.\nIn 1935, Robinson graduated from Washington Junior High School and enrolled at John Muir Technical High School. Recognizing his athletic talents, Robinson's older brothers, Frank and Mack (himself an accomplished track and field athlete and silver medalist behind Jesse Owens in the 200 meters at the Berlin 1936 Summer Olympics) inspired Jackie to pursue his interest in sports.\nAt Muir Tech, Robinson played numerous sports at the varsity level and lettered in four of them: football, basketball, track and field, and baseball. He played shortstop and catcher on the baseball team, quarterback on the football team, and guard on the basketball team. With the track and field squad, he won awards in the broad jump. He was also a member of the tennis team.\nIn 1936, Robinson won the junior boys singles championship in the annual Pacific Coast Negro Tennis Tournament and earned a place on the Pomona annual baseball tournament all-star team, which included future Hall of Famers Ted Williams and Bob Lemon. In late January 1937, the \"Pasadena Star-News\" newspaper reported that Robinson \"for two years has been the outstanding athlete at Muir, starring in football, basketball, track, baseball, and tennis.\"\nCollege career.\nAfter Muir, Robinson attended Pasadena Junior College (PJC), where he continued his athletic career by participating in basketball, football, baseball, and track. On the football team, he played quarterback and safety. He was a shortstop and leadoff hitter for the baseball team, and he broke an American junior college broad-jump record held by his brother Mack with a jump of 25\u00a0ft. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;6+1\u20442 in. on May 7, 1938. As at Muir High School, most of Jackie's teammates were white. While playing football at PJC, Robinson suffered a fractured ankle, complications from which would eventually delay his deployment status while in the military. In 1938, he was elected to the All-Southland Junior College Team for baseball and selected as the region's Most Valuable Player.\nThat year, Robinson was one of 10 students named to the school's Order of the Mast and Dagger (\"Omicron Mu Delta\"), awarded to students performing \"outstanding service to the school and whose scholastic and citizenship record is worthy of recognition.\" Also while at PJC, he was elected to the Lancers, a student-run police organization responsible for patrolling various school activities.\nAn incident at PJC illustrated Robinson's impatience with authority figures he perceived as racist, a character trait that would resurface repeatedly in his life. On January 25, 1938, he was arrested after vocally disputing the detention of a black friend by police. Robinson received a two-year suspended sentence, but the \u200calong with other rumored run-ins between Robinson and \u200cgave Robinson a reputation for combativeness in the face of racial antagonism. While at PJC, he was motivated by a preacher (the Rev. Karl Downs) to attend church on a regular basis, and Downs became a confidant for Robinson, a Christian. Toward the end of his PJC tenure, Frank Robinson (to whom Robinson felt closest among his three brothers) was killed in a motorcycle accident. The event motivated Jackie to pursue his athletic career at the nearby University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), where he could remain closer to Frank's family.\nAfter graduating from PJC in spring 1939, Robinson enrolled at UCLA, where he became the school's first athlete to win varsity letters in four sports: baseball, basketball, football, and track.\nRobinson was one of four black players on the Bruins' 1939 football team; the others were Woody Strode, Kenny Washington, and Ray Bartlett. Washington, Strode, and Robinson made up three of the team's four backfield players. At a time when only a few black students played mainstream college football, this made UCLA college football's most integrated team. They went undefeated with four ties at 6\u20130\u20134. Robinson finished the season with 12.2 yards per attempt on 42 carries, which is the school football record for highest rushing yards per carry in a season as of 2022. Robinson also led the NCAA in punt return average in the 1939 and 1940 seasons.\nIn track and field, Robinson won the 1940 NCAA championship in the long jump at . Baseball was Robinson's \"worst sport\" at UCLA; he hit .097 in his only season, although in his first game he went 4-for-4 and twice stole home.\nWhile a senior at UCLA, Robinson met his future wife, Rachel Isum (b.1922), a UCLA freshman who was familiar with Robinson's athletic career at PJC. He played football as a senior, but the 1940 Bruins won only one game. In the spring, Robinson left college just shy of graduation, despite the reservations of his mother and Isum. He took a job as an assistant athletic director with the government's National Youth Administration (NYA) \nAfter the government ceased NYA operations, Robinson traveled to Honolulu in the fall of 1941 to play football for the semi-professional, racially integrated Honolulu After a short season, Robinson returned to California in December 1941 to pursue a career as running back for the Los Angeles Bulldogs of the Pacific Coast Football League. By that time, however, the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor had taken place, which drew the United States into World War II and ended Robinson's nascent football career.\nMilitary career.\nIn 1942, Robinson was drafted and assigned to a segregated Army cavalry unit at Fort Riley, Kansas. Having the requisite qualifications, Robinson and several other black soldiers applied for admission to an Officer Candidate School (OCS) then located at Fort Riley.\nAlthough the Army's initial July 1941 guidelines for OCS had been drafted as race-neutral, few black applicants were admitted into OCS until after subsequent directives by Army leadership. The applications of Robinson and his colleagues were delayed for several months. After protests by heavyweight boxing champion Joe Louis (then stationed at Fort Riley) and with the help of Truman Gibson (then an assistant civilian aide to the Secretary of War), the men were accepted into OCS. The experience led to a personal friendship between Robinson and Louis. Upon finishing OCS, Robinson was commissioned as a second lieutenant in January 1943. Shortly afterward, Robinson and Isum were formally engaged.\nAfter receiving his commission, Robinson was reassigned to Fort Hood, Texas, where he joined the 761st \"Black Panthers\" Tank Battalion. While at Fort Hood, Robinson often used his weekend leave to visit the Rev. Karl Downs, President of Sam Huston College (now Huston\u2013Tillotson University) in nearby Austin, Texas; in California, Downs had been Robinson's pastor at Scott United Methodist Church while Robinson attended PJC.\nAn event on July 6, 1944, derailed Robinson's military career. While awaiting results of hospital tests on the ankle he had injured in junior college, Robinson boarded an Army bus with a fellow officer's wife; although the Army had commissioned its own unsegregated bus line, the bus driver ordered Robinson to move to the back of the bus. Robinson refused. The driver backed down, but after reaching the end of the line, summoned the military police, who took Robinson into custody. When Robinson later confronted the investigating duty officer about racist questioning by the officer and his assistant, the officer recommended Robinson be court-martialed.\nAfter Robinson's commander in the 761st, Paul L. Bates, refused to authorize the legal action, Robinson was summarily transferred to the 758th Battalion\u2014where the commander quickly consented to charge Robinson with multiple offenses, including, among other charges, public drunkenness, even though Robinson did not drink.\nBy the time of the court-martial in August 1944, the charges against Robinson had been reduced to two counts of insubordination during questioning. Robinson was acquitted by an all-white panel of nine officers.\nAlthough his former unit, the 761st Tank Battalion, became the first black tank unit to see combat in World War II, Robinson's court-martial proceedings prohibited him from being deployed overseas, and he was never in combat.\nAfter his acquittal, he was transferred to Camp Breckinridge, Kentucky, where he served as a coach for army athletics until receiving an honorable discharge in November 1944. While there, Robinson met a former player for the Kansas City Monarchs of the Negro American League, who encouraged Robinson to write the Monarchs and ask for a tryout. Robinson took the former player's advice and wrote to Monarchs co-owner Thomas Baird.\nPost-military.\nAfter his discharge, Robinson briefly returned to his old football club, the Los Angeles Bulldogs. Robinson then accepted an offer from his old friend and pastor Rev. Karl Downs to be the athletic director at Samuel Huston College in Austin, then of the Southwestern Athletic Conference. The job included coaching the school's basketball team for the 1944\u201345 season. As it was a fledgling program, few students tried out for the basketball team, and Robinson even resorted to inserting himself into the lineup for exhibition games. Although his teams were outmatched by opponents, Robinson was respected as a disciplinarian coach, and drew the admiration of, among others, Langston University basketball player Marques Haynes, a future member of the Harlem Globetrotters.\nProfessional career.\nNegro leagues and major league prospects.\nIn early 1945, while Robinson was at Sam Huston College, the Kansas City Monarchs sent him a written offer to play professional baseball in the Negro leagues. Robinson accepted a contract for $400 per month (equivalent to about $ per month today). Although he played well for the Monarchs, Robinson was frustrated with the experience. He had grown used to a structured playing environment in college, and the Negro leagues' disorganization and embrace of gambling interests appalled him. The hectic travel schedule also placed a burden on his relationship with Isum, with whom he could now communicate only by letter. In all, Robinson played 47 games at shortstop for the Monarchs, hitting .387 with five home runs, and registering 13 stolen bases. He also appeared in the 1945 East\u2013West All-Star Game, going hitless in five at-bats.\nDuring the season, Robinson pursued potential major league interests. No black man had played in the major leagues since Moses Fleetwood Walker in 1884, but the Boston Red Sox nevertheless held a tryout at Fenway Park for Robinson and other black players on April 16. The tryout, however, was a farce chiefly designed to assuage the desegregationist sensibilities of powerful Boston City Councilman Isadore H. Y. Muchnick. Even with the stands limited to management, Robinson was subjected to racial epithets. He left the tryout humiliated, and more than 14 years later, in July 1959, the Red Sox became the final major league team to integrate its roster.\nOther teams, however, had more serious interest in signing a black ballplayer. In the mid-1940s, Branch Rickey, club president and general manager of the Brooklyn Dodgers, began to scout the Negro leagues for a possible addition to the Dodgers' roster. Rickey selected Robinson from a list of promising black players and interviewed him for possible assignment to Brooklyn's International League farm club, the Montreal Royals. Rickey was especially interested in making sure his eventual signee could withstand the inevitable racial abuse that would be directed at him. In a famous three-hour exchange on August 28, 1945, Rickey asked Robinson if he could face the racial animus without taking the bait and reacting \u200ca concern given Robinson's prior arguments with law enforcement officials at PJC and in the military. Robinson was aghast: \"Are you looking for a Negro who is afraid to fight back?\" Rickey replied that he needed a Negro player \"with guts enough not to fight back.\" After obtaining a commitment from Robinson to \"turn the other cheek\" to racial antagonism, Rickey agreed to sign him to a contract for $600 per month (equivalent to about $ per month today). Rickey did not offer compensation to the Monarchs, instead believing all Negro league players were free agents due to the contracts not containing a reserve clause. Among those with whom Rickey discussed prospects was Wendell Smith, writer for the black weekly \"Pittsburgh Courier\", who, according to Cleveland Indians owner and team president Bill Veeck, \"influenced Rickey to take Jack Robinson, for which he's never completely gotten credit.\"\nAlthough he required Robinson to keep the arrangement a secret for the time being, Rickey committed to formally signing Robinson before November 1, 1945. On October 23, it was publicly announced that Robinson would be assigned to the Royals for the 1946 season. On the same day, with representatives of the Royals and Dodgers present, Robinson formally signed his contract with the Royals. In what was later referred to as \"The Noble Experiment\", Robinson was the first black baseball player in the International League since the 1880s. He was not necessarily the best player in the Negro leagues, and black talents Satchel Paige and Josh Gibson were upset when Robinson was selected first. Larry Doby, who broke the color line in the American League the same year as Robinson, said, \"One of the things that was disappointing and disheartening to a lot of the black players at the time was that Jack was not the best player. The best was Josh Gibson. I think that's one of the reasons why Josh died so early\u2014he was heartbroken.\"\nRickey's offer allowed Robinson to leave behind the Monarchs and their grueling bus rides, and he went home to Pasadena. That September, he signed with Chet Brewer's Kansas City Royals, a post-season barnstorming team in the California Winter League. Later that off-season, he briefly toured South America with another barnstorming team, while his fianc\u00e9e Isum pursued nursing opportunities in New York City. On February 10, 1946, Robinson and Isum were married by their old friend, the Rev. Karl Downs.\nMinor leagues.\nIn 1946, Robinson arrived at Daytona Beach, Florida, for spring training with the Montreal Royals of the Class AAA International League. Clay Hopper, the manager of the Royals, asked Rickey to assign Robinson to any other Dodger affiliate, but Rickey refused.\nRobinson's presence was controversial in racially segregated Florida. He was not allowed to stay with his white teammates at the team hotel, and instead lodged at the home of Joe and Dufferin Harris, a politically active African-American couple who introduced the Robinsons to civil rights activist Mary McLeod Bethune. Since the Dodgers organization did not own a spring training facility, scheduling was subject to the whim of area localities, several of which turned down any event involving Robinson or Johnny Wright, another black player whom Rickey had signed to the Dodgers' organization in January. In Sanford, Florida, the police chief threatened to cancel games if Robinson and Wright did not cease training activities there; as a result, Robinson was sent back to Daytona Beach. In Jacksonville, the stadium was padlocked shut without warning on game day, by order of the city's Parks and Public Property director. In DeLand, a scheduled day game was postponed, ostensibly because of issues with the stadium's electrical lighting.\nAfter much lobbying of local officials by Rickey himself, the Royals were allowed to host a game involving Robinson in Daytona Beach. Robinson made his Royals debut at Daytona Beach's City Island Ballpark on March 17, 1946, in an exhibition game against the team's parent club, the Dodgers. Robinson thus became the first black player to openly play for a minor league team against a major league team since the \"de facto\" baseball color line had been implemented in the 1880s.\nLater in spring training, after some less-than-stellar performances, Robinson was shifted from shortstop to second base, allowing him to make shorter throws to first base. Robinson's performance soon rebounded. On April 18, 1946, Roosevelt Stadium hosted the Jersey City Giants' season opener against the Montreal Royals, marking the professional debut of the Royals' Jackie Robinson and the first time the color barrier had been broken in a game between two minor league clubs. Pitching against Robinson was Warren Sandel who had played against him when they both lived in California. During Robinson's first at bat, the Jersey City catcher, Dick Bouknight, demanded that Sandel throw at Robinson, but Sandel refused. Although Sandel induced Robinson to ground out at his first at bat, Robinson ended up with four hits in his five at bats; his first hit was a three-run home run in the game's third inning. He also scored four runs, drove in three, and stole two bases in the Royals' 14\u20131 victory. Robinson proceeded to lead the International League that season with a .349 batting average and .985 fielding percentage, and he was named the league's Most Valuable Player. Although he often faced hostility while on road trips (the Royals were forced to cancel a Southern exhibition tour, for example), in Canada, the Montreal fan base enthusiastically supported Robinson. Whether fans supported or opposed it, Robinson's presence on the field was a boon to attendance; more than one million people went to games involving Robinson in 1946, an astounding figure by International League standards. In the fall of 1946, following the baseball season, Robinson returned home to California and briefly played professional basketball for the short-lived Los Angeles Red Devils.\nBrooklyn Dodgers (1947\u20131956).\nBreaking the color barrier (1947).\nIn 1947, the Dodgers called Robinson up to the major leagues six days before the start of the season. With Eddie Stanky entrenched at second base for the Dodgers, Robinson played his initial major league season as a first baseman. Robinson made his debut as a Dodger wearing uniform number 42 on April 11, 1947, in a preseason exhibition game against the New York Yankees at Ebbets Field with 24,237 in attendance. On April 15, Robinson made his major league debut at the relatively advanced age of 28 at Ebbets Field before a crowd of 26,623 spectators, more than 14,000 of whom were black. Although he failed to get a base hit, he reached second on a throwing error and scored the winning run in the Dodgers' 5\u20133 victory. Robinson became the first player since 1884 to openly break the major league baseball color line. Black fans began flocking to see the Dodgers when they came to town, abandoning their Negro league teams.\nRobinson's promotion met a generally positive, although mixed, reception among newspapers and white major league players. However, racial tension existed in the Dodger clubhouse. Some Dodger players insinuated they would sit out rather than play alongside Robinson. The brewing mutiny ended when Dodgers management took a stand for Robinson. Manager Leo Durocher informed the team, \"I do not care if the guy is yellow or black, or if he has stripes like a fuckin' zebra. I'm the manager of this team, and I say he plays. What's more, I say he can make us all rich. And if any of you cannot use the money, I will see that you are all traded.\"\nRobinson was also derided by opposing teams. According to a press report, the St. Louis Cardinals threatened to strike if Robinson played and spread the walkout across the entire National League. Existence of the plot was said to have been leaked by the Cardinals' team physician, Robert Hyland, to a friend, the \"New York Herald Tribune\"'s Rud Rennie. The reporter, concerned about protecting Hyland's anonymity and job, in turn leaked it to his \"Tribune\" colleague and editor, Stanley Woodward, whose own subsequent reporting with other sources protected Hyland. The Woodward article made national headlines. After it was published, National League President Ford Frick and Baseball Commissioner Happy Chandler let it be known that any striking players would be suspended. \"You will find that the friends that you think you have in the press box will not support you, that you will be outcasts,\" Frick was quoted as saying. \"I do not care if half the league strikes. Those who do it will encounter quick retribution. All will be suspended and I don't care if it wrecks the National League for five years. This is the United States of America and one citizen has as much right to play as another.\" Woodward's article received the E. P. Dutton Award in 1947 for Best Sports Reporting. The Cardinals players denied that they were planning to strike, and Woodward later told author Roger Kahn that Frick was his true source; writer Warren Corbett said that Frick's speech \"never happened\". Regardless, the report led to Robinson receiving increased support from the sports media. Even \"The Sporting News\", a publication that had backed the color line, came out against the idea of a strike.\nRobinson nonetheless became the target of rough physical play by opponents (particularly the Cardinals). At one time, he received a seven-inch gash in his leg from Enos Slaughter. On April 22, 1947, during a game between the Dodgers and the Philadelphia Phillies, Phillies players and manager Ben Chapman called Robinson a \"nigger\" from their dugout and yelled that he should \"go back to the cotton fields\". Rickey later recalled that Chapman \"did more than anybody to unite the Dodgers. When he poured out that string of unconscionable abuse, he solidified and united thirty men.\"\nHowever, Robinson received significant encouragement from several major league players. Robinson named Lee \"Jeep\" Handley, who played for the Phillies at the time, as the first opposing player to wish him well. Dodgers teammate Pee Wee Reese once came to Robinson's defense with the famous line, \"You can hate a man for many reasons. Color is not one of them.\" In 1947 or 1948, Reese is said to have put his arm around Robinson in response to fans who shouted racial slurs at Robinson before a game in Boston or Cincinnati. A statue by sculptor William Behrends, unveiled at KeySpan Park on November 1, 2005, depicts Reese with his arm around Robinson. Jewish baseball star Hank Greenberg, who had to deal with ethnic epithets during his career, also encouraged Robinson. Following an incident where Greenberg collided with Robinson at first base, he \"whispered a few words into Robinson's ear\", which Robinson later characterized as \"words of encouragement\". Greenberg had advised him to overcome his critics by defeating them in games. Robinson also talked frequently with Larry Doby, who endured his own hardships since becoming the first black player in the American League with the Cleveland Indians, as the two spoke to each other via telephone throughout the season.\nRobinson finished the season having played in 151 games for the Dodgers, with a batting average of .297, an on-base percentage of .383, and a .427 slugging percentage. He had 175 hits (scoring 125 runs) including 31 doubles, 5 triples, and 12 home runs, driving in 48 runs for the year. Robinson led the league in sacrifice hits, with 28, and in stolen bases, with 29. His cumulative performance earned him the inaugural Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award (separate National and American League Rookie of the Year honors were not awarded until 1949).\nThat year, the Brooklyn Dodgers won the National League pennant and went on to face the Yankees in the 1947 World Series. Robinson became the first black player to play in the World Series. He appeared in all seven games, with the Dodgers ultimately losing in Game 7.\nMVP, Congressional testimony, and film biography (1948\u20131950).\nFollowing Stanky's trade to the Boston Braves in March 1948, Robinson took over second base, where he logged a .980 fielding percentage that year (second in the National League at the position, fractionally behind Stanky). Robinson had a batting average of .296 and 22 stolen bases for the season. In a 12\u20137 win against the St. Louis Cardinals on August 29, 1948, he hit for the cycle\u2014a home run, a triple, a double, and a single in the same game. The Dodgers briefly moved into first place in the National League in late August 1948, but they ultimately finished third as the Braves went on to win the pennant and lose to the Cleveland Indians in the World Series.\nRacial pressure on Robinson eased in 1948 when a number of other black players entered the major leagues. Larry Doby (who broke the color barrier in the American League on July 5, 1947, just 11 weeks after Robinson) and Satchel Paige played for the Cleveland Indians, and the Dodgers had three other black players besides Robinson. In February 1948, he signed a $12,500 contract (equal to $ today) with the Dodgers; while a significant amount, this was less than Robinson made in the off-season from a vaudeville tour, where he answered pre-set baseball questions and a speaking tour of the South. Between the tours, he underwent surgery on his right ankle. Because of his off-season activities, Robinson reported to training camp overweight. He lost the weight during training camp, but dieting left him weak at the plate. In 1948, Wendell Smith's book, \"Jackie Robinson: My Own Story\", was released.\nIn the spring of 1949, Robinson turned to Hall of Famer George Sisler, working as an advisor to the Dodgers, for batting help. At Sisler's suggestion, Robinson spent hours at a batting tee, learning to hit the ball to right field. Sisler taught Robinson to anticipate a fastball, on the theory that it is easier to subsequently adjust to a slower curveball. Robinson also noted that \"Sisler showed me how to stop lunging, how to check my swing until the last fraction of a second\". The tutelage helped Robinson raise his batting average from .296 in 1948 to .342 in 1949. In addition to his improved batting average, Robinson stole 37 bases that season, was second place in the league for both doubles and triples, and registered 124 runs batted in with 122 runs scored. For the performance Robinson earned the Most Valuable Player Award for the National League. Baseball fans also voted Robinson as the starting second baseman for the 1949 All-Star Game \u2014 the first All-Star Game to include black players.\nThat year, a song about Robinson by Buddy Johnson, \"Did You See Jackie Robinson Hit That Ball?\", reached number\u00a013 on the charts; Count Basie recorded a famous version. Ultimately, the Dodgers won the National League pennant, but lost in five games to the New York Yankees in the 1949 World Series.\nSummer 1949 brought an unwanted distraction for Robinson. In July, he was called to testify before the United States House of Representatives' Committee on Un-American Activities (HUAC) concerning statements made that April by black athlete and actor Paul Robeson. Robinson was reluctant to testify, but he eventually agreed to do so, fearing it might negatively affect his career if he declined.\nIn 1950, Robinson led the National League in double plays made by a second baseman with 133. His salary that year was the highest any Dodger had been paid to that point: $35,000 ($ in 2024 dollars). He finished the year with 99 runs scored, a .328 batting average, and 12 stolen bases. The year saw the release of a film biography of Robinson's life, \"The Jackie Robinson Story\", in which Robinson played himself, and actress Ruby Dee played Rachel \"Rae\" (Isum) Robinson. The project had been previously delayed when the film's producers refused to accede to demands of two Hollywood studios that the movie include scenes of Robinson being tutored in baseball by a white man. \"The New York Times\" wrote that Robinson, \"doing that rare thing of playing himself in the picture's leading role, displays a calm assurance and composure that might be envied by many a Hollywood star.\"\nRobinson's Hollywood exploits, however, did not sit well with Dodgers co-owner Walter O'Malley, who referred to Robinson as \"Rickey's prima donna\". In late 1950, Rickey's contract as the Dodgers' team President expired. Weary of constant disagreements with O'Malley, and with no hope of being re-appointed as President of the Dodgers, Rickey cashed out his one-quarter financial interest in the team, leaving O'Malley in full control of the franchise. Rickey shortly thereafter became general manager of the Pittsburgh Pirates. Robinson was disappointed at the turn of events and wrote a sympathetic letter to Rickey, whom he considered a father figure, stating, \"Regardless of what happens to me in the future, it all can be placed on what you have done and, believe me, I appreciate it.\"\nPennant races and outside interests (1951\u20131953).\nBefore the 1951 season, O'Malley reportedly offered Robinson the job of manager of the Montreal Royals, effective at the end of Robinson's playing career. O'Malley was quoted in the \"Montreal Standard\" as saying, \"Jackie told me that he would be both delighted and honored to tackle this managerial post\"\u2014although reports differed as to whether a position was ever formally offered.\nDuring the 1951 season, Robinson led the National League in double plays made by a second baseman for the second year in a row, with 137. He also kept the Dodgers in contention for the 1951 pennant. During the last game of the regular season, in the 13th inning, he had a hit to tie the game and then hit a home run in the 14th inning, which proved to be the winning margin. This forced a best-of-three playoff series against the crosstown rival New York Giants.\nDespite Robinson's regular-season heroics, on October 3, 1951, the Dodgers lost the pennant on Bobby Thomson's famous home run, known as the Shot Heard 'Round the World. Overcoming his dejection, Robinson dutifully observed Thomson's feet to ensure he touched all the bases. Dodgers sportscaster Vin Scully later noted that the incident showed \"how much of a competitor Robinson was.\" He finished the season with 106 runs scored, a batting average of .335, and 25 stolen bases.\nRobinson had what was an average year for him in 1952. He finished the year with 104 runs, a .308 batting average, and 24 stolen bases. He did, however, record a career-high on-base percentage of .436. The Dodgers improved on their performance from the year before, winning the National League pennant before losing the 1952 World Series to the New York Yankees in seven games. That year, on the television show \"Youth Wants to Know\", Robinson challenged the Yankees' general manager, George Weiss, on the racial record of his team, which had yet to sign a black player. Sportswriter Dick Young, whom Robinson had described as a \"bigot\", said, \"If there was one flaw in Jackie, it was the common one. He believed that everything unpleasant that happened to him happened because of his blackness.\" The 1952 season was the last year Robinson was an everyday starter at second base. Afterward, Robinson played variously at first, second, and third bases, shortstop, and in the outfield, with Jim Gilliam, another black player, taking over everyday second base duties. Robinson's interests began to shift toward the prospect of managing a major league team. He had hoped to gain experience by managing in the Puerto Rican Winter League, but according to the \"New York Post\", Commissioner Happy Chandler denied the request.\nIn 1953, Robinson had 109 runs, a .329 batting average, and 17 steals, leading the Dodgers to another National League pennant (and another World Series loss to the Yankees, this time in six games). Robinson's continued success spawned a string of death threats. He was not dissuaded, however, from addressing racial issues publicly. That year, he served as editor for \"Our Sports\" magazine, a periodical focusing on Negro sports issues; contributions to the magazine included an article on golf course segregation by Robinson's old friend Joe Louis. Robinson also openly criticized segregated hotels and restaurants that served the Dodger organization; a number of these establishments integrated as a result, including the five-star Chase Park Hotel in St. Louis.\nWorld Series championship and retirement (1954\u20131956).\nIn 1954, Robinson had 62 runs scored, a .311 batting average, and 7 steals. His best day at the plate was on June 17, when he hit two home runs and two doubles. The following autumn, Robinson won his only championship when the Dodgers defeated the New York Yankees in the 1955 World Series. Although the team enjoyed ultimate success, 1955 was the worst year of Robinson's individual career. He hit .256 and stole only 12 bases. The Dodgers tried Robinson in the outfield and as a third baseman, both because of his diminishing abilities and because Gilliam was established at second base. Robinson, then 36 years old, missed 49 games and did not play in Game 7 of the World Series. He missed the game because manager Walter Alston decided to play Gilliam at second and Don Hoak at third base. That season, the Dodgers' Don Newcombe became the first black major league pitcher to win twenty games in a year.\nIn 1956, Robinson had 61 runs scored, a .275 batting average, and 12 steals. By then, he had begun to exhibit the effects of diabetes and to lose interest in the prospect of playing or managing professional baseball. Robinson ended his major league career when he struck out to end Game 7 of the 1956 World Series. After the season, the Dodgers traded Robinson to the arch-rival New York Giants for Dick Littlefield and $35,000 cash (equal to $ today). The trade, however, was never completed; unbeknownst to the Dodgers, Robinson had already agreed with the president of Chock full o'Nuts to quit baseball and become an executive with the company. Since Robinson had sold exclusive rights to any retirement story to \"Look\" magazine two years previously, his retirement decision was revealed through the magazine, instead of through the Dodgers organization.\nLegacy.\nRobinson's major league debut brought an end to approximately sixty years of segregation in professional baseball, known as the baseball color line. After World War II, several other forces were also leading the country toward increased equality for blacks, including their accelerated migration to the North, where their political clout grew, and President Harry Truman's desegregation of the military in 1948. Robinson's breaking of the baseball color line and his professional success symbolized these broader changes and demonstrated that the fight for equality was more than simply a political matter. Civil rights movement leader Martin Luther King Jr. said that he was \"a legend and a symbol in his own time\", and that he \"challenged the dark skies of intolerance and frustration.\" According to historian Doris Kearns Goodwin, Robinson's \"efforts were a monumental step in the civil-rights revolution in America\u00a0... [His] accomplishments allowed black and white Americans to be more respectful and open to one another and more appreciative of everyone's abilities.\"\nBeginning his major league career at the relatively advanced age of 28, he played only ten seasons from 1947 to 1956, all of them for the Brooklyn Dodgers. During his career, the Dodgers played in six World Series, and Robinson himself played in six All-Star Games. In 1999, he was one of 30 players named to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team.\nRobinson's career is generally considered to mark the beginning of the post\u2013\"long ball\" era in baseball, in which a reliance on raw power-hitting gave way to balanced offensive strategies that used footspeed to create runs through aggressive baserunning. Robinson exhibited the combination of hitting ability and speed which exemplified the new era. He scored more than 100 runs in six of his ten seasons (averaging more than 110 runs from 1947 to 1953), had a .311 career batting average, a .409 career on-base percentage, a .474 slugging percentage, and substantially more walks than strikeouts (740 to 291). Robinson was one of only two players during the span of 1947\u201356 to accumulate at least 125 steals while registering a slugging percentage over .425 (Minnie Mi\u00f1oso was the other). He accumulated 197 stolen bases in total, including 19 steals of home. None of the latter were double steals (in which a player stealing home is assisted by a player stealing another base at the same time). Robinson has been referred to by author David Falkner as \"the father of modern base-stealing\".\nHistorical statistical analysis indicates Robinson was an outstanding fielder throughout his ten years in the major leagues and at virtually every position he played. After playing his rookie season at first base, Robinson spent most of his career as a second baseman. He led the league in fielding among second basemen in 1950 and 1951. Toward the end of his career, he played about 2,000 innings at third base and about 1,175 innings in the outfield, excelling at both.\nAssessing himself, Robinson said, \"I'm not concerned with your liking or disliking me\u00a0... all I ask is that you respect me as a human being.\" Regarding Robinson's qualities on the field, Leo Durocher said, \"You want a guy that comes to play. But he didn't just come to play. He came to beat you. He came to stuff the damn bat right up your ass.\"\nPortrayals on stage, film and television.\nRobinson portrayed himself in the 1950 motion picture \"The Jackie Robinson Story\".\nOther portrayals include:\nRobinson was also the subject of a 2016 PBS documentary, \"Jackie Robinson\", which was directed by Ken Burns and features Jamie Foxx doing voice-over as Robinson.\nPost-baseball life.\nRobinson once told future Hall of Fame inductee Hank Aaron that \"the game of baseball is great, but the greatest thing is what you do after your career is over.\" Robinson retired from baseball at age 37 on January 5, 1957. Later that year, after he complained of numerous physical ailments, he was diagnosed with diabetes, a disease that also afflicted his brothers. Although Robinson adopted an insulin injection regimen, the state of medicine at the time could not prevent the continued deterioration of Robinson's physical condition from the disease.\nIn October 1959, Robinson entered the Greenville Municipal Airport's whites-only waiting room. Airport police asked Robinson to leave, but he refused. At a National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) speech in Greenville, South Carolina, Robinson urged \"complete freedom\" and encouraged black citizens to vote and to protest their second-class citizenship. The following January, approximately 1,000 people marched on New Year's Day to the airport, which was desegregated shortly thereafter.\nIn his first year of eligibility for the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1962, Robinson encouraged voters to consider only his on-field qualifications, rather than his cultural impact on the game. He was elected on the first ballot, becoming the first Black American player inducted into the Cooperstown museum.\nIn 1965, Robinson served as an analyst for ABC's \"Major League Baseball Game of the Week\" telecasts, the first Black American to do so. In 1966, Robinson was hired as general manager for the short-lived Brooklyn Dodgers of the Continental Football League. In 1972, he served as a part-time commentator on Montreal Expos telecasts.\nFrom 1957 to 1964, Robinson was the vice president for personnel at Chock full o'Nuts; he was the first Black American to serve as vice president of a major American corporation. Robinson always considered his business career as advancing the cause of black people in commerce and industry. He also chaired the NAACP's million-dollar Freedom Fund Drive in 1957, and served on the organization's board until 1967. In 1964, he helped found, with Harlem businessman Dunbar McLaurin, Freedom National Bank\u2014a Black-owned and operated commercial bank based in Harlem. He also served as the bank's first chairman of the board. In 1970, Robinson established the Jackie Robinson Construction Company to build housing for low-income families.\nRobinson was active in politics throughout his post-baseball life. He identified himself as a political independent, although he held conservative opinions on several issues, including the Vietnam War (he once wrote to Martin Luther King Jr. to defend the Johnson Administration's military policy). After supporting Richard Nixon in his 1960 presidential race against John F. Kennedy, Robinson later praised Kennedy effusively for his stance on civil rights. Robinson was angered by the 1964 presidential election candidacy of conservative Republican Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona, who had opposed the Civil Rights Act of 1964. He became one of six national directors for Nelson Rockefeller's unsuccessful campaign to be nominated as the Republican candidate for the election. After the party nominated Goldwater instead, Robinson left the party's convention commenting that he now had \"a better understanding of how it must have felt to be a Jew in Hitler's Germany\". He later became special assistant for community affairs when Rockefeller was re-elected governor of New York in 1966 and in 1971 was appointed to the New York State Athletic Commission by Rockefeller. In 1968, he broke with the Republican party and supported Hubert Humphrey against Nixon in that year's presidential election.\nRobinson protested against the major leagues' ongoing lack of minority managers and central office personnel, and he turned down an invitation to appear in an old-timers' game at Yankee Stadium in 1969. He made his final public appearance on October 15, 1972, nine days before his death, throwing the ceremonial first pitch before Game\u00a02 of the World Series at Riverfront Stadium in Cincinnati. He gratefully accepted a plaque honoring the twenty-fifth anniversary of his MLB debut, but also commented, \"I'm going to be tremendously more pleased and more proud when I look at that third base coaching line one day and see a Black face managing in baseball.\" This wish was only fulfilled after Robinson's death: following the 1974 season, the Cleveland Indians gave their managerial post to Frank Robinson (no relation to Jackie), a Hall of Fame-bound player who would go on to manage three other teams. Despite the success of these two Robinsons and other Black players, the number of Black American players in Major League Baseball has declined since the 1970s.\nFamily life and death.\nAfter Robinson's retirement from baseball, his wife Rachel Robinson pursued a career in academic nursing. She became an assistant professor at the Yale School of Nursing and director of nursing at the Connecticut Mental Health Center. She also served on the board of the Freedom National Bank until it closed in 1990. She and Jackie had three children: Jackie Robinson Jr. (1946\u20131971), Sharon Robinson (b. 1950), and David Robinson (b. 1952).\nRobinson's eldest son, Jackie Robinson Jr., had emotional trouble during his childhood and entered special education at an early age. He enlisted in the Army in search of a disciplined environment, served in the Vietnam War, and was wounded in action on November 19, 1965. After his discharge, he struggled with drug problems. Robinson Jr. eventually completed the treatment program at Daytop Village in Seymour, Connecticut, and became a counselor at the institution. On June 17, 1971, he was killed in an automobile accident at age 24. The experience with his son's drug addiction turned Robinson Sr. into an avid anti-drug crusader toward the end of his life.\nRobinson did not outlive his son by very long. In 1968, he suffered a heart attack. Complications from heart disease and diabetes weakened Robinson and made him almost blind by middle age. On October 24, 1972, Robinson died of a heart attack at his home at 95 Cascade Road in North Stamford, Connecticut; he was 53 years old. Robinson's funeral service on October 27, 1972, at Upper Manhattan's Riverside Church in Morningside Heights, attracted 2,500 mourners. Many of his former teammates, other famous baseball players, and basketball star Bill Russell served as pallbearers, and the Rev. Jesse Jackson gave the eulogy. Tens of thousands of people lined the subsequent procession route to Robinson's interment site at Cypress Hills Cemetery in Brooklyn, where he was buried next to his son Jackie and mother-in-law Zellee Isum. Twenty-five years after Robinson's death, the Interboro Parkway was renamed the Jackie Robinson Parkway in his memory. This parkway bisects the cemetery in close proximity to Robinson's gravesite.\nAfter Robinson's death, his widow founded the Jackie Robinson Foundation, and at 103 years old, she remains an officer as of 2025. On April 15, 2008, she announced that in 2010 the foundation would open a museum devoted to Jackie in Lower Manhattan. Robinson's daughter, Sharon, became a midwife, educator, director of educational programming for MLB, and the author of two books about her father. His youngest son, David, who has ten children, is a coffee grower and social activist in Tanzania.\nAwards and recognition.\nOn June 4, 1972, the Dodgers retired Robinson's uniform number, 42, alongside those of former teammates Roy Campanella (39) and Sandy Koufax (32). In 2017, a statue of Robinson, created by sculptor Branly Cadet, was unveiled at Dodger Stadium. It was the first statue the Dodgers ever unveiled.\nIn 1999, Robinson was named by \"Time\" on its list of the . That same year, he was one of 30 players elected to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. That same year, he was ranked No. 44 on \"The Sporting News\" list of \"Baseball's 100 Greatest Players\" in 1999. In 2020, \"The Athletic\" ranked Robinson at number 42 on its \"Baseball 100\" list, complied by sportswriter Joe Posnanski.\nBaseball writer Bill James, in \"The New Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract\", ranked Robinson as the 32nd greatest player of all time strictly on the basis of his performance on the field, noting that he was one of the top players in the league throughout his career. Robinson was among the 25 charter members of UCLA's Athletics Hall of Fame in 1984. In 1993, he was inducted into the National High School Hall of Fame. In 2002, Molefi Kete Asante included Robinson on his list of 100 Greatest African Americans.\nThe City of Pasadena has recognized Robinson with a baseball diamond and stadium named Jackie Robinson Field in Brookside Park next to the Rose Bowl, and with the Jackie Robinson Center (a community outreach center providing health services). In 1997, a $325,000 bronze sculpture (equal to $ today) called the Pasadena Robinson Memorial by artists Ralph Helmick, Stu Schecter, and John Outterbridge depicting oversized nine-foot busts of Robinson and his brother Mack was erected at Garfield Avenue, across from the main entrance of Pasadena City Hall; a granite footprint lists multiple donors to the commission project, which was organized by the Robinson Memorial Foundation and supported by members of the Robinson family.\nMajor League Baseball has honored Robinson many times since his death. In 1987, both the National and American League Rookie of the Year Awards were renamed the \"Jackie Robinson Award\" in honor of the first recipient (Robinson's Major League Rookie of the Year Award in 1947 encompassed both leagues).\nOn April 15, 1997, Robinson's jersey number, 42, was retired throughout Major League Baseball, the first time any jersey number had been retired throughout one of the four major American sports leagues. Under the terms of the retirement, a grandfather clause allowed the handful of players who wore number 42 to continue doing so in tribute to Robinson, until such time as they subsequently changed teams or jersey numbers. This affected players such as the Mets' Butch Huskey and Boston's Mo Vaughn. The Yankees' Mariano Rivera, who retired at the end of the 2013 season, was the last player in Major League Baseball to wear jersey number 42 on a regular basis. Since 1997, only Wayne Gretzky's number 99, retired by the NHL in 2000, and Bill Russell's number 6, retired by the NBA in 2022, have been retired league-wide in any of the four major sports.\nAs an exception to the retired-number policy, MLB began honoring Robinson by allowing players to wear number 42 on April 15, Jackie Robinson Day, which is an annual observance that started in 2004. For the 60th anniversary of Robinson's major league debut, MLB invited players to wear the number 42 on Jackie Robinson Day in 2007. The gesture was originally the idea of outfielder Ken Griffey Jr., who sought Rachel Robinson's permission to wear the number. After Griffey received her permission, Commissioner Bud Selig not only allowed Griffey to wear the number, but also extended an invitation to all major league teams to do the same. Ultimately, more than 200 players wore number 42, including the entire rosters of the Los Angeles Dodgers, New York Mets, Houston Astros, Philadelphia Phillies, St. Louis Cardinals, Milwaukee Brewers, and Pittsburgh Pirates. The tribute was continued in 2008, when, during games on April 15, all members of the Mets, Cardinals, Washington Nationals, and Tampa Bay Rays wore Robinson's number 42. On June 25, 2008, MLB installed a new plaque for Robinson at the Baseball Hall of Fame commemorating his off-the-field impact on the game as well as his playing statistics. In 2009, all of MLB's uniformed personnel (including players) wore number 42 on April 15; this tradition has continued every year since on that date.\nAt the November 2006 groundbreaking for Citi Field, the new ballpark for the New York Mets, it was announced that the main entrance, modeled on the one in Brooklyn's old Ebbets Field, would be called the Jackie Robinson Rotunda. The rotunda was dedicated at the opening of Citi Field on April 16, 2009. It honors Robinson with large quotations spanning the inner curve of the facade and features a large freestanding statue of his number, 42, which has become an attraction in itself. Mets owner Fred Wilpon announced that the Mets\u2014in conjunction with Citigroup and the Jackie Robinson Foundation\u2014would create the Jackie Robinson Museum and Learning Center, located at the headquarters of the Jackie Robinson Foundation at One Hudson Square, along Canal Street in lower Manhattan. Along with the museum, scholarships will be awarded to \"young people who live by and embody Jackie's ideals.\" The museum opened in 2022. The New York Yankees honor Robinson with a plaque in Monument Park.\nSince 2004, the Aflac National High School Baseball Player of the Year has been presented the \"Jackie Robinson Award\".\nRobinson has also been recognized outside of baseball. In December 1956, the NAACP recognized him with the Spingarn Medal, which it awards annually for the highest achievement by an African-American. President Ronald Reagan posthumously awarded Robinson the Presidential Medal of Freedom on March 26, 1984, and on March 2, 2005, President George W. Bush gave Robinson's widow the Congressional Gold Medal, the highest civilian award bestowed by Congress; Robinson was only the second baseball player to receive the award, after Roberto Clemente. On August 20, 2007, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and his wife, Maria Shriver, announced that Robinson was inducted into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts in Sacramento.\nA number of buildings have been named in Robinson's honor. The UCLA Bruins baseball team plays in Jackie Robinson Stadium, which, because of the efforts of Jackie's brother Mack, features a memorial statue of Robinson by sculptor Richard H. Ellis. The stadium also unveiled a new mural of Robinson by Mike Sullivan on April 14, 2013. City Island Ballpark in Daytona Beach, Florida was renamed Jackie Robinson Ballpark in 1990 and a statue of Robinson with two children stands in front of the ballpark. His wife Rachel was present for the dedication on September 15. 1990. A number of facilities at Pasadena City College (successor to PJC) are named in Robinson's honor, including Robinson Field, a football/soccer/track facility named jointly for Robinson and his brother Mack. The New York Public School system has named a middle school after Robinson, and Dorsey High School plays at a Los Angeles football stadium named after him. His home in Brooklyn, the Jackie Robinson House, was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1976, and Brooklyn residents sought to turn his home into a city landmark. In 1978, Colonial Park in Harlem was renamed after Robinson. Robinson also has an asteroid named after him, 4319 Jackierobinson. In 1997, New York City renamed the Interboro Parkway in his honor. The following year, a statue of Robinson was dedicated at Journal Square Transportation Center in Jersey City, New Jersey.\nIn 1997, the United States Mint issued a Jackie Robinson commemorative silver dollar, and five-dollar gold coin. Robinson has also been honored by the United States Postal Service on three separate postage stamps, in 1982, 1999, and 2000.\nIn 2011, the U.S. placed a plaque at Robinson's Montreal home to honor the ending of segregation in baseball. The house, at 8232 avenue de Gasp\u00e9 near Jarry Park, was Robinson's residence when he played for the Montreal Royals during 1946. In a letter read during the ceremony, Rachel Robinson, Jackie's widow, wrote: \"I remember Montreal and that house very well and have always had warm feeling for that great city. Before Jack and I moved to Montreal, we had just been through some very rough treatment in the racially biased South during spring training in Florida. In the end, Montreal was the perfect place for him to get his start. We never had a threatening or unpleasant experience there. The people were so welcoming and saw Jack as a player and as a man.\"\nOn November 22, 2014, UCLA announced that it would officially retire the number 42 across all university sports, effective immediately. While Robinson wore several different numbers during his UCLA career, the school chose 42 because it had become indelibly identified with him. The only sport this did not affect was men's basketball, which had previously retired the number for Walt Hazzard (although Kevin Love was actually the last player in that sport to wear 42, with Hazzard's blessing). In a move paralleling that of MLB when it retired the number, UCLA allowed three athletes (in women's soccer, softball, and football) who were already wearing 42 to continue to do so for the remainder of their UCLA careers. The school also announced it would prominently display the number at all of its athletic venues.\nA jersey that Robinson brought home with him after his rookie season ended in 1947 was sold at auction for $2.05\u00a0million on November 19, 2017. The price was the highest ever paid for a post-World War II jersey.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBook sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16194", "revid": "1318663958", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16194", "title": "JPEG Network Graphics", "text": "File format for image files\nJPEG Network Graphics (JNG, ) is a JPEG-based graphics file format which is closely related to PNG: it uses the PNG file structure (with a different signature) as a container format to wrap JPEG-encoded image data.\nJNG was created as an adjunct to the MNG animation format, but may be used as a stand-alone format. JNG files embed an 8-bit or 12-bit JPEG datastream in order to store color data, and may embed another datastream (1, 2, 4, 8, 16-bit PNG, or 8-bit JPEG grayscale image) for transparency information. However, a JNG may contain two separate JPEG datastreams for color information (one 8-bit and one 12-bit) to permit decoders that are unable to (or do not wish to) handle 12-bit datastreams to display the 8-bit datastream instead, if one is present.\nVersion 1.0 of the JNG specification was released on January 31, 2001 (initially as part of the MNG specification). Usually, all the applications supporting the MNG file format can handle JNG files too. For example, Konqueror has native MNG/JNG support, and MNG/JNG plugins are available for Opera, Internet Explorer, and Mozilla Firefox. The Mozilla Application Suite (and hence Netscape) originally supported MNG/JNG, but native support was removed in Mozilla 1.5a by developers, and Mozilla has not supported the format since. Safari does not support MNG/JNG.\nJNG enhances the capabilities of the JFIF format (the usual JPEG file format) by supporting transparency, two consecutive color streams (one 8-bit and the other 12-bit), and other useful PNG features like color correction, gamma correction, embedded color profiles, PNG-style metadata, checksums, etc. The transparency information inside a JNG file (as an alpha channel) can be saved either in lossless PNG format or in lossy JPEG format. This way, users can benefit from the power of JPEG compression while preserving lossless (PNG-compressed) transparency information.\nThe chunk-based structure of JNG files is essentially the same as that of PNG files, differing only in the slightly different signature and the use of different chunks.\nJNG does not have a registered Internet media type, but codice_1 can be used.\nAlternatives.\nDue to the lack of wide adoption of both the JNG and MNG format, it has fallen in disuse in favor of other formats that are in active development with similar qualities:"}
{"id": "16196", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16196", "title": "Jane Shore", "text": "Mistress of King Edward IV of England\nElizabeth \"Jane\" Shore (n\u00e9e Lambert; c. 1445 \u2013 c. 1527) was one of the many mistresses of King Edward IV of England. She became the best known in history by being later accused of conspiracy by the future King Richard III and compelled to do public penance. She was also a sometime mistress of other noblemen, including Edward's stepson, Thomas Grey, 1st Marquess of Dorset, and William Hastings, 1st Baron Hastings, but ended her life in bourgeois respectability.\nEarly life and first marriage.\nBorn in London in about 1445, Elizabeth Lambert was the daughter of a prosperous merchant, John Lambert (d. 1487), and his wife Amy (d. 1488), the daughter of a London grocer named Robert Marshall. The name \"Jane\", which has sometimes been attached to her, was the invention of a 17th-century playwright (Heywood), because during the course of the sixteenth century, her real first name was omitted, then forgotten by authors.\nSpending time in her father's shop at a young age may have brought the young Lambert into contact with ladies of high rank. C. J. S. Thompson's highly romanticised biography, \"The Witchery of Jane Shore, the Rose of London: The Romance of a Royal Mistress\" (1933) claimed that she was able to observe their behaviour and gain an understanding of the manners of those higher ranking than herself. She was thought to have been highly intelligent, and as a result, received an education that was not usually associated with a person of her class. Thompson also claimed that her beauty earned her the title of \"The Rose of London\" \u2013 although this is not mentioned in contemporary sources. According to Thomas More, writing when Shore was elderly, she had been fair of body though not tall; she was attractive to men more through her personality than her physical beauty, being intelligent, literate, merry and playful.\nLambert attracted many suitors, among them William Hastings, 1st Baron Hastings, friend and confidant of Edward IV. It is likely Hastings fell in love with Elizabeth Lambert before her marriage; his affection for her is apparent later in life by his continual protection of her.\nSuch extreme attention made John Lambert desirous of finding his daughter a suitable husband. Such an opportunity presented itself with William Shore (d. 1494), a goldsmith and banker and common visitor to the Lambert home. He was approximately 14 or 15 years older than Jane. Though handsome and well-to-do, he never really won her affections. Their marriage was annulled in March 1476 after she petitioned for the annulment of her marriage on the grounds that her husband was impotent, which prevented her from fulfilling her desire to have children. Pope Sixtus IV commissioned three bishops to decide the case, and they granted the annulment.\nRoyal mistress.\nAccording to the Patent Rolls for 4 December 1476, it was during this same year that Lambert began her liaison with Edward IV, after his return from France. Edward remained involved with her until his death. She had a large amount of influence over the king, but would not use it for her own personal gain. This was exemplified by her practice of bringing those out of favour before the king to help them gain pardon. Lambert, according to the official records, was not showered with gifts, unlike many of Edward's previous mistresses. Their relationship lasted until Edward's death in 1483. A story dating from 1714 suggests that her advocacy saved Eton College from loss of its lands and buildings to St George\u2019s, Windsor, and the society for the ladies at Eton College is called the Jane Shore Society in her memory.\nOpen penance and prison.\nLambert is also known to have two other lovers, Edward IV's eldest stepson, Thomas Grey, 1st Marquess of Dorset, and William Hastings, 1st Baron Hastings. Grey's wife was the wealthy heiress Cecily Bonville, 7th Baroness Harington, who also happened to be Hastings' stepdaughter. Shore was instrumental in bringing about the alliance between Hastings and the Woodvilles, which was formed while Richard, Duke of Gloucester, was Protector, before he took the throne as King Richard III. She was accused of carrying messages between Hastings and Edward IV's widow, Elizabeth Woodville. It was because of her role in this alliance that Shore was charged with conspiracy, along with Hastings and the Woodvilles, against the Protector's government.\nLambert's punishment included open penance at Paul's Cross for her promiscuous behaviour by Richard. Shore accordingly went in her chemise through the streets one Sunday with a taper (thin candle) in her hand, attracting a lot of male attention along the way. After her public penitence, Lambert resided in Ludgate prison.\nSecond marriage and later life.\nWhile in Ludgate prison, Lambert captivated the King's Solicitor General, Thomas Lynom. After he expressed an interest in Lambert to Richard, the king tried to dissuade him for his own good but if Lynom were determined on the marriage, to release Lambert from prison and put her in the charge of her father until Richard's next arrival in London when the marriage could take place. Despite the king's dissuasion, they were married. It is believed that Lambert lived the remainder of her life in bourgeois respectability. Lynom lost his position as King's Solicitor when Henry VII defeated Richard III at the Battle of Bosworth in August 1485, but he was able to stay on as a mid-level bureaucrat in the new reign, becoming a gentleman who sat on the commissions in the Welsh Marches and clerk controller to Arthur, Prince of Wales, at Ludlow Castle. Thomas More attested that even in her old age an attentive observer might discern in her shrivelled countenance traces of her former beauty.\nAccording to Michael Drayton, who had seen a purported portrait of her, \"her hair [was] of a dark yellow, her face round and full, her eye gray, delicate harmony\".\nFiction.\nBibliography.\nFor a bibliography see James L. Harner, \"Jane Shore in Literature: A Checklist\" in \"Notes and Queries\", v. 226, December 1981, p.\u00a0496.\nFilm.\nThe IMDb lists three films titled \"Jane Shore\": \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16200", "revid": "50317659", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16200", "title": "Jack Kemp", "text": "American politician and football player (1935\u20132009)\nJack French Kemp (July 13, 1935 \u2013 May 2, 2009) was an American politician, professional football player, and U.S. Army veteran who served as the ninth U.S. secretary of housing and urban development in the administration of President George H. W. Bush from 1989 to 1993. A member of the Republican Party from New York, he previously served nine terms in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1971 to 1989. He was the Republican Party's vice presidential nominee in the 1996 election, as the running mate of Bob Dole; they lost to incumbent president Bill Clinton and Vice President Al Gore. Kemp had previously contended for the presidential nomination in the 1988 Republican primaries.\nBefore entering politics, Kemp briefly played in the National Football League (NFL) and the Canadian Football League (CFL), but became a star in the American Football League (AFL). He served as a captain of both the Los Angeles / San Diego Chargers and the Buffalo Bills, earning the AFL Most Valuable Player award in 1965 after leading the Bills to a second consecutive championship. He played in the AFL for all 10 years of its existence, appeared in its All-Star game seven times, played in its championship game five times, and set many of the league's career passing records. Kemp also co-founded the AFL Players Association, for which he served five terms as president. During his early football career, he served in the United States Army Reserve.\nAs an economic conservative, Kemp advocated low taxes and supply-side policies during his political career. His positions spanned the social spectrum, ranging from his conservative opposition to abortion to his more libertarian stances advocating immigration reform. As a proponent of both Chicago school and supply-side economics, he is notable as an influence upon Ronald Reagan's political agenda and the architect of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, which is known as the Kemp\u2013Roth tax cut.\nAfter his days in political office, Kemp remained active as a political advocate and commentator; he served on corporate and nonprofit organization boards. He also authored, co-authored, and edited several books. He promoted American football and advocated for retired professional football players. Kemp was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2009 by President Barack Obama.\nEarly life.\nYouth.\nBorn and raised in Los Angeles, Kemp was the third of four sons of Frances Elizabeth (n\u00e9e Pope) and Paul Robert Kemp Sr. Paul turned his motorcycle messenger service into a trucking company that grew from one to 14 trucks. Frances was a social worker and Spanish teacher. Kemp grew up in the heavily Jewish Wilshire district of West Los Angeles, but his tight-knit middle-class family attended the Church of Christ, Scientist. In his youth, sports consumed Kemp, who once chose the forward pass as the subject of a school essay on important inventions, although his mother attempted to broaden his horizons with piano lessons and trips to the Hollywood Bowl.\nKemp attended Melrose Avenue's Fairfax High School, which was, at the time, known for its high concentration of both Jewish students and children of celebrities. Over 95% of Kemp's classmates were Jewish, and he later became a supporter of Jewish causes. His classmates included musician Herb Alpert, baseball pitcher Larry Sherry, and academic Judith A. Reisman. During his years in high school, Kemp worked with his brothers at his father's trucking company in downtown Los Angeles. In his spare time, he was a rigorous reader, preferring history and philosophy books.\nCollege.\nAfter graduating from high school in 1953, he attended Occidental College, a founding member of the NCAA Division III Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference. Kemp selected Occidental because its football team used professional formations and plays, which he hoped would help him to become a professional quarterback. At and , he considered himself too small to play for the USC Trojans or UCLA Bruins, the major Southern California college football programs.\nAt Occidental, Kemp was a record-setting javelin hurler and played several positions on the football team: quarterback, defensive back, place kicker, and punter. Although he was near-sighted, Kemp was tenacious on the field. During his years as starting quarterback, the 1955 and 1956 Occidental teams posted 6\u20132 and 3\u20136 records. Kemp was named a Little All-America player one year in which he threw for over 1,100\u00a0yards. That year, he led the nation's small colleges in passing. He and close friend Jim Mora, who later became an NFL head coach, were members of the Alpha Tau Omega fraternity. Another teammate in college was Ron Botchan. Kemp declined to become involved in student government. After graduating from Occidental with a degree in physical education, he pursued postgraduate studies in economics at Long Beach State University and California Western University in San Diego, and served in the military from 1958 to 1962.\nMarriage, family, and faith.\nKemp graduated from Occidental in 1957 and married Joanne Main, his college sweetheart, after she graduated from Occidental in 1958. Main had grown up in Fillmore, California, and attended Fillmore High School in Ventura County. Kemp's Biblical Literature professor, Keith Beebe, presided over the wedding. The Kemps had two sons. Both were professional football quarterbacks: Jeff Kemp (born in 1959) played in the NFL from 1981 to 1991, and Jimmy Kemp (born in 1971) played in the CFL from 1994 to 2002. Significantly for a man with his demanding schedule, Jack never missed one of their games as children or in college. They also had two daughters: Jennifer Kemp Andrews (born in 1961) and Judith Kemp (born in 1963).\nJoanne Kemp once suffered a miscarriage, which Kemp later said made him re-evaluate the sanctity of human life and affirmed his opposition to abortion.\nFollowing his wedding, Kemp converted to his wife's Presbyterian faith. He identified as a born-again Christian.\nKemp was a 33rd degree Freemason in the Northern Masonic Jurisdiction.\nFootball career.\nAfter being selected by the Detroit Lions in the 17th round of the 1957 NFL draft, Kemp was cut from the team before the 1957 NFL season began. He spent 1957 with the Pittsburgh Steelers and 1958 on the taxi squads of the San Francisco 49ers and New York Giants. The Giants hosted the NFL championship game, known as the \"Greatest Game Ever Played\" and the first overtime NFL playoff game, but, as a third-string quarterback member of the taxi squad, Kemp did not take the field.\nIn 1958, Kemp joined the United States Army Reserve and he served a year on active duty as a private to complete his initial training. He was a member of the San Diego\u2013based 977th Transportation Company from 1958 to 1962. When his unit was activated for the Berlin Crisis of 1961, Kemp received a medical exemption for his chronically separated left shoulder. The injury led to his discharge from the Reserve in July 1962.\nIn 1959, Kemp played one game for the Calgary Stampeders of the Canadian Football League, which made him ineligible for the NFL, in 1959. According to his older brother Tom, his parents drove him from California to Calgary, Alberta, only to see him cut. By this time, Kemp had been cut from five professional teams (Lions, Steelers, Giants, 49ers, and Stampeders) and his family encouraged him to get on with his life. On February 9 and 11, 1960, the newly formed AFL agreed to \"no tampering\" policies with the NFL and CFL respectively, protecting each league's players. Players like Kemp, with modest NFL experience, were often signed by the AFL at the time. Kemp signed as a free agent with the AFL's Los Angeles Chargers.\nSid Gillman era (1960\u20131962).\nIn 1960, Kemp led the Chargers to a Western Division Championship with a 10\u20134 record. He finished second in the league to Frank Tripucka in passing attempts, completions, and yards (making him and Tripucka the league's first 3,000-yard passers), led the AFL in yards per completion and times sacked, and finished one rushing touchdown short of the league lead. Under Kemp, the Chargers' offense averaged 46\u00a0points over its last four games and scored more than 41\u00a0points in five of its last nine games. In the AFL championship game, he led the team to field goals on its first two possessions, but after the Houston Oilers posted a touchdown in the second quarter for a 7\u20136 lead, the Chargers never recovered.\nIn 1961, \"San Diego Union\" editor Jack Murphy convinced Barron Hilton to move the Chargers from Los Angeles to San Diego. Kemp led the relocated team to a 12\u20132 record and a repeat Western Division Championship. He again finished second in passing yards (this time to George Blanda). The Chargers earned an AFL championship game rematch against the Oilers. However, this time the Chargers were unable to score until a fourth-quarter field goal in a 10\u20133 loss.\nIn 1962, Kemp broke his middle finger when he struck a helmet against the New York Titans in the second game of the season and was unable to play. He persuaded his doctors to set his broken finger around a football, so that his grip would not be affected once the finger healed. Chargers coach Sid Gillman put Kemp on waivers to try to \"hide\" him. Buffalo Bills coach Lou Saban noticed that Kemp was available and claimed him for a $100 waiver fee on September 25, 1962, in what sportswriter Randy Schultz has called one of the biggest bargains in professional football history. The Dallas Texans and Denver Broncos also attempted to claim Kemp, but he was awarded to Buffalo by AFL commissioner Joe Foss.\nLou Saban era (1962\u20131965).\nAccording to Billy Shaw, Kemp's acquisition solved the Bills' quarterback problem, but Kemp was not excited about coming to Buffalo. According to Van Miller, \"Jack's a skier, and he wanted to go to Denver and play for the Broncos. He hated the thought of coming to Buffalo.\" In Buffalo, he would become known for his love of reading a broad range of books including those by Henry Thoreau, which led to chidings from Saban.\nInjuries, including the broken finger, kept Kemp from playing for most of 1962. That season, Kemp received a military draft notice for service in the Vietnam War but was granted a draft waiver because of a knee problem. The injuries healed, and Kemp debuted for Buffalo on November 18, 1962, by directing the only touchdown drive in a 10\u20136 win over the Oakland Raiders. His start on December 8 versus New York (which he won 20-3), combined with his start against New York for San Diego (which he won 40-14) months earlier, made Kemp the first quarterback to ever start against the same team twice while playing for two different teams. As of 2025, six other quarterbacks have joined Kemp in this distinction, but only Kemp was successful in winning both starts. He played only four games for Buffalo in 1962, but made the AFL All-Star team. The Bills won three of their last four games to finish 7\u20136\u20131.\nOn December 14, 1962, the Bills outbid the Green Bay Packers for Notre Dame quarterback Daryle Lamonica. In 1963, a four-season starting quarterback battle began that continued until Lamonica left for the Raiders. Lamonica felt he \"learned a lot from Jack about quarterbacking. And I truly believe that we were a great one-two punch at the position for the Bills.\" In 1963, Kemp led the Bills from a slow start to a tie for the AFL Eastern Division lead with a 7\u20136\u20131 record. Kemp again placed second in passing attempts, completions, and yards, and he also finished second to teammate Cookie Gilchrist in rushing touchdowns. The Bills played the Boston Patriots in an Eastern Division playoff game to determine the division title on December 28, in weather. Buffalo replaced Kemp with Lamonica after falling behind 16\u20130, but still lost 26\u20138.\nKemp was said to be the \"clubhouse lawyer\" for the Bills because of his role in mediating conflicts. In 1964, he managed personalities such as Gilchrist, who walked off the field when plays were not being called for him, and Saban, whom he kept from cutting Gilchrist the following week. He also managed the politics of his quarterback battle with Lamonica, who engineered four winning touchdown drives in the Bills' first seven games. Kemp was the first and only professional football player to pass for three touchdowns in the first quarter of a season-opening game, against the Kansas City Chiefs in 1964, until the record was tied but not broken, 47 years later in 2011 by Aaron Rodgers. The 1964 team won its first nine games and went 12\u20132 for the regular season, winning the Eastern Division with a final game victory over the Patriots at Fenway Park. Kemp led the league in yards per attempt and finished one rushing touchdown short of the league lead, which was shared by Gilchrist and Sid Blanks. In the AFL championship game, he scored the final touchdown with just over nine minutes left in a 20\u20137 victory. Not long after, Kemp played a key role in an off the field decision. Kemp was part of the All-Star Game played three weeks after the Championship Game alongside teammates such as Cookie Gilchrist and Ernie Warlick, with the game scheduled to be played in New Orleans, Louisiana. However, Gilchrist led a movement of African American players wanting to boycott the game due to experiencing discrimination by cab drivers and others during their time in New Orleans; Kemp saw this firsthand when Gilchrist, and Warlick were not allowed to share a cab with him. Kemp attended a boycott meeting and alongside Ron Mix convinced the white players to go with the idea of a boycott. One day after the players left the city, AFL Commissioner Joe Foss moved the game to Houston, Texas.\nAccording to Lamonica, the 1965 team had a new emphasis: \"In '64 we had depended a lot on Gilchrist and our running attack to carry us.\u00a0.\u00a0.But that all changed in '65. The Bills had traded Gilchrist in the off season to the Denver Broncos. So we went to a pass-oriented game more that season than we ever had before. We not only went to our receivers, but we threw a lot to our running backs. And I really think it brought out the best in Jack that year.\" In 1965, the Bills finished with a 10\u20133\u20131 record. Kemp finished the season second in the league in pass completions. In the 1965 AFL Championship Game, Buffalo defeated the Chargers 23\u20130; for Kemp, the victory was special because it came against his former team. Kemp's role in leading the Bills to a repeat championship without Gilchrist and with star receiver Elbert Dubenion playing only three games earned him a share of the AFL MVP awards that he split with former Charger teammate, Paul Lowe. Kemp also won the Associated Press award and the Championship Game Most Valuable Player award.\nJoe Collier and John Rauch eras (1966\u20131969).\nFollowing the championship game, Saban resigned to coach the University of Maryland and defensive coordinator Joe Collier was promoted to head coach for the 1966 season. Kemp led the Bills to their third consecutive division title with a 9\u20134\u20131 record. However, in the AFL championship game, which was played for the right to represent the AFL in Super Bowl I, the Bills lost to the Kansas City Chiefs 31\u20137. Kemp was named an AFL All-Star for the sixth consecutive year. The 1967 Bills endured a 4\u201310 1967 AFL season, in which Kemp was not named to the All-Star game for the first time in his AFL career.\nOn August 23, 1968, the Bills suffered a blowout preseason loss to the Houston Oilers. On August 26, Collier put the Bills through a 40-play scrimmage. During the scrimmage, Ron McDole fell on Kemp's right knee and injured it, forcing Kemp to sit out the entire 1968 season. The Bills went 1\u201312\u20131 without Kemp.\nDespite Kemp's return from injury and the arrival of running back O. J. Simpson, the Bills only compiled a 4\u201310 record during the 1969 season under new coach John Rauch. Kemp was named an AFL All-Star in 1969 for the seventh time in the league's 10 years. He advocated recognition of the league, and in its last year, 1969, lobbied Pete Rozelle to have AFL teams wear an AFL patch to honor it. In 1969, the Erie County Republican Party approached him about running for the United States Congress. After the January 17, 1970, AFL All-Star game, Kemp returned home and talked to his wife before deciding to enter politics. Kemp said, \"I had a four-year no-cut contract with the Bills at the time. ...\u00a0I figured that if I lost I could always come back and play. But the fans had their say and I was elected to Congress.\"\nSports career summary.\nKemp led Buffalo to the AFL playoffs four straight years (1963\u20131966), three consecutive Eastern Division titles (1964\u20131966) and two straight AFL Championships (1964\u20131965). He led the league in career passes attempted, completions, and yards gained passing. He played in five of the AFL's 10 Championship Games, and holds the same career records (passing attempts, completions, and yardage) for championships. He is second in many other championship game categories, including career and single-game passer rating. He ranks sixth in rushing touchdowns by an NFL or AFL quarterback with 40; at the time of his retirement, he was second only to Otto Graham at 44. A \"Sporting News\" All-League selection at quarterback in 1960 and 1965, and the AFL MVP in 1965. He was the only AFL quarterback to be listed as a starter all 10 years of the league's existence and one of only 20 players to serve all 10 of those years. His number 15 was retired by the Bills in 1984. In 2012, the Professional Football Researchers Association named Kemp to the PRFA Hall of Very Good Class of 2012.\nHowever, despite his success and important AFL records, he is most prominently listed in the NFL record book for less flattering accomplishments, including his place as a former record holder for most quarterback sacks in a game. Despite Kemp's many records, Joe Namath and Len Dawson were selected as the quarterbacks for the All-time AFL team. Kemp is a member of the Greater Buffalo Sports Hall of Fame and the Buffalo Bills' Wall of Fame.\nKemp co-founded the AFL Players Association with Tom Addison of the Boston Patriots, and was elected its president five times. His founding of and involvement in the players' union contributed to his frequent siding with the Democrats on labor issues later in his career.\nThe NCAA's highest honor, the Theodore Roosevelt Award, was presented to Kemp in 1992, and he was named one of the association's 100 most influential student-athletes in 2006.\nPolitical career.\nKemp's political career began long before his 1970 campaign. In 1960 and 1961, Kemp was an editorial assistant to \"San Diego Union\" editor and future Richard Nixon aide Herb Klein. Subsequently, Kemp became a volunteer in both Barry Goldwater's 1964 presidential campaign and Ronald Reagan's successful 1966 California gubernatorial campaign. In the 1967 football off-season, Kemp worked on Reagan's staff in Sacramento. In 1969, he was special assistant to the Republican National Committee chairman.\nKemp was a voracious reader, and his political beliefs were founded in early readings of Goldwater's \"The Conscience of a Conservative\", Ayn Rand's novels, and Friedrich von Hayek's \"The Constitution of Liberty\". He also brought from his football career a belief in racial equality which came from playing football with black teammates. As Kemp said, \"I wasn't there with Rosa Parks or Dr. King or John Lewis. But I am here now, and I am going to yell from the rooftops about what we need to do.\" Kemp's football colleagues confirmed this influence: John Mackey explained that \"the huddle is colorblind.\"\nHouse of Representatives (1971\u20131989).\nAs a self-described \"bleeding-heart conservative\", Kemp represented a part of the suburban Buffalo region known as the Southtowns (that traditionally voted Democratic) in the United States House of Representatives from 1971 to 1989. He was described as having the charisma of the earlier John F. Kennedy. David Rosenbaum described Kemp as an independent politician who often legislated outside his committees' jurisdictions and often spoke in favor of ideals and principles rather than his party's political platforms. As a supply-sider, he was not a proponent of balanced budgeting and trivialized it while speaking of growth as an economic goal.\nThe Erie County, New York Republicans had drafted Kemp after incumbent congressman Richard D. McCarthy decided to run for the United States Senate. During his inaugural campaign, his district was in economic malaise, and \"The New York Times\" described him as a John F. Kennedy throwback who campaigned on family values, patriotism, sports, and defense. Upon his election to the Congress in a class of sixty-two freshmen, he was one of six newcomers\u2014along with Ronald Dellums, Bella Abzug, Louise Day Hicks, Robert Drinan, and Pete du Pont\u2014discussed in \"Time\". The article described him as a football fan like United States President Richard Nixon and as the recipient of advice from White House adviser Robert Finch and former Kemp boss Herb Klein, Nixon's director of communications. The Nixon aides encouraged Kemp to endorse the Cambodian invasion and to oppose criticism of Nixon's war policies in order to firm up Kemp's support from military hawks.\nKemp championed several Chicago school and supply-side economics issues, including economic growth, free markets, free trade, tax simplification and lower tax rates on both employment and investment income. He was a long-time proponent of the flat tax. He also defended the use of anti-Communist contra forces in Central America, supported the gold standard, spoke for civil rights legislation, opposed abortion, and was the first lawmaker to popularize enterprise zones, which he supported to foster entrepreneurship and job creation and expand homeownership among public housing tenants. During his career, he sometimes sounded like a liberal Democrat; he supported affirmative action and rights for illegal immigrants. \"The New York Times\" described Kemp as the most proactive combatant in the war on poverty since Robert F. Kennedy. He differed from Rockefeller Republicans and earlier combatants such as Lyndon Johnson by supporting incentive-based systems instead of traditional social programs. For his commitment to inner city concerns from within the Republican party, David Gergen heralded him as a \"courageous voice in the wilderness.\" Although he was liberal on many social issues and supported civil liberties for homosexuals, he opposed certain gay rights such as the right to teach in schools. Kemp at times felt his role was that of \"freewheeling, entrepreneurial, wildcatting backbencher.\"\n\"Time\" identified 38-year-old second-term congressman Kemp as a future leader in its 1974 \"Faces for the Future\" feature. Another early-career notable magazine appearance was in a 1978 issue of \"Esquire\". The article explained allegations of homosexual activity among staffers in Ronald Reagan's Sacramento office in 1967; Kemp was not implicated. Kemp considered running for the U.S. Senate in 1980 and Hugh Sidey mentioned him as a contender to unseat Jimmy Carter in the 1980 presidential election and was a front runner for the vice presidency at the 1980 Republican National Convention, where he received 43\u00a0votes from conservative detractors of George H. W. Bush. After he was reelected for a sixth term in 1980, his Republican peers elected him to a party leadership position, and he served seven years as chairman of the House Republican Conference. This promotion occurred immediately after Kemp and David Stockman urged Reagan by memorandum to dedicate his first 100\u00a0days to working on an economic package with Congress. Kemp considered running for Governor of New York in 1982 but ultimately decided to stay in the House. By 1984, many viewed Kemp as Reagan's heir apparent.\nKemp had his first encounter with supply-side economics in 1976, when \"The Wall Street Journal\"'s Jude Wanniski interviewed him at his congressional office. Kemp questioned Wanniski all day (until midnight, at Kemp's Bethesda, Maryland home) and was eventually converted to University of Southern California professor Arthur Laffer's supply-side discipline. Thereafter, Kemp espoused supply-side economics freely, and in 1978 he and Sen. William Roth of Delaware proposed tax-cutting legislation. Kemp has been credited as responsible for supply-side economics' inclusion in President Reagan's economic plan, although at the time of Robert Mundell's Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics recognition some attributed much of the credit to Mundell, Laffer, Robert Bartley, and Wanniski. In 1979, Kemp wrote \"An American Renaissance\" (), to deliver his message that \"A rising tide lifts all boats.\" Although the realization of early 1980s tax cuts are attributed to Reagan, they were initiated by Kemp and Roth through their 1981 Kemp\u2013Roth Tax Cut legislation. Reagan's budget based on this legislation passed over the objection of United States House Committee on Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski.\nDuring the Reagan years, Kemp and his followers ignored budget balancing while promoting tax cuts and economic growth. These tax cuts have been credited by conservatives for the economic growth from 1983 to 1990, which by 1996 had become one of the longest expansions in American history. Kemp notes that Federal Reserve chairman Paul Volcker's success at stemming inflation and the favorable regulatory environment were also major factors. Detractors note that the expansion was fueled by undesirable sectors like gaming, prisons, medical treatment, and credit card use.\nAn early Kemp tax reform attempt was an unsuccessful 1979 proposal to index tax brackets for cost of living fluctuations, which was incorporated in Reagan's 1980 package. Kemp co-sponsored a legislative attempt at enterprise zones in 1980. One of Kemp's more trying times as a congressman came in 1982 when Reagan decided to reverse the tax cuts and promote tax increases. The reversal was controversial and stimulated opposition by Kemp. Nonetheless, the revised taxes passed. In 1983, Kemp opposed the policies of chairman Volcker on multiple occasions. The debates included domestic monetary involvement and roles in funding the International Monetary Fund.\nKemp delivered speeches at several Republican National Conventions. He addressed the convention on July 15 at the 1980 Republican National Convention in Detroit, Michigan and on August 21 at the 1984 Republican National Convention in Dallas, Texas. During the 1984 Convention, with Trent Lott as Republican Party Platform Committee chairman, Congressmen Kemp and Newt Gingrich claimed control of the party platform to the consternation of G.O.P. senators Bob Dole and Howard Baker. Kemp's official role was as the chairman of the platform subcommittee on foreign policy. However, the three platform planks that he proposed involved tax hikes, the gold standard and the role of the Federal Reserve. Despite Kemp's official role, his real influence as an author was on the grammatical structure of the plank on tax hikes. By 1985, Kemp was a leading contender for the 1988 presidential nomination. He also delivered remarks on free enterprise zones at the 1992 Republican National Convention in Houston, Texas. Despite efforts and considerations of expanding his political domain, Kemp never held a fundraiser outside of his suburban Western New York district until well into his eighth term in Congress.\nKemp was a critic of association football, known as soccer in the United States. In 1986, during a House floor debate over whether the United States should host the 1994 FIFA World Cup, Kemp proclaimed: I think it is important for all those young out there\u2014who someday hope to play real football, where you throw it and kick it and run with it and put it in your hands\u2014[that] a distinction should be made that football is democratic capitalism, whereas soccer is a European socialist sport. Kemp compared his speech to George Carlin's 1984 comedy routine on the differences between baseball and American football and wrote that his \"tongue was firmly planted in cheek\" when making the speech. Despite the levity of the speech, it garnered significant backlash. However, he continued to insist that soccer's main problem is \"it doesn't have a quarterback\". Kemp noted that about half of his grandchildren play or have played organized soccer and claimed to have \"changed\" his position on soccer. He even attended the 1994 FIFA World Cup with longtime soccer fan Henry Kissinger, although he wrote during the 2006 FIFA World Cup that soccer can be interesting to watch but is still a \"boring game\".\nPresidential bid (1988).\nIn 1988, if Kemp had won his campaign for the United States presidency, it would have made him the first person to move from the United States House of Representatives to the White House since James Garfield. When he formed his exploratory committee, he signed Ed Rollins, Reagan's 1984 re-election political director, as an advisor. From the outset, Kemp had failed to position himself as the primary alternative to Vice President Bush. Except for a select few cognoscenti, the general public did not recognize Kemp's leadership ability, although he was a successful man of ideas. In fact, most of the Republican electorate found themselves unfamiliar with Kemp early in his campaign. Political pundits recognized him, however, as a visionary idea man. In addition, he was quickly perceived as a verbose speaker who sometimes lost contact with his audience. Although Kemp tried to appeal to conservatives, his libertarian philosophies of tolerance and individual rights and his commitment to supporting minorities, women, blue-collar workers and organized labor clashed with conservative voters' social and religious values. To Democrats, Kemp's free-market philosophies were a form of laissez-faire anarchy. However, as much as Kemp wanted to minimize government's role, he acknowledged that moves toward a more laissez-faire system should be well-thought out.\nAfter the May 1987 Gary Hart\u2013Donna Rice scandal, a questionnaire by \"The New York Times\" requested things such as psychiatric records and access to FBI files from all 14 presidential candidates. Candidates from each party expressed opinions on both sides of the personal privacy issue, and Kemp rejected the \"Times\" inquiry as \"beneath the dignity of a presidential candidate\". His campaign was on an early positive course with many key early endorsements in New Hampshire, but Bush held the support of much of the Republican establishment in New York. Although he had an eclectic mix of supporters, Kemp's campaign began borrowing against anticipated Federal matching funds because it had quickly spent itself into the red, which may have been due to the use of expensive direct mail fundraising techniques. To offset his socially moderate stances, Kemp clarified his opposition to abortion, his support of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) and his support for a stronger military than that favored by Secretary of State George Shultz. To position himself as Reagan's successor, Kemp called for Shultz's resignation based on claims that Shultz had neglected freedom fighters in Afghanistan and Nicaragua and had waffled on the SDI. In an attempt to highlight his stands on key Reagan Era foreign policy initiatives, Kemp traveled in September 1987 to Costa Rica, Honduras and El Salvador to lobby the presidents of those nations against the Arias Peace Plan\u2014a peace accord US conservatives felt too conciliatory to Central American communists. He was accompanied on the trip by 50-plus US conservative leaders.\nDespite a platform covering the full range of political subjects, Kemp's primary campaign weapon was a fiscal policy based on tax cuts. As part of his fiscal policy, he opposed a Social Security benefits freeze and endorsed a freeze on government spending. Some viewed Kemp's supply-side stance as an attempt to ignore the national budget deficit. In late 1987, political pundits saw that Kemp needed to gain support from the far right on non-social issues. Kemp was among the majority of Republican candidates in opposition to Reagan's INF Treaty agreement with the Soviet Union's Mikhail Gorbachev despite general Republican voter approval of the treaty. With aspirations of support from right-wing voters, all candidates with low levels of poll support for the nomination took this same \"sabre-rattling\" stand. By early 1988, the moderates (Bush and Dole) were clearly the front-runners and Kemp was battling with Pat Robertson as the conservative alternative to the moderates.\nHe used a somewhat negative advertising campaign that seemed to have the intended initial effect of boosting him to serious contention. His 1988 campaign was based on the platform of supply-side economics and inner-city enterprise zones. In \"Bare Knuckles and Back Rooms: My Life in American Politics\", campaign chairman Rollins described Kemp as a candidate with foibles. Kemp's campaign managers say he was unmanageable: he ignored timers on his speeches, refused to call contributors, and refused to practice for debates. A humbling Super Tuesday, in which his 39\u00a0delegate total was fewer than eventual nominee and President Bush and both Dole and Pat Robertson, ended his campaign. After withdrawing from the race, he was still considered a contender for the vice presidential nomination. In 1989, the Kemps switched their official residence from Hamburg, New York to Bethesda, Maryland, their residence at the time of his death. In 1994, Kemp's 1988 campaign reached a settlement with the Federal Election Commission by agreeing to pay $120,000 in civil penalties for 1988 campaign election law violations for, among other things, excessive contributions, improper direct corporate donations, press overbilling, exceeding spending limits in Iowa and New Hampshire, and failure to reimburse corporations for providing air transportation.\nCabinet (1989\u20131993).\nAs a so-called \"bleeding-heart conservative\", Kemp was a logical choice for Bush as the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, whose job would be to foster public sector and private sector methods to meet the demands of public housing. However, the scandals of Reagan's Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Samuel Pierce and the neglect of the president were obstacles from the start, and Kemp was unsuccessful at either of his major initiatives: enacting enterprise zones and promoting public housing tenant ownership. The goal of these two plans was to change public housing into tenant-owned residences and to lure industry and business into inner cities with federal incentives. Although Kemp did not affect much policy as HUD's director, he cleaned up HUD's reputation, and developed a plan to salvage the Federal Housing Administration. He halted or revamped certain programs and developed an antidrug offensive, which enabled him to collaborate with Director of the National Drug Control Policy Bill Bennett. He supported \"Operation Clean Sweep\" and similar movements to prohibit firearm possession in public housing.\nAlthough Kemp coaxed Bush to support a $4\u00a0billion housing program that encouraged public housing tenants to buy their own apartments, the Democratic Congress allocated only $361\u00a0million to the plan. In addition to opposition in Congress, Kemp fought White House Budget Director Richard Darman, who opposed Kemp's pet project HOPE (Homeownership and Opportunity for People Everywhere). The project involved selling public housing to its tenants. Darman also opposed Kemp's proposed welfare adjustment of government offsets. HOPE was first proposed to White House chief of staff John Sununu in June 1989 to create enterprise zones, increase subsidies for low-income renters, expand social services for the homeless and elderly, and enact tax changes to help first-time home buyers. Sununu opposed it at first as did most of the Cabinet, but in August 1990 Sununu, at the urging of United States Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, encouraged President Bush to endorse Kemp's Economic Empowerment Task Force. However, the Persian Gulf War and the budget negotiations overshadowed Kemp's new project. Darman battled Kemp and his allies such as Gingrich, James Pinkerton, and Vin Weber. The budget left him with $256\u00a0million for his plan, which Kemp increased during some appropriations battles. Soon after Clayton Yeutter was appointed chief White House domestic policy advisor, Kemp's Economic Empowerment Task Force was abolished.\nPresident Bush avoided federal antipoverty issues, and instead used Kemp to speak on the administration's low priority conservative activist agenda. Bush's contribution to the urban agenda had been volunteerism through his \"Points of Light\" theme, and Kemp received stronger support for his ideas from presidential candidate Bill Clinton. By the time of the Los Angeles riots of 1992, Bush was a bit late in supporting enterprise zones, tenant ownership and welfare reform: Mort Zuckerman compared Bush's vision on racial issues to that of a man riding backwards in a railroad car. Nonetheless, the riots made Kemp a focal point of the administration, even though at first, Kemp had been overlooked. However, Charles E. Schumer had probably summarized the prospects of Kemp's success in advance best when he said in 1989, \"Good ideas with money can do a whole lot. Good ideas without money aren't probably going to do a whole lot,\" and the issue here was the decision not to fund Kemp's ideas. Although Kemp was unable to procure money for his visions, he was among the administration's leading users of first class corporate jets. He cited lingering effects from a knee injury as the reason he had to fly first class at government expense as the Housing Secretary.\nGenerally, his time as housing secretary was considered unsuccessful. However, although he could not get federal funding for empowerment zones passed during his tenure, by 1992 38 states had created empowerment zones, and in 1994 $3.5\u00a0billion was approved for them under President Clinton. A free market Kemp initiative to allow homeowners to subdivide their houses for the purpose of creating rental units without inordinate bureaucracy did not get executed under the Clinton administration, however. In 1992, with H. Ross Perot mounting a formidable campaign, Kemp was again considered a vice presidential candidate.\nKemp was partly at fault for not achieving either of his primary goals because he did not get along with the rest of the Cabinet. At one point, Kemp told James Baker, White House Chief of Staff, that Bush's best chance to win reelection was to dump his economic advisors in dramatic fashion. Before the 1992 Republican National Convention, Kemp and six prominent Republican conservatives prepared a controversial memo urging Bush to revise his economic policy. Contemporaneously, conservative Republicans in office and in the media such as William F. Buckley Jr. and George Will felt Dan Quayle should be ousted in favor of Kemp. This followed Kemp's reference to parts of the President's economic policy as \"gimmicks\" after the 1992 State of the Union Address. Kemp was respected within the party for opposing Bush, and towards the end of Bush's administration insiders recognized his value. In late 1991, 81 of the 166 Republican Congressmen signed a letter co-authored by Curt Weldon and Dan Burton requesting that Bush cede some domestic authority to Kemp as a \"domestic policy czar.\" The letter, highlighting Kemp's \"energy, enthusiasm and national clout\", insulted Bush. Kemp was a bit of a surprise to stay in the for the duration of his presidency, and he was described as one of the few Bush administration members who would take tough stands. Kemp did not expect to be retained if the Republicans were reelected in 1992, and some pundits agreed with him.\nPost-HUD years (1993\u20131996).\nKemp gave public speeches for $35,000 apiece between his time as Housing Secretary and his vice presidential nomination. By 1994, Kemp had embarked on 241\u00a0fund-raising dinners to raise $35\u00a0million for a 1996 presidential bid and to pay off his 1988 campaign debts. After stepping down from his $189,000 Secretary of Housing and Urban Development job, Kemp personally earned $6.9\u00a0million in the next three years, primarily for speaking on behalf of local Republican candidates. During the Super Bowl XXVIII festivities, Kemp hosted a notable fundraiser series.\nKemp was considered the star of the 1992 Republican National Convention. In 1992 and 1993, Kemp was considered the favorite or co-favorite for the 1996 presidential nomination. At the time of the 1994 mid-term elections, Kemp was widely anticipated to announce his candidacy for 1996, and his supporters wanted a formal announcement by the end of the year. In January 1995, Kemp's stated reason for not entering the 1996 Republican Party presidential primaries was that his personal beliefs were out of balance with the contemporary Republican political landscape: Kemp opposed term limits, he always preferred tax cuts to anything resembling a balanced budget amendment and, unlike most Republicans, favored federal incentives to combat urban poverty. In 1995, Gloria Borger noted Kemp was not in step with the 1994 Contract with America. Kemp also noted a distaste for the fundraising necessary for a presidential campaign. Gergen stated that by 1996 the selection process had become so expensive, mean and personally invasive that it discouraged several top Republicans from running.\nSenate Majority Leader Dole and Gingrich appointed Kemp to head a tax reform commission, (the Kemp Commission), in response to voter concern that the tax code had become too complicated. Kemp championed many issues including the flat tax, which he formally proposed after he was appointed. The proposal included some politically popular income tax deductions, such as mortgage interest, but it remained fairly general. Among the 1996 Republican Party candidates, both Steve Forbes and Phil Gramm proposed the flat tax.\nDuring the campaign, Kemp's endorsement was highly coveted. Forbes had tried to get Kemp to run in the 1996 campaign, but Kemp declined and in fact endorsed Forbes just as Dole was closing in on the nomination, and just after Dole gained the endorsements of former contenders Lamar Alexander and Richard Lugar. Some feel the primary reason for the endorsement was to keep the flat tax idea and other supply-side views alive. Many thought Kemp had destroyed his own political future with the endorsement, and Kemp profusely apologized to Dole's campaign offices. After it became clear Dole would be the nominee, Kemp attempted to form a bipartisan seminar with Felix Rohatyn to produce a fiscal plan that could be endorsed by both parties.\nKemp was also outspoken on immigration at around this time: according to Kemp's interpretation of a scientific index that he and Bennett support, \"immigrants are a blessing, not a curse.\" In 1994, Kemp and Bennett opposed California ballot Proposition 187, a measure to bar illegal immigrants from obtaining public services, in direct opposition to first-term Republican California Governor Pete Wilson, one of its endorsers who was running for re-election. Kemp supported rights for illegal immigrants, and opposed Lamar Smith and Alan Simpson's proposed restrictions on legal immigration.\nVice presidential nomination (1996).\nKemp had a reputation as the highest-profile progressive Republican. When Dole declined an invitation to speak to the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, he suggested Kemp as a substitute even before Kemp had become the vice presidential nominee. On August 5, 1996, Dole announced a 15% across-the-board tax cut in response to both the Forbes campaign and Kemp's tax reform commission. Several of Dole's other campaign ideas came from Kemp and Bill Bennett's Empower America, which had Jeane Kirkpatrick, Weber, Forbes and Alexander as principals. For example, Dole borrowed Kirkpatrick's tough foreign policy, Bennett's \"right conduct\" and even Alexander's school choice interest.\nBennett declined the offer to be Dole's running mate but suggested Kemp, a man described as Dole's antagonist. On August 16, 1996, the Republican Party chose Kemp as its vice presidential , running alongside former Senator Dole. Kemp was seen as a means to attract conservative and libertarian-minded voters like those of tough nomination-challengers Forbes and Pat Buchanan. Kemp was chosen over Connie Mack, John McCain, and Carroll Campbell, and it is assumed that this was partly because Kemp had several former staffers in influential positions as Dole's senior advisors. Dole had had a long history of representing the budget-balancing faction of the Party, while Kemp had had a long history of representing the tax-cutting advocates, and Kemp's tax-cutting fiscal track record was seen as the perfect fit for the ticket. When Kemp became Dole's running mate in 1996, they appeared on the cover of the August 19, 1996, issue of \"Time\" magazine, but the pair barely edged out a story on the reported discovery of extraterrestrial life on Mars; \"Time\" inset the latter on the cover and wrote about how difficult the decision was.\nThe two politicians had a storied history stemming from alternative perspectives and objectives. Dole was a longstanding conservative deficit hawk who had even voted against John F. Kennedy's tax cuts, while Kemp was an outspoken supply-sider. In the early 1980s, according to David Stockman, Kemp persuaded Reagan to make a 30% across-the-board tax cut a central 1980 presidential campaign feature. Once Reagan was elected, Dole was the Senate Finance Committee chairman who Kemp claims resisted the plan every step of the way. Dole concedes he expressed reservations about the 1981 plan. The big confrontation came after the tax plan was approved and after Dole subsequently proposed tax increases that he referred to as reforms. Kemp was vocal in his opposition to the reforms and even penned an op-ed piece in \"The New York Times,\" which enraged Dole. Reagan supported the reforms at Dole's request, causing Kemp to summon allies to meetings to stop the act, which eventually passed in 1982. At the 1984 Republican National Convention, Kemp, along with allies such as Gingrich and Lott, added a plank to the party platform that put President Reagan on record as ruling out tax increases. Gingrich called this action \"Dole proofing\" the platform, and the plank passed over Dole's opposition. Then, in 1985, Dole proposed an austere budget that barely passed in the Senate with appendectomy patient Pete Wilson casting the tying vote and Vice President Bush casting the deciding vote. In meetings with the president that excluded Dole, Kemp reworked the budget to exclude crucial Social Security cutbacks. This is said to have been Dole's most crushing political defeat and to have contributed to the Republican loss of control of the Senate. During the 1988 presidential election, the two antagonized each other. After Bush won and Kemp left Congress for the Cabinet, the two did not really cross paths again until 1996, when Kemp endorsed Dole's opponent Forbes on the eve of the New York Primary in March.\nDole despised Kemp's economic theories, but he felt Kemp-like tax cuts offered his best chance at electoral success. For his part, Kemp had to make concessions as well: he had to back expelling the children of illegal immigrants from public schools despite his longstanding opposition to Proposition 187, and mute his opposition to abolishing affirmative-action programs in California. Some derided Kemp for his compromise and referred to him as a \"con artist\". From the outset of their campaign, Dole-Kemp trailed, and they faced skeptics even from within the party. However, Kemp was able to use the nomination to promote his opposition to Clinton's partial birth abortion ban veto. During the campaign, Kemp and Forbes advocated for a stronger stand on tax cutting than Dole used. However, in general, the opinion was that Kemp was helpful to the ticket's chances of catching Bill Clinton, and Kemp's advocacy gave a clear picture of the tax reforms that would likely occur on the condition of a successful campaign. Kemp was seen as likely to influence several types of swing voters, especially those of his native state of California, and even the Democrats feared Kemp might lure voters.\nAfter receiving the nomination, Kemp became the ticket's spokesman for minorities and the inner-city. Due to agreement on the self-help policy that Louis Farrakhan has endorsed in many fora including the Million Man March, Kemp in a sense aligned himself with Farrakhan. However, Farrakhan was perceived as being anti-Semitic, and Kemp was considered an ally of Republican Jews. This issue necessitated some political sidestepping. As the nominee, Kemp at times overshadowed Dole. In fact, more than once, Kemp was described as if he was the presidential nominee. In addition to having overshadowed Dole, despite the negative ad campaigns that the ticket used, Kemp was a very positive running mate who relied on a pep rally type of campaign tour full of football-related metaphors and hyperbole. Although some enjoyed Kemp's style, referring to him as the Good Shepherd, his detractors, such as \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" writer Steven V. Roberts, criticized the extensive use of recounting stories of passing balls relative to the use of recounting stories of passing bills. During the campaign, Kemp expressed the opinion that Republican Party leaders did not stand behind the ticket wholeheartedly. Despite Kemp's voice on minority issues, Colin Powell's support and polls that showed about 30% of blacks identified themselves as conservatives on issues such as school prayer, school vouchers and criminal justice, the Republicans were unable to improve upon historical support levels from African-American voters.\nBoth Al Gore and Kemp had presidential aspirations, which induced pursuit of debate on a higher plane. In addition, Gore and Kemp were long-time friends, unlike Gore and his previous vice presidential opponent Dan Quayle. Thus, as debaters they avoided personal attacks. However, some felt Kemp failed to counter substantive attacks. In the final October 9, 1996, vice presidential debate against Al Gore (held as the Dole\u2013Kemp ticket trailed badly in the national polls), Kemp was soundly beaten, and Al Gore's performance is considered one of the best modern debate performances. The debate topics ranged broadly from the usual such as abortion and foreign policy to the unusual such as an incident preceding the then-current baseball playoffs, in which Roberto Alomar, the Baltimore Orioles' second baseman, cursed and spat on an umpire. The Mexico policy debate was one of the more interesting topics for critical review. The Gore victory was not a surprise since Kemp had been outmatched by Gore in previous encounters, and Gore had a reputation as an experienced and vaunted debater.\nLate career.\nIn 1993, Kemp, Bennett, Kirkpatrick and financial backer Theodore Forstmann co-founded the free market advocacy group Empower America, which later merged with Citizens for a Sound Economy to form Freedom Works. Empower America represented the populist wing of the party: while avoiding divisive issues such as abortion and gay rights, it promoted free markets and growth over balancing the budget and cutting the deficit. He resigned as co-chairman of Freedom Works in March 2005 after the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) questioned his ties to Samir Vincent, a Northern Virginia oil trader implicated in the U.N. Oil-for-food scandal who pleaded guilty to four criminal charges, including illegally acting as an unregistered lobbyist of the Iraqi government of Saddam Hussein. Testimony about Kemp became prominent in the trial. FBI informant Richard Fino tied Kemp to James Cosentino just weeks before the 1996 election.\nBy 1996, Kemp had been named a director of six corporate boards. He was a director for Hawk Corporation, IDT Corporation, CNL Hotels and Resorts, InPhonic, Cyrix Corporation and American Bankers Insurance Group. Kemp briefly served on the board of Oracle Corporation, whose CEO was his friend Larry Ellison, in 1996, but resigned when he ran for vice president; he was named to the board of Six Flags, Inc. in December 2005. Kemp opted not to stand for re-election to IDT's board in 2006. He also served on the Habitat for Humanity board of directors, and served on the board of Atlanta-based software maker EzGov Inc. Kemp also served on the board of directors of Election.com, which was the private company that ran the world's first election on the internet (won by Al Gore), the 2000 Arizona Democratic Primary. Kemp was also a business partner with Edra and Tim Blixseth promoting membership in the elite private ski and golf Yellowstone Club. Kemp also partnered with the Blixseths in a failed anti-terrorism software venture called Blxware which was investigated for \"conning\" the federal government out of $20\u00a0million in contracts for software which fraudulently claimed to detect secret messages from Al-Qaeda in television broadcast signals. Kemp was the founder and chairman of Kemp Partners, a strategic consulting firm that helps clients achieve both business and public policy goals.\nIn addition to corporate boards of directors, Kemp served on several advisory boards such as the UCLA School of Public Policy Advisory Board, and the Toyota Diversity Advisory Board as well as the Howard University Board of Trustees, on which he served since 1993. On March 25, 2003, Kemp was selected as chairman of the board of Directors of USA Football, a national advocacy group for amateur football created by the National Football League (NFL) and the NFL Players Association. The organization supports Pop Warner, American Youth Football, Boys and Girls Clubs of America, National Recreation and Park Association, Police Athletic League, YMCA, and the Amateur Athletic Union. He was also vice president of NFL Charities.\nIn the late 1990s, Kemp remained outspoken on political issues: he was critical of Clinton's International Monetary Fund lax policies toward South Korea. In early 1998, he was a serious contender for the 2000 United States presidential election, but his campaign possibilities faltered, and he instead endorsed eventual winner George W. Bush. Kemp continued his political advocacy for reform of taxation, Social Security and education. When a 1997 budget surplus was earmarked for debt repayment, Kemp opposed the plan in favor of tax cuts. Along with John Ashcroft and Alan Krueger, he endorsed reform of payroll taxes to eliminate double taxation. In addition to his fiscal and economic policies, Kemp advocated against abortion when Congress was considering a bill banning intact dilation and extractions. He also advocated for retired NFL veterans on issues such as cardiovascular screening, assisted living, disability benefits, and the 2007 joint replacement program. He argued in support of reforming immigration laws. In the late 1990s, Kemp also was a vocal advocate for free market reform in Africa, arguing that the continent had great economic growth potential if it could shed autocratic and statist governmental policies.\nIn 1997, when Gingrich was embroiled in a House ethics controversy, Kemp served as an intermediary between Dole and Gingrich to save the Republican Party leader. Later, in 2002, when Lott made caustic remarks about Strom Thurmond, Kemp was upset, and he supported Lott's apology, saying he had encouraged him to \"repudiate segregation in every manifestation.\" Kemp was among the prominent leaders who pledged to raise money in 2005 for Scooter Libby's defense when he was charged with perjury and obstruction of justice in a case regarding the release of Central Intelligence Agency information.\nIn June 2004, Kemp rescinded his support of Vernon Robinson for Congress due to the latter's views on immigration laws, citing Robinson's choice to run \"as a Pat Buchanan Republican\".\nIn 2006 Kemp, along with 2004 vice-presidential nominee John Edwards, co-chaired the Council on Foreign Relations task force on Russia, producing a document called \"Russia's Wrong Direction: What the United States Can and Should Do\". After their task force roles ended, the pair advocated solutions to poverty in America at various fora.\nOn January 6, 2008, Kemp endorsed McCain in the 2008 Republican presidential primaries shortly before the New Hampshire primary, which surprised conservative Republican tax cutters. However, as McCain neared the official nomination, the press associated McCain with Kemp more and more. Kemp prepared an open letter to Sean Hannity, Rush Limbaugh, Laura Ingraham and other conservative talk show hosts on McCain's behalf to quell their dissatisfactions. In addition, Kemp and Phil Gramm advised McCain on economic policy.\nHe was a syndicated newspaper columnist.\nIn February 2008, Kemp was associated with a group called \"Defense of Democracies\" that was advocating an electronic surveillance bill that failed in the House of Representatives. The group's television ad caused such controversy that some of its advisors, including Schumer and Donna Brazile, resigned.\nHe was a member of the advisory council of the Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation and served as co-chair of the Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission Cabinet.\nHe was a board member for the Lott IMPACT Trophy, which is awarded annually to college football's Defensive IMPACT Player of the Year.\nIllness and death.\nOn January 7, 2009, Kemp's office issued a statement announcing that he had cancer; the type of cancer and the anticipated treatment were not announced. His diagnosis and prognosis were never publicly disclosed. He continued to serve as chairman of his Washington-based Kemp Partners consulting firm and continued his involvement in charitable and political work until his death.\nOn May 2, 2009, Kemp died from cancer at his home in Bethesda, Maryland, at the age of 73. President Barack Obama praised Kemp's work on race, adding that Kemp understood that divisions involving race and class stood in the way of the country's common goals, and former President George W. Bush said that Kemp \"will be remembered for his significant contributions to the Reagan Revolution and his steadfast dedication to conservative principles during his long and distinguished career in public service.\" It was later revealed that Kemp probably had melanoma.\nLegacy.\nKemp's legacy includes the Kemp\u2013Roth Tax Cut of the 1980s, also known as the first of two \"Reagan tax cuts.\" These served as the foundation of supply-side economics, known as Reaganomics. Many Republicans have endorsed this Laffer Curve view that tax cuts can spur economic growth and reduce deficits. Although George H. W. Bush called this philosophy voodoo economics, George W. Bush and his Treasury Secretary, John W. Snow, were believers. Kemp is also remembered alongside George Wallace and William Jennings Bryan for influencing history by changing the direction of presidential elections despite their defeats.\nIn the early 21st century, Kemp continued to be considered along with Reagan as the politician most responsible for the implementation of supply-side tax cuts and along with Steve Forbes as the political figure most responsible for their continued place in the marketplace of political ideas. He has been described as a beacon of economic conservatism and a hero for his urban agenda. Today, he continues to be described as a hero to fiscal conservatives who believe that free markets and low taxes work better than government bureaucracies. Kemp was considered the leader of the progressive conservatives who are socially conservative, but avoid protectionist fiscal and trade policy.\nIn addition to Roth, he has had numerous political allies. At times, he collaborated with Gingrich and Lott on deregulation and tax cuts, collaborated with McCain and Phil Gramm on tax cuts and spending restraints, legislated with and campaigned for Joseph Lieberman, and fought poverty with James Pinkerton. Pete du Pont was a progressive conservative ally. After retiring from Congress and serving in the Cabinet, Kemp remained close to Gingrich, Lott, Weber, and Mack. Kemp was a member of the federal committee to promote Martin Luther King Jr. Day as a national holiday. As a progressive voter, he had civil rights leaders such as Benjamin Hooks, Andrew Young and Coretta Scott King and conservative black intellectuals like Glenn C. Loury and Robert L. Woodson as supporters and friends. He boasted of having Democratic friends such as William H. Gray III, Charles B. Rangel and Robert Garcia. Ken Blackwell was a Deputy Secretary under Kemp. During the Reagan presidency, when Kemp was able to effect tax cutting, a leading United States Senate tax-cutting proponent was Democrat Bill Bradley, a former basketball star. Several American football players have followed Kemp to Congress, including Steve Largent, J. C. Watts, and Heath Shuler.\nCongressman Paul Ryan cites Kemp as a mentor, and mentioned him in his acceptance speech as the Republican vice-presidential nominee in 2012.\n\"Growth is obviously what Jack Kemp was about\" stated Fred Barnes in the opening of the session \"Growth! Growth! Growth!\" of Jack Kemp Foundation's Forum on \"The Future of the American Idea\", in 2014. Kemp didn't believe in limits to growth, a blind spot shared by many politicians of his era and which prompted him to dismiss the 1991 Report of the United Nations Population Fund as \"nonsense\".\nSenator Arlen Specter in a severe rebuke of federal governmental policy, stated just one day after Kemp died of cancer, that Kemp would still be alive if the federal government had done a better job funding cancer research.\nFollowing Kemp's death, his son, Jimmy Kemp, created the Jack Kemp Foundation to continue his father's legacy. A 501(c)(3) charitable organization, the foundation's mission statement is to \"develop, engage and recognize exceptional leaders who champion the American Idea\". The foundation is located in Washington, D.C., and is committed to advancing the universal values of the American Idea: growth, freedom, democracy and hope.\nThe football stadium at Occidental College is named after him.\nBooks.\nIn addition to authoring significant legislation as a congressman, Kemp wrote or co-authored several books:\nKemp also wrote the foreword to several books:\nExplanatory footnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\"\nstyle=\"width:100%\""}
{"id": "16202", "revid": "47773670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16202", "title": "January 18", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJanuary 18 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16203", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16203", "title": "Jihad", "text": "Term for religious struggle in Islam\nJihad (; ) is an Arabic word that means \"exerting\", \"striving\", or \"struggling\", particularly with a praiseworthy aim. In an Islamic context, it encompasses almost any effort to make personal and social life conform with God's guidance, such as an internal struggle against evil in oneself, efforts to build a good Muslim community (\"ummah\"), and struggle to defend Islam. Literally meaning 'struggle', the term is most frequently associated with warfare.\n\"Jihad\" is classified into inner (\"greater\") \"jihad\", which involves a struggle against one's own passions and impulses, and outer (\"lesser\") \"jihad\", which is further subdivided into \"jihad\" of the pen/tongue (debate or persuasion) and \"jihad\" of the sword (warfare). Much of Muslim opinion considers inner \"jihad\" to have primacy over outer \"jihad\". The analysis of a large survey from 2002 reveals considerable nuance in the conceptions of \"jihad\" held by Muslims around the world, ranging from righteous living and promoting peace to fighting against the opponents of Islam.\nThe word \"jihad\" appears frequently in the Qur'an referring to both religious and spiritual struggle and to war and physical struggle, often in the idiomatic expression \"striving in the path of God \"(al-jihad fi sabil Allah)\"\", conveying a sense of self-exertion. In the \"hadiths\", \"jihad\" refers predominantly to warfare. Greater \"jihad\" refers to spiritual and moral struggle, and has traditionally been emphasized in Sufi and Ahmadiyya circles. The sense of \"jihad\" as armed resistance was first used in the context of persecution faced by Muslims when Muhammad was at Mecca, when the community had two choices: further emigration (\"hijrah\") or war. The Qur'an justifies war in self-defense or in response to aggression towards other Muslims, however the sword verses have historically been interpreted to renounce other verses and justify offensive war against unbelievers, forcibly converting polytheistic pagans during the early Muslim conquests. A set of rules pertaining to \"jihad\" were developed, including prohibitions on harming those who are not engaged in combat, on killing animals such as horses, and on unnecessary destruction of enemy property.\nIn the twentieth century, the notion of \"jihad\" lost its jurisprudential relevance and instead gave rise to ideological and political discourse. While modernist Islamic scholars have emphasized the defensive and non-military aspects of \"jihad\", some Islamists have advanced aggressive interpretations that go beyond the classical texts. The term has gained additional attention in recent decades through its use by various insurgent Islamic extremist, militant Islamist, and terrorist individuals and organizations. Today, the word \"jihad\" is often used without religious connotations, like the English \"crusade\".\nEtymology and literary origins.\nThe term \"jihad\" is derived from the Arabic root \"jahada\", meaning \"to exert strength and effort, to use all means in order to accomplish a task\". In its expanded sense, it can be fighting the enemies of Islam, as well as adhering to religious teachings, enjoining good and forbidding evil. The peaceful sense of \"efforts towards the moral uplift of society or towards the spread of Islam\" can be known as \"\"jihad\" of the tongue\" or \"\"jihad\" of the pen\", as opposed to \"\"jihad\" of the sword\". It is used as a term in \"fiqh\" (Islamic jurisprudence) mostly in the latter sense, while in Sufism mostly in the sense of fighting the \"nafs al-ammara\", which is the psychological state of succumbing to one's own desires. Spiritual and moral \"jihad\" is generally emphasized in pious and mystical circles.\nThe Hans Wehr \"Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic\" defines the term as \"fight, battle; \"jihad\", holy war (against the infidels, as a religious duty)\". However, given the range of meanings, it is incorrect to equate it simply with \"holy war\". The notion of \"jihad\" has its origins in the Islamic idea that the whole humankind will embrace Islam. In the Qur'an and in later Muslim usage, \"jihad\" is commonly followed by the expression \"fi sabil illah\", \"in the path of God.\" Muhammad Abdel-Haleem stated that it indicates \"the way of truth and justice, including all the teachings it gives on the justifications and the conditions for the conduct of war and peace.\"\nIn Modern Standard Arabic, the term \"jihad\" is used for a struggle for causes, both religious and secular. It is sometimes used without religious connotation, with a meaning similar to the English word \"crusade\" (as in \"a crusade against drugs\"). \"Jihad\" is used commonly in Arabic countries, in the neutral sense of \"a struggle for a noble cause\", as a unisex name given to children. Nonetheless, \"jihad\" is usually used in the religious sense and its beginnings trace to the Qur'an and the words and actions of Muhammad.\nQuran.\n\"Jihad\" is mentioned in four places in the Qur'an as a noun, while its derived verb is used in twenty-four places. \"Mujahid\", the active participle meaning \"jihadist\", is mentioned in two verses. In some of these mentions (see At-Tawbah 9/41, 44, 81, 86), it is understood that the word \"jihad\" directly refers to war, and in others, \"jihad\" is used in the sense of \"the effort to live in accordance with Allah's will\". Qur'anic exhortations to \"jihad\" have been interpreted by Islamic scholars both in the combative and non-combative sense. Ahmed al-Dawoody wrote that there seventeen references to or derivatives of \"jihad\" occur altogether forty-one times in eleven Meccan texts and thirty Medinan ones, with 28 mentions related to religious belief or spiritual struggle and 13 mentions related to warfare or physical struggle.\nHadith.\nThere are also many hadiths (records of the teachings, deeds and sayings of the Islamic prophet Muhammad) about \"jihad\", typically under the headings of \"kitab al-jihad\" (book of \"jihad\") or \"faza'il al-jihad\" (virtues of \"jihad\") in \"hadith\" collections or as the subject of independent works. Of the 199 \"hadith\" references to \"jihad\" in the Bukhari collection of \"hadith\", all assume that \"jihad\" means warfare.\nAmong reported sayings of Muhammad involving \"jihad\" are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The best \"Jihad\" is the word of Justice in front of the oppressive sultan.\nand\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Messenger of Allah was asked about the best \"jihad\". He said: \"The best \"jihad\" is the one in which your horse is slain and your blood is spilled.\"\u2014\u200a\nIbn Nuhaas cited a hadith from Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, where Muhammad stated that the highest kind \"jihad\" is \"The person who is killed whilst spilling the last of his blood\" (Ahmed 4/144). Muhammad also said, \u201cI cannot find anything\u201d as meritorious as \"jihad\"; he further likened \"jihad\" to \u201cpraying ceaselessly and fasting continuously\u201d. Muhammad said that \u201cif it were not a hardship for the Muslims, I would never idle behind from a raiding party going out to fight in the path of Allah... I [would] love to raid in the path of Allah and be killed, to raid again and be killed, and to raid again and be killed\u201d. Muhammad also said that \"Lining up for battle in the path of Allah [jihad] is worthier than 60 years of worship\". Muhammad claimed that any Muslim who refused to fight in \"jihad\" \u201cwill be tortured like no other sinful human\u201d in hell with confirmation from Qur'an 8:15-16. In another \"hadith\" Muhammad said, \u201cthe sword wipes away all sins\u201d and \u201cbeing killed in the path of Allah washes away impurity\u201d.\nAccording to another \"hadith\", supporting one's parents is an example of \"jihad\". It has been reported that Muhammad considered performing \"hajj\" well to be the best \"jihad\" for Muslim women.\nThe \"hadith\" emphasize \"jihad\" as one of the means to Paradise. All sins (except debt) would be forgiven for the one who dies in it. Participation in \"jihad\" had to be voluntary and intention must be pure, for \"jihad\" is only waged for the sake of God not for material wealth. On the contrary, \"jihad\" required man to put both his life and wealth at risk. \"Jihad\" is ranked as one of the highest good deeds; according to one \"hadith\" it is the third-best deed after prayer and being good to one's parents. One \"hadith\" exempts military \"jihad\" on men whose parents are alive, as serving one's parents is considered a superior \"jihad\".\nGreater and lesser \"jihad\".\nTradition distinguishes the \"greater \"jihad\"\" (inner struggle against sinful behavior) from the \"lesser \"jihad\"\" (military sense). Early Islamic thought considered non-violent interpretations of \"jihad\", especially for those Muslims who could not partake in warfare in distant lands. Most classical writings use the term \"jihad\" in the military sense. The tradition differentiating between the \"greater and lesser \"jihad\"\" is not included in any of the authoritative compilations of Hadith. In consequence, some Islamists dismiss it as not authentic.\nThe most commonly cited \"hadith\" for \"greater \"jihad\"\" is:\nA number of fighters came to Muhammad and he said \"You have come from the 'lesser \"jihad\"' to the 'greater \"jihad\"'.\" The fighters asked \"what is the greater \"jihad\"?\" Muhammad replied, \"It is the struggle against one's passions.\"\nThis passage was cited in \"The History of Baghdad\" by al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, an 11th-century Islamic scholar. This reference gave rise to the practice of distinguishing \"greater\" and \"lesser\" \"jihad\". Islamic scholars such as Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani consider the \"hadith\" to have a weak chain of transmission.\nThe concept has had \"enormous influence\" in Islamic mysticism (Sufism).\nIbn Hazm lists four kinds of \"jihad fi sabilillah\" (struggle in the cause of God):\nA related \"hadith\" tradition that has \"found its way into popular Muslim literature\", and which has been said to \"embody the Muslim mindset\" of the Islamic Golden Age (the period from the mid-8th century to mid-13th century following the relocation of the Abbasid capital from Damascus to Baghdad), is: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The ink of the scholar is more holy than the blood of the martyr.\"\nThe belief in the veracity of this \"hadith\" was a contributing factor in the efforts by successive \"caliphs\" to subsidize translations of \"Greek, Hebrew and Syriac science and philosophy texts\", and the saying continues to be heavily emphasised in certain Islamic traditions advocating intellectualism over violence, for example in Timbuktu, where it is central to one of two key lessons in the work \"Tuhfat al-Fudala\" by 16th-century Berber scholar Ahmed Baba. In general, however, fewer people today are aware of the \"hadith\", which suffers from \"a general lack of knowledge\", according to Akbar Ahmed.\nAccording to classical Islamic scholars like Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya, \"jihad\" is against four types of enemies: the lower self (\"nafs\"), Satan, the unbelievers, and the hypocrites. The first two types of \"jihad\" are purely peaceful spiritual struggles. According to Ibn Qayyim, \"Jihad against the lower self precedes \"jihad\" against external enemies.\" Confirming the central importance of the spiritual aspect of \"jihad\", Ibn Taymiyyah wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Jihad against the lower self and whims is the foundation of \"jihad\" against the unbelievers and hypocrites, for a Muslim cannot wage \"jihad\" against them unless he has waged \"jihad\" against himself and his desires first, before he goes out against them.\"\nEngaging in the greater \"jihad\" does not preclude engaging in the lesser \"jihad\". Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani recommended his followers to pursue both the greater and the lesser \"jihad\"s.\nAt least one important contemporary Twelver Shia figure, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the leader of the Iranian Revolution and the founder of the Islamic Republic of Iran, wrote a treatise on the \"Greater \"Jihad\"\" (i.e., internal/personal struggle against sin).\nRobert W. Schaefer discussed \"jihad\" and \"gazavat\" in the context of the Caucasus: \"\"Gazavat\" was the \"jihad\" of its day. \"Gazavat\" meant putting yourself on the right path (what Muslims refer to as the lesser \"jihad\") as well as expelling the invader (what is referred to as greater \"jihad\").\"\nDefensive and offensive lesser \"jihad\".\nClassical scholars considered various justifications for \"jihad\", including waging it defensively vs offensively. Scholarly opinions carried significant weight with Muslim leaders. Scholars paid more attention to conduct of war (\"jus in bello)\" than justification of war (\"jus ad bellum\"). The decision of when to wage war was often viewed as a political decision best left to political authorities.\nTwo justifications for \"jihad\" were given: defensive war against external aggression, or an offensive or preemptive attack against an enemy state. According to the majority of jurists, the \"casus belli\" (justifications for war) are restricted to aggression against Muslims, and \"fitna\"\u2014persecution of Muslims because of their religious belief. They hold that unbelief in itself is not a justification for war. These jurists therefore maintain that only combatants are to be fought; noncombatants such as women, children, clergy, the aged, the insane, farmers, serfs, the blind, and so on are not to be killed in war. Thus, the Hanaf\u012b Ibn Naj\u012bm stated: \"the reason for \"jih\u0101d\" in our [the Hanaf\u012bs] view is \"kawnuhum harb\u0101 \u201balayn\u0101\" [literally, their being at war against us].\" The Hanaf\u012b jurists al-Shayb\u0101n\u012b state that \"although unbelief in God is one of the greatest sins, it is between the individual and his God the Almighty and the punishment for this sin is to be postponed to the \"d\u0101r al-jaz\u0101\u2019\", (the abode of reckoning, the Hereafter).\" Al-Sarakhs\u012b says something similar. Offensive \"jihad\" involved forays into enemy territory either for conquest, thus enlarging the Muslim political order, or to dissuade the enemy from attacking Muslim lands.\nShia and Sunni theories of \"jihad\" are similar, except that Shias consider offensive \"jihad\" to be valid only under the leadership of the Mahdi, who is currently believed to be in occultation but will return. However, defensive \"jihad\" is permissible in Shia Islam before the Mahdi's return. In fact, Shia scholars emphasized it was a religious duty for Shia to defend all Muslims (including Sunni Muslims) from outside invaders.\nRules of warfare.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nRules prohibit attacking or molesting non-combatants, including women, children under the age of puberty, elderly men, people with disabilities and those who are sick. Diplomats, merchants and peasants are similarly immune from being attacked. Monks are presumed to be non-combatants and thus have immunity; places of worship should not be attacked. Even if the enemy disregarded the immunity of noncombatants, Muslims could not respond in kind. However, these categories lose their immunity should they participate in fighting, planning, or supplying the enemy. Some jurists argued that immunity was more related to noncombatant status than being in a certain demographic class. For example, Muhaqqiq al-Hilli opined that only old men are only immune from being killed if they neither fight, nor take a role in military decision making.\nUp until the Crusades, Muslim jurists disallowed the use of \"mangonels\" because the weapon killed indiscriminately with the potential of harming noncombatants. During the Crusades this ruling was reversed out of military need. Jurists grappled with the question of attacking an enemy that used women, children or Muslims as human shields. Most jurists held that it was permissible to attack the enemy in cases of military necessity, but steps should be taken to direct the attack towards combatants to avoid the human shield. Abu Hanifa argued that if Muslims stopped combat for fear of killing noncombatants, then such a rule would make fighting impossible, as every city had civilians. Mutilating the enemy dead is prohibited.\nTwo rulings on destruction of enemy property conflict. In one military battle, Prophet Muhammad ordered the destruction of an enemy's palm trees as a means of ending a siege without bloodshed. By contrast, Abu Bakr prohibited destruction of trees, buildings and livestock. Most jurists did not allow unnecessary destruction of enemy property, but allowed it in cases of military necessity, such as destroying buildings in which the enemy is taking shelter. Some jurists allowed destruction if it would weaken the enemy or win the war. Many jurists cautioned against \"unnecessary devastation\", not just out of humanitarian concerns, but practical ones: it is more useful to capture an enemy's property than to destroy it. Islamic scholars prohibited killing animals, unless due to military necessity (such as killing horses in battle). This is because, unlike property, animals feel pain.\nHistory.\nIn pre-Islamic Arabia, Bedouins raided enemy tribes and settlements to collect spoils. According to some scholars (such as James Turner Johnson), while Islamic leaders \"instilled into the hearts of the warriors the belief\" in \"jihad\" \"holy war\" and \"ghaza\" (raids), the \"fundamental structure\" of this Bedouin warfare \"remained, ... raiding to collect booty\". According to Jonathan Berkey, the Qur'an's statements in support of \"jihad\" may have originally been directed against Muhammad's local enemies, the pagans of Mecca or the Jews of Medina, but these same statements could be redirected once new enemies appeared. According to scholar Majid Khadduri, it was the shift in focus to the conquest and spoils collecting of non-Bedouin unbelievers and away from traditional inter-Bedouin tribal raids, that may have made it possible for Islam to expand and to avoid self-destruction.\nClassical.\nAccording to Al-Baqara 256 \"there is no compulsion in religion\". The primary aim of \"jihad\" as warfare is not the conversion of non-Muslims to Islam by force, but rather the expansion and defense of the Islamic state. There could be truces before this was achieved, but no permanent peace. One who died \"on the path of God\" was a martyr (\"shahid\"), whose sins were remitted and who secured \"immediate entry to paradise\".\nAccording with Bernard Lewis, \"from an early date Muslim law laid down\" \"jihad\" in the military sense as \"one of the principal obligations\" of both \"the head of the Muslim state\", who declared \"jihad\", and the Muslim community. According to legal historian Sadakat Kadri, Islamic jurists first developed classical doctrine of \"jihad\" \"towards the end of the eighth century\", using the doctrine of \"naskh\" (that God gradually improved His revelations over the course of Muhammed's mission). They subordinated Qur'anic verses emphasizing harmony to the more \"confrontational\" verses of Muhammad's later years and linked verses on exertion (\"jihad\") to those of fighting (\"qital\"). Muslims jurists of the eighth century divided the world into three divisions, \"dar al-Islam\"/\"dar al-\u201badl\"/\"dar al-salam\" (house of Islam/house of justice/house of peace), \"dar al-harb\"/\"dar al-jawr\" (house of war/house of injustice, oppression), and \"dar al-sulh\"/\"dar al-\u201bahd/d\u0101r al-muwada\u201bah\" (house of peace/house of covenant/house of reconciliation). The eighth century jurist Sufyan al-Thawri (d. 778) headed what Khadduri called a pacifist school, which maintained that \"jihad\" was only a defensive war. He stated that the jurists who held this position, among whom he refers to Hanafi jurists al-Awza\u201bi (d. 774) and Malik ibn Anas (d. 795), and other early jurists, \"stressed that tolerance should be shown unbelievers, especially scripturaries and advised the Imam to prosecute war only when the inhabitants of the \"dar al-harb\" came into conflict with Islam.\" The duty of \"Jihad\" was a collective one (\"fard al-kifaya\"). It was to be directed only by the caliph who might delay it when convenient, negotiating truces for up to ten years at a time. Within classical Islamic jurisprudence, during the first few centuries after the prophet's death, \"jihad\" consisted of wars against unbelievers, apostated, and was the only form of permissible warfare. Bernard Lewis stated that fighting rebels and bandits was legitimate, though not a form of \"jihad\", and that while the classical perception and presentation of \"jihad\" was warfare in the field against a foreign enemy, internal \"jihad\" \"against an infidel renegade, or otherwise illegitimate regime was not unknown.\")\nHowever, some argue martyrdom is never automatic, because it is God's province to judge who is worthy of that designation.\nClassical manuals of Islamic jurisprudence often contained a section called \"Book of Jihad\", with rules governing the conduct of war covered at great length. Such rules include treatment of nonbelligerents, women, children (also cultivated or residential areas), and division of spoils. Such rules offered protection for civilians. Spoils include \"Ghanimah\" (spoils obtained by actual fighting), and \"fai\" (obtained without fighting i.e. when the enemy surrenders or flees).\nThe first documentation of the law of \"jihad\" was written by 'Abd al-Rahman al-Awza'i and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Shaybani. (It grew out of debates that surfaced following Muhammad's death.) Although some Islamic scholars have differed on the implementation of \"Jihad\", the consensus amongst them is that \"jihad\" always includes armed struggle against persecution and oppression.\nBoth Ibn Taymiyya and Ibn Qayyim asserted that Muhammad never initiated hostilities and that all the wars he engaged in were primarily defensive. He never forced non-Muslims to Islam and upheld the truces with non-Muslims so long as they did not violate them. Ibn Taymiyya's views on \"Jihad\" are explained in his treatise titled \"Q\u0101\u02bfidah mukhta\u1e63arah f\u012b qit\u0101l al-kuff\u0101r wa muh\u0101danatuhum wa ta\u1e25r\u012bm qatlahum li mujarrad kufrihim\". (An abridged rule on fighting the unbelievers and making truces with them, and the prohibition of killing them merely because of their unbelief). According to Ibn Taymiyya, human blood is inviolable by default, except \"by right of justice\". Although Ibn Taymiyya authorised offensive \"Jihad\" (\"Jihad al-Talab\") against enemies who threaten Muslims or obstruct their citizens from freely accepting Islam, unbelief (\"Kufr\") by itself is not a justification for violence, whether against individuals or stated. According to Ibn Taym\u012byah, \"jihad\" is a legitimate reaction to military aggression by unbelievers and not merely due to religious differences. Ibn Taymiyya wrote:\"As for the transgressor who does not fight, there are no texts in which Allah commands him to be fought. Rather, the unbelievers are only fought on the condition that they wage war, as is practiced by the majority of scholars and is evident in the Book and Sunnah.\"\nAs important as \"jihad\" was, it is not considered one of the \"pillars of Islam\". According to one scholar (Majid Khadduri, this is because the five pillars are individual obligations, but \"jihad\" is a \"collective obligation\" of the Muslim community meant to be carried out by the Islamic state. This was the belief of \"all jurists, with almost no exception\", but did not apply to \"defense\" of the Muslim community from a sudden attack, in which case \"jihad\" was an \"individual obligation\" of all believers, including women and children.\nScholars had previously claimed it was the responsibility of a centralized government to organize \"jihad\". But this changed as the authority of the Abbasid caliph weakened. Al-Mawardi allowed local governors to wage \"jihad\" on the caliph's behalf. This decentralization of \"jihad\" became especially pressing after the Crusades. Ali ibn Tahir al-Sulami argued that all Muslims were responsible for waging wars of self-defense. Al-Sulami encouraged Muslim rulers from distant lands to assist Muslims who were under attack.\nClassical Shia doctrine maintained defensive \"jihad\" was always permissible, but offensive \"jihad\" required the presence of the Imam. An exception to this, during medieval times, was when the first Fatimid caliph Abdallah al-Mahdi Billah claimed to be the representative of the Imam and claimed the right to launch offensive \"jihad\".\nAfter the Mongol invasions, Shia scholar Muhaqqiq al-Hilli claimed that defensive war was not just permissible but praiseworthy, even obligatory. If a Muslim could not take part in the defense then he should, at least, send material support. This remained the case even if the Muslims were ruled by an unjust ruler.\nEarly Muslim conquests.\nIn the early era that inspired classical Islam (Rashidun Caliphate) and lasted less than a century, \"jihad\" spread the realm of Islam to include millions of subjects, and an area extending \"from the borders of India and China to the Pyrenees and the Atlantic\". The role of religion in these early conquests is debated. Medieval Arabic authors claimed the conquests were commanded by God, and presented them as orderly and disciplined, under the command of the caliph. Many modern historians question whether hunger and desertification, rather than \"jihad\", was a motivating force in the conquests. Historian William Montgomery Watt argued, \"Most of the participants in the [early Islamic] expeditions probably thought of nothing more than booty ... There was no thought of spreading the religion of Islam.\" Similarly, Edward J. Jurji argues that the motivations of the Arab conquests were certainly not \"the propagation of Islam...Military advantage, economic desires, [and] the attempt to strengthen the hand of the state and enhance its sovereignty...are some of the determining factors.\" Some recent explanations cite both material and religious causes in the conquests.\nPost-classical usage.\nAccording to some authors, the more spiritual definitions of \"jihad\" developed sometime after the 150 years of \"jihad\" wars and Muslim territorial expansion, and particularly after the Mongol invaders sacked Baghdad and overthrew the Abbasid Caliphate. Historian Hamilton Gibb stated, \"in the historic [Muslim] Community the concept of \"jihad\" had gradually weakened and at length it had been largely reinterpreted in terms of Sufi ethics.\" notes that \"despite the theoretical importance of the idea of \"jihad\" in classical Islamic juristic thought\", by the time of the Abbasids, the concept was no longer central to statecraft.\nRudolph Peters wrote that with the stagnation of Islamic expansionism, the concept of \"jihad\" became internalized as a moral or spiritual struggle. Earlier classical works on fiqh emphasized \"jihad\" as war for God's religion, Peters claimed. Later Islamic scholars like Ibn al-Amir al-San'ani, Muhammad Abduh, Rashid Rida, Ubaidullah Sindhi, Yusuf al-Qaradawi, Shibli Nomani, etc. emphasized the defensive aspect of \"jihad\", distinguishing between defensive \"jihad\" (\"jihad al-daf\") and offensive \"jihad\" (\"jihad al-talab\" or \"jihad\" of choice). They refuted the notion of consensus that \"jihad al-talab\" was a communal obligation (\"fard kifaya\"). In support of this view, these scholars referred to the works of classical scholars such as Al-Jassas and Ibn Taymiyyah. According to Ibn Taymiyya, the reason for \"jihad\" against non-Muslims is not their disbelief, but the threat they pose to Muslims. Citing Ibn Taymiyya, scholars including Rashid Rida, Al San'ani, and Qaradawi argued that unbelievers need not be fought unless they pose a threat to Muslims. Thus, \"jihad\" is obligatory only as defensive warfare to respond to aggression or \"perfidy\" against the Muslim community, and that the \"normal and desired state\" between Islamic and non-Islamic territories was one of \"peaceful coexistence\". This was similar to the Western \"Just war\" concept. Similarly 18th-century scholar Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab defined \"jihad\" as a defensive military action to protect the Muslim community, and emphasized its defensive aspect in synchrony with later 20th century Islamic writers. Today, some Muslim authors only recognize as legitimate wars fought for the purpose of territorial defense as well as wars fought for the defense of religious freedom.\nIbn Taymiyyah's hallmark themes included the permissibility of overthrowing a ruler who is classified as an unbeliever due to a failure to adhere to Islamic law, the absolute division of the world into \"dar al-kufr\" and \"dar al-Islam\", labeling anyone not adhering to one's particular interpretation of Islam as an unbeliever, and the call for warfare against Non-Muslims, particularly Jews and Christians.\nIbn Taymiyyah recognized \"the possibility of a \"jihad\" against `heretical` and `deviant` Muslims within \"dar al-Islam\". He identified as heretical and deviant Muslims anyone who propagated innovations (\"bida\"') contrary to the Qur'an and Sunna ... legitimated \"jihad\" against anyone who refused to abide by Islamic law or revolted against the true Muslim authorities.\" He used a broad definition of what constituted aggression or rebellion against Muslims, which would make \"jihad\" \"not only permissible but necessary.\" Ibn Taymiyyah paid careful attention to the questions of martyrdom and the benefits of \"jihad\": \"It is in \"jihad\" that one can live and die in ultimate happiness, both in this world and in the Hereafter. Abandoning it means losing entirely or partially both kinds of happiness.\"\nBernard Lewis stated that while most Islamic theologians in the classical period (750\u20131258 CE) understood \"jihad\" to be a military endeavor, after Islamic conquest stagnated and the caliphate divided into smaller stated, \"irresistible and permanent \"jihad\" came to an end\". As \"jihad\" became unfeasible it was \"postponed from historic to messianic time.\" Even when the Ottoman Empire carried on a new holy war of expansion in the seventeenth century, \"the war was not universally pursued\". They made no attempt to recover Spain or Sicily.\nBy the 1500s, it had become accepted that the permanent state of relations between \"dar al-Islam\" and \"dar al-harb\" was that of peace.\nShah Ismail of the Safavid dynasty tried to claim the right to wage offensive \"jihad\", particularly against the Ottomans. However, Shia ulama did not permit that, maintaining the classical position that the true Imam could wage such a war. During the Qajar period, Shia ulama adopted the position that the Shah was responsible for national security. They authorized the Perso-Russian wars in the 19th century as \"jihad\".\nIn the 18th century, the Durrani Empire under the reigns of Ahmad Shah Durrani and his son and successor, Timur Shah Durrani, had declared \"jihad\"s against Sikh Misls in the Punjab region, often to consolidate territory and continue Afghan their region, efforts under Ahmad Shah failed, while Timur Shah had succeeded.\nColonialism and modernism.\nWhen Europeans began to colonize the Muslim world, \"jihad\" was one of the first responses. Emir Abdelkader organized a \"jihad\" in Algeria against French domination, tapping into existing Sufi networks. Other wars were often declared to be \"jihad\": the Senussi religious order declared \"jihad\" against Italian control of Libya in 1912, and the \"Mahdi\" in Sudan declared jihad against the United Kingdom and Egypt in 1881. Rashid Rida and Muhammad Abduh argued that peaceful coexistence should be the normal state between Muslim and non-Muslim stated, citing verses in the Qur'an that allowed war only in self-defense. However, this view left open \"jihad\" against colonialism, which was seen as an attack on Muslims.\nSyed Ahmad Khan argued that \"jihad\" was limited to cases of oppression, and since the British Raj allowed freedom of religion, \"jihad\" against the British was unnecessary. Instead, Khan formulated \"jihad\" as recovering past Muslim scientific progress to modernize the Muslim world. A concept that played a role in anti-colonial \"jihad\" (or lack thereof) was the belief in \"Mahdi\". According to Islamic eschatology, a messianic figure named Mahdi will one day appear and restore justice on earth. This belief sometimes discouraged Muslims from conducting \"jihad\", instead inducing them to wait. Such messages were circulated in Algeria to undermine Emir Abdelkader's \"jihad\" against the French. Alternatively, this belief could be a powerful mobilizing force when someone proclaimed to be the Mahdi. Mahdist rebellions happened in India (1810), Egypt (1865) and Sudan (1881).\nWith the Islamic revival, a new \"fundamentalist\" movement arose, with different interpretations of Islam that increased emphasis on \"jihad\". The Wahhabi movement that spread across the Arabian peninsula starting in the 18th century emphasized \"jihad\" as armed struggle. The Fula jihads in West Africa during the 18th and 19th centuries led to the establishment of various states, most notably the Sokoto Caliphate. None of these movements were victorious. The Sokoto Caliphate lasted for a century until it was conquered by the British and incorporated into Colonial Nigeria in 1903.\nOttoman Jihad in World War One.\nWhen the Ottoman caliph called for a \"Great \"Jihad\"\" Muslims against Allied powers during World War I, hopes and fears emerged that non-Turkish Muslims would side with Ottoman Turkey, but the appeal did not unite the Muslim world,24 and Muslims did not turn on their non-Muslim commanders in the Allied forces. (The war led to the end of the caliphate as the Ottoman Empire allied with the war's losers and surrendered. Post-war capitulations were overturned by secularist Mustafa Kemal, who later abolished the caliphate.)\nPrior to the Iranian revolution in 1922, Shiite cleric Mehdi Al-Khalissi issued a \"fatwa\" prohibiting Iraqis from participating in the Iraqi elections, as the Iraqi government had been established by foreign powers. He later played a role in the Iraqi revolt of 1920. Between 1918 and 1919 in the Shia holy city of Najaf the League of the Islamic Awakening was established by religious scholars, tribal chiefs, and landlords who assassinated a British officer in the hopes of sparking a similar rebellion in Karbala.\nDuring the revolt, Ayatollah Muhammad Taqi Shirazi, father of Mohammad al-Husayni al-Shirazi and grandfather of Sadiq Hussaini Shirazi, declared British rule impermissible and called for \"jihad\" against European occupations in the Middle East.\nPost-colonialism.\nIslamism played an increasing role in the Muslim world in the 20th century, especially following the economic crises of the 1970s and 1980s. One of the first Islamist groups, the Muslim Brotherhood, emphasized physical struggle and martyrdom in its creed: \"God is our objective; the Qur'an is our constitution; the Prophet is our leader; struggle (\"jihad\") is our way; and death for the sake of God is the highest of our aspirations.\" Hassan al-Banna emphasized \"jihad\" of the sword, and called on Egyptians to \"jihad\" against the British Empire,\n (the first influential scholar since the 1857 India uprising to do so). The group called for \"jihad\" against Israel in the 1940s, and its Palestinian branch, Hamas, called for \"jihad\" against Israel during the First Intifada.\nModern Muslim thought had been focused on when to go to war (\"jus ad bellum\"), not paying much attention on conduct during war (\"jus in bello\"). This was because most Muslim theorists viewed international humanitarian law as consistent with Islamic requirements. However, Muslims later discussed conduct during war in response to terrorist groups who targeted civilians.\nAccording to Rudolph F. Peters and Natana J. DeLong-Bas, the new \"fundamentalist\" movement brought a reinterpretation of Islam and their own writings on \"jihad\". These writings tended to be less involved with the different of schools of Islamic law, or in solutions for all potential situations. \"They emphasize more the moral justifications and the underlying ethical values of the rules, than the detailed elaboration of those rules.\" They also tended to ignore the distinction between Greater and Lesser \"jihad\" because it distracted Muslims \"from the development of the combative spirit they believe is required to rid the Islamic world of Western influences\".\nContemporary Islamic fundamentalists were often influenced by the ideas of Ibn Taymiyyah, and Egyptian journalist Sayyid Qutb.\nQutb preached in his book \"Milestones\" that \"jihad\", \u201cis not a temporary phase but a permanent war ... \"Jihad\" for freedom cannot cease until the Satanic forces are put to an end and the religion is purified for God in toto.\u201d Qutb focused on martyrdom and \"jihad\", adding the theme of treachery and enmity towards Islam of Christians and especially Jews. If non-Muslims were waging a \"war against Islam\", \"jihad\" against them was defensive, not offensive. He insisted that Christians and Jews were \"mushrikeen\" (not monotheists) because (he alleged) they gave their priests or rabbis \"authority to make laws, obeying laws which were made by them [and] not permitted by God\" and \"obedience to laws and judgments is a sort of worship\".\nLater ideologue, Muhammad abd-al-Salam Faraj, departed from some of Qutb's teachings. While Qutb felt that \"jihad\" was a proclamation of \"liberation for humanity\" (in which humanity has the free choice between Islam and unbelief), Faraj saw \"jihad\" as a mean of conquering the world and reestablishing the caliphate. Faraj legitimized lying, attacking by night (even accidentally killing innocents), and destroying trees of the infidel. His ideas influenced Egyptian Islamist extremist groups, and Ayman al-Zawahiri, later the leader of al-Qaeda.\nDuring the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and although it was predominantly Sunni, Afghanistan's Shiite population took arms against the Communist government and allied Soviet forces and the nation's Sunnis and were collectively referred to as the Afghan Mujahideen. Shiite jihadists in Afghanistan were known as the Tehran Eight and received support from the Iranian government in fighting the Communist Afghan government and allied Soviet forces in Afghanistan.\nTerrorism.\nMany Muslims, including scholars like al-Qaradawi and Sayyid Tantawi, denounced Islamic terrorist attacks against civilians, seeing them as contrary to rules of \"jihad\" that prohibit targeting noncombatants. After the September 11 attacks in 2001, the United States blamed Saudi Arabian Osama bin Laden and the Taliban in Afghanistan, triggering bin Laden, who in turn on October 7 issued a televised message, declaring \"Allah had blessed a vanguard group of Muslims, the spearhead of Islam, to destroy America.\" American and British forces were deployed around Afghanistan, and Mullah Mohammad Omar, also the Commander to the Faithful of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, in turn called the world's Muslims to join him in \"jihad\".\nAbdullah Azzam.\nIn the 1980s Abdullah Azzam advocated waging \"jihad\" against the \"unbelievers\". Azzam issued a fatwa calling for \"jihad\" against the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, declaring it an obligation for all able-bodied Muslims to repel invaders. His fatwa was endorsed by others, including Abd al-Aziz ibn Baz. Azzam saw Afghanistan as the beginning of \"jihad\" to repel unbelievers from many countries\u2014the southern Soviet Republics of Central Asia, Bosnia, the Philippines, Kashmir, Somalia, Eritrea, Spain, and especially his home country of Palestine. The Soviet defeat in Afghanistan is said to have \"amplified the jihadist tendency from a fringe phenomenon to a major force in the Muslim world.\" Many fighters returned to their home countries to continue \"jihad\", participating in insurgencies and later creating a \"transnational jihadist stream.\"\nAzzam also argued for a broader interpretation of who it was permissible to kill, which may have influenced students such as bin Laden. He argued, based on his interpretation of the hadith, that it is a sin to not wage offensive \"jihad\" against the unbelievers in non-Muslim lands, continuing until only those who submit to Islam remain; expelling unbelievers from Muslim lands, contrastingly, is defensive \"jihad\". In February 1998, bin Laden put a \"Declaration of the World Islamic Front for \"Jihad\" against the Jews and the Crusaders\" in the \"Al-Quds al-Arabi\" newspaper. He later organised the September 11 attacks against the United States.\nShia.\nIn Shia Islam, \"jihad\" is one of the ten Practices of the Religion (though not one of the five pillars). Traditionally, Twelver Shi'a doctrine differed from that of Sunni Islam on the concept of \"jihad\", with \"jihad\" seen as a \"lesser priority\" in Shia theology and \"armed activism\" by Shias \"limited to a person's immediate geography\".\nBecause of their history of oppression, Shias also associated \"jihad\" with certain passionate features, notably in the remembrance of Ashura. Mahmoud M. Ayoub says:\nIn Islamic tradition \"jihad\" or the struggle in the way of God, whether as armed struggle, or any form of opposition of the wrong, is generally regarded as one of the essential requirements of a person's faith as a Muslim. Shi'\u00ee tradition carried this requirement a step further, making \"jihad\" one of the pillars or foundations (arkan) of religion. If, therefore, Husayn's struggle against the Umayyad regime must be regarded as an act of \"jihad\", then, In the mind of devotees, the participation of the community in his suffering and its ascent to the truth of his message must also be regarded as an extension of the holy struggle of the Imam himself. The \"hadith\" from which we took the title of this chapter stated this point very clearly. Ja'far al-Sadiq is said to have declared to al-Mufaddal, one of his closest disciples, 'The sigh of the sorrowful for the wrong done us is an act of praise (tasbih) [of God], his sorrow for us is an act of worship, and his keeping of our secret is a struggle (\"jihad\") in the way of God'; the Im\u00e2m then added, 'This hadith should be inscribed in letters of gold'.\nand\nHence, the concept of \"jihad\" (holy struggle) gained a deeper and more personal meaning. Whether through weeping, the composition and recitation of poetry, showing compassion and doing good to the poor or carrying arms, the Shi'i Muslim saw himself helping the Imam in his struggle against the wrong (zulm) and gaining for himself the same merit (thawab) of those who actually fought and died for him. The ta'ziyah, in its broader sense the sharing of the entire life of the suffering family of Muhammad, has become for the Shi'i community the true meaning of compassion.\nIn the Syrian civil war, Shia and Sunni fighters waged \"jihad\" against each other. In Yemen, the Houthi Movement used appeals to \"jihad\" as part of their ideology as well as their recruitment.\nIslamic jurisprudence.\nObservers have noted the evolution in the rules of \"jihad\"\u2014from the original \"classical\" doctrine to that of 21st century Salafi jihadism. According to legal historian Sadarat Kadri, during the last few centuries, incremental changes in Islamic legal doctrine (developed by Islamists who otherwise condemn any \"bid\u2018ah\" (innovation) in religion), \"normalized\" what was once \"unthinkable\". \"The very idea that Muslims might blow themselves up for God was unheard of before 1983, and it was not until the early 1990s that anyone anywhere had justified killing innocent Muslims who were not on a battlefield.\"\nThe first or the \"classical\" doctrine of \"jihad\" which was developed towards the end of the 8th century, emphasized the \"jihad\" of the sword (\"jihad bil-saif\") rather than the \"\"jihad\" of the heart\", but it contained many legal restrictions developed from interpretations of the Quran and the Hadith, such as detailed rules involving \"the initiation, the conduct, the termination\" of \"jihad\", the treatment of prisoners, the distribution of booty, etc. Absent a sudden attack on the Muslim community, \"jihad\" was not a \"personal obligation\" (\"fard ayn\"); instead it was a \"collective one\" (\"fard al-kifaya\"), which had to be discharged \"in the way of God\" (\"fi sabil Allah\"), and could only be launched by the caliph, \"whose discretion over its conduct was all but absolute.\" (This was designed in part to avoid incidents like the Kharijia's \"jihad\" against and killing of Caliph Ali, once they deemed that he was no longer a Muslim). Martyrdom resulting from an attack on the enemy with no concern for your own safety was praiseworthy, but dying by your own hand (as opposed to the enemy's) merited a special place in Hell. The collective obligation to \"jihad\" is sometimes simplified as \"offensive \"jihad\"\" in Western texts.\nIslamic theologian Abu Abdullah al-Muhajir has been identified as the key theorist and ideologue behind modern jihadist violence. His theological and legal justifications influenced Abu Musab al-Zarqawi of al-Qaeda as well as jihadi terrorist groups, including ISIS. Zarqawi used a manuscript of al-Muhajir's ideas at AQI training camps that were later deployed by ISIS, referred to as \"The Jurisprudence of Jihad\" or \"The Jurisprudence of Blood\".\nThe book has been described as rationalising \"the murder of non-combatants\" by Mark Towsend, citing Salah al-Ansari of Quilliam, who noted: \"There is a startling lack of study and concern regarding this abhorrent and dangerous text \"The Jurisprudence of Blood\" in almost all Western and Arab scholarship\". Charlie Winter of \"The Atlantic\" describes it as a \"theological playbook used to justify the group's abhorrent acts\". He stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ranging from ruminations on the merits of beheading, torturing, or burning prisoners to thoughts on assassination, siege warfare, and the use of biological weapons, Muhajir's intellectual legacy is a crucial component of the literary corpus of ISIS\u2014and, indeed, whatever comes after it\u2014a way to render practically anything permissible, provided, that is, it can be spun as beneficial to the \"jihad\". [...] According to Muhajir, committing suicide to kill people is not only a theologically sound act, but a commendable one, too, something to be cherished and celebrated regardless of its outcome. [...] neither Zarqawi nor his inheritors have looked back, liberally using Muhajir's work to normalize the use of suicide tactics in the time since, such that they have become the single most important military and terrorist method\u2014defensive or offensive\u2014used by ISIS today. The way that Muhajir theorized it was simple\u2014he offered up a theological fix that allows any who desire it to sidestep the Koranic injunctions against suicide.\nPsychologist Chris E. Stout claimed that jihadists regard their actions as \"for the greater good\"; that they are in a \"weakened in the earth\" situation that renders terrorism a valid resort.\nUsage.\nThe term 'jihad' has accrued both violent and non-violent meanings. According to John Esposito, it can simply mean striving to live a moral and virtuous life, spreading and defending Islam as well as fighting injustice and oppression, among other things. The relative importance of the two forms of \"jihad\" is a matter of controversy. Rudoph Peters wrote that, in the contemporary world, traditionalist Muslims understand \"jihad\" from classical works on fiqh; modernist Muslims regard \"jihad\" as a just war in international law and emphasize its defensive aspects; and fundamentalists view it as an expansion of Islam and realization of Islamic ideals. David Cook wrote that Muslims understood \"jihad\" in a military sense, in both classical and contemporary texts. Cook located the idea that \"jihad\" is primarily non-violent in Sufi texts and the Western scholars who study them, or from Muslim apologists. Gallup stated that its surveys show that the concept of \"jihad\" among Muslims \"is considerably more nuanced than the single sense in which Western commentators invariably invoke the term\".\nMuslim public opinion.\nA Gallup poll asked Muslims in eight countries to define \"jihad\". In Lebanon, Kuwait, Jordan, and Morocco, the most frequent response was to \"duty toward God\", a \"divine duty\", or a \"worship of God\", with no military connotations. In Turkey, Iran, Pakistan and Indonesia, many of the responses includes \"sacrificing one's life for the sake of Islam/God/a just cause\" or \"fighting against the opponents of Islam\". Other common meanings of \"jihad\" in the Muslim world include \"a commitment to hard work\", \"promoting peace\", and \"living the principles of Islam\". The terminology was also applied to the fight for women's liberation.\nOther struggles.\nShia Muslim scholar Mahmoud M. Ayoud stated, \"The goal of true \"jihad\" is to attain a harmony between Islam (submission), iman (faith), and ihsan (righteous living).\" \"Jihad\" is a process encompassing both individual and social reform, this is called \"jihad fi sabil Allah\" (\"struggle in the way of God\"), and can be undertaken following the Qur'an (\"jihad bi-al-qur'an\"). According to Ayoud the greatest \"jihad\" is the struggle of every Muslim against social, moral, and political evils. However, depending on social and political circumstances, \"jihad\" may be regarded as a sixth fundamental obligation (\"farid\") incumbent on the entire Muslim community (\"ummah\") when their integrity is in danger, in this case \"jihad\" becomes an \"absolute obligation\" (\"fard 'ayn\"), or when social and religious reform is gravely hampered. Otherwise it is a \"limited obligation\" (\"fard kifayah\"), incumbent upon those who are directly involved. These rules apply to armed struggle or \"\"jihad\" of the sword\".\nIn modern times, Pakistani scholar and professor Fazlur Rahman Malik used the term to describe the struggle to establish a \"just moral-social order\", while President Habib Bourguiba of Tunisia used it to describe the struggle for economic development in that country.\nAccording to the BBC, a third meaning of \"jihad\" is the struggle to build a good society. In a commentary of the \"hadith\" Sahih Muslim, entitled al-Minhaj, the medieval Islamic scholar Yahya ibn Sharaf al-Nawawi stated, \"one of the collective duties of the community as a whole (\"fard kifaya\") is to lodge a valid protest, to solve problems of religion, to have knowledge of Divine Law, to command what is right and forbid wrong conduct\".\nScholar Natana J. DeLong-Bas lists a number of types of \"jihad\" that have been proposed by Muslims:\nOther \"types\" mentioned include:\nOther groups.\nAhmadiyya.\nIn Ahmadiyya Islam, \"jihad\" is primarily one's personal inner struggle and should not be used violently for political motives. Violence is only to be used to protect religion and one's own life in extreme situations of persecution.\nQuranist.\nQuranists do not believe that the word \"jihad\" means holy war. They believe it means to struggle, or to strive. They believe it can incorporate both military and non-military aspects. When it refers to the military aspect, it is understood primarily to be defensive warfare.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "16204", "revid": "21640150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16204", "title": "Gottlieb Fichte", "text": ""}
{"id": "16205", "revid": "1312216455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16205", "title": "Jacobin (politics)", "text": "Member of the French revolutionary political movement known as the Jacobin Club\nA Jacobin (; ) was a member of the Jacobin Club, a revolutionary political movement that was the most famous political club during the French Revolution (1789\u20131799). The club got its name from meeting at the Dominican rue Saint-Honor\u00e9 Monastery of the Jacobins. The Dominicans in France were called \"Jacobins\" (, corresponds to \"Jacques\" in French and \"Jack\" in English) because their first house in Paris was the\nSaint Jacques Monastery.\nThe terms Jacobin and Jacobinism have been used in a variety of senses. Prior to 1793, the terms were used by contemporaries to describe the politics of Jacobins in the congresses of 1789 through 1792. With the ascendancy of Maximilien Robespierre and the Montagnards into 1793, they have since become synonymous with the policies of the Reign of Terror, with Jacobinism now meaning \"Robespierrism\". As Jacobinism was memorialized through legend, heritage, tradition and other nonhistorical means over the centuries, the term acquired a \"semantic elasticity\" in French politics of the late 20th Century with a \"vague range of meanings\", but all with the \"central figure of a sovereign and indivisible public authority with power over civil society.\" Today in France, Jacobin colloquially indicates an ardent or republican supporter of a centralized and revolutionary democracy or state as well as \"a politician who is hostile to any idea of weakening and dismemberment of the State.\"\nIn the French Revolution.\nThe Jacobin Club was one of several organizations that grew out of the French Revolution and it was distinguished for its left-wing, revolutionary politics. Because of this, the Jacobins, unlike other sects such as the Girondins (who were originally part of the Jacobins, but branched off), were closely allied to the sans-culottes, who were a popular force of working-class Parisians that played a pivotal role in the development of the revolution.\nThe Jacobins had a significant presence in the National Convention; they were dubbed \"the mountain\" or Montagnards for their seats in the uppermost part of the chamber. Eventually, the Revolution coalesced around The Mountain's power, with the help of the insurrections of the sans-culottes, and, led by Robespierre, the Jacobins established a revolutionary dictatorship, or the joint domination of the Committee of Public Safety and Committee of General Security.\nThe Jacobins were known for creating a strong government that could deal with the needs of war, economic chaos, as well as internal rebellion (such as the war in the Vend\u00e9e). This included establishing the world's first universal military draft as a solution to filling army ranks to put down civil unrest and prosecute war. The Jacobin dictatorship was known for enacting the Reign of Terror, which targeted speculators, monarchists, right-wing Girondin, H\u00e9bertists, and traitors, and led to many beheadings.\nThe Jacobins supported the rights of property, but represented a much more middle-class position than the government that succeeded them in Thermidor.\nThey favored free trade and a market economy much like the Girondists, but their relationship to the people made them more willing to adopt interventionist economic policies. Unlike the Girondins, their economic policy favored price controls (\"i.e.\", General maximum) on staples like grain and select household and grocery goods to address economic problems. Using the \"arm\u00e9e revolutionnaire\", they targeted farmers, the rich and others who may have stocks of essential goods (\"goods of the first necessity\") in service of a national distribution system with severe punishment for uncooperative hoarders.\nAnother tenet of Jacobinism is a secularism that includes the elimination of existing religions in favor of one run by the state (\"i.e.\", the cults of Reason and the Supreme Being).\nJacobinism was as an ideology thus developed and implemented during the French Revolution of 1789. In the words of Fran\u00e7ois Furet, in \"Penser la r\u00e9volution fran\u00e7aise\" (quoted by Hoel in https://), \"Jacobinism is both an ideology and a power: a system of representations and a system of action.\" (\"le jacobinisme est \u00e0 la fois une id\u00e9ologie et un pouvoir : un syst\u00e8me de repr\u00e9sentations et un syst\u00e8me d'action\"). Its political goals were largely achieved later during France's Third Republic.\nFrance.\nJacobinism did not end with the Jacobins. The Robespierrist Fran\u00e7ois-No\u00ebl Babeuf eventually rejected the rule of the Jacobins and welcomed the end of the Terror. However, he later eschewed the Thermidorean Reaction that overthrew the Jacobins and he returned to Robespierrism. In May 1796, he led a failed coup d'\u00e9tat with neo-Robespierrists to attempt to return the republic to the Montagnard Constitution of 1793 in the Conspiracy of Equals. His political ideology was a form of neo-Jacobinism and primordial communism that highlighted egalitarian division of all land and property enforced by a dictatorship run by the Equals. His ideas were widely publicized and further developed as \"Babeuvism\" by colleague Filippo Buonaroti in his 1828 book, \"Histoire de la Conspiration Pour l'\u00c9galit\u00e9 Dite de Babeuf\" (\"History of Babeuf's Conspiracy for Equality\").\nFriedrich Engels and Karl Marx called the Conspiracy of Equals \"the first appearance of a truly active Communist party.\" Leon Trotsky echoed these sentiments, stating that the foundation of the Communist International marked a \"carrying on in direct succession the heroic endeavours and martyrdom of a long line of revolutionary generations from Babeuf.\"\nHimself a Robespierrist, Buonaroti went on to write \"Observations sur Maximilien Robespierre\" in 1836, which extolled the Jacobin leader as a legend and hero. His portrayal of Robespierre as a model for socialist revolutionaries greatly influenced young socialists and republicans, such as Albert Laponneraye.\nThe 19th century socialist firebrand, nationalist and founder of Blanquism, Louis Auguste Blanqui expressed admiration for Jacobin leaders of the Terror like Robespierre and Louis Antoine de Saint-Just, framing them in messianic terms. There is evidence that his principles were also instructed by Babeuvism through his familiarity with Buonarroti. After the French Revolution of 1848, he criticized contemporaries who claimed to be heirs of Jacobinism, writing: \"Our own self-styled Montagnards are a caricature, indeed a very poor copy, of the Girondins.\" His view of Robespierre later changed over an understanding of the Terror's executions of Georges Danton and the H\u00e9bertists, as well as the formation of the Cult of the Supreme Being, the latter due to Blanqui's promotion of materialism and atheism. According to Blanqui, the Hebertists were the true revolutionaries in defending atheism, science and equality. He said that socialism needed to be built on the foundations laid by the French Revolution, and would better defend the ideals of the Enlightenment than Jacobinism, adding the toast, \"Citizens, the Mountain is dead! To socialism, its sole heir!\"\nVarious French left-wing parties would claim to be the \"true heirs\" to the French Revolution and the 1871 Paris Commune. Aspects of Blanqui were likewise claimed by French political groups like the Radical Socialists and the Stalinists. Other organizations included the French Central Revolutionary Committee and its successor, the Socialist Revolutionary Party, and the Blanquist section of the International Workingmen's Association or First International.\nOn 4 October 1919, Alexandre Varenne founded the socialist daily \"La Montagne, Quotidien de la D\u00e9mocratie Socialiste du Center\". The title was selected to reflect its alignment with the ideas of the Montagnards.\nIn the 1930s, the Popular Front coalition included the French Communist Party or \"Parti communiste fran\u00e7ais\" (PCF), who along with portions of the alliance's socialist French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO) party increasingly emphasized patriotism. The PCF were characterized as \"New Jacobins\", and their leader Maurice Thorez as a \"Stalinist Jacobin\".\nOn the French right, the nazi-collaborating founder of Neosocialism Marcel D\u00e9at was known to be inspired by Jacobin politics.\nIndia.\nIn 1794, Frenchmen in the Kingdom of Mysore allegedly established the \"Jacobin Club of Mysore\" with the assistance of its ruler Tipu Sultan, who purportedly declared himself \"Citizen Tipoo\". During the subsequent Fourth Anglo-Mysore War of 1799, British forces captured French volunteers led by Fran\u00e7ois Ripaud who were serving under Mysorean command. French historian Jean Boutier argued that senior officials of the East India Company fabricated the club's existence to justify their war against Mysore.\nItaly.\nBlanquism had a notable influence on Benito Mussolini who founded fascism as an outgrowth of revolutionary socialism. He claimed he \"introduced into Italian socialism something of (Henri) Bergson mixed with much of Blanqui,\" including Blanqui's nationalism, the idea of rule by a dominant minority and use of violence. However, Mussolini dispensed with Blanquism's links to the Enlightenment and communism and instead stated, fascism is \"opposed to all individualistic abstractions based on eighteenth century materialism; and it is opposed to all Jacobinistic utopias and innovations.\" The masthead of his newspaper Il Popolo d'Italia carried quotes from Blanqui (\"Whoever has steel has bread\") and Napoleon Bonaparte (\"The Revolution is an idea which has found bayonets!\"). Leon Trotsky called fascism in a sense \"a caricature of Jacobinism\".\nPoland.\nKing Stanis\u0142aw II August was enamored with the American Constitution, the ideals of the Gironde of 1790\u20131792, and the office of \"Roi Citoyen\" (\"Citizen King\"). He helped develop the 1791 Polish Constitution which embraced social reforms guaranteeing \"the freedom, property and equality of every citizen.\" Its ratification led some Society of the Friends of the Constitution chapters to endorse the King and his \"Rzeczypospolita\" and helped shape the French constitution adopted later that year.\nWhile the Constitutionalists had contacts with Jacobin Clubs, they were expressly not Jacobins. However prior to the 1792 war that crushed the republic, Russian Empress Catherine the Great claimed the constitution was the work of the Jacobins and that she would be \"fighting Jacobinism in Poland\" and \"the Jacobins of Warsaw\".\nRussia and Soviet Union.\nThe 1870s saw the emergence of the \"Worker's Marseillaise\", a Russian revolutionary song set to a Robert Schumann melody inspired by the 1792 \"Marseillaise\". It was used as a national anthem by the Russian Provisional Government and in Soviet Russia for a short time alongside \"The Internationale\".\nIn the early 20th Century, Bolshevism and Jacobinism were linked. Russia's notion of the French Revolution permeated educated society and was reflected in speeches and writings of leaders, including Leon Trotsky and Vladimir Lenin. They modeled their revolution after the Jacobins and the Terror with Trotsky even envisioning a trial for Nicholas II akin to that for Louis XVI. Lenin regarded the execution of the former tsar and his immediate family as necessary, highlighting the precedent set in the French Revolution. At the same time, the Bolsheviks consciously tried to avoid the mistakes they saw made by the French revolutionaries.\nLenin referred to Robespierre as a \"Bolshevik \"avant la lettre\"\" and erected a statue to him. Other statues were planned or erected of other prominent members of the Terror as well as Babeuf. The Voskresenskaya Embankment in St. Petersburg was also renamed \"Naberezhnaya Robespera\" for the French leader in 1923; it was returned to its original name in 2014.\nLike Karl Marx, Lenin saw the overall progress in events in France from 1789 through 1871 as the French Bourgeois Revolution. He adhered to the Montagnards' policies of centralization of authority to stabilize a new state, the virtue and necessity of terror against oppressors and \"an alliance between the proletariat and peasantry\" (\"the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasants\"). He would refer to his side as the Mountain or Jacobin and label his Menshevik opponents as the \"Gironde\".\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe conventionalized scrawny, French revolutionary \"sans-culottes\" Jacobin, was developed from about 1790 by British satirical artists James Gillray, Thomas Rowlandson and George Cruikshank. It was commonly contrasted with the stolid stocky conservative and well-meaning John Bull, dressed like an English country squire. C. L. R. James also used the term to refer to revolutionaries during the Haitian Revolution in his book \"The Black Jacobins\".\nThomas Paine was a believer in the French Revolution and supported the Girondins. At the same time, Protestant Dissenters seeking for relief from the Test and Corporation Acts supported the French Revolution at least in its early stages after seeing concessions to religious minorities by the French authorities in 1787 and in the Declaration of Rights of Man. Paine's publications enjoyed support by Painite Radical factions like the Manchester Constitutional Society. Prominent members of the Society who worked for the Radical \"Manchester Herald\" newspaper even contacted the Jacobin Club in France on 13 April 1792. Thus, Radicals were labeled \"Jacobins\" by their opponents. Regional Painite radicalism was incorrectly portrayed as English Jacobinism and were attacked by Conservative forces including Edmund Burke as early as 1791. The London Revolution Society also corresponded with the National Assembly starting in November 1789. Their letters were circulated among the regional Jacobin clubs, with around 52 clubs corresponding with the society by the spring of 1792. Other regional British revolutionary societies formed in centers of British Jacobinism. English Jacobins included the young Samuel Taylor Coleridge, William Wordsworth and others prior to their disillusionment with the outbreak of the Reign of Terror. Others, such as Paine, William Hazlitt and Whig statesman Charles James Fox, remained idealistic about the Revolution.\nThe London Corresponding Society founded in 1792 was partly modeled on the Jacobins to pressure the government in a law-abiding manner for democratic reform. Scottish chapters of the Societies of the Friends of the People pressed for parliamentary reform at the 1792 Scottish Convention in Edinburgh using explicit imitations of the Jacobins.\nOverall, after 1793 with the sidelining of the Girondins and the Terror, \"Jacobin\" became a pejorative for radical left-wing revolutionary politics and was linked to sedition. The word was further promoted in England by George Canning's 1797\u201398 newspaper \"Anti-Jacobin\" and later, John Gifford's 1798\u20131821 \"Anti-Jacobin Review\", which both criticized the English Radicals of the 18th and 19th centuries. Much detail on English Jacobinism can be found in E.\u00a0P.\u00a0Thompson's \"The Making of the English Working Class\".\nWelsh Jacobins include William Jones, a radical patriot who was a keen disciple of Voltaire. Rather than preaching revolution, Jones believed that an exodus from Wales was required and that a new Welsh colony should be founded in the United States.\nThe socialist Chartist movement in the first half of the 19th Century was inspired by Robespierre. Chartist leader James Bronterre O'Brien defended Robespierre, describing him as \"one of the greatest men, and one of the purest and most enlightened reformers, that ever existed in the world.\" He came to Robespierre through his studies of Buonarroti and even served as Buonarroti's translator for the English edition of \"Buanarroti's History of Babeuf's Conspiracy for Equality,\" for which he further included his own observations.\nAustria.\nIn the correspondence of Austrian statesman and diplomat Prince Klemens von Metternich and other leaders of the repressive policies that followed the second fall of Napoleon in 1815, \"Jacobin\" is the term commonly applied to anyone with progressive tendencies, such as the emperor Alexander I of Russia.\nUnited States.\nFederalists often characterized Thomas Jefferson, who himself had intervened in the French Revolution, and his Democratic-Republican party as Jacobins. Early Federalist-leaning American newspapers during the French Revolution referred to the Democratic-Republican party as the \"Jacobin Party\". The most notable examples are the \"Gazette of the United States\", published in Philadelphia, and the \"Delaware and Eastern-Shore Advertiser\", published in Wilmington, during the elections of 1800.\nIn modern American politics, the term Jacobin is often used to describe extremists of any party who demand ideological purity.\nEvidencing the antagonistic relationship between the press and insurgent Arizona conservative presidential candidate Barry Goldwater, \"The New York Times\" attacked Goldwater in their Bastille Day coverage of the 1964\u00a0Republican National Convention. The paper called his supporters \"Cactus Jacobins\", comparing their opposition to \"establishment\" Eastern Republicans (see Rockefeller Republican) and \"sensation\u2010seeking columnists and commentators\" as expressed by moderate former president Dwight Eisenhower to the execution of representatives of the Ancien R\u00e9gime in the Reign of Terror. In contrast, L. Brent Bozell, Jr. has written in Goldwater's seminal \"The Conscience of a Conservative\" (1960) that \"Throughout history, true Conservatism has been at war equally with autocrats and with 'democratic' Jacobins.\"\nIn 2010 an American left-wing socialist publication, \"Jacobin\", was founded.\nOn 27 May 2010 issue of \"The New York Review of Books\", Columbia university political science and humanities professor and self-described liberal Mark Lilla analyzed three recent books dealing with American political party discontent in a review titled \"The Tea Party Jacobins\". On the other side, historian Victor Davis Hanson likened the rise and policies of leftists in the Democratic Party in 2019 to the Jacobins and Jacobinism.\nInfluence.\nThe political rhetoric and populist ideas espoused by the Jacobins would lead to the development of the modern leftist movements throughout the 19th and 20th century, with Jacobinism being the political foundation of almost all leftist schools of thought including anarchism, communism and socialism. The Paris Commune was seen as the revolutionary successor to the Jacobins. The undercurrent of radical and populist tendencies espoused and enacted by the Jacobins would create a complete cultural and societal shock within the traditional and conservative governments of Europe, leading to new political ideas of society emerging. Jacobin rhetoric would lead to increasing secularization and skepticism towards the governments of Europe throughout the 1800s. This complex and complete revolution in political, societal and cultural structure, caused in part by the Jacobins, had lasting impact throughout Europe, with such societal revolutions throughout the 1800s culminating in the Revolutions of 1848.\nJacobin populism and complete structural destruction of the old order led to an increasingly revolutionary spirit throughout Europe and such changes would contribute to new political foundations. It also informed new political ideologies. For instance in France, Georges Valois, founder of the first non-Italian fascist party Faisceau, claimed the roots of fascism stemmed from the Jacobin movement. While fascism bears similarities to Jacobinism particularly as a democratic nationalism fighting against an existing order, it is difficult to directly trace such lineage. Fascist groups themselves have held a variety of opinions mostly negative about the French Revolution, with the German National Socialists straightforwardly condemning it. Italian fascists called on fascism to surpass the French Revolution \"with a new kind of democracy run by producers.\" Some French fascists were ambivalent or admired parts of Jacobinism and the Revolution. Valois on the other hand saw the Revolution as the start of a movement both socialist and nationalist, which fascists would complete.\nLeftist organizations would take different elements from Jacobin's core foundation. Anarchists took influence from the Jacobins use of mass movements, direct democracy and left-wing populism which would influence the tactics of direct action. Some Marxists would take influence from the extreme protectionism of the Jacobins and the notion of the vanguard defender of the republic which would later evolve into vanguardism. The Jacobin philosophy of a complete dismantling of an old system, with completely radical and new structure, is historically seen as one of the most revolutionary and important movements throughout modern history.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16206", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16206", "title": "Johann Tobias Krebs", "text": "German organist and composer (1690 - 1762)\nJohann Tobias Krebs (7 July 1690 \u2013 11 February 1762) was a German organist and composer, today best remembered as the father of Johann Ludwig Krebs, one of Bach's most accomplished pupils.\nKrebs was born in Heichelheim and went to school in the nearby Weimar. Nothing is known about his early musical training, but at age 20 Krebs was proficient enough at the keyboard to be invited to become organist at Buttelstedt, another town in the same area. Krebs accepted, but continued his music studies in Weimar, travelling there twice a week to study with Johann Gottfried Walther, and later with Johann Sebastian Bach. In 1721 he was accepted a position at Buttst\u00e4dt, where he played the organ of Michaeliskirche and taught at the school. Krebs remained in Buttst\u00e4dt for the rest of his life. He had three sons, and the eldest, Johann Ludwig Krebs, became a well-known composer.\nKrebs' surviving works are scarce. A few chorale preludes preserved in manuscripts show a marked fondness for counterpoint. Two of the lesser known pieces from the Bach-Werke-Verzeichnis catalogue may have been composed by Krebs: \nIn addition, Johann Tobias Krebs and his eldest son are among the list of potential composers of the \"Eight Short Preludes and Fugues\", BWV 553\u2013560, once attributed to Bach."}
{"id": "16207", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16207", "title": "Joseph Gurney Cannon", "text": "American politician (1836\u20131926)\nJoseph Gurney Cannon (May 7, 1836\u00a0\u2013 November 12, 1926) was an American politician from Illinois and a leader of the Republican Party. Cannon represented parts of Illinois in the United States House of Representatives for twenty-three non-consecutive terms between 1873 and 1923; upon his retirement, he was the longest serving member of the United States Congress ever. From 1903 to 1911, he presided as Speaker of the House, becoming one of the most powerful speakers in United States history.\nAs the Speaker during most of the presidencies of Theodore Roosevelt and William Howard Taft, Cannon was an obstacle to the progressive policies advanced by Roosevelt and later abandoned by Taft. A revolt against Cannon's authority as Speaker, led by George W. Norris, was a contributing factor to the Republican Party split in the elections of 1910 and 1912 and led to significant reforms to the House rules.\nThe Cannon House Office Building, the oldest congressional office building, was named for him in 1962.\nEarly life and education.\nCannon was born in Guilford County, North Carolina. on May 7, 1836. He was the elder of two sons of Horace Franklin Cannon, a country doctor, and Gulielma Cannon (n\u00e9e Hollingsworth).\nThe Cannon family were Quakers and, like most members of their faith, opposed to slavery. Abhorring the practice and fearing war, the Cannons were among the many Quakers who left the South for the Western frontier. In 1840, his family moved west with other North Carolina Quakers, settling about 30 miles north of Terre Haute along the Wabash River. Their new settlement became Annapolis, Indiana. Horace Cannon drowned on August 7, 1851, as he tried to reach a sick patient by crossing a creek. Joe Cannon, aged fifteen, became head of the family and took charge of the family farm. He worked as a clerk in a country store to save money and, after five years, the family were able to pay their mortgage.\nCannon became fascinated by the law when asked to testify in a slander case on behalf of a friend represented by John Palmer Usher. He studied under Usher at his Terre Haute office and used the remainder of his savings to enroll in law school at the University of Cincinnati. In 1858, he was admitted to the bar and commenced practice in Terre Haute, Indiana, but was disappointed when Usher refused to offer him a place in his office. He relocated to Shelbyville, Illinois but failed to attract clients, and from there moved on to Tuscola, county seat of the newly organized Coles County. His choice of a new hometown was involuntary; while travelling from Shelbyville to Chicago to find more clients, he ran out of money. He boarded a Chicago-bound train in Mattoon but was removed from the train in Tuscola after failing to show a ticket.\nWhile building his law practice, Cannon became a follower of Abraham Lincoln during the Lincoln\u2013Douglas debates of 1858. He launched his first campaign for the office of state's attorney for Coles County in 1860 but was defeated. However, he was elected in 1861 as state's attorney for the twenty-seventh judicial district, after the Republican legislature reformed the state judicial system. Cannon remained in that position until 1872, when he was elected to the U.S. House.\nEarly House career.\nIn 1872, Cannon ran for the U.S. House as an anti-reform candidate supportive of President Ulysses S. Grant. He later recalled it as \"a reform year, the beginning of a decade of 'reform' which shook up the virtues as well as the vices of the people. Nothing was right and nobody was safe from the reformers.\" Despite this, Cannon was elected to represent Illinois's 14th district, which included nearby Danville, in the 43rd Congress.\nInitially, Cannon focused on purely local issues. He secured an appointment to the Committee on Post Offices and Post Roads, from which he promoted a bill to provide that postage on newspapers and magazines should be prepaid by publishers, rather than by the subscribers after arrival. Despite opposition from the publishing industry, the measure passed both houses of Congress and became law. His maiden speech in the House was a defense of this bill and the free mailing of seed. Upon a remark by William Walter Phelps that Cannon \"must have oats in his pocket,\" the freshman Representative exclaimed, \"Yes! I have oats in my pocket and hayseed in my hair, and the Western people generally are affected the same way. And we expect that the seed, being good, will yield a good crop.\" The incident gained Cannon an instant national reputation as an advocate for farmers, though he would frequently bemoan that the press treated him as a caricature, rather than giving serious consideration to his legislative proposals.\nIn 1889, Cannon stood as a candidate for Speaker of the House, but finished a poor third behind Thomas Brackett Reed and William McKinley. Instead, Cannon was named (alongside Reed and McKinley) to the powerful Committee on Rules. As his career progressed, Cannon had gained a reputation for partisan loyalty which was made evident in the 51st Congress. For example, he led opposition within the Republican Party to the Lodge Federal Elections Bill, but after the party caucus approved the bill by one vote, Cannon aided Speaker Reed in passing the bill on an expedited process by a party-line vote. Likewise, when Reed introduced dramatic reforms to the House Rules, Cannon vigorously pressed the issue both in committee and in the whole House. As a consequence of his efforts, Cannon was among the many House Republicans unseated in the 1890 elections.\nCannon was out of office for only one term; he was elected again in 1892. After Reed's abrupt retirement in 1899, Cannon stood again for the Speakership but was defeated by David B. Henderson of Iowa. Cannon finally became Speaker in 1903, at the start of the 58th Congress. From 1895 until he became Speaker, Cannon chaired the powerful Appropriations Committee.\nSpeaker of the House (1903\u20131911).\nTheodore Roosevelt presidency.\nAt the time Cannon was elevated to Speaker, the President was Theodore Roosevelt, a fellow Republican. Roosevelt immediately took steps to consult Cannon on legislative matters and the two met several times a week at Roosevelt's request. However, unlike Roosevelt, Cannon opposed most of the progressive reform efforts of the day, including conservation, women's suffrage, the labor movement, and especially reductions in the overall tariff rate. Cannon also came to personally oppose Roosevelt's demanding, autocratic personality, once asserting that Roosevelt had \"no more use for the Constitution than a tomcat has for a marriage license.\" On another occasion, he said, \"That fellow at the other end of the Avenue wants everything from the birth of Christ to the death of the devil.\"\nAt the time of Cannon's election, the Speaker of the House concurrently held the chair of the Rules Committee, which determined under what rules and restrictions bills could be debated, amended, and voted on, and, in some cases, whether they would be allowed on the floor at all. As such, Cannon effectively controlled every aspect of the House's agenda: bills reached the floor of the House only if Cannon approved of them, and then in whatever form he determined \u2013 with Cannon himself deciding whether and to what extent the measures could be debated and amended. Cannon also reserved to himself the right to appoint not only the chairs of the various House committees, but also all of the committees' members, and (despite the seniority system that had begun to develop) used that power to appoint his allies and proteges to leadership positions while punishing those who opposed his legislation.\nCannon wielded the Speaker's authority with unprecedented severity. While his predecessor Thomas Brackett Reed was noted for his dramatic expansion of the Speaker's authority, Cannon distinguished himself by the manner in which he wielded that authority. According to historian Booth Mooney, \"The deadly rapier wielded by Reed gave way to a bludgeon, which at first he used only to knock down Democrats.\" Though Reed had been lampooned as a \"Czar,\" press treatment of \"Uncle Joe\" Cannon was far more critical during his first term as Speaker. Cannon was criticized by the Democratic press for the arbitrary exercise of his considerable power; on one voice vote, he ruled, \"The ayes make the most noise, but the nays have it.\" On another occasion, Representative Cordell Hull attempted to offer an income tax amendment to a tariff bill, and Cannon simply ignored him. When one Representative was asked by a constituent for a copy of the House Rules, the Representative simply sent back a picture of Speaker Cannon. When confronted with criticisms directly, Cannon would respond that the power he exercised was granted by the whole House, which reserved the authority to amend the Rules or vote him out as Speaker.\nEarly in his term, Cannon was largely free from opposition within the House majority. His wrath was typically reserved for the Senate, and in conference committees he was a vigorous defender of the House position on legislation, winning him support and admiration from his colleagues. He continued to enjoy the public support of the President, who praised him in 1906 as \"a patriotic American... for every man, rich or poor, capitalist or labor man, so long as he is a decent American, and [Cannon] is entitled to our support because he is a patriotic man.\"\nAfter the 1906 election, the relationship between Cannon and Roosevelt began to fray. Roosevelt, who had already announced he would not campaign in 1908, adopted a more progressive stance against major corporations. Roosevelt's new proposals for a Pure Food and Drug Act, an income tax, an inheritance tax, a federal corporation law, government involvement in labor disputes, laws regulating the labor of women and children, and regulation of railroad securities all drew opposition from Cannon. Quoting John Morley, Cannon began to frequently refer to Roosevelt as \"half St. Paul, half St. Vitus.\" Rumors began to spread that Roosevelt would look to supplant Cannon as speaker, in order to hasten his legislative agenda through the House, but Roosevelt never addressed them, and Cannon survived as Speaker through Roosevelt's term in office.\nWilliam Howard Taft presidency.\n1908 elections.\nAs early as 1905, Cannon had expressed confidence that he was a contender for the 1908 presidential nomination. Ultimately, Roosevelt was able to maneuver the delegates at the 1908 Republican National Convention in support of William Howard Taft, his Secretary of War. Cannon received 51 of the 54 Illinois delegates and a handful from other states, finishing a distant fourth. Taft was nominated easily on the first ballot. Nevertheless, Cannon was influential at the convention, engineering the party platform and the nomination of conservative James S. Sherman of New York, one of his strongest House allies, for vice president.\nDuring the 1908 campaign, Cannon came under heavy fire from the press, which denounced him as a tyrant and obstacle to every piece of progressive legislation introduced in the prior thirty years. One cartoon depicted him as the \"Unrepentant Defendant\" in the court trial of \"Predatory Wealth\" for its victimization of \"The Common People.\" For his part, Cannon attributed the newspaper opposition to his refusal to support Roosevelt's proposal to permit the duty-free importation of newsprint and wood pulp, as well as his very first House bill which passed the cost of magazine and newspaper subscriptions to publishers.\nThe Democratic Party seized on the issue of House reform, stating in their party platform, \"The House of Representatives, as controlled in recent years by the Republican party, has ceased to be a deliberative and legislative body, responsive to the will of a majority of its members, but has come under the absolute domination of the Speaker, who has entire control of its deliberations and powers of legislation. ... Legislative government becomes a failure when one member, in the person of the Speaker, is more powerful than the entire body.\" William Jennings Bryan, the Democratic nominee for president, and labor leader Samuel Gompers each visited Illinois to campaign against Cannon's re-election. Even some Republicans, including Nebraska representative George W. Norris, campaigned against \"Cannonism.\" Taft himself privately admitted, \"the great weight I have to carry in this campaign is Cannonism.\" Nevertheless, Taft and the Republicans won an easy victory in the fall elections; Norris, who had distinguished himself as an intra-party rival to Cannon's power, won re-election by only 22 votes.\n1910 rules revolt.\nWhen the 61st Congress met in March 1909, Roosevelt and Taft agreed that Cannon could not be removed as Speaker. The large Republican majority carried him to another term in office, though a core of twelve \"Insurgent\" members refused to vote for him. However, the new Democratic floor leader, Champ Clark, forced a roll-call vote on the usually uncontested vote to adopt the rules of the previous Congress. An amendment was ultimately adopted, with Democratic and Insurgent votes, to revise certain rules, including the introduction of a unanimous consent calendar for those bills which were not contested. In retaliation, Cannon removed three Insurgents from committee chairs and moved others to less significant committees. To the press, Cannon said, \"Judas was an insurgent and sold his Master for thirty pieces of silver. I have no doubt he would have been applauded by the newspapers in Jerusalem had there been any in that day.\"\nAs Cannon's power continued to expand, his relationship with Taft continued to decline. Taft stayed out of House business, neither aiding nor opposing Cannon, but he privately noted that it was his wish to have Cannon removed. Cannon likewise grew critical of Taft, particularly after his elevation of Edward Douglass White, a Catholic Democrat, as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. A growing movement within the Republican Party came to support Cannon's removal as Speaker, for pragmatic reasons; Henry Cabot Lodge advised Roosevelt that the Republicans would lose the House if Cannon remained, Taft expressed that such removal would \"accord... with the welfare of the Republican party,\" and various Republican newspapers suggested his resignation as Speaker or even from Congress. In the face of growing opposition, Cannon grew defiant. He said, \"I will say positively that I will not retire from Congress until my constituents fail to give me a majority.\" In one public meeting, he pulled open his coat and shouted, \"Behold Mr. Cannon, the Beelzebub of Congress! Gaze on this noble manly form\u2014me, Beelzebub! Me, the Czar!\" Of the Insurgents, he remarked that they were \"dishonest and disgruntled\"; he accused them of introducing demagogic bills which would never be approved, then telling the \"ignorant element\" of their constituents that Cannon had personally stopped the bill, \"thus creating the belief that the Speaker was a 'Czar' and controlled by the 'interests.'\"\nOn March 16, 1910, Cannon's power began to crack when the House voted against his ruling on a matter of procedure. Edgar Crumpacker, chair of the Committee on the Census, introduced a joint resolution regarding the upcoming census. Though the resolution was not in the order of business, Crumpacker argued that the matter was constitutionally privileged, as the census was mandated by the Constitution, and the Constitution overrode any House rule. Cannon ruled in favor of the argument, but the House majority voted not to sustain his ruling. It was rare for the House to reject a Speaker's ruling, and Cannon bitterly remarked that his \"face [had been] rubbed in the sand.\" Sensing an opening, George Norris took the opportunity. The next day, Norris introduced a prepared resolution to create a new Rules Committee with fifteen members, all elected by the House. The Speaker, who had been the chair of the Rules Committee \"ex officio\" since 1880, would be barred from membership, thus placing the Committee (and ostensibly the House) above the Speaker's authority, with the power to revise that authority. Like Crumpacker, Norris claimed his resolution was constitutionally privileged under Article I, Section 5: \"Each House may determine the Rules of its Proceedings...\" and therefore should be heard immediately by the whole House. Having used Cannon's own ruling against him, Norris placed the Speaker in a double-bind. Cannon immediately denounced the resolution as \"anarchy under the color of law,\" but hurriedly withdrew to whip votes against it. His lieutenants delayed through dilatory tactics while loyal members returned to the Capitol, but after a weekend recess, Cannon proved unable to rally support to his side. On March 19, Cannon ruled Norris's resolution out of order, citing a long list of precedential rulings by prior Speakers, but the House again overruled him on appeal, by a vote of 182 to 163. The House immediately voted on the resolution itself, and it passed with 42 Republican and all 149 Democratic votes by the margin of 191 to 156. Cannon did maintain his position as Speaker by entertaining an immediate motion to vacate, which he won handily since the Republican majority would not risk a Democratic speaker replacing him. However, his iron rule of the House was broken.\nThe new Rules Committee, chaired by John Dalzell, passed a flurry of reforms, including a discharge rule empowering a majority to remove bills from committee and a \"Calendar Wednesday,\" allowing committees to present bills otherwise blocked from consideration by the Speaker's scheduling. Despite the dramatic reduction in Cannon's powers, Republican prospects for the upcoming election did not improve. The Democrats won control of the House in the 1910 midterm elections for the first time since 1894; Cannon himself struggled for his re-election.\nLater House career.\nAfter Republicans became the minority party in the House, Cannon refused to serve as minority leader. He returned as ranking member of the Appropriations Committee, which he had chaired before his term as Speaker. While as chair he had favored lower spending, as ranking member he presented numerous expenditure measures to the Democratic majority. When the Insurgents' revolt of 1910 evolved into the Republican Party split of 1912, Cannon was defeated for re-election. He returned in 1914 and was re-elected each congressional election until 1920. He was a critic of President Woodrow Wilson and U.S. entry into World War\u00a0I. He was also an outspoken critic of Wilson's League of Nations.\nCannon declined to run in the 1922 congressional election and retired at the end of his last term in 1923; he was featured on the cover of the first issue of \"Time\" magazine on the last day of his last term in office.\nPersonal life.\nCannon was one of the charter members of Tuscola's Masonic Lodge No. 332, which was founded on October 2, 1860.\nCannon married Mary Reed in 1862. They had two daughters. In 1876, Cannon moved his family to Danville, Illinois, where he resided for the rest of his life.\nBorn a Quaker, he became a Methodist after leaving Congress. However, he may have been effectively a Methodist long before this. After marrying in a Methodist service, a Quaker encouraged him to express regret for this, to which Cannon replied, \"If you mean that I am to get up in meeting and say that I am sorry I married Mary, I won't do it. I'm damned if I'm sorry and I'm damned if I will say I am.\"\nCannon died in his residence in Danville on November 12, 1926, while in a deep sleep. He had a weakened heart and also suffered from the general effects of old age. He was buried in Spring Hill Cemetery.\nLegacy.\nThe first building of offices for congressmen outside of the United States Capitol building was named after Cannon.\nPublic image.\nHis antic speaking style, diminutive stature and pugnacious manner were his trademarks. The newspapers frequently lampooned him as a colorful rube.\nDespite his reputation for tyranny in the House, Cannon was well-liked by colleagues and friends in Washington, including members of the opposition.\nLength of service.\nCannon is to date the second longest-serving Republican Representative, surpassed only by Alaska congressman Don Young, and also was the first member of Congress of either party ever to surpass 40 years of service (non-consecutive). His congressional career spanned 46 years of cumulative service, a concurrent 50 years, barring two terms after which he came back\u2014a record not broken until 1959. He is the longest-serving member ever of the House of Representatives in Illinois, although the longest continuous service belongs to Adolph J. Sabath. He served in the House during the terms of 11 presidents, a record he shares with John Dingell and Jamie Whitten.\nCannon is to date the second-longest continuously serving Republican Speaker in history, after another Illinoisan, Dennis Hastert, who surpassed him on June 1, 2006.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16208", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16208", "title": "James G. Blaine", "text": "American politician (1830\u20131893)\nJames Gillespie Blaine (January 31, 1830\u00a0\u2013 January 27, 1893) was an American statesman and Republican politician who represented Maine in the United States House of Representatives from 1863 to 1876, served as Speaker of the House from 1869 to 1875, and was a U.S. senator from 1876 to 1881. He served twice as Secretary of State, under presidents James A. Garfield and Chester A. Arthur in 1881, and under Benjamin Harrison from 1889 to 1892. Blaine was one of two secretaries of state to serve under three presidents, the other being Daniel Webster. He sought the Republican presidential nomination in 1876 and 1880, and received the nomination in 1884, narrowly losing the general election to Democratic nominee Grover Cleveland by approximately 1,000 votes. Blaine was a prominent figure in the moderate faction of the Republican Party, known as the \"Half-Breeds\".\nBorn in West Brownsville, Pennsylvania, Blaine moved to Maine after college, where he worked as a newspaper editor in Augusta before entering politics. Contemporary sources described him as an effective public speaker during an era when oratory was highly valued in American politics. He supported Abraham Lincoln and the Union cause during the American Civil War, and during Reconstruction he advocated for voting rights for former slaves while opposing some of the more punitive measures favored by Radical Republicans. His economic positions evolved from supporting high tariffs to favoring reduced tariffs and expanded international trade. Throughout his career, Blaine faced allegations of improper financial dealings with railroad companies, particularly concerning the Mulligan letters. While these allegations were never substantiated with conclusive evidence, they became a significant issue in his 1884 presidential campaign.\nAs Secretary of State, Blaine advocated for expanded American involvement in international affairs, marking a shift from the more limited foreign policy approaches of previous decades. He promoted increased trade relationships, particularly with Latin American nations, and supported policies that came to be known as tariff reciprocity. His diplomatic approach emphasized American commercial interests and included support for territorial expansion in the Caribbean and Pacific regions. His foreign policy initiatives contributed to the development of more assertive American international engagement that would be further expanded during and after the Spanish\u2013American War.\nEarly life.\nFamily and childhood.\nJames Gillespie Blaine was born January 31, 1830, in West Brownsville, Pennsylvania, the third child of Ephraim Lyon Blaine and his wife Maria (Gillespie) Blaine. He had two older sisters, Harriet and Margaret. Blaine's father was a western Pennsylvania businessman and landowner, and the family lived in relative comfort. On his father's side, Blaine was descended from Scotch-Irish settlers who first emigrated to Pennsylvania in 1745. His great-grandfather Ephraim Blaine served as a Commissary-General under George Washington in the American Revolutionary War. Blaine's mother and her forebears were Irish Catholics who immigrated to Pennsylvania in the 1780s. Blaine's parents were married in 1820 in a Catholic ceremony, although Blaine's father remained a Presbyterian. Following a common compromise of the era, the Blaines agreed that their daughters would be raised in their mother's Catholic faith while their sons would be brought up in their father's religion. James Blaine's cousin, Angela Gillespie, was a nun and founded the American branch of the Sisters of the Holy Cross. In politics, Blaine's father supported the Whig Party.\nBlaine's biographers describe his childhood as \"harmonious,\" and note that the boy took an early interest in history and literature. At the age of thirteen, Blaine enrolled in his father's alma mater Washington College, in nearby Washington, Pennsylvania. There, he was a member of the Washington Literary Society, one of the college's debating societies. Blaine graduated near the top of his class and delivered the salutatory address in June 1847. Blaine then considered attending Yale Law School, but ultimately decided against it, and moved west to find a job.\nTeacher and publisher.\nIn 1848, Blaine was hired as a professor of mathematics and ancient languages at the Western Military Institute in Georgetown, Kentucky. Although he was only 18 years old and younger than many of his students, Blaine adapted well to his new profession. Blaine grew to enjoy life in his adopted state and became an admirer of Kentucky senator Henry Clay. He also made the acquaintance of Harriet Stanwood, a teacher at the nearby Millersburg Female College and native of Maine. On June 30, 1850, the two wed. Blaine once again considered the study of law, but instead took his new bride to visit his family in Pennsylvania. They next lived with Harriet Blaine's family in Augusta, Maine, for several months, where their first child, Stanwood Blaine, was born in 1851. The young family soon moved again, this time to Philadelphia where Blaine took a job at the Pennsylvania Institution for the Instruction of the Blind (now Overbrook School for the Blind) in 1852, teaching science and literature.\nPhiladelphia's law libraries gave Blaine the chance to, at last, begin to study the law, but in 1853 he received a more tempting offer: to become editor and co-owner of the \"Kennebec Journal\". Blaine had spent several vacations in his wife's native state of Maine and had become friendly with the \"Journal\"'s editors. When the newspaper's founder, Luther Severance, retired, Blaine was invited to purchase the publication along with co-editor Joseph Baker. He quickly accepted, borrowing the purchase price from his wife's brothers. In 1854, Baker sold his share to John L. Stevens, a local minister. The \"Journal\" had been a staunchly Whig newspaper, which coincided with Blaine's and Stevens' political opinions. The decision to become a newspaperman, unexpected as it was, started Blaine on the road to a lifelong career in politics. Blaine's purchase of the \"Journal\" coincided with the demise of the Whig party and the birth of the Republican party, and Blaine and Stevens actively promoted the new party in their newspaper. The newspaper was financially successful, and Blaine was soon able to invest his profits in coal mines in Pennsylvania and Virginia, forming the basis of his future wealth.\nMaine politics.\nBlaine's career as a Republican newspaperman led naturally to involvement in party politics. In 1856, he was selected as a delegate to the first Republican National Convention. From the party's early days, Blaine identified with the conservative wing, supporting Supreme Court Justice John McLean for the presidential nomination over the more radical John C. Fr\u00e9mont, the eventual nominee. The following year, Blaine was offered the editorship of the \"Portland Daily Advertiser\", which he accepted, selling his interest in the \"Journal\" soon thereafter. He still maintained his home in Augusta, however, with his growing family. Although Blaine's first son, Stanwood, died in infancy, he and Harriet had two more sons soon afterward: Walker, in 1855, and Emmons, in 1857. They would have four more children in years to come: Alice, James, Margaret, and Harriet. It was around this time that Blaine left the Presbyterian church of his childhood and joined his wife's new denomination, becoming a member of the South Parish Congregational Church in Augusta.\nIn 1858, Blaine ran for a seat in the Maine House of Representatives, and was elected. He ran for reelection in 1859, 1860, and 1861, and was successful each time by large majorities. The added responsibilities led Blaine to reduce his duties with the \"Advertiser\" in 1860, and he soon ceased editorial work altogether. Meanwhile, his political power was growing as he became chairman of the Republican state committee in 1859, replacing Stevens. Blaine was not a delegate to the Republican convention in 1860, but attended anyway as an enthusiastic supporter of Abraham Lincoln. Returning to Maine, he was elected Speaker of the Maine House of Representatives in 1861 and reelected in 1862. With the outbreak of the Civil War in 1861, he supported Lincoln's war effort and saw that the Maine Legislature voted to organize and equip units to join the Union Army.\nHouse of Representatives, 1863\u20131876.\nElected to the House.\nBlaine had considered running for the United States House of Representatives from Maine's 4th district in 1860, but agreed to step aside when Anson P. Morrill, a former governor, announced his interest in the seat. Morrill was successful, but after redistricting placed Blaine in the 3rd district for the 1862 election, he allowed his name to be put forward. Running on a campaign of staunch support for the war effort, Blaine was elected by a wide margin; though nationwide, the Republican Party lost a significant number of seats in Congress as the Union war effort to date had been only weakly successful. By the time Blaine took his seat in December 1863, at the start of the 38th Congress, the Union Army had turned the tide of the war with victories at Gettysburg and Vicksburg.\nAs a first-term congressman, he initially said little, mostly following the administration's lead in supporting the continuing war effort. He did clash several times with the leader of the Republicans' radical faction, Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania, firstly over payment of states' debts incurred in supporting the war, and again over monetary policy concerning the new greenback currency. Blaine also spoke in support of the commutation provision of the military draft law passed in 1863 and proposed a constitutional amendment allowing the federal government to impose taxes on exports, but it never passed.\nReconstruction and impeachment.\nBlaine was reelected in 1864 and, when the 39th Congress assembled in December 1865, the main issue was the Reconstruction of the defeated Confederate States. Although he was not a member of the committee charged with drafting what became the Fourteenth Amendment, Blaine did make his views on the subject known and believed that three-fourths of the non-seceded states would be needed to ratify it, rather than three-fourths of all states, an opinion that did not prevail and placed him, atypically, in the radical camp. The Republican Congress also played a role in the governance of the conquered South, dissolving the state governments President Andrew Johnson had installed and substituting military governments under Congress' control. Blaine voted in favor of these new, harsher measures, but also supported some leniency toward the former rebels when he opposed a bill that would have barred Southerners from attending the United States Military Academy. Blaine voted to impeach Johnson in 1868, although he had initially opposed the effort. Later, Blaine was more ambiguous about the validity of the charges against Johnson, writing that \"there was a very grave difference of opinion among those equally competent to decide,\" but he followed his party's leaders.\nMonetary policy.\nContinuing his earlier battle with Stevens, Blaine led the fight in Congress for a strong dollar. After the issuance of 150 million dollars in greenbacks\u2014non-gold-backed currency\u2014the value of the dollar stood at a low ebb. A bipartisan group of inflationists, led by Republican Benjamin F. Butler and Democrat George H. Pendleton, wished to preserve the \"status quo\" and allow the Treasury to continue to issue greenbacks and even to use them to pay the interest due on pre-war bonds. Blaine called this idea a repudiation of the nation's promise to investors, which was made when the only currency was gold. Speaking several times on the matter, Blaine said that the greenbacks had only ever been an emergency measure to avoid bankruptcy during the war. Blaine and his hard money allies were successful, but the issue remained alive until 1879, when all remaining greenbacks were made redeemable in gold by the Specie Payment Resumption Act of 1875.\nSpeaker of the House.\nDuring his first three terms in Congress, Blaine had earned for himself a reputation as an expert of parliamentary procedure, and, aside from a growing feud with Roscoe Conkling of New York, had become popular among his fellow Republicans. In March 1869, when Speaker Schuyler Colfax resigned from office at the end of the 40th Congress to become vice president, the highly regarded Blaine was the unanimous choice of the Republican Congressional Caucus to become Speaker of the House for the 41st Congress. In the subsequent March 4, 1869, election for Speaker, Blaine easily defeated Democrat Michael C. Kerr of Indiana by a vote of 135 to 57. Republicans remained in control of the House in the 42nd and 43rd congresses, and Blaine was re-elected as speaker at the start of both of them. His time as speaker came to an end following the 1874-75 elections which produced a Democratic majority in the House for the 44th Congress.\nBlaine was an effective Speaker with a magnetic personality. In the words of Washington journalist Benjamin Perley Poore, Blaine's \"graceful as well as powerful figure, his strong features, glowing with health, and his hearty, honest manner, made him an attractive speaker and an esteemed friend.\" Moreover, President Ulysses S. Grant valued his skill and loyalty in leading the House. He enjoyed the job and made his presence in Washington more permanent by buying a large residence on Fifteenth Street in the city. At the same time, the Blaine family moved to a mansion in Augusta.\nDuring Blaine's six-year tenure as Speaker his popularity continued to grow, and Republicans dissatisfied with Grant mentioned Blaine as a potential presidential candidate prior to the 1872 Republican National Convention. Instead, Blaine worked steadfastly for Grant's re-election. Blaine's growing fame brought growing opposition from the Democrats, as well, and during the 1872 campaign he was accused of receiving bribes in the Cr\u00e9dit Mobilier scandal. Blaine denied any part in the scandal, which involved railroad companies bribing federal officials to turn a blind eye to fraudulent railroad contracts that overcharged the government by millions of dollars. No one was able to satisfactorily prove Blaine's involvement. Though not an absolute defense, it is true that the law that made the fraud possible had been written before he was elected to Congress. But other Republicans were exposed by the accusations, including Vice President Colfax, who was dropped from the 1872 presidential ticket in favor of Henry Wilson.\nAlthough he supported a general amnesty for former Confederates, Blaine opposed extending it to include Jefferson Davis, and he cooperated with Grant in helping to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1875 in response to increased violence and disenfranchisement of blacks in the South. He refrained from voting on the anti-third term resolution that overwhelmingly passed the House that same year, believing that to vote for it would look self-interested. Blaine was loyal to Grant, and the scandals of the Grant administration did not seem to affect how the public perceived him; according to his biographer, Blaine was never more popular than when he was Speaker. Liberal Republicans saw him as an alternative to the evident corruption of other Republican leaders, and some even urged him to form a new, reformist party. Although he remained a Republican, this base of moderate reformers remained loyal to Blaine and became known as the Half Breed faction of the party.\nBlaine Amendment.\nOnce out of the speaker's chair, Blaine had more time to concentrate on his presidential ambitions, and to develop new policy ideas. One result was a foray into education policy. In late 1875, President Grant made several speeches on the importance of the separation of church and state and the duty of the states to provide free public education. Blaine saw in this an issue that would distract from the Grant administration scandals and let the Republican party regain the high moral ground. In December 1875, he proposed a joint resolution that became known as the Blaine Amendment.\nThe proposed amendment codified the church-state separation Blaine and Grant were promoting, stating that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; No State shall make any law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; and no money raised by taxation in any State for the support of public schools, or derived from any public fund therefor, nor any public lands devoted thereto, shall ever be under the control of any religious sect; nor shall any money so raised or lands so devoted be divided between religious sects or denominations.\nThe effect was to prohibit the use of public funds by any religious school, although it did not advance Grant's other aim of requiring states to provide public education to all children. The bill passed the House but failed in the Senate. Although it never passed Congress, and left Blaine open to charges of anti-Catholicism, the proposed amendment served Blaine's purpose of rallying Protestants to the Republican party and promoting himself as one of the party's foremost leaders.\n1876 presidential election.\nMulligan letters.\nBlaine entered the 1876 presidential campaign as the favorite, but his chances were almost immediately harmed by the emergence of a scandal. Rumors had begun to spread in February that Blaine had been involved in a transaction with the Union Pacific Railroad which had paid Blaine $64,000 for some Little Rock and Fort Smith Railroad bonds he owned even though they were nearly worthless. In essence, the alleged transaction was presented as a sham designed to bribe Blaine. Blaine denied the charges, as did the Union Pacific's directors. Blaine claimed that he never had any dealings with the Little Rock and Fort Smith Railroad except to purchase bonds at market price and that he had lost money on the transaction. Democrats in the House of Representatives, however, demanded a congressional investigation. The testimony appeared to favor Blaine's version of events until May 31, when James Mulligan, a Boston clerk who had been employed by Blaine's brother-in-law, testified that the allegations were true, that he had arranged the transaction, and that he had letters to prove it. The letters ended with the damning phrase: \"Kindly burn this letter.\" When the investigating committee recessed, Blaine met with Mulligan that night in his hotel room. What happened between the men is unclear, but Blaine acquired the letters or, as Mulligan told the committee, snatched them from Mulligan's hands, and fled the room. In any event, Blaine had the letters and refused the committee's demand to turn them over.\nOpinion swiftly turned against Blaine. The June 3 \"New York Times\" carried the headline \"Blaine's Nomination Now Out of the Question.\" Blaine took his case to the House floor on June 5, theatrically proclaiming his innocence and calling the investigation a partisan attack by Southern Democrats in revenge for his exclusion of Jefferson Davis from the amnesty bill of the previous year. He read selected passages from the letters aloud and said, \"Thank God Almighty, I am not afraid to show them!\" Blaine even succeeded in extracting an apology from the committee chairman. The political tide turned anew in Blaine's favor, but the pressure had begun to affect Blaine's health, and he collapsed while leaving church services on June 14. His opponents called the collapse a political stunt, with one Democratic newspaper reporting the event as \"Blaine Feigns a Faint.\" Rumors of Blaine's ill health, combined with the lack of hard evidence against him, garnered him sympathy among Republicans and, when the Republican convention began in Cincinnati later that month, he was again seen as the frontrunner.\nPlumed Knight.\nThough he was damaged by the Mulligan letters, Blaine entered the convention as the favorite. Five other men were also considered serious candidates: Benjamin Bristow, the Kentucky-born Treasury Secretary; Roscoe Conkling, Blaine's old enemy and now a senator from New York; Senator Oliver P. Morton of Indiana; Governor Rutherford B. Hayes of Ohio; and Governor John F. Hartranft of Pennsylvania.\nBlaine was nominated by Illinois orator Robert G. Ingersoll in what became a famous speech:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is a grand year\u2014a year filled with recollections of the Revolution\u00a0... a year in which the people call for the man who has torn from the throat of treason the tongue of slander, the man who has snatched the mask of Democracy from the hideous face of rebellion\u00a0... Like an armed warrior, like a plumed knight, James G. Blaine from the state of Maine marched down the halls of the American Congress and threw his shining lance full and fair against the brazen foreheads of every traitor to his country and every maligner of his fair reputation.\nThe speech was a success and Ingersoll's description of Blaine as a \"plumed knight\" remained a nickname for Blaine for years to come. On the first ballot, no candidate received the required majority of 378, but Blaine had the most votes, with 285, and no other candidate had more than 125. There were a few vote shifts in the next five ballots, and Blaine climbed to 308 votes, with his nearest competitor having just 111. On the seventh ballot, however, the situation shifted drastically because anti-Blaine delegates began to coalesce around Hayes. By the time the balloting ended, Blaine's votes had risen to 351, but Hayes surpassed him with 384, a majority.\nBlaine received the news at his home in Washington and telegraphed Hayes his congratulations. In the subsequent contest of 1876, Hayes was elected after a contentious compromise over disputed electoral votes. The results of the convention had further effects on Blaine's political career because Bristow, having lost the nomination, resigned as Treasury Secretary three days after the convention ended. President Grant selected Senator Lot M. Morrill of Maine to fill the cabinet post, and Maine's governor, Seldon Connor, appointed Blaine to the now-vacant Senate seat. When the Maine Legislature reconvened that autumn, it confirmed Blaine's appointment and elected him to the full six-year term that would begin on March 4, 1877.\nUnited States Senate, 1876\u20131881.\nBlaine was appointed to the Senate on July 10, 1876, but did not begin his duties there until the Senate convened in December of that year. While in the Senate, he served on the Appropriations Committee and held the chairmanship of the Committee on Civil Service and Retrenchment, but he never achieved the role of leadership that he had held as a member of the House. The Senate in the 45th Congress was controlled by a narrow Republican majority, but it was a majority often divided against itself and against the Hayes administration. Blaine did not number himself among the administration's defenders\u2014later known as the Half-Breeds\u2014but neither could he join the Republicans led by Conkling\u2014later known as the Stalwarts\u2014who opposed Hayes, because of the deep personal enmity between Blaine and Conkling. He opposed Hayes's withdrawal of federal troops from Southern capitals, which effectively ended the Reconstruction of the South, but to no avail. Blaine continued to antagonize Southern Democrats, voting against bills passed in the Democrat-controlled House that would reduce the Army's appropriation and repeal the post-war Enforcement Acts he had helped pass. Such bills passed Congress several times and Hayes vetoed them several times; ultimately, the Enforcement Acts remained in place, but the funds to enforce them dwindled. By 1879, there were only 1,155 soldiers stationed in the former Confederacy, and Blaine believed that this small force could never guarantee the civil and political rights of black Southerners\u2014which would mean an end to the Republican party in the South.\nOn monetary issues, Blaine continued the advocacy for a strong dollar that he had begun as a Representative. This stance was in opposition to Senate Republican leadership, including Senate president pro tempore Thomas W. Ferry, who generally supported the greenback movement. The issue had shifted from debate over greenbacks to debate over which metal should back the dollar: gold and silver, or gold alone. The Coinage Act of 1873 stopped the coinage of silver for all coins worth a dollar or more, effectively tying the dollar to the value of gold. As a result, the money supply contracted and the effects of the Panic of 1873 grew worse, making it more expensive for debtors to pay debts they had entered into when currency was less valuable. Farmers and laborers, especially, clamored for the return of coinage in both metals, believing the increased money supply would restore wages and property values. Democratic Representative Richard P. Bland of Missouri proposed a bill, which passed the House, that required the United States to coin as much silver as miners could sell the government, thus increasing the money supply and aiding debtors. In the Senate, William B. Allison, a Republican from Iowa offered an amendment to limit the silver coinage to two to four million dollars per month. This was still too much for Blaine, and he denounced the bill and the proposed amendment, but the amended Bland\u2013Allison Act passed the Senate by a 48 to 21 vote. Hayes vetoed the bill, but Congress mustered the two-thirds vote to pass it over his veto. Even after the Bland\u2013Allison Act's passage, Blaine continued his opposition, making a series of speeches against it during the 1878 congressional campaign season.\nHis time in the Senate allowed Blaine to develop his foreign policy ideas. He advocated expansion of the American navy and merchant marine, which had been in decline since the Civil War. Blaine also bitterly opposed the results of the arbitration with Great Britain over American fishermen's right to fish in Canadian waters, which resulted in a $5.5\u00a0million award to Britain. Blaine's Anglophobia combined with his support of high tariffs. He had initially opposed a reciprocity treaty with Canada that would have reduced tariffs between the two nations, but by the end of his time in the Senate, he had changed his mind, believing that Americans had more to gain by increasing exports than they would lose by the risk of cheap imports.\n1880 presidential election.\nHayes had announced early in his presidency that he would not seek another term which meant that the contest for the Republican nomination in 1880 was open to all challengers\u2014including Blaine. Blaine was among the early favorites for the nomination, as were former president Grant, Treasury Secretary John Sherman of Ohio, and Senator George F. Edmunds of Vermont. Although Grant did not actively promote his candidacy, his entry into the race re-energized the Stalwarts and when the convention met in Chicago in June 1880, they instantly polarized the delegates into Grant and anti-Grant factions, with Blaine the most popular choice of the latter group. Blaine was nominated by James Frederick Joy of Michigan, but in contrast to Ingersoll's exciting speech of 1876, Joy's lengthy oration was remembered only for its maladroitness. After the other candidates were nominated, the first ballot showed Grant leading with 304 votes and Blaine in second with 284; no other candidate had more than Sherman's 93, and none had the required majority of 379. Sherman's delegates could swing the nomination to either Grant or Blaine, but he refused to release them through twenty-eight ballots in the hope that the anti-Grant forces would desert Blaine and flock to him. Eventually, they did desert Blaine, but instead of Sherman they shifted their votes to Ohio Congressman James A. Garfield, and by the thirty-sixth ballot he had 399 votes, enough for victory.\nGarfield placated the Stalwarts by endorsing Chester A. Arthur of New York, a Conkling loyalist, as nominee for vice president, but it was to Blaine and his delegates that Garfield owed his nomination. When Garfield was elected over Democrat Winfield Scott Hancock, he turned to Blaine to guide him in selection of his cabinet and offered him the preeminent position: Secretary of State. Blaine accepted, resigning from the Senate on March 4, 1881.\nSecretary of State, 1881.\nForeign policy initiatives.\nBlaine saw presiding over the cabinet as a chance to preside over the Washington social scene, as well, and soon ordered construction of a new, larger home near Dupont Circle. Although his foreign policy experience was minimal, Blaine quickly threw himself into his new duties. By 1881, Blaine had completely abandoned his protectionist leanings and now used his position as Secretary of State to promote freer trade, especially within the Western Hemisphere. His reasons were twofold: firstly, Blaine's old fear of British interference in the Americas was undiminished, and he saw increased trade with Latin America as the best way to keep Britain from dominating the region. Secondly, he believed that by encouraging exports, he could increase American prosperity, and by doing so position the Republican party as the author of that prosperity, ensuring continued electoral success. Garfield agreed with his Secretary of State's vision and Blaine called for a Pan-American conference in 1882 to mediate disputes among the Latin American nations and to serve as a forum for talks on increasing trade. At the same time, Blaine hoped to negotiate a peace in the War of the Pacific then being fought by Bolivia, Chile, and Peru. Blaine favored a resolution that would not result in Peru yielding any territory, but Chile, which had by 1881 occupied the Peruvian capital, rejected any negotiations that would gain them nothing. Blaine sought to expand American influence in other areas, calling for renegotiation of the Clayton\u2013Bulwer Treaty to allow the United States to construct a canal through Panama without British involvement, as well as attempting to reduce British involvement in the strategically located Kingdom of Hawaii. His plans for the United States' involvement in the world stretched even beyond the Western Hemisphere, as he sought commercial treaties with Korea and Madagascar.\nGarfield's assassination.\nOn July 2, 1881, Blaine and Garfield were walking through the Sixth Street Station of the Baltimore and Potomac Railroad in Washington when Garfield was shot by Charles J. Guiteau, a crazed office seeker who had made repeated demands for Blaine and other State Department officials to appoint him to a consulship for which he was grossly unqualified. On May 14, 1881, Guiteau had encountered Blaine just outside the State Department. Guiteau's request for a position in the US Consul's office in France was met by an angry rebuke from Blaine: \"Never speak to me about the Paris Consulship again as long as you live!\"\nGuiteau, a self-professed Stalwart, believed that after assassinating the president, he would strike a blow to unite the two factions of the Republican Party, allowing him to ingratiate himself with Vice President Arthur and receive his coveted position. Guiteau was overpowered and arrested immediately, while Garfield lingered for two months before he died on September 19, 1881. Guiteau was convicted of killing Garfield and hanged in 1882.\nGarfield's death was not just a personal tragedy for Blaine; it also meant the end of his dominance of the cabinet, and the end of his foreign policy initiatives. With Arthur's ascent to the presidency, the Stalwart faction now held sway, and Blaine's days at the State Department were numbered. While Arthur asked all of the cabinet members to postpone their resignations until Congress recessed that December, Blaine nonetheless tendered his resignation on October 19, 1881, but he agreed to remain in office until December 19, when his successor would be in place.\nBlaine's replacement was Frederick T. Frelinghuysen, a New Jersey Stalwart; while Arthur and Frelinghuysen undid much of Blaine's work, cancelling the call for a Pan-American conference and stopping the effort to end the War of the Pacific, they did continue the drive for tariff reductions, signing a reciprocity treaty with Mexico in 1882.\nPrivate life.\nBlaine began the year 1882 without a political office for the first time since 1859. Troubled by poor health, he sought no employment other than the completion of the first volume of his memoir, \"Twenty Years of Congress.\" Friends in Maine petitioned Blaine to run for Congress in the 1882 elections, but he declined, preferring to spend his time writing and supervising the move to the new home. His income from mining and railroad investments was sufficient to sustain the family's lifestyle and to allow for the construction of a vacation cottage, \"Stanwood\" on Mount Desert Island, Maine, designed by Frank Furness. Blaine appeared before Congress in 1882 during an investigation into his War of the Pacific diplomacy, defending himself against allegations that he owned an interest in the Peruvian guano deposits being occupied by Chile, but otherwise stayed away from the Capitol. The publication of the first volume of \"Twenty Years\" in early 1884 added to Blaine's financial security and thrust him back into the political spotlight. As the 1884 campaign loomed, Blaine's name was being circulated once more as a potential nominee, and despite some reservations, he soon found himself back in the hunt for the presidency.\n1884 presidential election.\nNomination.\nIn the months leading up to the 1884 convention, Blaine was once more considered the favorite for the nomination, but President Arthur was contemplating a run for election in his own right. George Edmunds was again the favored candidate among reformers and John Sherman had a few delegates pledged to him, but neither was expected to command much support at the convention. John A. Logan of Illinois hoped to attract Stalwart votes if Arthur's campaign was unsuccessful. Blaine was unsure he wanted to try for the nomination for the third time and even encouraged General William T. Sherman, John Sherman's older brother, to accept it if it came to him, but ultimately Blaine agreed to be a candidate again.\nWilliam H. West of Ohio nominated Blaine with an enthusiastic speech and after the first ballot, Blaine led the count with 334\u00bd votes. While short of the necessary 417 for nomination, Blaine had far more than any other candidate with Arthur in second place at 278 votes. Blaine was unacceptable to the Arthur delegates just as Blaine's own delegates would never vote for the president, so the contest was between the two for the delegates of the remaining candidates. Blaine's total steadily increased as Logan and Sherman withdrew in his favor and some of the Edmunds delegates defected to him. Unlike in previous conventions, the momentum for Blaine in 1884 would not be halted. On the fourth ballot, Blaine received 541 votes and was, at last, nominated. Logan was named vice presidential nominee on the first ballot, and the Republicans had their ticket.\nCampaign against Cleveland.\nThe Democrats held their convention in Chicago the following month and nominated Governor Grover Cleveland of New York. Cleveland's time on the national scene was brief, but Democrats hoped that his reputation as a reformer and an opponent of corruption would attract Republicans dissatisfied with Blaine and his reputation for scandal. They were correct, as reform-minded Republicans (called \"Mugwumps\") denounced Blaine as corrupt and flocked to Cleveland. The Mugwumps, including such men as Carl Schurz and Henry Ward Beecher, were more concerned with morality than with party, and felt Cleveland was a kindred soul who would promote civil service reform and fight for efficiency in government. However, even as the Democrats gained support from the Mugwumps, they lost some blue-collar workers to the Greenback Party, led by Benjamin F. Butler, Blaine's antagonist from their early days in the House.\nThe campaign focused on the candidates' personalities, as each candidate's supporters cast aspersions on their opponents. Cleveland's supporters rehashed the old allegations from the Mulligan letters that Blaine had corruptly influenced legislation in favor of railroads, later profiting on the sale of bonds he owned in both companies. Although the stories of Blaine's favors to the railroads had made the rounds eight years earlier, this time more of his correspondence was discovered, making his earlier denials less plausible. Blaine acknowledged that the letters were genuine, but denied that anything in them impugned his integrity or contradicted his earlier explanations. Nevertheless, what Blaine described as \"stale slander\" served to focus the public's attention negatively on his character. On some of the most damaging correspondence, Blaine had written \"Burn this letter,\" giving Democrats the last line to their rallying cry: \"Blaine, Blaine, James G. Blaine, the continental liar from the state of Maine, 'Burn this letter!'\"\nTo counter Cleveland's image of superior morality, Republicans discovered reports that Cleveland had fathered an illegitimate child while he was a lawyer in Buffalo, New York, and chanted \"Ma, Ma, where's my Pa?\"\u2014to which the Democrats, after Cleveland had been elected, appended, \"Gone to the White House, Ha! Ha! Ha!\" Cleveland admitted to paying child support in 1874 to Maria Crofts Halpin, the woman who claimed he fathered her child named Oscar Folsom Cleveland. Halpin was involved with several men at the time, including Cleveland's friend and law partner, Oscar Folsom, for whom the child was also named. Cleveland did not know which man was the father, and is believed to have assumed responsibility because he was the only bachelor among them. At the same time, Democratic operatives accused Blaine and his wife of not having been married when their eldest son, Stanwood, was born in 1851; this rumor was false, however, and caused little excitement in the campaign. Halpin disputed the claims of being involved with several men, accusing Cleveland of raping and impregnating her, then institutionalizing her against her will to gain control of their child.\nBoth candidates believed that the states of New York, New Jersey, Indiana, and Connecticut would determine the election. In New York, Blaine received less support than he anticipated when Arthur and Conkling, still powerful in the New York Republican party, failed to actively campaign for him. Blaine hoped that he would have more support from Irish Americans than Republicans typically did; while the Irish were mainly a Democratic constituency in the 19th century, Blaine's mother was Irish Catholic, and he believed his career-long opposition to the British government would resonate with the Irish. Blaine's hope for Irish defections to the Republican standard were dashed late in the campaign when one of his supporters, Samuel D. Burchard, gave a speech denouncing the Democrats as the party of \"Rum, Romanism, and Rebellion.\" The Democrats spread the word of this insult in the days before the election, and Cleveland narrowly won all four of the swing states, including New York by just over one thousand votes. While the popular vote total was close, with Cleveland winning by just one-quarter of a percent, the electoral votes gave Cleveland a majority of 219\u2013182.\nParty leader in exile.\nBlaine accepted his narrow defeat and spent most of the next year working on the second volume of \"Twenty Years of Congress.\" The book continued to earn him enough money to support his lavish household and pay off his debts. Although he spoke to friends of retiring from politics, Blaine still attended dinners and commented on the Cleveland administration's policies. By the time of the 1886 Congressional elections, Blaine was giving speeches and promoting Republican candidates, especially in his home state of Maine. Republicans were successful in Maine, and after the Maine elections in September, Blaine went on a speaking tour from Pennsylvania to Tennessee, hoping to boost the prospects of Republican candidates there. Republicans were less successful nationwide, gaining seats in the House while losing seats in the Senate, but Blaine's speeches kept him and his opinions in the spotlight.\nBlaine and his wife and daughters sailed for Europe in June 1887, visiting England, Ireland, Germany, France, Austria-Hungary, and finally Scotland, where they stayed at the summer home of Andrew Carnegie. While in France, Blaine wrote a letter to the \"New-York Tribune\" criticizing Cleveland's plans to reduce the tariff, saying that free trade with Europe would impoverish American workers and farmers. The family returned to the United States in August 1887. His letter in the \"Tribune\" had raised his political profile even higher, and by 1888 Theodore Roosevelt and Henry Cabot Lodge, both former opponents, urged Blaine to run against Cleveland again. Opinion within the party was overwhelmingly in favor of renominating Blaine.\nAs the state conventions drew nearer, Blaine announced that he would not be a candidate. His supporters doubted his sincerity and continued to encourage him to run, but Blaine still demurred. Hoping to make his intentions clear, Blaine left the country and was staying with Carnegie in Scotland when the 1888 Republican National Convention began in Chicago. Carnegie encouraged Blaine to accept if the convention nominated him, but the delegates finally accepted Blaine's refusal. John Sherman was the most prominent candidate and sought to attract the Blaine supporters to his candidacy, but instead found them flocking to former senator Benjamin Harrison of Indiana after a telegram from Carnegie suggested that Blaine favored him. Blaine returned to the United States in August 1888 and visited Harrison at his home in October, where twenty-five thousand residents paraded in Blaine's honor. Harrison defeated Cleveland in a close election, and offered Blaine his former position as Secretary of State.\nSecretary of State, 1889\u20131892.\nHarrison had developed his foreign policy based largely on Blaine's ideas, and at the start of his term, Harrison and Blaine had very similar views on the United States' place in the world. In spite of their shared worldview, however, the two men became personally unfriendly as the term went on. Harrison was conscious that his Secretary of State was more popular than he, and while he admired Blaine's gift for diplomacy, he grew displeased with Blaine's frequent absence from his post because of illness, and suspected that Blaine was angling for the presidential nomination in 1892. Harrison tried to limit how many \"Blaine men\" filled subordinate positions in the State Department and denied Blaine's request that his son, Walker, be appointed First Assistant Secretary, instead naming him Solicitor of the Department of State. Despite the growing personal rancor, the two men continued, with one exception, to agree on the foreign policy questions of the day.\nPacific diplomacy.\nBlaine and Harrison wished to see American power and trade expanded across the Pacific and were especially interested in securing rights to harbors in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, and Pago Pago, Samoa. When Blaine entered office, the United States, Great Britain, and the German Empire were disputing their respective rights in Samoa. Thomas F. Bayard, Blaine's predecessor, had accepted an invitation to a three-party conference in Berlin aimed at resolving the dispute, and Blaine appointed American representatives to attend. The result was a treaty that created a condominium among the three powers, allowing all of them access to the harbor.\nIn Hawaii, Blaine worked to bind the kingdom more closely to the United States and to avoid its becoming a British protectorate. When the McKinley Tariff of 1890 eliminated the duty on sugar, Hawaiian sugar-growers looked for a way to retain their once-exclusive access to the American market. The Hawaiian minister to the United States, Henry A. P. Carter, tried to arrange for Hawaii to have complete trade reciprocity with the United States, but Blaine proposed instead that Hawaii become an American protectorate; Carter favored the idea, but the Hawaiian king, Kal\u0101kaua, rejected the infringement on his sovereignty. Blaine next procured the appointment of his former newspaper colleague John L. Stevens as minister to Hawaii. Stevens had long believed that the United States should annex Hawaii, and as minister he co-operated with Americans living in Hawaii in their efforts to bring about annexation. Their efforts ultimately culminated in a coup d'\u00e9tat against Kal\u0101kaua's successor, Liliuokalani, in 1893. Blaine's precise involvement is undocumented, but the results of Stevens' diplomacy were in accord with his ambitions for American power in the region. The new government petitioned the United States for annexation, but by that time Blaine was no longer in office.\nLatin America and reciprocity.\nSoon after taking office, Blaine revived his old idea of an international conference of Western Hemisphere nations. The result was the First International Conference of American States, which met in Washington in 1890. Blaine and Harrison had high hopes for the conference, including proposals for a customs union, a pan-American railroad line, and an arbitration process to settle disputes among member nations. Their overall goal was to extend trade and political influence over the entire hemisphere; some of the other nations understood this and were wary of deepening ties with the United States to the exclusion of European powers. Blaine said publicly that his only interest was in \"annexation of trade,\" not annexation of territory, but privately he wrote to Harrison of a desire for some territorial enlargement of the United States:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I think there are only three places that are of value enough to be taken\u00a0... One is Hawaii and the others are Cuba and Porto Rico [\"sic\"]. Cuba and Porto Rico are not now imminent and will not be for a generation. Hawaii may come up for decision at an unexpected hour and I hope we shall be prepared to decide it in the affirmative.\nCongress was not as enthusiastic about a customs union as Blaine and Harrison were, but tariff reciprocity provisions were ultimately included in the McKinley Tariff that reduced duties on some inter-American trade. Otherwise, the conference achieved none of Blaine's goals in the short-term, but did lead to further communication and what would eventually become the Organization of American States.\nIn 1891, a diplomatic crisis arose in Chile that drove a wedge between Harrison and Blaine. The American minister to Chile, Patrick Egan, a political friend of Blaine's, granted asylum to Chileans who were seeking refuge from the Chilean Civil War. Chile was already suspicious of Blaine because of his War of the Pacific diplomacy ten years earlier, and this incident raised tensions even further. When sailors from the \"Baltimore\" took shore leave in Valpara\u00edso, a fight broke out, resulting in the deaths of two American sailors and three dozen arrested. When the news reached Washington, Blaine was in Bar Harbor recuperating from a bout of ill health and Harrison himself drafted a demand for reparations. The Chilean foreign minister, Manuel Antonio Matta, replied that Harrison's message was \"erroneous or deliberately incorrect\" and said that the Chilean government was treating the affair the same as any other criminal matter. Tensions increased as Harrison threatened to break off diplomatic relations unless the United States received a suitable apology. Blaine returned to the capital and made conciliatory overtures to the Chilean government, offering to submit the dispute to arbitration and recall Egan. Harrison still insisted on an apology and submitted a special message to Congress about the threat of war. Chile issued an apology for the incident, and the threat of war subsided.\nRelations with European powers.\nBlaine's earliest expressions in the foreign policy sphere were those of a reactionary Anglophobe, but by the end of his career his relationship with the United Kingdom had become more moderate and nuanced. A dispute over seal hunting in the waters off Alaska was the cause of Blaine's first interaction with Britain as Harrison's Secretary of State. A law passed in 1889 required Harrison to ban seal hunting in Alaskan waters, but Canadian fishermen believed they had the right to continue fishing there. Soon thereafter, the United States Navy seized several Canadian ships near the Pribilof Islands. Blaine entered into negotiations with Britain and the two nations agreed to submit the dispute to arbitration by a neutral tribunal. Blaine was no longer in office when the tribunal began its work, but the result was to allow the hunting once more, albeit with some regulation, and to require the United States to pay damages of $473,151. Ultimately, the nations signed the North Pacific Fur Seal Convention of 1911, which outlawed open-water seal hunting.\nAt the same time as the Pribilof Islands dispute, an outbreak of mob violence in New Orleans became an international incident. After New Orleans police chief David Hennessy led a crackdown against local mafiosi, he was assassinated on October 14, 1890. After the alleged murderers were found not guilty on March 14, 1891, a mob stormed the jail and lynched eleven of them. Since many of those killed were Italian citizens the Italian minister, Saverio Fava, protested to Blaine. Blaine explained that federal officials could not control how state officials deal with criminal matters, and Fava announced that he would withdraw the legation back to Italy. Blaine and Harrison believed the Italians' response to be an overreaction, and did nothing. Tensions slowly cooled, and after nearly a year, the Italian minister returned to the United States to negotiate an indemnity. After some internal dispute\u2014Blaine wanted conciliation with Italy, Harrison was reluctant to admit fault\u2014the United States agreed to pay an indemnity of $25,000, and normal diplomatic relations resumed.\nRetirement and death.\nBlaine had always believed his health to be fragile, and by the time he joined Harrison's cabinet he truly was unwell. The years at the State Department also brought Blaine personal tragedy as two of his children, Walker and Alice, died suddenly in 1890. Another son, Emmons, died in 1892. With these family losses and his declining health, Blaine decided to retire and announced that he would resign from the cabinet on June 4, 1892. Because of their growing animosity, and because Blaine's resignation came three days before the 1892 Republican National Convention began, Harrison suspected that Blaine was preparing to run against him for the party's nomination for president.\nHarrison was unpopular with the party and the country, and many of Blaine's old supporters encouraged him to run for the nomination. Blaine had denied any interest in the nomination months before his resignation, but some of his friends, including Senator Matthew Quay of Pennsylvania and James S. Clarkson, chairman of the Republican National Committee, took it for false modesty and worked for his nomination anyway. When Blaine resigned from the cabinet, his boosters were certain that he was a candidate, but the majority of the party stood by the incumbent. Harrison was renominated on the first ballot, but die-hard Blaine delegates still gave their champion 182 and 1/6 votes, good enough for second place.\nBlaine spent the summer of 1892 at his Bar Harbor cottage, and did not involve himself in the presidential campaign other than to make a single speech in New York in October. Harrison was defeated soundly in his rematch against former president Cleveland and when Blaine returned to Washington at the close of 1892, he and Harrison were friendlier than they had been in years. Blaine's health declined rapidly in the winter of 1892\u20131893, and he died in his Washington home on January 27, 1893, four days before turning sixty-three. After a funeral at the Presbyterian Church of the Covenant, he was buried in Oak Hill Cemetery in Washington. He was later re-interred in Blaine Memorial Park, Augusta, Maine, in 1920.\nLegacy.\nShortly after his passing, James G. Blaine Elementary School was built in 1895. It is located within the Lakeview neighborhood in Chicago, Illinois.\nA towering figure in the Republican party of his day, Blaine fell into obscurity fairly soon after his death. A 1905 biography by his wife's cousin, Edward Stanwood, was written when the question was still in doubt, but by the time David Saville Muzzey published his biography of Blaine in 1934, the subtitle \"A Political Idol of Other Days\" already spoke to its subject's fading place in the popular mind, perhaps because of the nine men the Republican Party nominated for the presidency from 1860 to 1912, Blaine is the only one who never became president. Although several authors studied Blaine's foreign policy career, including Edward P. Crapol's 2000 work, Muzzey's was the last full-scale biography of the man until Neil Rolde's 2006 book. Historian R. Hal Williams was working on a new biography of Blaine, tentatively titled \"James G. Blaine: A Life in Politics\", until his death in 2016.\nDuring the 2016 United States presidential election, both Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton were compared to Blaine for their controversies. Blaine's status as a former Secretary of State who sought to erase evidence of his personal corruption drew parallels to Clinton, while his appeals to anti-Chinese sentiment were compared to Trump's anti-Muslim rhetoric. Similarly, the Mugwumps who opposed Blaine in 1884 have been compared to the Never Trump movement.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "16209", "revid": "51065619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16209", "title": "Justinian I", "text": "Roman emperor from 527 to 565 AD\nJustinian I (, ; 482\u00a0\u2013 14 November 565), also known as Justinian the Great, was Roman emperor from 527 to 565.\nHis reign was marked by the ambitious but only partly realized \"renovatio imperii\", or \"restoration of the Empire\". This ambition was expressed by the partial recovery of the territories of the defunct Western Roman Empire. His general, Belisarius, swiftly conquered the Vandal Kingdom in North Africa. Subsequently, Belisarius, Narses, and other generals conquered the Ostrogothic Kingdom, restoring Dalmatia, Sicily, Italy, and Rome to the empire after more than half a century of rule by the Ostrogoths. The praetorian prefect Liberius reclaimed the south of the Iberian Peninsula, establishing the province of Spania. These campaigns re-established Roman control over the western Mediterranean, increasing the Empire's annual revenue by over a million \"solidi\". During his reign, Justinian also subdued the \"Tzani\", a people on the east coast of the Black Sea that had never been under Roman rule before. He engaged the Sasanian Empire in the east during Kavad I's reign, and later again during Khosrow I's reign; this second conflict was partially initiated due to his ambitions in the west.\nJustinian is regarded as one of the most prominent and influential Roman emperors. One of the most enduring aspects of his legacy was the uniform rewriting of Roman law, the , which was first applied throughout Continental Europe and is still the basis of civil law in many modern states. His reign also marked a blossoming of Byzantine culture, and his building program yielded works such as the Hagia Sophia.\nLife.\nJustinian was born in Tauresium, Dardania, probably in 482. A native speaker of Latin (possibly the last Roman emperor to be one), he came from a peasant family thought to have been of either of Illyro-Roman or Thraco-Roman origin. The name \"Iustinianus\", which he took later, is indicative of adoption by his uncle Justin. During his reign, he founded Justiniana Prima not far from his birthplace. His mother was Vigilantia, the sister of Justin. Justin, who was commander of one of the imperial guard units (the Excubitors) before he became emperor, adopted Justinian, brought him to Constantinople, and ensured the boy's education. As a result, Justinian was well educated in jurisprudence, theology, and Roman history. Justinian served as a \"candidatus\", one of 40 men selected from the \"scholae palatinae\" to serve as the emperor's personal bodyguard. The chronicler John Malalas, who lived during the reign of Justinian, describes his appearance as short, fair-skinned, curly-haired, round-faced, and handsome, with receding hairline and greying hair and beard. Another contemporary historian, Procopius, describing him in similar terms, compares Justinian's appearance to that of Emperor Domitian.\nWhen Emperor Anastasius died in 518, Justin was proclaimed the new emperor with significant help from Justinian. Justinian showed a lot of ambition, and several sources claim that he was functioning as virtual regent long before Justin made him associate emperor, although there is no conclusive evidence of this. As Justin became senile near the end of his reign, Justinian became the \"de facto\" ruler. Following the general Vitalian's assassination in 520 (orchestrated by Justinian or Justin), Justinian was appointed consul and commander of the army of the east. Justinian remained Justin's close confidant, and in 525 was granted the titles of \"nobilissimus\" and \"caesar\" (heir-apparent). He was crowned co-emperor on 1 April 527, and became sole ruler after Justin's death on 1 August 527.\nAs a ruler, Justinian showed great energy. He was known as \"the emperor who never sleeps\" for his work habits. Nevertheless, he seems to have been amiable and easy to approach. Around 525, he married his mistress, Theodora, in Constantinople. She was by profession an actress and some twenty years his junior. In earlier times, Justinian could not have married her owing to her class, but his uncle, Emperor Justin I, had passed a law lifting restrictions on marriages with ex-actresses. Though the marriage caused a scandal, Theodora would become very influential in the politics of the Empire. Other talented individuals included Tribonian, his legal adviser; Peter the Patrician, the diplomat and long-time head of the palace bureaucracy; Justinian's finance ministers John the Cappadocian and Peter Barsymes, who managed to collect taxes more efficiently than any before, thereby funding Justinian's wars; and finally, his generals, Belisarius and Narses, responsible for the re-conquest of North Africa and Italy.\nJustinian's rule was not universally popular; early in his reign he nearly lost his throne during the Nika riots, and a conspiracy against the emperor's life by dissatisfied entrepreneurs was discovered as late as 562. Justinian was struck by the plague in the early 540s but recovered. Theodora died in 548 at a relatively young age, possibly of cancer; Justinian outlived her by nearly twenty years. Justinian, who had always had a keen interest in theological matters and actively participated in debates on Christian doctrine, became even more devoted to religion during the later years of his life. He died on 14 November 565, childless. He was succeeded by Justin II, who was the son of his sister Vigilantia and married to Sophia, the niece of Theodora. Justinian's body was entombed in a specially built mausoleum in the Church of the Holy Apostles until it was desecrated and robbed during the pillage of the city in 1204 by the Latin States of the Fourth Crusade.\nReign.\nLegislative activities.\nJustinian remains well-known for his judicial reforms, particularly through the complete revision of all Roman law, something that had not previously been attempted. The total of Justinian's legislation is known today as the . It consists of the \"Codex Justinianeus,\" the \"Digesta\" or \"Pandectae\", the \"Institutiones\", and the \"Novellae\".\nEarly in his reign, Justinian had appointed the \"quaestor\" Tribonian to oversee this task. The first draft of the \"Codex Justinianeus\", a codification of imperial constitutions from the 2nd century onward, was issued on 7 April 529. (The final version appeared in 534.) It was followed by the \"Digesta\" (or \"Pandectae\"), a compilation of older legal texts, in 533, and by the \"Institutiones\", a textbook explaining the principles of law. The \"Novellae\", a collection of new laws issued during Justinian's reign, supplements the \"Corpus\". As opposed to the rest of the corpus, the \"Novellae\" appeared in Greek, the common language of the Eastern Empire.\nThe \"Corpus\" forms the basis of Latin jurisprudence (including ecclesiastical Canon Law) and, for historians, provides a valuable insight into the concerns and activities of the later Roman Empire. As a collection it gathers together the many sources in which the \"leges\" (laws) and the other rules were expressed or published: proper laws, senatorial consults (\"senatusconsulta\"), imperial decrees, case law, and jurists' opinions and interpretations (\"responsa prudentium\").\nTribonian's code ensured the survival of Roman law. It formed the basis of later Byzantine law, as expressed in the \"Basilika\" of Basil I and Leo VI the Wise. The only western province where the Justinianic code was introduced was Italy (after the conquest by the so-called Pragmatic Sanction of 554), from where it was to pass to Western Europe in the 12th century and become the basis of much Continental European law code, which was eventually spread by European empires to the Americas and beyond in the Age of Discovery. It eventually passed to Eastern Europe where it appeared in Slavic editions, and it also passed on to Russia. It remains influential to this day.\nHis legislations restricted avenues of divorce, including divorce by mutual consent. The latter was overturned by his immediate successor, Justin II.\nHe passed laws to protect prostitutes from exploitation and women from being forced into prostitution. Rapists were treated severely. Further, by his policies: women charged with major crimes should be guarded by other women to prevent sexual abuse; if a woman was widowed, her dowry should be returned; and a husband could not take on a major debt without his wife giving her consent twice.\nFamily legislation also revealed a greater concern for the interests of children. This was particularly so with respect to children born out of wedlock. The law under Justinian also reveals a striking interest in child neglect issues. Justinian protected the rights of children whose parents remarried and produced more offspring, or who simply separated and abandoned their offspring, forcing them to beg.\nHe passed legislations directed against the Christian \"heretics\", pagans, Jews and Samaritans, forbidding them from holding public office, destroying their places of worship and restricting the ownership of property.\nJustinian discontinued the regular appointment of Consuls in 541.\nNika riots.\nIn January 532, partisans of the chariot racing factions in Constantinople, normally rivals, united against Justinian in a revolt that has become known as the Nika riots. They forced him to dismiss Tribonian and two of his other ministers, and then attempted to overthrow Justinian himself and replace him with the senator Hypatius, who was a nephew of the late emperor Anastasius. While the crowd was rioting in the streets, Justinian considered fleeing the capital by sea, but eventually decided to stay, apparently on the prompting of his wife Theodora, who refused to leave. In the next two days, he ordered the brutal suppression of the riots by his generals Belisarius and Mundus. Procopius relates that 30,000 unarmed civilians were killed in the Hippodrome. Justinian had Anastasius' nephews executed.\nThe destruction that took place during the revolt provided Justinian with an opportunity to carry out his building program in Constantinople, most notably the architectural innovation of the domed Hagia Sophia.\nMilitary activities.\nJustinian's reign was marked by the recovery of large stretches of land around the Western Mediterranean basin that had slipped out of imperial control in the 5th century. Although he never personally took part in military campaigns, he boasted of his successes in the prefaces to his laws and had them commemorated in art. The re-conquests were in large part carried out by his general Belisarius.\nWar with the Sassanid Empire, 527\u2013532.\nFrom his uncle, Justinian inherited ongoing hostilities with the Sassanid Empire. In 530 the Persian forces suffered a double defeat at Dara and Satala, but the next year saw the defeat of Roman forces under Belisarius near Callinicum. Justinian then tried to make alliance with the Axumites of Ethiopia and the Himyarites of Yemen against the Persians, but this failed. When king Kavadh I of Persia died (September 531), Justinian concluded an \"Eternal Peace\" (which cost him 11,000 pounds of gold) with his successor Khosrau I (532). Having thus secured his eastern frontier, Justinian turned his attention to the West, where Germanic kingdoms had been established in the territories of the former Western Roman Empire.\nConquest of North Africa, 533\u2013534.\nThe first of the western kingdoms Justinian attacked was that of the Vandals in North Africa. King Hilderic, who had maintained good relations with Justinian and the North African Catholic clergy, had been overthrown by his cousin Gelimer in 530 AD. Imprisoned, the deposed king appealed to Justinian. Justinian protested Gelimer's actions, demanding that Gelimer return the kingdom to Hilderic. Gelimer replied, in effect, that Justinian had no authority to make these demands. Angered at this response, Justinian quickly concluded his ongoing war with the Sassanian Empire and prepared an expedition against the Vandals in 533.\nIn 533, Belisarius sailed to Africa with a fleet of 92 dromons, escorting 500 transports carrying an army of about 15,000 men, as well as a number of barbarian troops. They landed at Caput Vada (modern Ras Kaboudia) in modern Tunisia. They defeated the Vandals, who were caught completely off guard, at Ad Decimum on 14 September 533 and Tricamarum in December; Belisarius took Carthage. King Gelimer fled to Mount Pappua in Numidia, but surrendered the next spring. He was taken to Constantinople, where he was paraded in a triumph. Sardinia and Corsica, the Balearic Islands, and the stronghold Septem Fratres near Mons Calpe (later named Gibraltar) were recovered in the same campaign.\nIn this war, the contemporary Procopius remarks that Africa was so entirely depopulated that a person might travel several days without meeting a human being, and he adds, \"it is no exaggeration to say, that in the course of the war 5,000,000 perished by the sword, and famine, and pestilence.\" An African prefecture, centred in Carthage, was established in April 534, but it would teeter on the brink of collapse during the next 15 years, amidst warfare with the Moors and military mutinies. By the mid-540s, under a succession of Byzantine generals, the region was disrupted under civil war, plague and military campaigning. The area was not completely pacified until 548, but remained peaceful thereafter and enjoyed a measure of prosperity. The recovery of Africa cost the empire about 100,000 pounds of gold.\nWar in Italy, first phase, 535\u2013540.\nAs in Africa, dynastic struggles in Ostrogothic Italy provided an opportunity for intervention. The young king Athalaric had died on 2 October 534, and a usurper, Theodahad, had imprisoned queen Amalasuintha, Theodoric's daughter and mother of Athalaric, on the island of Martana in Lake Bolsena, where he had her assassinated in 535. Thereupon Belisarius, with 7,500 men, invaded Sicily (535) and advanced into Italy, sacking Naples and capturing Rome on 9 December 536. By that time Theodahad had been deposed by the Ostrogothic army, who had elected Vitigis as their new king. He gathered a large army and besieged Rome from February 537 to March 538 without being able to retake the city.\nJustinian sent another general, Narses, to Italy, but tensions between Narses and Belisarius hampered the progress of the campaign. Milan was taken, but was soon recaptured and razed by the Ostrogoths. Justinian recalled Narses in 539. By then the military situation had turned in favour of the Romans, and in 540 Belisarius reached the Ostrogothic capital Ravenna. There he was offered the title of Western Roman Emperor by the Ostrogoths at the same time that envoys of Justinian were arriving to negotiate a peace that would leave the region north of the Po River in Gothic hands. Belisarius feigned acceptance of the offer, entered the city in May 540, and reclaimed it for the Empire. Then, having been recalled by Justinian, Belisarius returned to Constantinople, taking the captured Vitigis and his wife Matasuntha with him.\nWar with the Sassanid Empire, 540\u2013562.\nBelisarius had been recalled in the face of renewed hostilities by the Persians. Following a revolt against the Empire in Armenia in the late 530s and possibly motivated by the pleas of Ostrogothic ambassadors, King Khosrau I broke the \"Eternal Peace\" and invaded Roman territory in the spring of 540. He first sacked Beroea and then Antioch (allowing the garrison of 6,000 men to leave the city), besieged Daras, and then went on to attack the Byzantine base in the small but strategically significant satellite kingdom of Lazica near the Black Sea as requested by its discontented king Gubazes, exacting tribute from the towns he passed along his way. He forced Justinian I to pay him 5,000 pounds of gold, plus 500 pounds of gold more each year.\nBelisarius arrived in the East in 541, but after some success, was again recalled to Constantinople in 542. The reasons for his withdrawal are not known, but it may have been instigated by rumours of his disloyalty reaching the court. \nThe outbreak of the plague coupled with a rebellion in Persia brought Khosrow I's offensives to a halt. Exploiting this, Justinian ordered all the forces in the East to invade Persian Armenia, but the 30,000-strong Byzantine force was defeated by a small force at Anglon. The next year, Khosrau unsuccessfully besieged the major city of Edessa. Both parties made little headway, and in 545 a truce was agreed upon for the southern part of the Roman-Persian frontier. After that, the Lazic War in the North continued for several years: the Lazic king switched to the Byzantine side, and in 549 Justinian sent Dagisthaeus to recapture Petra, but he faced heavy resistance and the siege was relieved by Sasanian reinforcements. Justinian replaced him with Bessas, who was under a cloud after the loss of Rome in 546, but he managed to capture and dismantle Petra in 551. The war continued for several years until a second truce in 557, followed by a fifty years' peace in 562. Under its terms, the Persians agreed to abandon Lazica in exchange for an annual tribute of 400 or 500 pounds of gold (30,000 \"solidi\") to be paid by the Romans.\nWar in Italy, second phase, 541\u2013554.\nWhile military efforts were directed to the East, the situation in Italy took a turn for the worse. Under their respective kings Ildibad and Eraric (both murdered in 541) and especially Totila, the Ostrogoths made quick gains. After a victory at Faenza in 542, they reconquered the major cities of Southern Italy and soon held almost the entire Italian Peninsula. Belisarius was sent back to Italy late in 544 but lacked sufficient troops and supplies. Making no headway, he was relieved of his command in 548. Belisarius succeeded in defeating a Gothic fleet of 200 ships. During this period the city of Rome changed hands three more times, first taken and depopulated by the Ostrogoths in December 546, then reconquered by the Byzantines in 547, and then again by the Goths in January 550. Totila also plundered Sicily and attacked Greek coastlines.\nFinally, Justinian dispatched a force of approximately 35,000 men (2,000 men were detached and sent to invade southern Visigothic Hispania) under the command of Narses. The army reached Ravenna in June 552 and defeated the Ostrogoths decisively within a month at the battle of Busta Gallorum in the Apennines, where Totila was slain. After a second battle at Mons Lactarius in October that year, the resistance of the Ostrogoths was finally broken. In 554, a large-scale Frankish invasion was defeated at Casilinum, and Italy was secured for the empire, though it would take Narses several years to reduce the remaining Gothic strongholds. At the end of the war, Italy was garrisoned with an army of 16,000 men. The recovery of Italy cost the empire about 300,000 pounds of gold. Procopius estimated 15,000,000 Goths died.\nOther campaigns.\nIn addition to the other conquests, the Empire established a presence in Visigothic Hispania, when the usurper Athanagild requested assistance in his rebellion against King Agila I. In 552, Justinian dispatched a force of 2,000 men; according to the historian Jordanes, this army was led by the octogenarian Liberius. The Byzantines took Cartagena and other cities on the southeastern coast and founded the new province of Spania before being checked by their former ally Athanagild, who had by now become king. This campaign marked the apogee of Byzantine expansion.\nDuring Justinian's reign, the Balkans suffered from several incursions by the Turkic and Slavic peoples who lived north of the Danube. Here, Justinian resorted mainly to a combination of diplomacy and a system of defensive works. In 559 a particularly dangerous invasion of Sklavinoi and Kutrigurs under their khan Zabergan threatened Constantinople, but they were repulsed by the aged general Belisarius.\nResults.\nJustinian's ambition for re-conquest was only partly realized, with the only lasting and sustainable conquest being Africa. In the West, the early military successes of the 530s were followed by years of stagnation. The dragging war with the Goths was a disaster for Italy, even though its long-lasting effects may have been less severe than is sometimes thought. The heavy taxes that the administration imposed upon Italian population were deeply resented.\nThe final victory in Italy and the conquest of Africa and the coast of southern Hispania significantly enlarged the area of Byzantine influence and eliminated all naval threats to the empire, which in 555 reached its territorial zenith. Despite losing much of Italy soon after Justinian's death, the empire retained several important cities, including Rome, Naples, and Ravenna, leaving the Lombards as a regional threat. The newly founded province of Spania kept the Visigoths as a threat to Hispania alone and not to the western Mediterranean and Africa.\nEvents of the later years of his reign showed that Constantinople itself was not safe from barbarian incursions from the north, and even the relatively benevolent historian Menander Protector felt the need to attribute the Emperor's failure to protect the capital to the weakness of his body in his old age. Some historians view that in his efforts to renew the Roman Empire, Justinian dangerously stretched its resources while failing to take into account the changed realities of 6th-century Europe.\nReligious activities.\nJustinian saw the orthodoxy of his empire threatened by diverging religious currents, especially miaphysitism, which had many adherents in the eastern provinces of Syria and Egypt. Miaphysitism rejected the Council of Chalcedon in 451, which ruled that Jesus Christ has two natures (one divine and one human), instead maintaining that he has one nature that is both fully divine and fully human. The tolerant policies towards Miaphysitism of Zeno and Anastasius I had been a source of tension in the relationship with the bishops of Rome.\nJustin reversed this trend and confirmed the Chalcedonian doctrine, openly condemning the Miaphysites. Justinian, who continued this policy, tried to impose religious unity on his subjects by forcing them to accept doctrinal compromises that might appeal to all parties, a policy that proved unsuccessful as he satisfied none of them.\nThe empress Theodora, herself a Miaphysite, sympathized with the Miaphysites and was accused of being constant source of pro-Miaphysite intrigues at the court in Constantinople in the earlier years. In the course of his reign, Justinian, who had a genuine interest in matters of theology, authored a small number of theological treatises.\nReligious policy.\nAs in his secular administration, despotism appeared also in the Emperor's ecclesiastical policy. At the very beginning of his reign, he promulgated by law the Church's belief in the Trinity and the Incarnation, and to threaten all heretics with the appropriate penalties, whereas he subsequently declared that he intended to deprive all disturbers of orthodoxy of the opportunity for such offense by due process of law. He made the Nicaeno-Constantinopolitan creed the sole symbol of the Church and accorded legal force to the canons of the four ecumenical councils. The bishops in attendance at the Council of Constantinople (536) recognized that nothing could be done in the Church contrary to the emperor's will and command, while, on his side, the emperor, in the case of the Patriarch Anthimus, reinforced the ban of the Church with temporal proscription. Justinian protected the purity of the church by suppressing heretics. He neglected no opportunity to secure the rights of the Church and clergy, and to protect and extend monasticism. He granted the monks the right to inherit property from private citizens and the right to receive \"solemnia\", or annual gifts, from the imperial treasury or from the taxes of certain provinces and he prohibited lay confiscation of monastic estates.\nThroughout his reign Justinian promoted Archangel Michael as imperial \"archistrat\u0113gos\", forwarding the cult of Michael directly and indirectly through his inclusion in imperial oaths, liturgical commemorations and imperial iconography, and building churches in his honour. In doing this Justinian reinforced his own legitimacy by placing Michael as his imperial protector.\nBoth the \"Codex\" and the \"Novellae\" contain many enactments regarding donations, foundations, and the administration of ecclesiastical property; election and rights of bishops, priests and abbots; monastic life, residential obligations of the clergy, conduct of divine service, episcopal jurisdiction, etc. Justinian also rebuilt the Church of Hagia Sophia (which cost 20,000 pounds of gold), the original site having been destroyed during the Nika riots. The new Hagia Sophia, with its numerous chapels and shrines, gilded octagonal dome, and mosaics, became the Eastern Roman Empire's space of identification.\nReligious relations with Rome.\nJustinian entered the arena of ecclesiastical conflicts shortly after his uncle's accession in 518, and put an end to the Acacian schism. Previous Emperors had tried to alleviate theological conflicts by declarations that deemphasized the Council of Chalcedon, which had condemned miaphysitism, which had strongholds in Egypt and Syria, and by tolerating the appointment of Miaphysites to church offices. The Popes reacted by severing ties with the Patriarch of Constantinople who supported these policies. Emperors Justin I (and later Justinian himself) rescinded these policies and re-established the union between Constantinople and Rome. After this, Justinian also felt entitled to settle disputes in papal elections, as he did when he favored Vigilius and had his rival Silverius deported.\nThis new-found unity between East and West did not, however, solve the ongoing disputes in the east. Justinian's policies switched between attempts to force Miaphysites to accept the Chalcedonian creed by persecuting their bishops and monks \u2013 thereby embittering their sympathizers in Egypt and other provinces \u2013 and attempts at a compromise that would win over the Miaphysites without surrendering the Chalcedonian faith. Such an approach was supported by the Empress Theodora, who favoured the Miaphysites unreservedly. In the condemnation of the \"Three Chapters\", three theologians that had opposed Miaphysitism before and after the Council of Chalcedon, Justinian tried to win over the opposition. At the Fifth Ecumenical Council, most of the Eastern church yielded to the Emperor's demands, and Pope Vigilius, who was forcibly brought to Constantinople and besieged at a chapel, finally also gave his assent. However, the condemnation was received unfavourably in the west, where it led to new (albeit temporal) schism, and failed to reach its goal in the east, as the Miaphysites remained unsatisfied \u2013 all the more bitter for him because during his last years he took an even greater interest in theological matters.\nAuthoritarian rule.\nJustinian's religious policy reflected the conviction that the unity of the empire presupposed unity of faith under the Chalcedonian Church. Those of different beliefs were subjected to persecution, which imperial legislation had effected from the time of Constantius II and which would now vigorously continue. The \"Codex\" contained two statutes that decreed the total destruction of paganism, even in private life; these provisions were zealously enforced. Contemporary sources (John Malalas, Theophanes, and John of Ephesus) tell of severe persecutions, including men in high positions.\nThe original Academy of Plato had been destroyed by the Roman dictator Sulla in 86 BC. Several centuries later, in 410 AD, a Neoplatonic Academy was established that had no institutional continuity with Plato's Academy, and which served as a center for Neoplatonism and mysticism. It persisted until 529 AD when it was finally closed by Justinian I. Other schools in Constantinople, Antioch, and Alexandria, which were the centers of Justinian's empire, continued.\nIn Asia Minor alone, John of Ephesus was reported to have converted 70,000 pagans, which was probably an exaggerated number. Other peoples also accepted Christianity: the Heruli, the Huns dwelling near the Don, the Abasgi, and the Tzanni in Caucasia.\nThe worship of Amun at the oasis of Awjila in the Libyan desert was abolished, and so were the remnants of the worship of Isis on the island of Philae, at the first cataract of the Nile. The Presbyter Julian and the Bishop Longinus conducted a mission among the Nabataeans, and Justinian attempted to strengthen Christianity in Yemen by dispatching a bishop from Egypt.\nThe civil rights of Jews were restricted and their religious privileges threatened. Justinian also interfered in the internal affairs of the synagogue and encouraged the Jews to use the Greek Septuagint in their synagogues in Constantinople.\nThe Emperor faced significant opposition from the Samaritans, who resisted conversion to Christianity and were repeatedly in insurrection. He persecuted them with rigorous edicts, for example, in 529, he banned them from having wills, an intentional act of humiliation. However, he could not prevent reprisals towards Christians from taking place in Samaria toward the close of his reign.\nThe Manicheans too suffered persecution, experiencing both exile and threat of capital punishment. In Constantinople, c.450, a number of Manicheans, after strict inquisition, were executed by burning.\nArchitecture, learning, art and literature.\nJustinian's reputation as a prolific builder is attested in the works of Procopius, Paul the Silentiary, John Malalas and Pseudo-Zacharias Rhetor. Under Justinian's reign, the San Vitale in Ravenna, which features two famous mosaics representing Justinian and Theodora, was completed under the sponsorship of Julius Argentarius. Most notably, he had the Hagia Sophia, originally a basilica-style church that had been burnt down during the Nika riots, splendidly rebuilt according to a completely different ground plan, under the architectural supervision of Isidore of Miletus and Anthemius of Tralles. On 26 December 537, according to Pseudo-Codinus, Justinian stated at the completion of this edifice: \"Solomon, I have outdone thee\" (in reference to the first Jewish temple). The church had a second inauguration on 24 December 562, after several reworks made by Isidore the Younger. This new cathedral, with its magnificent dome filled with mosaics, remained the centre of eastern Christianity for centuries.\nAnother prominent church in the capital, the Church of the Holy Apostles, which had been in a very poor state near the end of the 5th century, was likewise rebuilt. The Church of Saints Sergius and Bacchus, later renamed Little Hagia Sophia, was also built between 532 and 536 by the imperial couple. Works of embellishment were not confined to churches alone: excavations at the site of the Great Palace of Constantinople have yielded several high-quality mosaics dating from Justinian's reign, and a column topped by a bronze statue of Justinian on horseback and dressed in a military costume was erected in the Augustaeum in Constantinople in 543. Rivalry with other, more established patrons from the Constantinopolitan and exiled Roman aristocracy might have enforced Justinian's building activities in the capital as a means of strengthening his dynasty's prestige.\nJustinian also strengthened the borders of the Empire from Africa to the East through the construction of fortifications and ensured Constantinople of its water supply through construction of underground cisterns (see Basilica Cistern). To prevent floods from damaging the strategically important border town Dara, an advanced arch dam was built. During his reign the large Sangarius Bridge was built in Bithynia, securing a major military supply route to the east. Furthermore, Justinian restored cities damaged by earthquake or war and built a new city near his place of birth called Justiniana Prima, which was intended to replace Thessalonica as the political and religious centre of Illyricum.\nIn Justinian's reign, and partly under his patronage, Byzantine culture produced noteworthy historians, including Procopius and Agathias, and poets such as Paul the Silentiary and Romanus the Melodist flourished. On the other hand, centres of learning such as the Neoplatonic Academy in Athens and the famous Law School of Berytus lost their importance during his reign.\nEconomy and administration.\nAs was the case under Justinian's predecessors, the empire was an agrarian-based economy. In addition, long-distance trade flourished, reaching as far north as Cornwall where tin was exchanged for Roman wheat. Within the empire, convoys sailing from Alexandria provided Constantinople with wheat and grains. Justinian made the traffic more efficient by building a large granary on the island of Tenedos for storage and further transport to Constantinople. Justinian also tried to find new routes for the eastern trade, which was suffering badly from the wars with the Persians.\nSilk was an important luxury product, which was imported and then processed in the empire. In order to protect the manufacture of silk products, Justinian granted a monopoly to the imperial factories in 541. In order to bypass the Persian landroute, Justinian established friendly relations with the Abyssinians, whom he wanted to act as trade mediators by transporting Indian silk to the empire; the Abyssinians, however, were unable to compete with the Persian merchants in India. Then, in the early 550s, two monks succeeded in smuggling eggs of silk worms from Central Asia back to Constantinople, and silk became an indigenous product.\nGold and silver were mined in the Balkans, Anatolia, Armenia, Cyprus, Egypt and Nubia. At the start of Justinian I's reign, he had inherited a surplus 28,800,000 \"solidi\" (400,000 pounds of gold) in the imperial treasury from Anastasius I and Justin I. Under Justinian's rule, measures were taken to counter corruption in the provinces and to make tax collection more efficient. Greater administrative power was given to both the leaders of the prefectures and of the provinces, while power was taken away from the vicariates of the dioceses, of which a number were abolished. The overall trend was towards a simplification of administrative infrastructure. According to Brown (1971), the increased professionalization of tax collection did much to destroy the traditional structures of provincial life, as it weakened the autonomy of the town councils in the Greek towns. It has been estimated that before Justinian I's reconquests the state had an annual revenue of 5,000,000 \"solidi\" in AD 530, but after his reconquests, the annual revenue was increased to 6,000,000 \"solidi\" in AD 550.\nThroughout Justinian's reign, the cities and villages of the East thrived, although Antioch was struck by two earthquakes (526, 528) and sacked and evacuated by the Persians (540). Justinian had the city rebuilt, but on a slightly smaller scale.\nThe empire suffered several major setbacks in the course of the 6th century. The first one was the plague, which lasted from 541 to 543 and, by decreasing the empire's population, probably created a scarcity of labor and a rising of wages. It has been proposed that the lack of manpower also led to a significant increase in the number of \"barbarians\" in the Byzantine armies after the early 540s, but others are skeptical of this view. The protracted war in Italy and the wars with the Persians themselves laid a heavy burden on the empire's resources, and Justinian was criticized for curtailing the government-run post service, which he limited to only one eastern route of military importance.\nNatural disasters.\nThe extreme weather events of 535\u2013536 led to a famine such as had not been recorded before, affecting both Europe and the Middle East. These events may have been caused by an atmospheric dust veil resulting from a large volcanic eruption.\nThe historian Procopius recorded in 536 in his work on the Vandalic War \"during this year a most dread portent took place. For the sun gave forth its light without brightness ... and it seemed exceedingly like the sun in eclipse, for the beams it shed were not clear\".\nThe causes of these disasters are not precisely known, but volcanoes at the Rabaul caldera, Lake Ilopango, Krakatoa, or, according to a 2018 finding, in Iceland are suspected.\nSeven years later in 542, a devastating outbreak of Bubonic Plague, known as the Plague of Justinian, was traditionally believed to have killed tens of millions, second only to Black Death of the 14th century. Justinian and members of his court were afflicted, with Justinian himself contracting and surviving the pestilence. The impact of this outbreak of plague has recently been disputed, since evidence for tens of millions dying is uncertain.\nIn July 551, the Beirut earthquake struck the eastern Mediterranean and triggered a tsunami. The combined fatalities of both events likely exceeded 30,000, with tremors felt from Antioch to Alexandria.\nHistorical sources.\nContemporary sources include the writings of Procopius, John Malalas, John of Ephesus, Agathias, John the Lydian, Menander Protector, Evagrius Scholasticus, Pseudo-Zacharias Rhetor, Jordanes, Marcellinus Comes, Corippus and Victor of Tunnuna. The Paschal Chronicle and Theophanes the Confessor also provide accounts of his reign though written in a later period.\nProcopius provides some of the primary sources for the history of Justinian's reign, but displays growing disillusionment (Justinian and the Later Roman Empire by John W. Barker) and bitterness towards Justinian and his empress Theodora. While he glorified Justinian's architectural achievements in his panegyric (\"Buildings\") and provided a more lukewarm account in his history (\"Wars\"), Procopius also wrote a hostile account, \"Anekdota\" (the so-called \"Secret History\"), in which Justinian is depicted as cruel, venal, incompetent and demonic. The Syriac chronicle of John of Ephesus, which survives partially, was used as a source for later chronicles, contributing many additional details of value. John Malalas' chronicle was another popular source that summarized the events of his reign.\nVeneration.\nJustinian is widely regarded as a saint by Orthodox Christians. In various Eastern Orthodox Churches, including the Orthodox Church in America, Justinian and his empress Theodora are commemorated on the anniversary of his death, 14 November. Some denominations translate the Julian calendar date to 27 November on the Gregorian calendar. The Calendar of Saints of the Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod and the Lutheran Church\u2013Canada also commemorate Justinian on 14 November.\nCultural depictions.\nIn the \"Paradiso\" section of the \"Divine Comedy\", Canto (chapter) VI, by Dante Alighieri, Justinian I is prominently featured as a spirit residing on the sphere of Mercury. The latter holds in Heaven the souls of those whose acts were righteous, yet meant to achieve fame and honor. Justinian's legacy is elaborated on, and he is portrayed as a defender of the Christian faith and the restorer of Rome to the Empire. Justinian confesses that he was partially motivated by fame rather than duty to God, which tainted the justice of his rule in spite of his proud accomplishments. In his introduction, \"Cesare fui e son Iustin\u00efano\" (\"Caesar I was, and am Justinian\"), his mortal title is contrasted with his immortal soul, to emphasize that \"glory in life is ephemeral, while contributing to God's glory is eternal\", according to Dorothy L. Sayers. Dante also uses Justinian to criticize the factious politics of his 14th-century Italy, divided between Ghibellines and Guelphs, in contrast to the unified Italy of the Roman Empire.\nJustinian is a major character in the 1938 novel \"Count Belisarius\", by Robert Graves. He is depicted as a jealous and conniving Emperor obsessed with creating and maintaining his own historical legacy.\nJustinian appears as a character in the 1939 time-travel novel \"Lest Darkness Fall\", by L. Sprague de Camp.\n\"The Glittering Horn: Secret Memoirs of the Court of Justinian\" was a novel written by Pierson Dixon in 1958 about the court of Justinian.\nIn the 1968 West German\u2013Italian historical drama film \"Kampf um Rom\" (English language title: \"The Last Roman\") Justinian is played by Orson Welles.\nIn the 1985 Soviet film \"Primary Russia\" Justinian is played by Innokenty Smoktunovsky.\nJustinian is a chief protagonist of Belisarius in \"Empire in Apocalypse\" by Robert Bruton (Legend Books 2023). The emperor's jealousy and envy of Belisarius eventually prompt him to undermine his best general.\nJustinian occasionally appears in the comic strip \"Prince Valiant\", usually as a nemesis of the title character.\nJustinian's Crown is a historical artifact claimed by the Byzantine Empire in the popular 2020 computer strategy game \"Crusader Kings 3\", by Paradox Development Studio.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16211", "revid": "25884178", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16211", "title": "John Martyn", "text": "British musician (1948\u20132009)\nIain David McGeachy (11 September 1948\u00a0\u2013 29 January 2009), known professionally as John Martyn, was a British singer-songwriter and guitarist. Over a 40-year career, he released 23 studio albums and received frequent critical acclaim. \"The Times\" described him as \"an electrifying guitarist and singer whose music blurred the boundaries between folk, jazz, rock and blues\".\nMartyn began his career at age 17 as a key member of the Scottish folk music scene, drawing inspiration from American blues and English traditional music, and signed with Island Records. By the 1970s he had begun incorporating jazz and rock into his sound on albums such as \"Solid Air\" (1973) and \"One World\" (1977), as well as experimenting with guitar effects and tape delay machines like the Echoplex. Domestic and substance abuse problems marked his personal life throughout the 1970s and 1980s, though he continued to release albums while collaborating with figures such as Phil Collins and Lee \"Scratch\" Perry. He remained active until his death in 2009.\nEarly life and education.\nMartyn was born in Beechcroft Avenue, New Malden, Surrey, to Belgian Jewish mother Beatrice \"Betty\" Ethel (\"n\u00e9e\" Jewitt) and Greenock-born Scottish father Thomas Paterson \"Tommy\" McGeachy. His parents, both opera singers, divorced when he was five and he spent his childhood alternating between Scotland and England. Most of this time was spent in the care of his father and grandmother, Janet, in Shawlands, Glasgow, part of his holidays each year spent on his mother's houseboat. He adapted his accent depending on context or company, changing between broad or refined Glaswegian and southern English accents, and continued to do so throughout his life. He attended Shawlands Academy in Glasgow. At school, he was a keen rugby player. On leaving school he attended Glasgow School of Art, but left to pursue his musical aspirations.\nCareer.\n1960s and 1970s.\nMentored by Hamish Imlach, Martyn began his professional musical career when he was 17, playing a fusion of blues and folk resulting in a distinctive style which made him a key figure in the British folk scene during the mid-1960s. He signed to Chris Blackwell's Island Records in 1967 and released his first album, \"London Conversation\", the same year. Released in 1968, his second album, \"The Tumbler\", was moving towards jazz.\nBy 1970 Martyn had developed a wholly original and idiosyncratic sound: acoustic guitar run through a fuzzbox, phase shifter and Echoplex. This sound was first apparent on \"Stormbringer!\", released in February 1970.\n\"Stormbringer!\" was written and performed by Martyn and his then-wife Beverley, who had previously recorded solo as Beverley Kutner. Their second duo album, \"The Road to Ruin\", was released in November 1970. Island Records felt that it would be more successful to market Martyn as a solo act and this was how subsequent albums were produced, although Beverley continued to make appearances as a backing singer as well as continuing as a solo artist herself.\nReleased in 1971, \"Bless the Weather\" was Martyn's third solo album. In February 1973, Martyn released the album \"Solid Air\", the title song a tribute to the singer-songwriter Nick Drake, a close friend and label-mate who would die in 1974 from an overdose of antidepressants. In 2009, a double CD Deluxe edition of \"Solid Air\" was released featuring unreleased songs and out-takes, and sleeve notes by Record Collector's Daryl Easlea. On \"Bless the Weather\" and on \"Solid Air\" Martyn collaborated with jazz bassist Danny Thompson, with whom he proceeded to have a musical partnership which continued until his death.\nFollowing the commercial success of \"Solid Air\", later on in 1973 Martyn quickly recorded and released the experimental \"Inside Out\", an album with emphasis placed on feel and improvisation rather than song structure. In 1975, he followed this with \"Sunday's Child\", a more song-based collection that includes \"My Baby Girl\" and \"Spencer the Rover\", which are references to his young family. Martyn subsequently described this period as 'very happy'. In September 1975, he released a live album, \"Live at Leeds\" \u2014 Martyn had been unable to persuade Island to release the record, and resorted to selling individually signed copies by mail from his home in Hastings. \"Live at Leeds\" features Danny Thompson and drummer John Stevens. In 2010, a 2CD Deluxe version of Live at Leeds was released, and it was discovered that not all of the songs on the original album were from the Leeds concert. After releasing \"Live at Leeds\", Martyn took a sabbatical, including a visit to Jamaica, spending time with reggae producer Lee \"Scratch\" Perry.\nIn 1977, he released \"One World\", which led some commentators to describe Martyn as the \"Father of Trip-Hop\". It included tracks such as \"Small Hours\" and \"Big Muff\", a collaboration with Lee \"Scratch\" Perry. \"Small Hours\" was recorded outside; the microphones picked up ambient sounds, such as geese from a nearby lake. In 1978, he played guitar on the album \"Harmony of the Spheres\" by Neil Ardley.\n1980s.\nMartyn's marriage broke down at the end of the 1970s and \"John hit the self destruct button\" (although other biographers, including \"The Times\" obituary writer, attribute the break-up of his marriage to his already being addicted to alcohol and drugs). In her autobiography, Beverley also alleges protracted domestic violence. Out of this period, described by Martyn as \"a very dark period in my life\", came the album \"Grace and Danger\". Released in October 1980, the album had been held up for a year by Chris Blackwell. He was a close friend of John and Beverley, and found the album too openly disturbing to release. Only after intense and sustained pressure from Martyn did Blackwell agree to release the album. Commenting on that period, Martyn said, \"I was in a dreadful emotional state over that record. I was hardly in control of my own actions. The reason they finally released it was because I freaked: Please get it out! I don't give a damn about how sad it makes you feel\u2014it's what I'm about: the direct communication of emotion. \"Grace and Danger\" was very cathartic, and it really hurt.\"\nIn the late 1980s, Martyn cited \"Grace and Danger\" as his favourite album, and said that it was \"probably the most specific piece of autobiography I've written. Some people keep diaries, I make records.\" The album has since become one of his highest-regarded, prompting a deluxe double-disc issue in 2007, containing the original album remastered.\nPhil Collins played drums and sang backing vocals on \"Grace and Danger\" and subsequently played drums on and produced Martyn's next album, \"Glorious Fool\", in 1981. Martyn left Island records in 1981, and recorded \"Glorious Fool\" and \"Well Kept Secret\" for WEA achieving his first Top 30 album. In 1983 Martyn released a live album, \"Philentropy\", and married Annie Furlong but the couple, who had lived in Scotland, later separated. Returning to Island records, he recorded \"Sapphire\" (1984), \"Piece by Piece\" (1986) and the live \"Foundations\" (1987) before leaving the label in 1988.\n1990s and 2000s.\nMartyn released \"The Apprentice\" in 1990 and \"Cooltide\" in 1991 for Permanent Records, and reunited with Phil Collins for \"No Little Boy\" (1993), which featured rerecorded versions of some of his classic tracks. The similar 1992 release \"Couldn't Love You More\" was unauthorised and disowned by Martyn. Material from these recordings and his two Permanent albums have been recycled on many releases. Permanent Records also released a live 2-CD set called \"Live\" in 1994. \"And\" (1996) came out on Go! Discs and saw Martyn draw heavily on trip-hop textures, a direction which saw more complete expression on 2000's \"Glasgow Walker\". \"The Church with One Bell\" (1998) is a covers album of blues classics, which draws on songs by other artists, including Portishead and Ben Harper. In 2001, Martyn appeared on the track \"Deliver Me\" by Faithless keyboard player and DJ Sister Bliss.\nIn July 2006, the documentary \"Johnny Too Bad\" was screened by the BBC. The programme documented the period surrounding the operation to amputate Martyn's right leg below the knee (the result of a burst cyst that had led to septicaemia) and the writing and recording of \"On the Cobbles\" (2004), an album described by Peter Marsh on the BBC Music website as \"the strongest, most consistent set he's come up with in years.\" Much of \"Cobbles\" was a revisiting of his acoustic-based sound.\nMartyn's last concerts were in November 2008, reprising Grace and Danger.\nIn collaboration with his keyboard player Spenser Cozens, Martyn wrote and performed the score for \"Strangebrew\" (Robert Wallace 2007), which won the Fortean Times Award at the London Short Film Festival in the same year. The film concept being a strong influence of the album design of Martyn's \"Heaven and Earth\" (2011). On 4 February 2008, Martyn received the lifetime achievement award at the BBC Radio 2 Folk Awards. The award was presented by his friend Phil Collins. The BBC website stated Martyn's \"heartfelt performances have either suggested or fully demonstrated an idiosyncratic genius.\" Eric Clapton was quoted saying that Martyn was \"so far ahead of everything, it's almost inconceivable.\"\nTo mark Martyn's 60th birthday, Island released a 4 CD boxed set, \"Ain't No Saint\", on 1 September 2008. The set includes unreleased studio material and rare live recordings.\nMartyn was appointed OBE in the 2009 New Year Honours and died a few weeks later. His partner Theresa Walsh collected the award at Buckingham Palace. Martyn had recorded new material before he died and his final studio album, \"Heaven and Earth\", was completed and released posthumously in May 2011. The sleeve note says, \"all the tracks on this recording were kept as John wished \u2014 in their entirety\".\nDeath.\nMartyn died on 29 January 2009, at a hospital in Thomastown, County Kilkenny, Ireland, from acute respiratory distress syndrome. He had been living in Thomastown with his partner Theresa Walsh. Martyn's health was affected by his life-long abuse of drugs and alcohol. He was survived by his partner and his children, Mhairi, Wesley and Spencer McGeachy.\nTributes.\nFollowing Martyn's death, \"Rolling Stone\" lauded his \"progressive folk invention and improvising sorcery\". Phil Collins paid tribute to him, saying, \"John's passing is terribly, terribly sad. I had worked with and known him since the late 1970s and he was a great friend. He was uncompromising, which made him infuriating to some people, but he was unique and we'll never see the likes of him again. I loved him dearly and will miss him very much.\"\nMike Harding introduced an hour-long tribute to Martyn in his BBC Radio 2 programme on 25 February 2009. A tribute album, \"Johnny Boy Would Love This\", was released on 15 August 2011, comprising cover versions of his songs by various artists.\nThe \"Grace &amp; Danger: A Celebration of John Martyn\" tribute concert held on 27 January 2019 at Glasgow Royal Concert Hall marked the tenth anniversary of his passing. Curated and hosted by Danny Thompson, artists including Eddi Reader, Eric Bibb and Paul Weller performed \"to do full justice to a selection of Martyn's finest songs and channel some of the great man's spirit\".\nOn 19 April 2025 his song \"May You Never\" was featured in an episode of the BBC Radio 4 series \"Soul Music\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16212", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16212", "title": "Joseph Hergenroether", "text": ""}
